letter contained the following directive:

    “5. The procurement of the apparatus needed for all the
    experiments should be discussed in detail with the offices of
    the Reichsarzt SS, of the Main Office for Economic
    Administration, and with the Ahnenerbe. * * *”

The evidence proves that prior to 21 October 1943, Rascher received an
assignment from Blome of the Reich Research Council to conduct open-air
freezing experiments. (_NO-432, Pros. Ex. 119._) Sievers aided Rascher
in the matter of obtaining the location and personnel for these
experiments. (_3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123._)

On 13 January 1943, Rascher had a conference with Grawitz and the
defendant Poppendick concerning the freezing experiments. In this
conference Rascher’s freezing experiments were discussed in detail. He
stressed the point that he was working with the Ahnenerbe and that he
reported to the Ahnenerbe. The documentary note of Rascher’s on this
conference shows on its face that wet-freezing experiments had been
conducted by him and that Grawitz requested him to carry out further
freezing experiments with dry cold until he would “have a few hundred
cases.” This documentary note was forwarded by Sievers to the defendant
Rudolf Brandt on 28 January. (_NO-320, Pros. Ex. 103._) In his covering
letter Sievers requested Brandt’s opinion as to what attitude he and
Rascher were to take in respect of their position to Grawitz, with the
implied request that Brandt should strengthen his position with Grawitz,
who considered it “an unbearable situation to have a non-physician give
information on medical matters.” What Sievers wanted to achieve was an
intervention of Brandt with Himmler on his behalf and, therefore, he
stressed his personal importance by saying:

    “My duty merely consists in smoothing the way for the research
    men and seeing that the tasks ordered by the Reich Leader SS are
    carried out in the quickest possible way. On one thing I
    certainly can form an opinion—that is, on who is doing the
    quickest job.

    “If things are to go on in the future as SS Gruppenfuehrer
    Grawitz desires, I am afraid that Dr. Rascher’s work will not
    continue to advance as fast and unhampered as hitherto.”
    (_NO-320, Pros. Ex. 103._)

On 17 February, Rascher forwarded his report on the results of the
experiment in which animal warmth was used for the rewarming of severely
chilled persons. (_1616-PS, Pros. Ex. 105._) In his accompanying letter
to Himmler, he informed him that he was conducting dry-cold experiments
in Dachau. Thirty experimental subjects had been experimented upon and
had been exposed to cold out of doors from 9-14 hours, thereby reducing
their body temperature to 27°-29° C. The extremities of the experimental
subjects were frozen white. Rascher suggested a large series of
experiments in the Auschwitz concentration camp. This place would be
suitable for such experimentation because it was colder there, and the
spacious open country within the camp “would make the experiments less
conspicuous, as the experimental subjects _yell_ when they freeze
severely.” [Emphasis supplied.] (_1616-PS, Pros. Ex. 105._) Himmler gave
Rascher permission to carry out additional freezing experiments in the
concentration camps Auschwitz and Lublin. (_1615-PS, Pros. Ex. 109._)

Rascher’s letter to the defendant Rudolf Brandt, dated 4 April 1943,
reveals that another series of dry-freezing experiments had been carried
out on inmates of the Dachau concentration camp during a period of heavy
frost weather. Some of the experimental subjects were exposed to cold
of -6° C. in the open air for 14 hours and had reached an internal
temperature of 25° C. (_NO-292, Pros. Ex. 111._) The three fatalities
which, according to Neff’s testimony, resulted from the dry-freezing
experiments, apparently occurred during this series of experiments.
(_Tr. pp. 637-8._)

On 11 April 1943, Rascher submitted to Himmler a brief report concerning
“freezing experiments on human beings exposed to the open air.”
(_NO-240, Pros. Ex. 112._) The report itself is not available, but the
letter of the defendant Rudolf Brandt of 16 April to Rascher proves that
the defendant Gebhardt received it from Himmler for study. (_NO-241,
Pros. Ex. 113._) A conference between Rascher and the defendant Gebhardt
took place in Hohenlychen on 14 May in the presence of the defendant
Fischer. Gebhardt discussed with Rascher the freezing experiments and
other experimentation carried out in the Dachau concentration camp and
invited Rascher to collaborate with him. Rascher feared to lose his
independence and turned to Sievers to settle this affair in a tactful
way as Gebhardt was a very close friend of Himmler, and Rascher,
therefore, feared his eventual enmity. (_NO-231, Pros. Ex. 116._)
Sievers, in turn, approached Brandt in this matter on 22 May and
requested information whether Himmler had given any definite directive
to Gebhardt in regard to Rascher’s sphere of action and work. He further
asked Brandt’s intervention on behalf of Rascher by saying:

    “I entrust you with this affair and ask you particularly to use
    it only for your strict personal information so that Dr. Rascher
    does not encounter any difficulties with SS Gruppenfuehrer
    Professor Dr. Gebhardt.” (_NO-267, Pros. Ex. 117._)

When Rascher visited Gebhardt in Hohenlychen, the latter encouraged him
to embark upon a career of university lecturer. (_NO-231, Pros. Ex.
116._) Rascher followed this suggestion and Sievers supported him
wholeheartedly and collaborated with the defendants Brandt and Blome to
have Rascher appointed university lecturer. (_NO-229, Pros. Ex. 118_;
_NO-290, Pros. Ex. 121_.) That Rascher’s thesis for habilitation was
based on the freezing and high-altitude experiments is proved by
Rascher’s memorandum on his medical training which he wrote for the
purpose of his habilitation (_NO-230, Pros. Ex. 115_) and other evidence
in the record. (_NO-240, Pros. Ex. 112._)

          c. Selections from the Argumentation of the Defense

        _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT SIEVERS_
                       _The Freezing Experiments_

Freezing experiments on human beings were carried out in Dachau
concentration camp from the end of 1942 on.

It cannot be denied that a ruthless carrying-out of these experiments
was liable to inflict torture and death upon the persons experimented
on. Here, too, it seems necessary to distinguish between two groups of
experiments. One group comprises the experiments carried out by
Professor Holzloehner, Dr. Rascher, and Dr. Finke, and the other one,
those carried out by Rascher alone. The first group of experiments
easily permits the assumption that the possible effects of the
experiments on the persons subjected to them were taken into
consideration. After all that has become known about Rascher by now, the
assumption is justified that, during the experiments carried out by
Rascher alone, considerations of the effect on life and health of the
persons used were not of primary importance. The only exceptions were
probably the experiments Rascher carried out in the presence of third
persons who were not involved.

On the occasion of administrative conferences he had to attend in
Dachau, Sievers met Professor Holzloehner, Dr. Finke, and Rascher who
had just finished a freezing experiment. The person experimented on was
placed under an arc of light [Lichtbogen]. That is all Sievers saw of
this experiment. (_German Tr. p. 5684._)

Then Sievers watched a second freezing experiment. Himmler had
instructed Professor Hirt of Strasbourg to have a look at Rascher’s work
on freezing, since he (Himmler) obviously had come to the conclusion
that Rascher alone was not sufficient for the clarification of these
scientifically extensive and difficult questions. For this experiment a
professional criminal was introduced whom a regular court had sentenced
to death for robbery and murder. Sievers and Dr. Hirt made sure about
this by examining the files of the criminal police department of the
Dachau concentration camp. Dr. Hirt then asked the person to be
experimented on whether he realized that the experiment might prove
fatal to him. The person to be experimented on answered in the
affirmative.

By personally questioning the person to be experimented on, Sievers then
made sure that he agreed to the experiment. The person in question
answered in the affirmative and added: “If it does not hurt.” This
assurance could be given since the experiment was carried out under full
narcosis. Sievers did not take part in the entire experiment, but he saw
that it was carried out under full narcosis. (_German Tr. pp. 5685-86._)

The witness Dr. Punzengruber, at that time an inmate of the Dachau
concentration camp and from 1942-1943 assigned to Dr. Rascher’s station
as a chemist, confirms that the person used had been condemned to death.

The same witness confirms that Sievers was not present during other
freezing experiments. Dr. Punzengruber could establish this because his
laboratory was located next to the room where Dr. Rascher carried out
his experiments. (_Affidavit of Dr. Punzengruber, 14 March 1947._)

A further presence of Sievers at freezing experiments has not occurred
and has not been claimed from any side.

In order to prove Sievers’ participation in the freezing experiments,
the prosecution pointed out the following documents:

    Rascher’s letter of 10 September 1942 to Himmler. “SS
    Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers, who observed the experiments in
    Dachau last week, is of the opinion that if during a convention
    there would be a report at all, I, too, would have to be called
    in for reporting.” (_NO-234, Pros. Ex. 83._)

    Himmler’s letter of 22 September 1942 to Rascher in which the
    former instructs Rascher to carry out experiments in quick
    increase of body temperature and increase of body temperature
    through medicaments and animal heat [medikamentanimalische
    Erwaermung], Sievers received a copy of this letter for
    information on 25 September 1942. (_1611-PS, Pros. Ex. 85._)

    Rascher’s letter of 3 October 1942 to Dr. R. Brandt which
    contains the information that he (Rascher) had asked Sievers to
    transmit at once a teletype communication to the camp commander
    stating that four female gypsies from another camp must be
    procured immediately; that furthermore he had asked Sievers to
    take steps to have the low-pressure chamber put at his disposal;
    he finally mentioned that he informed Sievers about the failure
    of the planned report to Field Marshal Milch. (_NO-285, Pros.
    Ex. 86._)

    Sievers’ note of 6 November 1942 concerning Rascher’s transfer
    to the SS. (_NO-288, Pros. Ex. 95._)

    Letter, dated 12 January 1943, from the Reich Chief Manager
    [Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer] of Ahnenerbe to SS Obergruppenfuehrer
    Wolff, concerning Rascher’s transfer to the Waffen SS. (_NO-236,
    Pros. Ex. 101._)

    Letter, dated 28 January 1943, from the Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer
    of Ahnenerbe to the personal staff of the Reich Leader SS
    concerning the taking of Dr. Rascher’s work under the protection
    of Ahnenerbe in pursuance of Dr. Rascher’s conversation on 13
    January 1943 with the Chief Reich Physician [Reichsarzt] of the
    SS, Dr. Grawitz. (_NO-320, Pros. Ex. 103._)

    Note, dated 4 February 1943, of the Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer of
    Ahnenerbe concerning Dr. Rascher’s report to the medical
    inspection [Sanitaetsinspekteur] of the Luftwaffe on his
    activities since he was declared unassigned [zur Disposition].
    Furthermore Rascher should go to SS Obersturmbannfuehrer
    Professor Dr. Pfannenstiel on 7 February 1943. (_NO-238, Pros.
    Ex. 104._)

    Letter, dated 17 May 1943, from Dr. Rascher to the
    Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer of Ahnenerbe concerning Rascher’s
    statement on his report to SS Gruppenfuehrer Professor Dr.
    Gebhardt on 14 May 1943. (_NO-231, Pros. Ex. 116._)

    Letter, dated 22 May 1943, from the Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer of
    Ahnenerbe to Dr. R. Brandt concerning Rascher’s statement on his
    report to SS Gruppenfuehrer Professor Dr. Gebhardt. (_NO-267,
    Pros. Ex. 117._)

    Letter, dated 27 September 1943, from the
    Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer of Ahnenerbe to Dr. Brandt concerning
    Dr. Rascher’s establishment as a college professor
    (Habilitation). (_NO-229, Pros. Ex. 118._)

    Letter, dated 21 March 1944, from the Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer of
    Ahnenerbe to Dr. R. Brandt concerning the establishment of Dr.
    Rascher as a college professor. (_NO-290, Pros. Ex. 121._)

The prosecution furthermore refers to the testimony given on 17 and 18
December 1946 by witness Neff. Neff testified that Sievers frequently
was at the experimental station; that during experiments he was present
several times; that, however, he could not remember whether Sievers had
been present during experiments which ended fatally.

The prosecution furthermore accuses Sievers of having procured female
concentration camp inmates to be used in the rewarming experiments
[Wiedererwaermungsversuche]. In this connection the following was
submitted:

    Letter, dated 3 October 1942, from Dr. Rascher to Dr. Brandt:
    “* * * Today I asked Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers to pass on
    immediately a teletype communication to the camp commander in
    which is stated that four female gypsies must be procured from
    another camp at once.” (_NO-285, Pros. Ex. 86._)

    Telephone call [Fernspruch] of 7 October 1942 from camp
    commander Weiss to Dr. Brandt, concerning the putting at the
    disposal of staff physician [Stabsarzt] Dr. Rascher “of the four
    women for experimental purposes as ordered by the Reich Leader
    SS”. (_1619-PS, Pros. Ex. 87._)

    Teletype communication, dated 8 October 1942, to SS
    Brigadefuehrer Gluecks, concerning the departure from their
    original station of “the four women ordered by the Reich Leader
    SS”.

    Dr. Rascher’s report of 5 November 1942 on concentration camp
    prostitutes [KL-Dirnen]. Refusal, on account of her Nordic
    racial characteristics, to use one of those women, and
    corresponding report to the camp commander and to the adjutant
    of the Reich Leader SS. (_NO-323, Pros. Ex. 94._)

    Witness Neff estimates that 10 women from the Ravensbrueck
    concentration camp were put at disposal for experiments with
    body heat [animalische Waerme]. (_German Tr. p. 632._)

The following is to be said to the prosecution’s accusation that Sievers
played an important part in procuring female concentration camp inmates
to be used for the rewarming of persons used in experiments:

Nowhere, except in the letter, dated 3 October 1942, from Dr. Rascher to
Dr. Brandt does there exist any indication that such an assumption might
be justified. But this letter only states that Dr. Rascher had asked
Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers immediately to pass on to the camp
commander a teletype communication reporting that four female gypsies
must be procured from another camp at once. (_NO-285, Pros. Ex. 86._)

The fact that the order to carry out experiments concerning the increase
of temperature through medicaments and body heat [medikamentanimalische
Erwaermung] was given by Himmler is proved beyond doubt by 1611-PS,
Prosecution Exhibit 85.

Furthermore, I point to the interrogation of Dr. Romberg. (_German Tr.
pp. 6864-65._)

Sievers claims not to have done anything in this connection since the
orders originated with Himmler himself. Consequently there was nothing
caused by his own initiative. (_German Tr. pp. 5685-86._)

At that time Rascher was at Dachau concentration camp most of the time,
while Sievers came there very rarely. Therefore it was much easier for
Rascher than for Sievers to inform the camp commander of his wishes.

Rascher refused to use one of the four women for experiments in
rewarming through body heat because this woman possessed beyond doubt
the characteristics of the Nordic race. Rascher reported this to the
camp commander and to the adjutant of the Reich Leader SS. (_NO-323,
Pros. Ex. 94._) In this connection, too, Sievers did not play any part.

The prosecution furthermore accuses Sievers of taking part in Dr.
Rascher’s dry-freezing experiments [Trockenkaelteversuche].

Sievers is not mentioned in the following documents submitted in this
connection: NO-319, Pros. Ex. 96; 1579-PS, Pros. Ex. 97; NO-431, Pros.
Ex. 99; 1580-PS, Pros. Ex. 107; 1615-PS, Pros. Ex. 109; NO-292, Pros.
Ex. 111; NO-240, Pros. Ex. 112; NO-241, Pros. Ex. 113; NO-432, Pros. Ex.
119.

These letters are neither addressed to him nor signed by him. Neither
have copies of them reached him nor have they passed through his hands.

The letter, dated 12 January 1943, from the Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer of
Ahnenerbe to SS Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff, contains the following
passage: “Since the freezing experiments depend on the season, valuable
time is lost as long as Dr. Rascher is not available.” (_NO-236, Pros.
Ex. 101._)

The witness Neff did not testify that Sievers knew of the dry-freezing
experiments [Trockenkaelteversuche].

Sievers knew through Himmler’s order of 13 December 1942, that Rascher
was supposed to carry out dry-freezing experiments. (_1612-PS, Pros. Ex.
79._) Only during this trial did Sievers come to know that Rascher
carried out such experiments in Dachau. Himmler had ordered these
experiments to be carried out on the terrain of Berghaus Sudelfeld. They
were planned for the winter of 1943-44. Sievers faked inquiries as a
result of which the terrain at Sudelfeld was supposed to be unsuited and
by this he succeeded in not having the dry-freezing experiments carried
out during the winter of 1943-44. The experiments, which Himmler then
ordered for the winter of 1944-45, did not take place because Rascher
was arrested in the spring of 1944. (_German Tr. pp. 5689-90._)

Since the dry-freezing experiments in the mountains, ordered by Himmler,
did not take place at all, Sievers can rightfully claim to have helped
to prevent them.

The freezing experiments which, beginning at the end of August 1942,
were carried out in Dachau concentration camp, originated from a
scientific research order the medical inspector [Inspekteur des
Sanitaetswesens] of the Luftwaffe had given Stabsarzt Professor Dr.
Holzloehner on 24 February 1942. At Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher’s suggestion,
corresponding experiments were carried out on human beings. For this
research work an experimental group “Seenot” (“Hardships at sea”),
consisting of Professor Dr. Holzloehner as chief, and Stabsarzt Dr.
Rascher and Dr. Finke, was organized. (_NO-286, Pros. Ex. 88_; _NO-268,
Pros. Ex. 106_; _NO-230, Pros. Ex. 115_.) The freezing experiments were
carried out in agreement with the Reich Leader SS. (_NO-286, Pros. Ex.
88._) In his letter, dated 19 February 1943, the medical inspector of
the Luftwaffe thanks the Reich Leader SS for the great help which the
cooperation with the SS afforded in carrying out the research work.
(_NO-268, Pros. Ex. 106._) On 6 March 1943 the medical inspector of the
Luftwaffe confirmed in a letter to Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff that he had
at once agreed to freezing experiments on human beings. (_NO-262, Pros.
Ex. 108._)

The prosecution argues that Sievers gave special support to Rascher as a
person and thus he revealed that he also wanted to support Rascher’s
experiments. Therefore reason exists for comment on Rascher’s
personality and Sievers’ attitude toward him.

Dr. Rascher was staff physician (Stabsarzt [Captain, M. C.]) of the
Luftwaffe reserve and at the same time a member of the general SS,
holding the rank of an SS Hauptsturmfuehrer. In a well-planned scheme he
always put this last mentioned position and his direct connection with
Himmler in the foreground. Orally or in writing he submitted all his
wishes to Himmler; to him directly did he send the reports on his work.
He referred to Himmler whenever he wanted to assert himself and his work
before other official agencies such as, for example, the Luftwaffe. He
appealed to Himmler when the chief physician of the SS [Reichsarzt SS]
Dr. Grawitz, and Professor Dr. Gebhardt, did not give him the
recognition and the support he believed were due him. Through Himmler he
tried to effect his establishment as a university lecturer. (_NO-283,
Pros. Ex. 82_; _NO-234., Pros. Ex. 83_; _NO-320, Pros. Ex. 103_;
_1616-PS, Pros. Ex. 105_; _1580-PS, Pros. Ex. 107_; _NO-270, Pros. Ex.
110_; _NO-240, Pros. Ex. 112_.)

There can be no doubt that on account of his protection by Himmler he
showed an autocratic mind toward his surroundings and also toward his
military superiors, brutality toward his inferiors, and disgusting
servility toward his protector, Himmler. (_German Tr. p. 674._)

In the Dachau concentration camp he was able to move without
restrictions and without control by accompanying guards. This was
impossible for occasional visitors like Sievers. (_German Tr. p. 5672_;
_German Tr. p. 5320_; _German Tr. pp. 6542-43_; _German Tr. p. 8620_;
_German Tr. pp. 8697 and 8887-88_; _Beiglboeck 31, Beiglboeck Ex. 12_.)

Holding the rank of a commanding general, the medical inspector of the
Luftwaffe deemed it advisable to assure SS Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff in
his letter of 6 March 1943 that he “would discuss the entire problem in
_old comradeship_ with Rascher personally.” (_NO-262, Pros. Ex. 108._)

A commanding general deemed it advisable to adopt this attitude,
contrary to all military customs, toward a staff physician because by
this conciliatory attitude, inconceivable under other circumstances, he
wanted to avoid a controversy with the latter on account of the latter’s
connections with Himmler.

What Rascher thought of Medical Inspector Dr. Hippke’s attitude is
revealed in the letter of 14 March 1943 to Dr. Rudolf Brandt in which he
states:

    “I would like to point out the extraordinary amiability of the
    inspector and his carefulness in all remarks relating to the
    SS.” (_NO-270, Pros. Ex. 110._)

To make sure that Himmler would under all circumstances be informed
about Rascher’s conference with Medical Inspector Hippke, he continues:

    “May I respectfully ask to inform, wherever that seems necessary
    to you, the Reich Leader SS of my report.” (_NO-270, Pros. Ex.
    110._)

The statement that Witness Dr. Punzengruber made about Rascher is very
characteristic:

    “His (Rascher’s) connections were so strong that practically
    every important superior trembled in fear of the intriguing
    Rascher, who consequently held a position of enormous power.”
    (_Sievers 44, Sievers Ex. 45._)

Rascher’s servility toward Himmler is already revealed by the bombastic
phrases with which he closes his letters to Himmler. To give a few
examples only:

    Letter dated 17 February 1943, from Rascher to Himmler: “With
    most obedient regards I remain in honest gratitude with Heil
    Hitler your very devoted S. Rascher.” (_1616-PS, Pros. Ex.
    105._)

    Letter, dated 11 April 1943, from Rascher to Himmler: “With most
    obedient regards and Heil Hitler I remain always, devoted to you
    in gratitude, your S. Rascher.” (_NO-240, Pros. Ex. 112._)

    Letter, dated 10 September 1942, from Rascher to Himmler: “In
    grateful admiration with Heil Hitler your very devoted S.
    Rascher.” (_NO-234, Pros. Ex. 83._)

The picture of Rascher is completed by the testimony that personally he
went to the highest authorities only. (_German Tr. p. 7966._)

Sievers is also brought into connection with Dr. Rascher’s attempt to
establish himself as a university lecturer.

In his “educational history” [“Ausbildungsverlauf”] Rascher mentions
that the Reich Leader SS (Himmler) ordered him to establish himself as a
university lecturer with one of his two papers: “Attempts at Rescue from
High Altitude” [“Versuche zur Rettung aus grossen Hoehen”] and “Attempts
at the Saving of Frozen Humans” [“Versuche zur Rettung ausgekuehlter
Menschen”]. (_NO-230, Pros. Ex. 115._)

By a letter, dated 12 August 1943, from Dr. Rudolf Brandt of the
personal staff of the Reich Leader SS, Sievers is entrusted with this
affair. This letter is not at our disposal. On 27 September 1943, that
is after more than 6 weeks, Sievers answers that he introduced Rascher
to Professor Dr. Blome and SS Brigadefuehrer Mentzel. The former had
talked to Professor Dr. Pfannenstiel of Marburg. On 21 March 1944, that
is almost 6 months after the letter just mentioned, Sievers reports to
Dr. Brandt on the further development of the case of Dr. Rascher’s
establishment as a university lecturer. The attempt in Marburg had
failed and consequently they would have to try to establish Rascher as a
lecturer at Strasbourg University. (_NO-290, Pros. Ex. 121._)

Rascher’s arrest freed Sievers from the necessity of taking any further
action. The fact that Sievers was involved, as far as the establishment
as a university lecturer is concerned, not only in Rascher’s case, is
revealed, for example, by Sievers’ 1943 diary, entry of 9 February 1943
concerning the establishment as a lecturer of Dr. Schuetrumpf (_NO-538,
Pros. Ex. 122_); furthermore, entry of 22 February 1943 concerning the
establishment as a lecturer of Dr. Rudolph; furthermore, Sievers’ 1944
diary, entry of 22 February 1944, concerning the establishment as a
lecturer of Dr. Schmidt-Rohr. (_3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123._)

If, in case of Rascher’s establishment as a lecturer, Sievers was acting
only as in other similar cases of members of Ahnenerbe, then this was
one of his tasks as Reich manager [Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer] of Ahnenerbe
and he cannot be charged with special activity on Rascher’s behalf.

                 *        *        *        *        *

There is no indication that Sievers had known, before the experiments
started, that they could become immoderate or inhuman. Neither as far as
planning nor as far as the direction was concerned nor in any other way
had Sievers anything to do with the carrying out of the experiments.

Furthermore the question must be answered whether Sievers did not gain
knowledge through Rascher’s reports, which he received while the
experiments were carried out, of the criminal character of Rascher’s
experiments.

The prosecution submitted the following reports of Dr. Rascher: Final
report, dated 10 October 1942, of Professor Dr. Holzloehner, Dr. Finke,
Dr. Rascher (_NO-428, Pros. Ex. 91._) Interim report, dated 15 August
1942, of Dr. Rascher. (_1618-PS, Pros. Ex. 84._) Report, dated 17
February 1943, of Dr. Rascher. (_1616-PS, Pros. Ex. 105._) These reports
were sent by Rascher directly to Himmler as can be ascertained from the
documents themselves or from the accompanying letters. None of the
documents indicates that a copy of the reports went to the Ahnenerbe or
that they came to Sievers’ knowledge in some other way. Sievers denies
that he obtained knowledge of these reports.

Sievers did not take part in the conference of 26-27 October 1942, as
can be clearly seen from the list of those present. (_NO-401, Pros. Ex.
93._) Sievers, also, never received a written report on the conference.
Also the secretary of many years’ standing of the Ahnenerbe, the
witness, Dr. Gisela Schmitz, has stated that she never saw reports about
experiments of Rascher. Since all the incoming mail was delivered first
to her she would necessarily have seen any such reports. (_Sievers 45,
Sievers Ex. 46._) Even if Sievers—as he did not—should have obtained
knowledge of one or another of the reports, he cannot be expected to
have formed an independent opinion on the permissibility of human
experiments from the point of view of medical professional ethics.

Sievers had neither the power nor the opportunity to interfere with the
sub-chilling experiments, or to prevent them or bring them to a stop. It
must be pointed out again and again that Sievers was competent only for
administrative affairs.

Everything that Sievers could do for the prevention of the experiments
was done. In the cases of the experiments at Dachau, Sievers’ influence
was nil. On the other hand he was able to prevent some experimental
activity on Rascher’s part by procrastinating the dry-cold experiments
[Trockenkaelteversuche] which should have been carried out in the
mountains.

                 *        *        *        *        *

          _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT WELTZ_

Document 343-A-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 62, is the only document
submitted in this connection [freezing experiments] and mentioning the
name of Professor Weltz. It is a letter by Field Marshal Milch, dated 20
May 1942, to SS Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff, Chief of the Personal Staff,
Reich Leader SS. In this letter Field Marshal Milch says that the
high-altitude experiments were completed and that there was no real
reason for their continuation. The letter continues: “The carrying out
of experiments concerning the problem of distress at sea, on the other
hand, is important; they were prepared in direct agreement with the
authorities. Oberstabsarzt Weltz is instructed to carry them through and
Stabsarzt Rascher is also made available for them until further notice.”

Obviously, the prosecution intends to take this letter as basis for the
assertion that Professor Weltz participated in the planning and the
carrying out of the experiments. At the session of 8 May 1947, (_Tr. p.
7237_) the prosecutor referred to this letter and drew the conclusion
therefrom that Field Marshal Milch, pursuant to the information he had
obtained from Professor Hippke on 20 May, thought that Rascher still
belonged to the office of Weltz in Munich and that Professor Weltz was
entrusted with the carrying out of the freezing experiments for this
reason. If and to what extent Field Marshal Milch was informed about the
actual events may be left undecided. It is merely established that
Professor Hippke already knew at that time that Stabsarzt Rascher no
longer belonged to the office of Weltz. This appears with certainty from
NO-296, Prosecution Exhibit 58, which is the letter of the Medical
Inspector of the Luftwaffe of 27 April 1942 to the Chief of the Personal
Staff of the Reich Leader SS, from the reply to Wolff’s application to
Hippke of 16 April 1942, in which Wolff asks for the extension of
Stabsarzt Rascher’s assignment to the DVL (German Research Institute for
Aviation), Dachau Branch. There is, therefore, no doubt that on 20 May
1942, Hippke knew that at that time Rascher no longer belonged to Weltz’
office. How it happened that the name of Professor Weltz was mentioned
in this document was established by Professor Hippke’s testimony as
witness in the trial against Erhard Milch. (_Weltz 3, Weltz Ex. 7._)
Professor Hippke testified in this connection that in a discussion at
the beginning of June 1942 he was informed by Rascher that the latter
had received orders from the Reich Leader SS (Himmler) to carry out
freezing experiments. A report on this conference is contained in
NO-283, Prosecution Exhibit 82. Supplementing this report, Rascher’s
report on his conference with Professor Hippke, Hippke himself testified
that he was thinking of Professor Weltz because he knew that Professor
Weltz—in his institute in Munich—had been working on problems of
freezing with animal experiments. Later, he had abandoned this plan to
ask Professor Weltz to cooperate in the carrying out of these
experiments because he had become convinced that the theoretical work
was not the point but the practical experience on freezing problems and
that not Professor Weltz but Professor Holzloehner had the greater
practical experience.

However, it has been established that Professor Weltz never received
such an order and also that he was not otherwise concerned in any way
with the carrying out of the freezing experiments. This is proved by the
testimony of the defendant Weltz in his own case, (_Tr. 7108-09_), and
by the affidavit of Professor Weltz’ co-worker Dr. Wendt. (_Weltz 23,
Weltz Ex. 21._)

For the rest, Weltz’ name does not appear in any connection in any of
the numerous documents relating to the problem of freezing experiments
submitted by the prosecution. On the contrary, these documents show
clearly who from the Luftwaffe was actually ordered to carry out these
experiments and who carried them out in Dachau.

The fact that Professor Weltz was not even requested to participate in
the planning of the freezing experiments, appears clearly from Document
NO-283, Prosecution Exhibit 82, already discussed, and above all without
objection.

                 *        *        *        *        *

That Professor Weltz refused to participate in the experiments after he
learned about them was firmly established on the other hand by the
evidence submitted by the defense which in turn is supported by the
documents submitted by the prosecution. Document 1610-PS, Prosecution
Exhibit 73, submitted by the prosecution appears to have special weight
as evidence in this connection. It is Rascher’s letter to Himmler of 9
October 1942. In this letter Rascher asks Himmler to see to it that the
apparatus necessary for chemical analysis be put at his disposal by
laboratories not working to full capacity. He points to the fact that
the Weltz Institute does not make apparatus available to him, as it was
allegedly used there for freezing experiments with shaved cats, and the
institute needed these apparatus for its own use. Moreover, the
affidavit of the witness Dr. v. Werz (_Weltz 4, Weltz Ex. 11_) according
to which Professor Weltz refused to furnish apparatus for freezing
experiments at Dachau, further proves this disapproval on the part of
Professor Weltz of the freezing experiments carried out at Dachau.
Moreover, it appears also from NO-3674, Prosecution Exhibit 549. Here,
an attempt is made to procure the apparatus (colorimeter) which was not
delivered by Weltz from somewhere else. From 1609-PS, Prosecution
Exhibit 92, it becomes apparent to what danger Professor Weltz exposed
himself by his attitude against Rascher. It is a letter of the Reich
Leader SS of 24 October 1942 to Rascher. In it Himmler acknowledges the
receipt of Rascher’s letter, dated 9 October 1942, (_1610-PS, Pros. Ex.
73_) mentioned above in which Rascher complains about Professor Weltz’
attitude. In reply to this complaint Himmler writes:

    “People who today still disapprove of human experiments and
    would rather have German soldiers die of the consequences of
    freezing I consider to be guilty of treason and high treason,
    and I shall have no compunction to report the names of these
    gentlemen to the authorities concerned. You are authorized by me
    to inform the offices concerned of this of my opinion.”

From Sievers’ testimony in direct interrogation it appears,
unequivocally, that this referred to Professor Weltz. In this regard
Sievers declared the following: “I can only say this in respect to Weltz
himself, for Herr Rascher, as I already stated in reply to your
question, mentioned in this connection Weltz as a participant.”

The defendant Sievers also declared that in view of Rascher’s character,
as known to him, it could be expected that Rascher would make use of the
powers given him with respect to “those guilty of treason and high
treason,” among others also against Professor Weltz.

In the course of the cross-examination of Weltz the prosecution
intimated in a veiled manner that Professor Weltz might have moved
objects and files or might have put apparatus at the disposal of the
Dachau experiments.

Since the prosecution could not submit evidence of any weight in this
respect it is unnecessary to go into this. In the cross-examination
itself it became apparent that all the files and apparatus were in
existence at the end of the war and that Weltz himself had made
suggestions to hand over his institute in an orderly manner to the
Americans. (_Tr. pp. 7241-7242._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_

              Pros.
Doc. No.     Ex. No.             Description of Document              Page
NO-234          83    Letter from Rascher to Himmler, 10 September     219
                        1942, transmitting intermediate report on
                        freezing experiments (1618-PS).
1618-PS         84    Intermediate report, 10 September 1942, on       220
                        intense chilling experiments in Dachau
                        concentration camp.
1611-PS         85    Letter from Himmler to Rascher and Sievers, 22   221
                        September 1942, ordering rewarming in
                        freezing experiments through physical
                        warmth.
NO-285          86    Letter from Rascher to Rudolf Brandt, 3          221
                        October 1942, stating that Sievers would
                        obtain four gypsy women for rewarming
                        through body warmth.
1619-PS         87    Teletype from commandant of Dachau               223
                        concentration camp to Rudolf Brandt, 7
                        October 1942, stating that four women would
                        be available from Ravensbrueck concentration
                        camp for Rascher’s experiments.
NO-286          88    Letter from Goering’s office to Himmler, 8       223
                        October 1942, with attached invitation to
                        the conference on “Medical Problems Arising
                        from Hardships of Sea and Winter.”
1613-PS         90    Letter from Rascher to Himmler, 16 October       225
                        1942, transmitting report on cooling
                        experiments on human beings (NO-428).
NO-428          91    Report of 10 October 1942, on cooling            226
                        experiments on human beings.
1609-PS         92    Letter from Himmler to Rascher, 24 October       244
                        1942, and note by Rudolf Brandt.
NO-323          94    Memorandum of Rascher on women used for          245
                        rewarming warming in freezing experiments, 5
                        November, 1942.
NO-320         103    Letter from Sievers to Brandt, 28 January        246
                        1943, and Rascher’s report on his
                        discussions with Grawitz and Poppendick.
1616-PS        105    Letter from Rascher to Himmler, 17 February      249
                        1943, and summary of experiments for
                        rewarming of chilled human beings by animal
                        warmth, 12 February 1943.
NO-268         106    Letter from Hippke to Himmler, 19 February       252
                        1943, on freezing experiments in Dachau.
1580-PS        107    Letter from Himmler to Rascher, 26 February      253
                        1943, on freezing experiments in the
                        concentration camps Auschwitz and Lublin.
NO-292         111    Letter from Rascher to Rudolf Brandt, 4 April    253
                        1943, reporting on dry-freezing experiments
                        in Dachau.
NO-322         114    Letter from Rascher to Keindl, 28 April 1943,    254
                        about previous freezing experiments
                        conducted at Sachsenhausen.
NO-231         116    Letter from Rascher to Sievers, 17 May 1943,     255
                        concerning a conference with Gebhardt on
                        freezing experiments.
NO-432         119    Letter from Rascher to Neff, 21 October 1943,    258
                        concerning dry-freezing experiments.
NO-690         120    List of research projects from the files of      259
                        the Reich Research Council.
                               _Testimony_

Extracts from the testimony of Tribunal witness Walter Neff            260
Extract from the testimony of defendant Handloser                      265
Extract from the testimony of defendant Schroeder                      269
Extracts from the testimony of defendant Sievers                       274

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-234
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 83

    LETTER FROM RASCHER TO HIMMLER, 10 SEPTEMBER 1942, TRANSMITTING
         INTERMEDIATE REPORT ON FREEZING EXPERIMENTS (1618-PS)

Dr. med. Sigmund Rascher                           Munich, Trogerstr. 56
                                          at present Berlin, 10 Sep 1942
My dear Reich Leader,

May I submit in the enclosure the first intermediary report about the
freezing experiments?

In the beginning of October, a meeting on the subject of freezing
experiments is to take place. Professor Dr. Holzloehner, participating
in our Dachau experiments on behalf of the Luftwaffe, wants to give on
this occasion an account of the results of our experiments. SS
Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers, who surveyed the experiments in Dachau
last week, believes that if any report was to be made at a meeting, I
should be called upon to submit the report. A discussion with other
experts on freezing experiments would surely be very valuable. I
therefore request your decision.

1. Can a report be made elsewhere before the oral report has been
submitted to you, my Reich Leader?

2. Is my participation in the conference on the subject of the freezing
experiments of the Luftwaffe ordered by you, my Reich Leader?

I will take care that the report is submitted in the manner appropriate
for top secret matter.

                                  Yours gratefully and respectfully
                                                         Heil Hitler!
                              [Signed] Yours very devotedly, S. RASCHER
1 enclosure

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1618-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 84

INTERMEDIATE REPORT, 10 SEPTEMBER 1942, ON INTENSE CHILLING EXPERIMENTS
                      IN DACHAU CONCENTRATION CAMP

S. Rascher
Intermediate report on intense chilling experiments in the Dachau Camp,
                       started on 15 August 1942
_Experimental procedure_

The experimental subjects (VP) were placed in the water, dressed in
complete flying uniform, winter or summer combination, and with an
aviator’s helmet. A life jacket made of rubber or kapok was to prevent
submerging. The experiments were carried out at water temperatures
varying from 2.5° to 12°. In one experimental series, the occiput (brain
stem) protruded above the water, while in another series of experiments
the occiput (brain stem) and back of the head were submerged in water.

Electrical measurements gave low temperature readings of 26.4° in the
stomach and 26.5° in the rectum. Fatalities occurred only when the brain
stem and the back of the head were also chilled. Autopsies of such fatal
cases always revealed large amounts of free blood, up to one-half liter,
in the cranial cavity. The heart invariably showed extreme dilation of
the right chamber. As soon as the temperature in these experiments
reached 28°, the experimental subjects died invariably, despite all
attempts at resuscitation. The above discussed autopsy finding
conclusively proved the importance of a warming protective device for
head and occiput when designing the planned protective clothing of the
foam type.

Other important findings, common in all experiments, should be
mentioned, marked increase of the viscosity of the blood, marked
increase of hemoglobin, an approximate five-fold increase of the
leukocytes, invariable rise of blood sugar to twice its normal value.
Auricular fibrillation made its appearance regularly at 30°.

During attempts to save severely chilled persons [Unterkuehlte], it was
shown that rapid rewarming was in all cases preferable to slow
rewarming, because after removal from the cold water, the body
temperature continued to sink rapidly. I think that for this reason we
can dispense with the attempt to save intensely chilled subjects by
means of animal heat.

Rewarming by animal warmth—animal bodies or women’s bodies—would be
too slow. As auxiliary measures for the prevention of intense chilling,
improvements in the clothing of aviators come alone into consideration.
The foam suit with suitable neck protector which is being prepared by
the German Institute for the Textile Research, Munich-Gladbach, deserves
first priority in this connection. The experiments have shown that
pharmaceutical measures are probably unnecessary if the flier is still
alive at the time of rescue.

                                              [Signed] DR. S. RASCHER
Munich—Dachau, 10 September 1942.

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1611-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 85

LETTER FROM HIMMLER TO RASCHER AND SIEVERS, 22 SEPTEMBER 1942, ORDERING
       REWARMING IN FREEZING EXPERIMENTS THROUGH PHYSICAL WARMTH

                                 Secret
Reich Leader SS
Rf/Dr. AR/19/30/42
                                                  Personal Headquarters
                                                        Reich Leader SS
                                                      22 September 1942
1. Dr. Rascher
 Munich—Dachau

I have received the intermediate report on the chilling experiments in
Camp Dachau.

Despite everything, I would so arrange the experiments that all
possibilities, prompt warming, medicine, body warming, will be executed
in positive experiment orders.

                                                  [Signed] H. HIMMLER
2. SS—Lt. Col. Sievers
Berlin
A carbon copy with the request for acknowledgment.
                                                          SS Lt. Col.
                                                              25 Sep 42

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-285
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 86

   LETTER FROM RASCHER TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 3 OCTOBER 1942, STATING THAT
SIEVERS WOULD OBTAIN FOUR GYPSY WOMEN FOR REWARMING THROUGH BODY WARMTH

Dr. med. Sigmund Rascher; Munich, Trogerstr. 56, 3 October 42

Most honored Obersturmbannfuehrer!

First of all I want to thank you very much for “Das glaeserne Meer”
(“The Glass Ocean”). My wife and myself are very happy to possess now a
complete set of these books. I have already read the book with great
interest.

The Reich Leader SS wants to be informed of the state of the
experiments. I can announce that the experiments have been concluded,
with the exception of those on warming with body heat. The final report
will be ready in about 5 days. Professor Holzloehner, for reasons that I
cannot fathom, does not himself want to make the report to the Reich
Leader Himmler and has asked me to attend to it. This report must be
made before 20 October, because the great Luftwaffe conference on
freezing takes place in Nuernberg on 25 October. The report on the
results of our research _must_ be made there, to assure that they be
used in time for the troops. May I ask you to arrange for a decision
from the Reich Leader regarding the final report to him, and the
submission to him of the relevant material?

Today I received your letter of 22 September 1942, in which the Reich
Leader orders that the experiments on warming through body heat must
absolutely be conducted. Because of incomplete address it was delayed.
Today I asked Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers to send a telegram to the
camp commander immediately, to the effect that four gypsy women be
procured at once from another camp. Moreover, I asked SS
Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers to take steps to have the low-pressure
chamber made ready for use.

The report to Field Marshal Milch planned for 11 September could not be
made, as you have discovered, because he was prevented from attending,
and no representative was commissioned to receive it. As the Reich
Leader had not empowered me to report to anyone in the Reich Air
Ministry (RLM), I abstained from making the report, which rather nettled
the gentlemen of the Medical Inspectorate [Sanitaetsinspektion]. I
immediately informed Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers. For the time being
the report is being held as a military secret at the German Aviation
Research Institute (DVL) together with a distribution list prepared by
the Reich Air Ministry. The distribution of the copies, however, has not
yet taken place, because, as I said, the report has not yet been made to
Milch. I assume that you were informed of this whole business long ago.
What shall we do now?

I wish to enclose a letter of thanks to the Reich Leader from the former
prisoner Neff. At the same time I should like to thank you very much for
your efforts; and let me beg you, should opportunity offer, to convey to
the Reich Leader my most sincere thanks for his granting of this
request. I did not write to the Reich Leader in person, in order not to
make any further demands on his valuable time.

   With best wishes and
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                 Yours most sincerely
                                                   [Signed] S. RASCHER.

                                 PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1619-PS
                                 PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 87

TELETYPE FROM COMMANDANT OF DACHAU CONCENTRATION CAMP TO RUDOLF BRANDT,
    7 OCTOBER 1942, STATING THAT FOUR WOMEN WOULD BE AVAILABLE FROM
       RAVENSBRUECK CONCENTRATION CAMP FOR RASCHER’S EXPERIMENTS

            Reich Security Main Office (RSHA) Message Center

                 *        *        *        *        *

CONCENTRATION CAMP DACHAU 9793 7 OCTOBER 1942 1630-FR-

TO SS OBERSTURMBANNFUEHRER DR. BRANDT BERLIN PRINZ ALBRECHT STR. 8. THE
HEADQUARTERS CONCENTRATION CAMP DACHAU REQUESTS CHIEF OF THE AMTSGRUPPE
SS BRIGADEFUEHRER GLUECKS TO HAVE THE FOUR WOMEN ORDERED BY THE REICH
LEADER SS FOR STABSARZT DR. RASCHER FOR THE PURPOSE OF EXPERIMENTS SENT
IMMEDIATELY FROM RAVENSBRUECK TO DACHAU.

SIGNED WEISS, SS STURMBANNFUEHRER AND COMMANDANT OF THE CAMP.

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-286
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 88

 LETTER FROM GOERING’S OFFICE TO HIMMLER, 8 OCTOBER 1942, WITH ATTACHED
INVITATION TO THE CONFERENCE ON “MEDICAL PROBLEMS ARISING FROM HARDSHIPS
                           OF SEA AND WINTER”

The Reich Air Minister
and Commander in chief
  of the Luftwaffe
Az: 55 No. 5 340/secret/42 (L. I. 14, 2IIB)

                                             Berlin W 8, 8 October 1942
                                                   Leipziger Strasse 7
                             By Messenger!
Subject: Research order on Freezing [Abkuehlung].

Reference:     1. D. R. d. L. and Ob. d. L. Ch. d. Lw. L. In. 14 Az: 55
                 No. 20058/41 (2II B) dated: 24/2/42

               2. D. R. d. L. and Ob. d. L. Ch. d. Lw. L. In. 14 Az: 21
                 o-r No. 10909/42 (1 II A) dated: 6/8/42

To the Reich Leader SS

The Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe has given an
order for research to the Stabsarzt Professor Dr. Holzloehner, reference
above, dated 24 February 1942, for work on the following problem:

    “The effect of freezing on warm-blooded subjects.”

At the proposal of Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher appropriate examinations were
made of human beings, and in agreement with the Reich Leader SS suitable
SS facilities were used for the examinations.

In order to carry out these examinations a research group “Hardships at
Sea” (“Seenot”) was set up, consisting of Professor Dr. Holzloehner as
leader and Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher and Dr. Finke.

The leader of this research group reported that the examinations have
been concluded.

It is intended to dissolve the research group at the latest by 15
October 1942.

The research documents and an extensive report will be presented to the
Reich Leader SS by Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher. It is requested that the
originals or copies of the report and of the documents be put at the
disposal of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe.

It is intended to make the results, in the form of an extract,
accessible to experts at a conference which will take place in Nuernberg
on 26 and 27 October 1942. The agenda schedule of the conference is
closed.

The SS Central Office, Medical Department [SS Hauptamt, Sanitaetsamt]
has been invited to this discussion by letter, dated 30 September 1942.

It is further requested to abstain from forwarding the documents and the
report to other nonmedical offices.

                                         Draft signed [Im Entwurf gez.]
   By order
                                                             WULLEN
                                                            True Copy
                                                    [Signature] ANTHONY
1 enclosure
[Enclosure]
The Inspector of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe

Conference on “Medical Problems Arising from Hardships of Sea and
Winter” on 26 and 27 October 1942 in Nuernberg, Hotel “Der Deutsche
Hof,” 29-35 Frauentorgraben. Chairman of the conference: Stabsarzt
Professor Dr. Anthony, L. In. 14.

_Tentative schedule_:

26 October 1942.

                 *        *        *        *        *

15.35 o’clock—Oberstabsarzt Dr. Weltz:
                   “Warming Up after Freezing to the Danger Point”.
15.55 o’clock—Stabsarzt Professor Holzloehner:
                   “Prevention and Treatment of Freezing.”
16.40 o’clock—Discussion.

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1613-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 90

LETTER FROM RASCHER TO HIMMLER, 16 OCTOBER 1942, TRANSMITTING REPORT ON
              COOLING EXPERIMENTS ON HUMAN BEINGS (NO-428)

Dr. Sigmund Rascher
                                                   Munich 16 October 42
                                                        Troger Str. 56
Highly esteemed Reich Leader!

Permit me to submit the attached final report on the super-cooling
experiments performed at Dachau. This report does not contain the course
and results of a series of experiments with drugs as well as experiments
with animal body heat [animalische Waerme] which are now being
conducted. Likewise this report does not contain the microscopic
pathological examinations of the brain tissues of the deceased. I was
surprised at the extraordinary microscopic findings in this field. I
will carry out experiments before the start of the conference in which
the effect of cooling will be discussed and I hope to be able to present
further results by that time. My two coworkers left Dachau about 8 days
ago.

In the hope that you, highly esteemed Reich Leader, will be able to
spare a quarter of an hour to listen to an oral report, I remain, with
the most obedient regards and

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                  Yours respectfully.
                                                   [Signed] S. RASCHER.

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-428
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 91

   REPORT OF 10 OCTOBER 1942, ON COOLING EXPERIMENTS ON HUMAN BEINGS

                   STABSARZT PROF. DR. E. HOLZLOEHNER
                        STABSARZT DR. S. RASCHER
                         STABSARZT DR. E. FINKE

                     _I. Problem of the Experiment_

Up to the present time there has been no basis for the treatment of
shipwrecked persons who have been exposed for long periods of time to
low-water temperatures. These uncertainties extended to the possible
physical and pharmacological methods of attack. It was not clear, for
example, whether those who had been rescued should be warmed quickly or
slowly. According to the current instructions for treating frozen
people, a slow warming up seemed to be indicated. Certain theoretical
considerations could be adduced for a slow warming. Well-founded
suggestions were missing for a promising medicinal therapy.

All these uncertainties rested in the last analysis upon the absence of
well-founded concepts concerning the cause of death by cold in human
beings. In the meantime, in order to clarify this question, a series of
animal experiments were started. And, indeed, these officials who wished
to make definite suggestions to the doctors in the sea-rescue service
had to assume a great deal of responsibility if it came to a question of
convincing and consistent results in these animal experiments. At this
particular point it is especially difficult to carry the findings in
animals over into the human field. In the warm-blooded, one finds a
varied degree of development in the heat-regulating mechanism. Besides
this, the processes in the skin of the pelted animals cannot be carried
over to man.

               _II. General Procedure of the Experiment_

The effect of _water temperatures_ of 2°, 3°, to 12° C. [34°, 37°, to
54° F.] were investigated. A tank 2×2×2 m. [6-2/3×6-2/3×6-2/3 ft.]
served as an _experimental basin_. The water temperature was attained by
addition of ice, and remained constant during the experiment. The
experimental subjects were generally dressed in _equipment_ such as the
flier wears, consisting of underclothing, uniform, a one piece summer or
winter protective suit, helmet, and aviators fur-lined boots. In
addition they wore a life preserver of rubber or kapok. The effect of
_additional protective clothing_ against water-cold was tested in a
special series of experiments, and in another series the _cooling of the
unclothed person_ was studied.

The _bodily warmth_ was measured _thermoelectrically_. Following
preliminary experiments in which gastric temperatures were measured by a
thermic sound, we adopted the procedure of continuously registering
_rectally_ the body temperature [Kerntemperatur]. Parallel with this,
the recording of the _skin temperature_ was undertaken. The point of
measurement was the skin of the back at the level of the fifth thoracic
certebral process. The thermoelectrical measurements were controlled
before, during, and after the experiments by thermometric tests of the
cheek and rectal temperature.

In severe cooling, _checking of the pulse_ is difficult. The pulse
becomes weaker, the musculature become stiff, and shivering sets in.
Auscultation during the experiment by means of a tube stethoscope
fastened over the tip of the heart proved effective. The tubes were led
out of the uniform and made possible the continuous _listening to the
heart during the stay in the water_.

_Electrocardiographic controls_ were not possible in the water. After
removal from the water they were possible only in those cases in which,
a too severe muscle shivering did not disturb the electrocardiograph
records.

The following _chemical studies_ were carried out: following up of the
_blood sugar picture_ (continuous); the _sodium chloride picture_ in the
serum; the _nonprotein nitrogen_ (_Rest-N_); the _alkali reserve_; the
alkali reserve of the venous and arterial blood and _sedimentation rate_
(before and after the experiment). Besides this the general _blood
condition_ and _viscosity_ were followed during the experiment, and
before and after the experiment the _resistance_ of the red blood cells
and the protein content of the blood plasma (this refractometrically)
were measured.

The following _urinalyses_ were made regularly: _sediment_, _albumen_,
_sugar_, _sodium chloride_, _acetone_, _acetic acid_, as well as a
qualitative _albumen_ determination.

In part of the experiment lumbar and suboccipital punctures were made as
well as corresponding spinal fluid studies.

Among _physical_ and _therapeutic measures_ the following were tested:

    _a._ Rapid warming by means of a _hot_ bath.

    _b._ Warming by means of a _light cradle_.

    _c._ Warming in a heated _sleeping bag_.

    _d._ Vigorous _massage_ of the whole body.

    _e._ _Wrapping in covers._

    _f._ _Diathermy of the heart._

In addition the following drugs were given: _Strophanthin_ i. v.;
_Cardiaz_ 1 i. v. and i. c.; _Lobelin and Coramin_ i. v. and i. c. In
other experiments alcohol or grape sugar was given.

A part of the experiments was begun under _narcosis_ (8 cc. _Evipan_ i.
v.).

                 _III. The Clinical Picture of Cooling_

The clinical picture as well as the behavior of the body temperature
showed certain regularities in the general course; the time of
appearance of certain phenomena was, however, subject to very great
_individual variations_. As one might expect, a _good general physical
condition_ delayed the cooling and the concomitant phenomena. Further
differences were conditioned by the _position of the subject in the
water_ and the _manner of clothing_. Furthermore, differences showed up
between experiments in which the subject lay horizontally in the water
so that the nape of the neck and the back of the head were splashed with
water, and others in which neck and head protruded freely out of the
water.

Peculiarly, the _actual water temperatures_ between 2° C. and 12° C.
[35° and 54° F.] had no demonstrable effect upon the rate of the
cooling. Naturally such an effect must exist. But since besides the
already mentioned individual differences and those due to experimental
conditions, the various subjects cooled on different days at different
rates of speed, the effect of the actual water temperatures between 2°
and 12° disappears behind such variations.

If the experimental subject was placed in the water under narcosis, one
observed a certain arousing effect. The subject began to groan and made
some defensive movements. In a few cases a state of excitation
developed. This was especially severe in the cooling of head and neck.
But never was a complete cessation of the narcosis observed. The
defensive movements ceased after about 5 minutes. There followed a
progressive rigor, which developed especially strongly in the arm
musculature; the arms were strongly flexed and pressed to the body. The
rigor increased with the continuation of the cooling, now and then
interrupted by tonic-clonic twitchings. With still more marked sinking
of the body temperature it suddenly ceased. These cases ended fatally,
without any successful results from resuscitation efforts.

In the course of the narcosis experiments the evipan effects in a few
cases went directly over into a cold narcosis; in other cases one could
determine a transitory return of consciousness, immediately following
the awakening effect already described; at any rate, the experimental
subjects were dizzy. Cold pain was not expressed.

Experiments without narcosis showed no essential differences in the
course of cooling. Upon entry into the water a severe cold shuddering
appeared. The cooling of the neck and back of the head was felt as
especially painful, but already after 5 to 10 minutes a significant
weakening of the pain sensation was observable. Rigor developed after
this time in the same manner as under narcosis, likewise the
tonic-clonic twitchings. At this point speech became difficult because
the rigor also affected the speech musculature.

Simultaneously with the rigor a severe _difficulty in breathing_ set in
with or without narcosis. It was reported that, so to speak, an iron
ring was placed about the chest. Objectively, already at the beginning
of this breathing difficulty, a marked _dilatation of the nostrils_
occurred. The _expiration was prolonged and visibly difficult_. This
difficulty passed over into a rattling and snoring breathing. However,
the breathing at this point was not especially deep as in Kussmaul’s
breathing nor were any Cheyne-Stokes breathing or Biot’s breathing to be
observed. Not in all subjects, but in a great number, a simultaneous
hindering during this breathing through very profuse _secretion of
mucous_ could be established. Under these conditions sometimes a white,
_fine-bubbled foam_ appeared at the mouth which reminded one of an
incipient _lung oedema_, though it was not possible to determine this
symptom with certainty by clinical auscultation; only a sharpened
unclean breath sound was audible. This foam might occur early, that is,
at rectal temperatures of 32° C. to 35° C.; [90°-95° F.]. No special
significance was to be attributed to this regarding the outcome of the
experiment which is the opposite of the described relaxation of rigor.
The _rate of breathing increased_ at the beginning of the experiment,
but after about 20 minutes it decreased to something like 24 per minute
with slight variations.

In general a definite _dulling of consciousness_ occurred at the
dropping of the body temperature of 31° C. [88° F.] rectal temperature.
Next, the subjects still responded to speech but finally answered very
sleepily. The _pupils_ dilated markedly. The contraction under light
became increasingly weaker. The gaze was directed overhead with a
compulsive fixation. After withdrawal from the water _an increase in the
reflexes_ was evident in spite of the rigor, and regularly a very marked
drawing up of the testicles occurred which practically disappeared into
the abdomen. Early in the experiment the _face_ was pale. After 40 to 50
minutes _cyanosis_ appeared. With this the face appeared redder, the
mucous membrane bluish-red. The skin veins were not maximally collapsed
and were virtually always penetrable.

The _heart activity_ showed a constant change independent of all other
individual variations, which was noticeable in all subjects. Upon
introduction into the water with narcotized subjects as well as
nonnarcotized subjects, the heart rate went suddenly to about 120 per
minute. At a rectal body temperature of about 34° C. [93° F.] it then
began to become increasingly slower and to sink continuously to about 50
per minute.

The bradycardia at a body temperature of about 29° to 30° C. [84° to 86°
F.] changed suddenly to an _arrythmia perpetua_ or, as the case may be,
to a _total irregularity_ and this began with a slow form of about 50
beats per minute; this slow form of irregularity could be transformed
into a faster one. The transformation to the faster form was not an
unfavorable sign regarding life.

When an electrocardiographic control after the experiment was possible,
it regularly showed a Vorhof flutter. Let it be anticipated _that this
irregularity could continue to exist after the cessation of the cooling
and a recovery of the body temperature to 33° or 34° C. [91° or 93° F.]
1½ to 2 hours after removal from the water_, but then customarily
changed of itself and without therapeutic aids into a coordinated heart
activity. In the same way let it be anticipated that in all cases with a
lethal termination, a sudden cessation of the heartbeat ensued upon an
irregularity of the slow type.

A check of the _blood pressure_ was attempted, but was in no case
satisfactory since an exact measurement was not possible in the decisive
stage of the experiment because of the severe rigor and muscle
fibrillation.

Reference has already been made to _individual differences in the
behavior of the rectal temperatures_. Figure 4 gives an example which
includes four experiments, in which four different experimental subjects
were cooled at identical water temperatures and with identical clothing.
It was shown that in water at 4.5° C. [40° F.] temperature the time
required for reaching a rectal temperature of about 29.5° C. [85° F.]
varies between 70 and 90 minutes. But nevertheless the diagram shows
that in spite of these individual differences, it is observable that the
progress of the rectal temperature proceeds according to rule. The body
temperature begins to sink rapidly from about 35° C. [95°-97° F.].

_It is of very great practical significance at this point that the body
temperature continues to sink virtually lineally for a considerable time
after removal from the water._ This continued drop can last 20 minutes
or more. During this drop an after-drop of 4° C. [7° F.] could be
observed, and indeed not only at temperatures under 30° C. [86° F.]. In
one case it was observed that an interruption of the experiment at 35°
C. [95° F.] after a further lapse of 20 minutes the rectal temperature
had fallen 4° to 5° C. [8° F.] more. We will later discuss the
“arresting” of this after-drop by physical measures.

In our experimental series, the lowest rectal temperatures which could
be survived varied individually just as did the progress of the
temperature drop. In general (in six cases) death occurred with a drop
in temperature to values between 24.2° and 25.7° C. [75.6° and 77.6°
F.]. In one case, however, a drop to 25.2° C. was survived. This
experiment fell outside the typical picture insofar as after 90 minutes
at 26.6° C. [79.9° F.] a virtually stationary condition of the rectal
temperature had become established for 85 minutes. We will come back
again to this special experiment.

The _skin temperature_ sinks or drops much more rapidly than the rectal
temperature. Within a minute there occurs a thorough saturation of the
articles of clothing. Correspondingly the skin temperature falls already
within 5 minutes to values between 24° and 19° C. [75° and 66° F.].
After 10 minutes it may have already dropped to 12° C. [54° F.]. Within
10 to 20 minutes more after the beginning of the experiment the
steepness of the drop changes considerably. The curve of the skin
temperature runs for some time, that is, for 15 to 30 minutes virtually
horizontal. After this time there follows a further but now slower drop
to the lowest figures, which may lie below 15° C. [59° F.] at the close
of the experiment.

Parallel experiments which compare the _course of the rectal
temperatures_ and the cooling of the body with and _without submersion
of neck and back of head_ showed great difference in temperature drop.
The curves pertain to the same experimental subject. The one with the
deep fall to 26° C. [79° F.] in 70 minutes was obtained with a water
temperature of 12° C. [54° F.] the other with a drop to 32.5° C. [90.4°
F.] in the same time resulted from a water temperature of 5.5° C. [41.9°
F.]. The very marked difference cannot be explained by a variation in
resistance of the particular person, but is to be attributed to the
position of the subject in the water and his head covering. In the
experiment with the water at 12° C. [54° F.] the subject, in a kapok
life preserver, lay flat in the water so that his neck and the back of
his head were well submerged; beyond this he did not wear a flier’s
helmet. In the other experiment with water at 5.5° C. [41.9° F.] the
head was covered with an aviator’s summer helmet without headphones. The
subject wore a rubber life preserver open at the back; with this, the
head is somewhat out of the water.

In order to follow up the effect of _isolated cooling of the neck and
the back of the head_ on consciousness, body temperature, and
circulation, this was undertaken in three special experiments. The
experimental subject lay horizontal; the back of the head and the neck
were dipped into a receptacle through which water of corresponding
temperature was continuously run. In an experiment of 3 hours duration
there occurred small temperature drops of not more than 0.8° C. [1.4°
F.]. The water temperature was 1° to 2° C. [34° to 35° F.]. In one case
after 50 minutes a marked sleepiness occurred which changed over into a
deep narcosis. The heart activity was variable, and obvious bradycardia
could not be observed. Irregularity never developed. Changes were not
seen in the electrocardiograph. On the other hand in all three subjects
the spinal fluid pressure was markedly increased after the ending of the
experiment to maximal values of 300 mm. After the experiment, ataxia and
definite Romberg phenomena were observed, as well as exaggeration of the
normal reflexes; pathological reflexes were absent.

          _IV. Blood, Spinal Fluid, and Urine During Freezing_

The _differential blood smears_ showed no special features during
cooling. On the other hand the number of white and red blood corpuscles
shows a regular change. The _number of leukocytes_ rapidly increases,
roughly with the beginning of the steeper temperature drop at about 35°
C. [95° F.] rectal temperature to values of from 25,000 to 27,000 per
cu. mm. After one hour a maximum may be reached and a falling-off begins
in the number of leukocytes, while the body temperature falls still
further. The number of red corpuscles undergoes an increase, though to a
relatively small degree, which in its course resembles the change in the
_number of leukocytes_. We saw increases up to 20 percent. This increase
is interrupted even earlier than the increase in the number of
leukocytes, so that both curves give no reflection of the temperature
curve. The increase of the erythrocytes corresponded to the increase of
the hemoglobin of from 10 to 20 percent. A reduction of the fragility of
the red corpuscles could not be demonstrated with certainty, on the
other hand, although in three experiments a definite hemolysis occurred.

The viscosity regularly increases with the beginning of the fall in
temperature. The rise can reach values up to 7.8. This rise occurs very
early, indeed, already at body temperatures of 35° C. [95° F.]. After
that the values remain relatively constant with further temperature
falls. The _albumen content of the plasma_ was likewise increased after
the experiment, on the average by 1 percent of the absolute value. Since
these measurements could not be made as often as those of viscosity for
technical reasons, the connection with the progress of the viscosity
remained unclear. Such a connection could not be recognized from the
absolute values obtained.

With the acceleration of the temperature drop, there always occurs a
more marked increase of the blood sugar to maximal values which may
attain an average _increase of 80 percent_ and in a few cases may reach
an _increase of over 100 percent_. According to that, the maximal value
of about 27.5° C. [81.5° F.] is reached and is maintained for some time.
It is to be observed that _as long as the temperature drop continues, in
no experiment was it possible to observe a decrease in these high blood
sugar values_. It is usually to be observed that a relatively rapid drop
of the blood sugar values sets in when, after removal from the water,
the temperature drop ceases and goes over into a temperature rise. We
consider these findings to be of theoretical significance. During the
isolated cooling of the neck and back of the head which was described in
section III the blood sugar remained constant.

In striking contrast to the increase of the blood sugar, there was never
established a _corresponding glycosuria_ in the urine collected
immediately after the experiment or withdrawn through a catheter,
although considerable quantities of urine averaging 500 cc. were found
in the bladder; in only two cases could traces of sugar (0.5 percent) be
demonstrated. This paradoxical behavior can, perhaps, be explained in
this manner: during the time of great blood sugar increase, a blocking
of the kidneys had occurred, and that the associated urine quantities
were formed before or after this blocking under reflex polyuria. Acetone
and acetic acid, likewise, could not be demonstrated in the urine.

The _alkali reserve_ in the arterial and venous blood was regularly very
much reduced at the end of the experiments. Experiments concerning
_oxygen saturation_ could not be carried out. According to the color of
the venous blood withdrawn from the arm veins, the saturation of this
blood must have been very greatly reduced; the blood was virtually black
as it came into the syringe. Noteworthy in this connection are the
autopsy findings which were undertaken directly after death. In these,
the blood in the right heart appeared very dark, and in the left heart
very bright red. According to this, one must calculate upon an _increase
in the saturation differential between the arteries and veins_.

_Sodium chloride_ and _nonprotein nitrogen_ in the blood were not clear
in the blood at the end of the experiments or increased within the limit
of error. _Sodium chloride in the urine_ was generally less,
corresponding to a reduction of the specific gravity. On the other hand
at the end of the experiments _traces of albumin_ could regularly be
demonstrated _in the urine_ and moderately increased leukocytes,
occasional erythrocytes, and epithelial cells in the sediments. In
particular cases, _albumin casts_ were also observed. The reaction of
the urine remained identical before and after the experiments virtually
without exception. The studies of the bile yielded no results.

_Lumbar and suboccipital_ punctures immediately after the experiments
showed a considerable _increase in fluid pressure_. On the average it
amounted to between 50 and 60 mm. In one case, an _increase to 420 mm._
was seen. The protein values were always normal. Cell increases did not
appear, likewise no abnormal deviation of the colloidal gold curve was
observed. The meaning of these findings for therapy is still to be
discussed later.

  _V. Recovery After Cooling and Its Dependence Upon Physiotherapeutic
                               Measures_

The important fact has already been referred to that after rescue from
the cold water, the body temperature sinks further and so a further
temperature reduction of 4° C. [7° F.] may take place. As was likewise
emphasized, this may occur as a postphenomenon not only when low
temperatures have been obtained already during the experiments, but it
can be noted also at final temperatures of 35° C. [95° F.]. A dependence
of this after-drop on the duration of the experiment could not be
established; as a result it is difficult to calculate in advance. This
fact becomes of great importance for practical measures; on the other
hand it makes it difficult to gain an insight into the manner in which
various physiotherapeutic measures affect the arresting of this
after-drop and the recovery of the body temperature. Only because of the
large number of the experiments was it possible to obtain well-founded
concepts of this.

The _flattest rise of the body temperature_ was to be observed when the
subject was merely dried off, wrapped in warm cover, and left to himself
after removal from the water. The recovery is greatly accelerated if the
subject is placed in a hot bath as soon as possible after the removal of
the wet articles of clothing. Warming under a light cradle assisted the
temperature rise. Vigorous massage had a favorable effect, however, only
if it was preceded by treatment in a hot bath or light cradle. _In no
case was it established that there was any indication of bad effects
from the hot water or the light cradle, or that the subject had been
harmed in any way._ On the other hand, it was observed in three cases
that a hot bath had doubtless a life saving effect. In two of these
cases there had been complete cessation of heart and breathing action,
and in one case the heart had stopped for several seconds after a
markedly slackened irregularity before the subject was placed into water
of not more than 50° C. [122° F.]. _As a result of this we can discard
all traditional objections to a sudden rewarming._

The favorable effect of a hot bath is still clearer in the observation
of the general condition of the subject than in the temperature curves,
although it cannot be presented objectively. The breathing very often
becomes “freer” immediately upon introduction into the hot water. The
hot water releases a strong stimulus; the unconscious subject often
reacts with an outcry. Soon thereafter there occurs a distinct lessening
of the severe rigor. The return of consciousness occurs sooner, and
indeed at temperatures at which it did not usually happen under other
methods of treatment.

In the first experiments with hot water treatment, this was continued
only for 10 minutes; after that the subjects were removed and vigorously
massaged. Under these circumstances it could be established that the
temperature rise continued during the rubbing, indeed in one experiment
the rise became steeper. As already indicated, this favorable effect of
dry rubbing was not so pronounced without preliminary treatment by heat.
It is important, too, that the rubbing be done when the severe spasm of
the peripheral vessels has already passed.

_In view of this, the hot hath is the best method of treatment of the
severely cooled person._ However, in the practice of sea rescue service
it will not be possible to carry out this method, since the necessary
means are not available in aircraft and boats. Under these circumstances
we must consider next only the rapid rewarming with light cradle or
electrically _heated sleeping bag_. Therefore a sleeping bag as now used
in the sea rescue service was also tested. It was evident that the
temperatures which can be developed by this means are not sufficient for
heat therapy. With those it was possible to reach a temperature of only
32° C. [90° F.] over the skin, with the heat turned on fully. Besides
this, the wall of the foot-section of the sleeping bag is only partly
heated; on the outer sides it remains completely cold. As long as no
improvement and strengthening of the heating equipment of the sack is
carried out, the sleeping bag can be considered only as a substitute for
wrapping in warm covers.

The warming by means of the _light cradle_ is more uneven than with a
hot bath. With warming by light one might expect severe local vessel
expansion with _danger of collapse_. Actually the subjects often
complained of dizziness and nausea after reaching consciousness if the
treatment lasted longer than 15 minutes. Occasionally vomiting occurred.
In these cases it is indicated to switch off the light cradle and to
pack the subject with covers. Apart from this it must be remembered that
during unconsciousness the subject should be protected against direct
contact with the lamps by means of covers, otherwise burns could occur
during clonic-tonic convulsions.

This suggests that “_short waves_” be employed to supply heat, since it
was shown in animal experimentation that by this means it is possible to
bring about a thorough warming of the whole animal, which leads to a
recovery of the animal with puzzling rapidity. We did not have the
proper equipment for a thorough warming of a human being by this means.
For this reason the _short wave therapy of the heart_ was tried. This
did not have any demonstrable effect. Above all, it is necessary to
advise against a practical application of this method, since there
exists the danger of prolonged burning even in full consciousness, as
the result of cold anaesthesia, even if the treating physician carefully
tries to avoid this.

The severe difficulty in breathing as well as the formation of foam
before the mouth, which reminded one of incipient lung oedema, seemed to
indicate oxygen therapy. Therefore this therapy was tried in four
experiments. It showed no effect on either the breathing or the heart
action. It has been pointed out that the arterial blood appears
especially light red.

                   _VI. Death After Cooling in Water_
               _Practical and Theoretical Considerations_

Reports to the effect that those who have been rescued at sea are
imperilled for a considerable time after rescue has aroused special
attention. It has been reported especially that sudden cases of death
occurred as much as 20 minutes to 90 minutes after rescue, and that in
mass catastrophes these sudden deaths could amount to mass-dying (rescue
collapse). These observations have set off far-reaching discussions.
Bleeding in the rewarming periphery, break-downs of neural and humoral
correlations and similar ideas have been brought up.

In contrast to this our experiments give a relatively simple explanation
of cold-death under these conditions. With the exception of a single
case, a total irregularity of the heart chamber could be definitely
demonstrated in all cases of cooling under 30° C. [86° F.], (50
experiments), when the rectal temperature reached 29° C. [84° F.] and
usually already at a cooling of 31° C. [88° F.]. The exception was an
experiment on an intoxicated subject, which is to be gone into more
fully below (_see sec. VII_).

_Furthermore heart-death was established clinically in all cases of
death observed by us._ In two cases breathing ceased simultaneously with
the heart activity. These were cases in which it was specially noted
that the neck and the back of the head lay deep in the water. In all
remaining cases breathing outlasted the clinical chamber cessation by as
much as 20 minutes. In part this was “normal, much decelerated
breathing,” in part an angonal form of gasping. As already referred to,
an auricular flutter could be demonstrated cardiographically during the
irregularity.

In cases in which a special _cooling of neck and back of head_ had
existed before death, the _autopsy_ showed _a marked brain oedema_, a
tight filling of the general brain cavity [Hirngefaesse] blood in the
spinal fluid as well as blood in the Michaelisrhomboid.

The heart findings warrant our taking a certain attitude toward _the
question of rescue collapse_. Death occurred relatively quickly after
removal from the water, which may be compared with rescue. The longest
interval involved was 14 minutes. It is to be noted, however, in the
first place, that almost certainly a much larger number of deaths would
have been observed if an active heat therapy had not almost regularly
been coupled directly with the completion of the experiment; in the
second place, that in such cases there would have been very much longer
intervals. We have already called attention repeatedly to the
after-cooling following the experiment. In every case where this had
proceeded to a certain point, countermeasures were taken, since the
experiments were never planned to end in death. One may well imagine,
however, that in mass catastrophes, in which almost exclusively rescue
collapse has heretofore been described, the therapeutic measures were
confined to an undressing and drying off of the rescued together with a
subsequent wrapping in covers. Under these conditions after-drops of
great magnitude and long duration were to be expected. In the course of
this delayed fall in temperature, a heart-death might occur as in our
experiments.

_We should like to emphasize that the irregularity per se is not to be
regarded in our experiments as a symptom of danger to life any more than
in the clinic, but rather as a sign of direct heart damage, which
increases continuously with further falling off of temperature, until
finally the heart fails. If the temperature drop is arrested, the slow
form of irregularity passes over into a rapid form._ This transition is
a favorable sign for survival; for this irregularity virtually always
passes over of itself after a time averaging 90 minutes into normal
heart activity. It continues therefore for a long time after the body
temperature has already risen markedly. A danger to the circulatory
system could not be demonstrated at this stage. In three cases the
return of the heart action to normal occurred in spite of simultaneous
energetic physical work.

With the demonstration that cold-death of man is primarily a
heart-death, the essential points for therapy are also cleared up. The
_cause of the severe heart_ damage is another question. Since our
studies were primarily aimed at the development of practical methods of
treatment, we will not go very far into the theoretical concepts which
may be developed in this connection. Still, several hints may be drawn
from the blood studies:

1. The great increase of the _viscosity_ causes an _increased loading_
upon the heart.

2. The _choking of peripheral vessel_ areas by the severe vessel
contraction leads to an over-filling of the central areas. This appears
not only from our autopsies. In all available records of autopsies which
pertain to cases of death from cold in the water after sea disaster, we
find uniformly a severe over-filling of the right heart.

3. It is to be calculated that, under the effect of the low blood
temperature, the _heart_ itself becomes severely _hypodynamic_. It has
been proved long ago in animal experimentation that a Vorhof flutter can
be developed by the overloading and cooling of the isolated heart.

Besides a physical damaging of the heart musculature by the cold, we
must also keep in mind the _damaging by pathological products of
metabolism_. Next, the sharp increase in blood sugar may be connected
with the increased outpouring of adrenalin. The constancy of this
increase of blood sugar during the temperature drop is, however,
remarkable. One may well assume that this flow of adrenalin exhausts
itself with the continuance of the temperature drop. With this there
would have to be a rapid decrease in the blood sugar if the oxidation
processes were to continue undisturbed. The decrease in the alkali
reserve or the development of an acidosis argues strongly for an injury.

Animal experiments, with general cooling, give grounds for believing
that the intermediary metabolism is disturbed during drops in
temperature; but this change is also discussed in connection with local
freezing of the human being and has been proved to a certain extent.
Furthermore, not only this disturbance shows a transition between
general and local damage by cold. In both cases there occurs an increase
in viscosity, which points to a change in the capillary walls and
indicates the conclusion that there is a change in the permeability of
those walls for protein and water.

The heart-death remains prominent, the regular increase of spinal fluid
pressure with severe cooling of the neck and back of the head leaves it
unsettled whether, in addition, this has pathognomonic significance for
the outcome. With a fluid pressure of 420 mm. it must in fact be assumed
that this participates in the development of bradycardia.

The detection of an increase in fluid pressure is also not without
significance for therapy. One may think of a lumbar or suboccipital
puncture as a measure to be prescribed. After a lumbar puncture there
occurs a transformation of the slow form of arrhythmia into the rapid
form. It must remain undecided whether such measures, which delay a
rapid, active rewarming, are to be recommended for practical application
in the sea-rescue service.

The idea that cold-death in water depends upon failure of the heart,
accompanied or unaccompanied by breathing, is subject to limitation. One
experiment among fifty-seven was typical. This involved survival of a
cooling to 25.2° C. [77.4° F.] during a stay of 3 hours in water of 5.5°
C. [41.4° F.]. The rectal temperature under these conditions remained
constant within slight variations between 27° and 25° C. [81° and 77°
F.] for the last hour and a half. Likewise, quite irregularly, no
increase in blood sugar occurred. But most striking was the fact that
until the end of the experiment and after its termination consciousness
was undisturbed. The course of the experiment reminded one of the
behavior of certain experimental animals which can withstand extremely
low body temperatures for long periods of time. Lower, warm-blooded
animals (for example, rats) can endure rectal temperatures of 20° C.
[68° F.] for several hours. It is conceivable that this atypical
experiment, had it been continued, would have shown also an atypical
cause of death. Against this we have the fact that an irregularity had
already set in but not before a temperature of 30.1° C. [86.2° F.] had
been reached.

Also, aside from the fluid pressure increase, the part which the
_central nervous system_ plays in the outcome of the experiment seems to
us to be _secondary_. The experiments with simultaneous cooling of the
neck of course showed how the cooling of the neck and back of the head
speeds up the lowering of temperature. This is to be explained by the
fact that the counter-controls which are relayed from the temperature
center to the periphery, either cannot exist further because of
hypofunction of the centers (effect of oedema and cooling), or are no
longer transmitted because of cold-blocking of the pathways. But
likewise central counter-controls for the areas of the peripheral
capillaries may fall; thus delaying the overloading of the heart by
extended periphera vasco friction.

    _VII. The Influence of Pharmacology and the Question of Alcohol_

Now experiments by _Jarisch_ have shown that heart drugs like
_strophanthin_ and stimulants like _cardiazol_ and _coramine_ in
therapeutic doses may react _toxically_ upon cooled animals. These
findings are a warning to be most careful in the medicinal treatment of
severely cooled persons, though strophanthin and cardiazol have
heretofore been expressly recommended in such cases.

In experiments with fatal outcome, the stopping of the heart occurred
either in the water or after an interval of not more than 14 minutes
after removal from the water. With such a rapid course of events it is
unlikely that one can favorably influence the heart action by
intravenous injections of strophanthin, especially because the
circulation is at a very low ebb before the heart-death. For this
reason, in a case whose condition was already very dangerous,
_strophanthin was given intracardially_ in a dose of 0.25 mg. Thereupon
the heart condition grew still worse and after 5 minutes the heart
stopped. One had the impression that the heart action was made worse by
the intracardial injection of strophanthin. This is, however, the only
case which left the possibility of damage by strophanthin in doubt. No
such damage could ever be established in the intravenous injection of
strophanthin. On the other hand no therapeutic effect, even with maximal
doses of 0.5 mg., could be detected. Figure 11 [not reproduced], last
section, shows the total duration in 10 cases of the irregularity
observed without strophanthin dosage. This varies between 25 and 200
minutes. On the other hand in Figure 13 in the last section, first five
cross-rows there are corresponding time values of 175 to 360 minutes. At
various experimental time points during these experiments 0.25 to 0.5 of
strophanthin were given. Accordingly, a shortening of the duration of
the irregularity cannot be established. Furthermore no improvement of
the pulse or general condition was ever noted. Obviously these
experiments are too few to rule out a possible favorable effect in all
cases. Several hundred experiments would be necessary to obtain
statistically reliable data on this point. And so, since contrary to
animal experimentation, we could not unquestionably establish damage
following intravenous strophanthin dosage, we may leave it to the
treating physician whether or not he may still want to make an
_experiment with strophanthin_. To be sure, such an employment of it
must be advised against in case of a very much decelerated form of
irregularity. This will be observed when there is the greatest danger;
under such circumstances time should never be lost by experimenting with
drugs, but every effort should be made in the direction of intensive
heat therapy.

Also in the experiments with _cardiazol_, _coramin_ and _lobeline_ we
restricted ourselves primarily to determining whether injurious effects
occurred in the case of relatively large doses. Four cc. of 10 percent
coramin as well as 2 cc. of 1 percent lobeline were injected
intravenously at various stages of recovery without any marked objective
and subjective deterioration of the state of the heart, the breathing,
and the general condition. But just as with strophanthin, it is
impossible to rule out a possible therapeutically favorable effect
because of the small number of experiments. We never observed such an
effect. Especially the marked deepening of breathing and of the
irritability of the trigeminal nerve which usually sets in very suddenly
after coramin (for example, sneezing immediately after the injection)
were always missing. Contrary to strophanthin, in the case of which we
cannot advise against experimentation by intravenous injection under
certain conditions, we believe on theoretical grounds that such
experiments with _peripheral circulatory drugs_ which may heighten the
vessel tonus are not indicated because of the following considerations:
The damage to the heart is to be attributed, among other things, to an
overloading, which is caused by a blocking of enlarged vessel areas,
aside from an increase in viscosity. If the vessel tonus is further
increased in the areas which have remained unimpeded, the conditions for
the heart are thereby made worse.

The sceptical attitude toward the effect of drugs is strengthened above
all by the observation that in the majority of the experiments in which
no drugs were given, even the most severe disturbances of the peripheral
circulation were reduced remarkably rapidly under intensive heat
treatment. In this connection it must be emphasized that besides the
recovery of body temperature through heat therapy an unloading of the
heart takes place because the blocked areas open up. Contrary to earlier
concepts, according to which there was danger of hemorrhage into the
periphery during rapid rewarming, and according to which one sought to
avoid this hemorrhage by wrapping up the extremities as well as by very
slow warming, the “venalous bleeding into the periphery” may be
life-saving under some circumstances. An exception, namely, loval
pyperacmia after considerable rise in temperature and corresponding
reestablishment of circulation has already been described in the
reference to the danger in some cases of very prolonged treatment in the
light cradle.

The familiar increase of peripheral blood volume as a result of alcohol
leads one to expect that very intoxicated persons cool more rapidly.
Figure 14[28] shows an experiment from which we may conclude that
_actually acceleration of the cooling_ does set in after partaking
_liberally of alcohol before the experiment_. It is very remarkable that
in such an experiment, _the only exception among all cooling
experiments_, irregularity was absent in a cooling to 28.1° C. [82.6°
F.]. Even if it was not possible to reproduce this apparent protection
against irregularity caused by partaking of alcohol in control
experiments on other subjects, there remains the possibility that the
distending of the peripheral vessels delays the overloading of the
heart, just as on the other hand it increases the speed of cooling.

Our observations contradict the old seafaring custom of pouring
_alcohol_ into a person _already cooled_, since, according to these
observations the temperature tends, even in slight degrees of cooling,
to sink further for a long time after rescue. As long as there is no
active supply of heat from outside, the disadvantage of an increased
heat loss will reduce the utility of stopping the peripheral vessel
blockage. Also in _later stages_ of recovery one must obviously be very
careful in giving alcohol; above all, this warning is emphasized by the
possibility that one must reckon with a total irregularity after more
than an hour, which may go unnoticed by the inexperienced experimenter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                      _VIII. Preventive Measures_

                 *        *        *        *        *

            _IX. Concerning Life Jackets_ [_Schwimmwesten_]

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              _X. Summary_

1. The curve of rectal temperature of human beings chilled in water of
2° C. [35.6° F.] to 12° C. [53.6° F.] shows a gradual drop to about 35°
C. [95° F.], after which the drop becomes rapid. Death may occur at
rectal temperatures below 30° C. [86° F.].

2. Death results from heart failure. The direct damage to the heart
becomes evident from the total irregularity observed in all cases,
setting in at approximately 30° C. [86° F.]. This cardiac damage is due
to overloading of the heart, caused by the marked and regular increase
in the viscosity of the blood, as well as by the marked throttling of
large peripheral vascular areas; besides, a direct injury to the heart
by the cold is also probable.

3. If the neck is also chilled, the lowering of the temperature is more
rapid. This is due to interference with the temperature-regulating and
vascular centers; cerebral oedema also makes its appearance.

4. The blood sugar rises as the temperature falls, and the blood sugar
does not drop again as long as the body temperature continues to fall.
This fact suggests an intermediary disturbance of metabolism.

5. Respiration of the chilled subject is rendered difficult due to the
rigor of the respiratory musculature.

6. After removal from the cold water, the body temperature may continue
to fall for 15 minutes or longer. This may be an explanation of deaths
which occur after successful rescue from the sea.

7. Intensive rewarming never injures the severely chilled person.

8. Strophanthin treatment was not observed to have been successful. The
question of the use of strophanthin remains open, however. Remedies
which influence the peripheral circulation are definitely not advisable.

9. The most effective therapeutic measure is rapid and intensive heat
treatment, best applied by immersion in a hot bath.

10. By means of special protective clothing, the survival time after
immersion in cold water could be extended to double the survival time of
subjects who were immersed without protective clothing.

11. Certain proposals for improvement of life jackets are being made.

Concluded on 10 October 1942.

                                      [Signed] Prof. DR. HOLZLOEHNER
                                                     DR. RASCHER
                                                     DR. FINKE

                 *        *        *        *        *

    _Behavior of the heart action under the influence of medication_

     │     │Occurance of │   Therapy    │Pulse becomes │ Total │
     │     │Irregularity │       │      │   regular    │ dura- │
Subj.│Water│ After│  At  │       │    At│ After exper. │ tion  │
     │temp.│exper.│  body│  Mg.  │  min.│time & admin. │of ir- │ Remarks
     │ [°C]│  time│ temp.│stroph.│[min.]│ strophanthin │ regu- │
     │     │[min.]│  [°C]│       │      │              │larity │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
  *  │  *  │  *   │  *   │   *   │  *   │      *       │   *   │    *
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
B. L │    4│    55│    30│0.25   │    65│      —       │   —   │Death in
     │     │      │      │  mg., │      │              │       │  the
     │     │      │      │  4 cc.│      │              │       │  seventie
     │     │      │      │  coram│      │              │       │  th
     │     │      │      │  in.  │      │              │       │  minute,
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  ten
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  minutes
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  after
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  removal
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  from
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  water.
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
L. H │    4│    30│  31.5│0.25   │    60│      —       │   —   │Death
     │     │      │      │  mg., │      │              │       │  (heart
     │     │      │      │  intra│      │              │       │  stopped)
     │     │      │      │  cardi│      │              │       │  five
     │     │      │      │  al.  │      │              │       │  minutes
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  after
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  administ
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  ering
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  strophan
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  thin,
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  ten
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  minutes
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  after
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  removal
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  from
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  water.
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
V. E │  5.2│    60│  30.3│0.25   │    68│      —       │   —   │Death
     │     │      │      │  mg., │      │              │       │  (heart
     │     │      │      │  heart│      │              │       │  stopped)
     │     │      │      │  ,    │      │              │       │  in the
     │     │      │      │  masag│      │              │       │  sixty-si
     │     │      │      │  e,   │      │              │       │  xth
     │     │      │      │  coram│      │              │       │  minute
     │     │      │      │  in,  │      │              │       │  during
     │     │      │      │  cardi│      │              │       │  removal
     │     │      │      │  azol,│      │              │       │  from
     │     │      │      │  artif│      │              │       │  water.
     │     │      │      │  icial│      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │  respi│      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │  ratio│      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │  n.   │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
S. M │    6│    75│  31.4│Artific│    82│      —       │   —   │Death
     │     │      │      │  ial  │      │              │       │  (heart
     │     │      │      │  respi│      │              │       │  stopped)
     │     │      │      │  ratio│      │              │       │  in the
     │     │      │      │  n,   │      │              │       │  eighty-s
     │     │      │      │  cardi│      │              │       │  eventh
     │     │      │      │  azol.│      │              │       │  minute,
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  seven
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  minutes
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  after
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  removal
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  from
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  water.
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
L. O │  4.5│    30│  31.2│L. P   │    57│      —       │   —   │Death
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  (heart
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  stopped)
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  in the
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  sixty-fi
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  fth
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  minute,
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  eight
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  minutes
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  after
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  removal
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  from
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │  water.
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │
     │     │      │      │       │      │              │       │

                               FIGURE 13.

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1609-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 92

  LETTER FROM HIMMLER TO RASCHER, 24 OCTOBER 1942, AND NOTE BY RUDOLF
                                 BRANDT

Reich Leader SS
Nr 1397/42

                                         Field Command Post, 24 Oct 1942

Dr. Sigmund Rascher
Munich, Trogerstr. 56

                               Top Secret

                                                                3 copies
                                                                2d copy

Dear Rascher!

I acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 9th and 10th and both
notes of 16 October 1942.

I have read your report regarding cooling experiments on humans with
great interest. SS Sturmbannfuehrer Sievers should arrange the
possibility of evaluation at institutes which are connected with us.

I regard these people as guilty of treason and high treason, who, still
today, reject these experiments on humans and would instead let sturdy
German soldiers die as a result of these cooling methods. I shall not
hesitate to report these men to the offices concerned. I empower you to
make my opinion on this known to the offices concerned.

I invite you to a personal conference in November as I cannot make it
sooner despite my great interest.

SS Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff will once again get in touch with Field
Marshal Milch. You are empowered to make a report to Field Marshal
Milch—and, of course, to the Reich Marshal if he has time—concerning
those who are not doctors.

I think that covers which have heat packets or something similar sewed
in their lining are the best for the warming of those who were stranded
at sea and were picked up in boats or small vessels and where there is
no possibility of placing these chilled people in a hot bath. I take it
for granted that you know these heat packets which we also have in the
SS and which were used by the Russians a great deal. They consist of a
mass which develops a warmth of 70° to 80° upon addition of water and
retains it for hours.

I am very curious as to the experiments with body warmth. I personally
take it that these experiments will probably bring the best and lasting
results. Naturally, I could be mistaken.

Keep me informed on future findings. Of course we will see each other in
November.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours
                                                    [Signed] H. HIMMLER

2. SS Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff

Sent with request for acknowledgment. I present the report with the
request for acknowledgment and return since the Reich Leader SS in
Munich wants these copies again.

                                                     [Signed] BRANDT
                                                     SS Sturmbannfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-323
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 94

     MEMORANDUM OF RASCHER ON WOMEN USED FOR REWARMING IN FREEZING
                      EXPERIMENTS, 5 NOVEMBER 1942

Sigmund Rascher, M. D.

                               Munich, Trogerstrasse 56, 5 November 1942
Subject: Requested report on concentration camp prostitutes.

For the resuscitation experiments by animal warmth after freezing as
ordered by the Reich Leader SS I had four women assigned to me from the
women’s concentration camp Ravensbrueck.

One of the assigned women shows unobjectionably Nordic racial
characteristics: blond hair, blue eyes, corresponding head and body
structure, 21¾ years of age. I asked the girl why she had volunteered
for the brothel. I received the answer: “To get out of the concentration
camp, for we were promised that all those who would volunteer for the
brothel for half a year would then be released from the concentration
camp”. To my objection that it was a great shame to volunteer as a
prostitute, I was told: “Rather half a year in the brothel than half a
year in the concentration camp”. Then followed an account of a number of
most peculiar conditions at camp Ravensbrueck. Most of the reported
conditions were confirmed by the three other prostitutes and by the
female warden who had accompanied them from Ravensbrueck.

It hurts my racial feelings to expose to racially inferior concentration
camp elements a girl as a prostitute who has the appearance of a pure
Nordic and who could perhaps by assignment of proper work be put on the
right road.

Therefore, I refused to use this girl for my experimental purposes and
gave the adequate reports to the camp commander and the adjutant of the
Reich Leader SS.

                                           [Signature] DR. S. RASCHER

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-320
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 103

          LETTER FROM SIEVERS TO BRANDT, 28 JANUARY 1943, AND
          RASCHER’S REPORT ON HIS DISCUSSIONS WITH GRAWITZ AND
                               POPPENDICK

The Ahnenerbe
The Reich Business Manager

To the Reich Leader SS                           Berlin, 28 January 1943
Personal Staff                                              G/R/8 S 1/Sb
                                             [illegible shorthand notes]

Attention: SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. R. Brandt
Berlin S. W. 11, Prinz Albrecht Str. 8

                                Secret!

Subject: Research of Dr. Rascher.
Dear comrade Brandt!

I submit to you enclosed a documentary note of Dr. Rascher on his
discussion with the Reich Physician SS [Reichsarzt SS] of 13 January
1943. I would be much obliged to you if you could advise us as to what
attitude we or Dr. Rascher are to take in the future. I am slightly
astonished about the course of the discussion, for the orders of the
Reich Leader SS were especially to the effect that we—that is the
Ahnenerbe—were to take Dr. Rascher’s work under our care. The argument
of SS Gruppenfuehrer Grawitz, that it constituted an unbearable
situation to have a non-physician give information on medical matters,
is not pertinent. I have never claimed to be a judge of medical matters,
nor do I consider it as one of my duties. My duty merely consists of
smoothing the way for the research men and seeing that the tasks ordered
by the Reich Leader SS are carried out in the quickest possible way. On
one thing I certainly can form an opinion—that is, on who is doing the
quickest job.

If things are to go on in the future as SS Gruppenfuehrer Grawitz
desires, I am afraid that Dr. Rascher’s work will not continue to
advance as fast and unhampered as hitherto.

   With comradely greetings,
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours
                                                    [Signature] SIEVERS

[Stamp]:
Personal Staff RF SS / Enclosure
Received on: 4th Feb. 1943 1
Journal No: 1786/43

To: RB                                                      Please turn!
                                  COPY

    _Documentary note_ on discussion Reich Physician SS [Reichsarzt
    SS] Dr. Grawitz—SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Poppendick—SS
    Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Rascher, 13 January 1943.

RASCHER: Reports on freezing experiments with water and emphasizes that
they have been concluded practically, but not in theory.

GRAWITZ: Question about the memorandum. Whether Rascher believes this to
be absolutely established for dry freezings, too?

RASCHER: No, a lot of theoretical work is still to be done, primarily
many practical experiments have still to be conducted.

GRAWITZ: That is my opinion, too. We cannot distribute a memorandum to
the troops, abolishing all former views, if this is not entirely
well-founded, as otherwise uncertainties will arise among the troops. I
shall write to Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Brandt that I am asking the
Reich Leader SS not to distribute the memorandum before a well-founded
method of treatment of dry frozen persons has been established.

RASCHER: Very well, that’s why the Reich Leader SS gave me the order of
13 December 1942. But I urgently want to emphasize that the results of
the freezing experiments with water have been established and are
well-founded.

GRAWITZ: Well, now, this had to be mentioned in the letter to Brandt so
that you are not blamed in any way! You see, from my former activities
(mention of some hospital) I know so much about metabolism that I am
almost a specialist in this field and can help you enormously.

RASCHER: As I understood, Gruppenfuehrer, that’s why I am to turn to
your office for glass materials, chemicals, etc.

GRAWITZ: No. Not only for that. You have to turn to me in all medical
matters, since after all, I am Reich Physician SS and all medical
affairs are subordinate to me. It is absolutely necessary that all
medical matters destined for the Reich Leader SS go through my office.

RASCHER: I don’t know, Gruppenfuehrer, if this was the intention. I am
under the direct orders of the Reich Leader SS and I have always
reported directly to him. I have never received orders to another
effect.

GRAWITZ: You certainly will be transferred to the Waffen SS?

RASCHER: Yes, I hope so. The transfer is under way.

GRAWITZ: There you are. Then you will be under my orders as a physician
at any rate and all matters will have to go through my office, otherwise
the situation would be unbearable.

RASCHER: But I am under the orders of the Ahnenerbe! Am I to report to
you, too, what I have to report to the Ahnenerbe?

GRAWITZ: Certainly! At least a copy on all medical matters has to be
sent to me for my information. For it is an unbearable situation to have
a non-physician, such as Standartenfuehrer Sievers, inform me on medical
matters if he does not have the adequate special medical education. I
have nothing against Sievers. Well, yes, I know you are of the
Ahnenerbe. I don’t say anything against your work for the Ahnenerbe, but
I want you to work with the Ahnenerbe for the Reich Physician. I shall
also write to Brandt on that matter.

POPPENDICK: Well, I already had to ask Standartenfuehrer Sievers several
times to come to me to receive information. In the long run all medical
matters wind up with us, anyway.

GRAWITZ: You see, this is the point! When the Reich Leader SS does not
understand a medical matter clearly he hands the matter over to me,
anyway.

RASCHER: Of course, I am grateful for every kind of help, but I believe
that I am primarily under the orders of the Ahnenerbe.

GRAWITZ: Certainly not when you are a member of the Waffen SS. I am able
to be of much use to you through my knowledge and I shall inform Brandt
to that effect. It isn’t that I bear a grudge against you or your work,
but all things have to follow their course. Don’t be afraid, scientific
thefts don’t occur with us. As I know, you have to acquire the right of
giving lectures at universities as a qualified academic teacher under
Pfannenstiel. And you will need support. Do you want to be supported by
me?

RASCHER: Of course, I thank you most obediently. Where I need support, I
gladly accept it.

GRAWITZ: Well, we shall wait then with the memorandum until you have a
few hundred cases, then we shall continue. Of course, I would not like
the Reich Leader SS to believe that I want to impede you. But if
something has not yet been proved to a great extent, we cannot
distribute anything to the troops that might spread uncertainty among
the responsible authorities!

Everything may be true for freezing by water, but we don’t have that in
the Waffen SS. So you agree to wait with the distribution of the
memorandum.

RASCHER: Gruppenfuehrer, anyway it is entirely your affair, whether the
memorandum is issued now, as you are responsible for it. I composed the
memorandum on the basis of these few cases of dry freezing, because the
Reich Leader SS pressed for its publication. In composing the
memorandum, I was fully aware of the necessity that many experiments
still have to be carried out, and I also submitted this view on the
occasion of a discussion with the Reich Leader SS in Dachau. But the
Reich Leader saw the results in Dachau and in wanting to help the troops
ordered the memorandum to be drawn up.

GRAWITZ: In composing a memorandum or in any other scientific work you
should not let anybody press you, not even the Reich Leader SS, that
will never do! Well now, you’ll send me a copy of all your medical
correspondence with the Ahnenerbe, and you’ll no longer write directly
to the Reich Leader SS in medical matters but write to me, as it comes
to me anyway. Will you do that?

RASCHER: I’ll have to discuss the matter with Standartenfuehrer Sievers
first, this comes too much as a surprise.

GRAWITZ: Well, I shall send you a copy of my letter to Dr. Brandt so
that you can get a clear picture. I am very pleased to have established
such a close contact with you.

This is a certified true copy.

                                                    [Signature] WOLFF
                                                   SS Untersturmfuehrer

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1616-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 105

         LETTER FROM RASCHER TO HIMMLER, 17 FEBRUARY 1943, AND
             SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTS FOR REWARMING OF CHILLED
             HUMAN BEINGS BY ANIMAL WARMTH, 12 FEBRUARY 1943

Dr. S. Rascher
SS Hauptsturmfuehrer

                                                Munich, 17 February 1943

To the Reich Leader SS and Chief of the German Police Heinrich Himmler

Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Str. 8
Dear Reich Leader,

Enclosed I present to you in condensed form a summary of the results of
the experiments made in warming up people who have been cooled off by
using animal heat.

Right now I am attempting to prove through experiments on human beings
that it is possible to warm up people cooled off by dry cold just as
fast as people who were cooled off by remaining in cold water. The Reich
Physician SS, SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr. Grawitz, doubted very much that that
would be possible and said that I would have to prove it first by 100
experiments. Up to now I have cooled off about 30 people stripped in the
open air during 9-14 hours at 27°-29°. After a time corresponding to a
transport of 1 hour, I put these subjects in a hot bath. _Up to now_
every single patient was completely warmed up within 1 hour at most,
though some of them had their hands and feet frozen white. In some cases
a slight fatigue with slightly rising temperature was observed on the
day following the experiments. I have not observed any fatal results
from this extremely fast warming up. I have not so far been able to do
any warming up by “Sauna” as ordered by you, my dear Reich Leader, as
the weather in December and January was too warm for any experiments in
the open air, and right now the camp is closed on account of typhoid and
I am not allowed therefore to bring in subjects, for “Sauna”
experiments.

                 *        *        *        *        *

With most obedient greetings and sincere gratitude, and

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                 Yours very devotedly
                                                                RASCHER
(enclosure)

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                 Secret
    _Experiments for rewarming of intensely chilled human beings by
                             animal warmth_

A. _Purpose of the Experiments_

To ascertain whether the rewarming of intensely chilled human beings by
animal warmth, i. e., the warmth of animals or human beings, is as good
or better than rewarming by physical or medical means.

B. _Method of the Experiments_

The experimental subjects were cooled in the usual way—clad or
unclad—in cold water of temperatures varying between 4° C. and 9° C.
The rectal temperature of every experimental subject was recorded
thermoelectrically. The reduction of temperature occurred within the
usual span of time varying in accordance with the general condition of
the body of the experimental subject and the temperature of the water.
The experimental subjects were removed from the water when their rectal
temperature reached 30° C. At this time the experimental subjects had
all lost consciousness. In eight cases the experimental subjects were
then placed between two naked women in a spacious bed. The women were
supposed to nestle as closely as possible to the chilled person. Then
all three persons were covered with blankets. A speeding up of rewarming
by light cradles or by medicines was not attempted.

C. _Results_

1. When the temperature of the experimental subjects was recorded it was
striking that an after-drop of temperature up to 3° C. occurred, which
is a greater after-drop than seen with any other method of rewarming. It
was observed, however, that consciousness returned at an earlier point,
that is, at a lower body temperature than with other methods of
rewarming. Once the subjects regained consciousness they did not lose it
again, but very quickly grasped the situation and snuggled up to the
naked female bodies. The rise of body temperature then occurred at about
the same speed as in experimental subjects who had been rewarmed by
packing in blankets. Exceptions were four experimental subjects who, at
body temperatures between 30° C. and 32° C., performed the act of sexual
intercourse. In these experimental subjects the temperature rose very
rapidly after sexual intercourse, which could be compared with the
speedy rise in temperature in a hot bath.

2. Another set of experiments concerned the rewarming of intensely
chilled persons by one woman. In all these cases rewarming was
significantly quicker than could be accomplished by two women. The cause
of this seems to me that in warming by one woman only, personal
inhibitions are removed, and the woman nestles up to the chilled
individual much more intimately. Also in these cases, the return of
complete consciousness was strikingly rapid. Only one experimental
subject did not return to consciousness and the warming effect was only
slight. This person died with symptoms suggesting cerebral hemorrhage,
as was confirmed by subsequent autopsy.

D. _Summary_

Rewarming experiments of intensely chilled experimental subjects
demonstrated that rewarming with animal warmth was very slow. Only such
experimental subjects whose physical condition permitted sexual
intercourse rewarmed themselves remarkably quickly and showed an equally
strikingly rapid return to complete physical well-being. Since
excessively long exposure of the body to low temperatures implies danger
of internal damage, that method must be chosen for rewarming which
guarantees the quickest relief from dangerously low temperatures. This
method, according to our experiences, is a massive and rapid supply of
warmth by means of a hot bath.

Rewarming of intensely chilled human beings by human or animal warmth
can therefore be recommended only in such cases in which other
possibilities for rewarming are not available, or in cases of specially
tender individuals who possibly may not be able to stand a massive and
rapid supply of warmth. As for example, I am thinking of intensely
chilled small children, who are best rewarmed by the body of their
mothers, with the aid of hot water bottles.

Dachau, 12 February 1943.
                                           [Signature] DR. S. RASCHER
                                                   SS Hauptsturmfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-268
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 106

          LETTER FROM HIPPKE TO HIMMLER, 19 FEBRUARY 1943, ON
                     FREEZING EXPERIMENTS IN DACHAU

The Inspector of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe

                                        Berlin W8, 19 February 1943
                                                      Leipziger Strasse
                                        Phone numbers: [illegible]
                                        Cable address: Reichsluft Berlin

File No. 55 No. 81038/43 (2 IIB)
Reich Leader,

The experiments conducted in Dachau concerning protective measures
against the effects of freezing on the human body by immersion in cold
water have led to results of practical use. They were conducted by the
Stabsaerzte [Captains] of the Luftwaffe, Professor Dr. Holzloehner, Dr.
Fink, and Dr. Rascher in cooperation with the SS, and are now finished.
The results were reported upon by those who worked on them during a
conference on medical problems arising from distress at sea and winter
hardships, on 26 and 27 October 1942, at Nuernberg. The detailed report
on the conference is at present in state of preparation.

I thank you most gratefully for the great assistance that the
cooperation of the SS has meant for us in conducting the experiments,
and beg you to express our thanks, too, to the commander of the Dachau
camp.

                                                         Heil Hitler!
                                           [Signature] PROF. DR. HIPPKE

2 [?] Feb 1943
1509/43
RF
  [stamp illegible]
[figures 1509/43 handwritten]

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1580-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 107

          LETTER FROM HIMMLER TO RASCHER, 26 FEBRUARY 1943, ON
             FREEZING EXPERIMENTS IN THE CONCENTRATION CAMPS
                          AUSCHWITZ AND LUBLIN

The Reich Leader SS
  1516/43

                                                        26 February 1943
                                 Secret
Dear Rascher,

Best thanks for your letter of 17 February[29] with report on warming-up
experiments. I agree to experiments being made at Auschwitz or Lublin,
although I believe that the time for the cooling-off and warming-up
tests under natural conditions of cold weather has nearly passed for
this winter.

I am sending this letter at the same time to SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl,
whom I request to order the execution of your experiments at Lublin or
Auschwitz.

   Kind greetings and
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours
                                                    [Signed] H. HIMMLER
2. SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl

Transmitted with request to take note and to take the necessary steps.

   By order,
                                              [Signature (illegible)]
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-292
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 111

          LETTER FROM RASCHER TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 4 APRIL 1943,
             REPORTING ON DRY-FREEZING EXPERIMENTS IN DACHAU

Dr. med. Sigmund Rascher
                                                         [4 April 1943]
To Herr Oberregierungsrat SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. R. Brandt
Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Strasse 8
Much esteemed Obersturmbannfuehrer!

                 *        *        *        *        *

The question of the saving of people frozen in the open air has in the
meantime been cleared up, since, thank goodness, there was once again a
period of heavy frost weather in Dachau. Certain people were in the open
air for 14 hours at -6° C., reached an internal temperature of 25° C.
with peripheral freezings, and were _all_ able to be saved by a hot
bath. As I said: it is easy to contradict! But before someone does so,
he should come and see for himself. Moreover, a report about freezing in
the open air will be sent to the Reich Leader in the next few days.

   With best wishes,
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                    Yours gratefully,
                                                 [Signature] S. RASCHER

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-322
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 114

 LETTER FROM RASCHER TO KEINDL, 28 APRIL 1943, ABOUT PREVIOUS FREEZING
                 EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED AT SACHSENHAUSEN

Dr. med. S. Rascher, SS Hauptsturmfuehrer
Personal Staff Leader SS
Division (Abteilung) Chief at the Institute for Military
    Scientific Research
Office A (Amt A)

                                                Dachau 3K, 28 April 1943

To the Commander of the Sachsenhausen Concentration Camp,
SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Keindl
Sachsenhausen, near Oranienburg

Obersturmbannfuehrer!

By order of the Reich Leader SS, I have been conducting freezing
experiments on human beings in the Dachau concentration camp for more
than a year. Today I learned from an experimental subject that I was not
the only one conducting these experiments, but that, on the contrary,
already in October and November 1938, similar experiments were conducted
in the Sachsenhausen concentration camp. SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr.
Samenstrang is said to have frozen experimental subjects—that is
prisoners—in cold water, and subsequently revived them by means of warm
water or hot compresses. As I was to work out and have worked out a
prescription for the Waffen SS for the resuscitation of frozen persons
(for the campaign in the East), knowledge of all preliminary experiments
in my field of work is of great importance for me.

I therefore request that if possible you let me know what kind of
experiments were conducted in your camp, and, if possible, what results
were obtained in connection with these experiments.

As you might not know anything about me, please make inquiries about me,
if necessary, either at the Personal Staff of the Reich Leader SS
(Obersturmbannfuehrer Baumert) or from the Commander of the Dachau
concentration camp, SS Sturmbannfuehrer Weiss.

                                                    Yours sincerely
                                                         Heil Hitler!

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-231
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 116

        LETTER FROM RASCHER TO SIEVERS, 17 MAY 1943, CONCERNING,
           A CONFERENCE WITH GEBHARDT ON FREEZING EXPERIMENTS

                                  Copy
                             By Messenger!

Dr. med. Rascher, SS Hauptsturmfuehrer
                                                  Dachau 3K, 17 May 1943

To: Reich Business Manager of the Ahnenerbe Society
Attn: SS Standartenfuehrer Sievers
Berlin-Dahlem, 16 Pueckler Street

Dear Standartenfuehrer!

The following contains a short account of my report to SS Gruppenfuehrer
Dr. Gebhardt.

On 14 May 1943, I reported to SS Gruppenfuehrer Prof. Dr. Gebhardt at
Hohenlychen. I had hardly arrived, when SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr. Gebhardt
asked me in a very loud voice to explain how I dared to submit
specialist medical reports directly to the Reich Leader SS (he was
referring to the treatise on “The Cooling of Human Beings Outdoors”). I
actually did not even get a chance to speak and practically couldn’t
reply anything. Then, when I tried to reply, Prof. Dr. Gebhardt said
that if I wanted to defy him, my train would be leaving for Berlin at 3
o’clock. When I was finally given the opportunity to speak I was able to
point out to Prof. Dr. Gebhardt that the report in question was not
meant to be a strictly scientific work, but simply was a short
information for the Reich Leader SS on the results of the experiments
conducted up to now. Dr. Gebhardt had taken the view that the report was
unscientific, and if a student of the second term dared to submit a
treatise of that kind, he would throw him out. Later on I was able to
tell him that of course all the physiological-chemical experiments that
could be carried out in Dachau with the available instruments had indeed
been conducted. Whereupon Dr. Gebhardt replied: “I can imagine that you
did a lot of work; one can tell it from this job. If I had not believed
that you did a lot of work, I would not have asked you to come at all.”

In addition Dr. Gebhardt said that he intended to merge all the groups
of physicians working independently within the SS, since that would suit
the Reich Leader SS much better than individual people working on their
own. Besides that, he said that I somehow ought to learn university
methods of working since very likely I did not yet have the proper
training. He suggested that it was necessary for me to get out of Dachau
since there I was quite left to myself and had no guidance whatsoever;
that since I intended to enter upon a university career, I would by all
means have to complete the training of a university assistant first. He
further said that all those SS physicians, who are qualified to enter
upon a university career, had the duty to do so. Upon my reply that for
that reason I was already in touch with Professor Pfannenstiel,
Professor Gebhardt replied that these matters ought to be processed by a
centralized agency. In future it would not do that I send any reports
directly to the Reich Leader SS, but that further reports to serve their
purpose would have to be transmitted through him to the Reich Leader. If
the report had reached a suitable stage, he would first inform the Reich
Leader SS, and then go to see the Reich Leader SS together with me.
Finally Dr. Gebhardt asked me to give him data on my personal and
scientific career to enable him to make further arrangements. He
requested me to call again in the afternoon.

When I called in the afternoon, I was, as in the morning, accompanied by
SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Fischer. This time Dr. Gebhardt was extremely
amiable. He asked me whether I now agreed with his arrangements; it
would be by far the best I could do, if I joined him. I should not
worry, but just continue my work in Dachau, until I had finished my
jobs. Later, one would see what was to be done for the future. Upon my
question, what it was all about, and who was my superior, whether the
Reichsarzt SS, SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr. Grawitz, who had come for an
inspection several days ago, the Reich Leader SS, as he personally had
promised me, or the Ahnenerbe, of which I had been a member for years,
Dr. Gebhardt suggested that all that will be straightened out. Just
trust it to me. But I’ll need your curriculum vitae soon, since I have
to report to the Reich Leader SS on 23 May.

May I ask you, Standartenfuehrer, under whom I am actually working?
Under the Reich Leader SS, the Ahnenerbe, the Reich Physician SS or Dr.
Gebhardt? Dr. Gebhardt has already asked me why I am not a member of the
Waffen SS. Upon my answer that Dr. Hippke does not like to let me go, he
declared that I was too able for him to let me go. Standartenfuehrer! If
the same tug of war starts in the Waffen SS as has been going on between
Luftwaffe and the SS, I’d rather do without a transfer to the Waffen SS.
I was promised that I would continue to work under the Reich Leader SS
or under the Ahnenerbe. But I cannot serve several masters at the same
time. Of course I am convinced that SS Gruppenfuehrer Prof. Dr. Gebhardt
has the best of intentions. His assistants are enthusiastic about him.
If I am compelled to ask Prof. Dr. Gebhardt’s advice each time I am
going to start a new experiment, I will get so much involved in the
academic routine that I won’t even be allowed to experiment with such a
method as rapid resuscitation which overthrows all the established
clinical experiences because the results contradict Prof. Dr. Gebhardt’s
methods which are based upon centuries-old clinical experiences. Also
the cooperation with Professor von Luetzelberg would thus come to an
end, as these experiments are from the very start contradictory to the
hitherto recognized clinical experiences. I think, this arrangement
would stop everything that really ought to be experimented.

I pray you with all my heart, Standartenfuehrer, to handle this affair
in such a way that Prof. Dr. Gebhardt, who is a very close friend of the
Reich Leader SS does not become my enemy. I think that Prof. Dr.
Gebhardt can and will be an extremely disagreeable adversary. Before I
get into trouble with him, I would rather resign my job and ask for an
immediate transfer to the Luftwaffe for combat service. I therefore ask
you again to deal with this affair with as much circumspection as it
actually requires, because in addition I am convinced that Prof. Dr.
Gebhardt (apart from his personal ambition) really has good intentions.

                 *        *        *        *        *

   Very respectfully yours and
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                 Yours very devotedly
                                                 [Signature] S. RASCHER

This is to certify that the above copy is true:

                                                  [Signature] SIEVERS
                                                  SS Standartenfuehrer.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-432
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 119

        LETTER FROM RASCHER TO NEFF, 21 OCTOBER 1943, CONCERNING
                        DRY-FREEZING EXPERIMENTS

Dr. S. Rascher
                                                 Dachau, 21 October 1943

To
Police-Rottwachtmeister Walter Neff
Police Training Battalion I
Dresden-Hellerau

Dear Neff:

Your letter dated 11.10 reached me here on 15.10. First of all many
thanks for your decision to write such a detailed letter. I really was
very pleased about it. To come right away to the affair concerned: I am
very sorry to hear that you are being bullied, especially as there
exists no reason at all for it. Please let me know the name, rank, and
address of your commanding officer because I most certainly will take
the matter up. There is no purpose at all in your getting stuck there.
Finally I too know how the general condition of your health had been,
when you were still here, and I also am able to judge that you cannot go
through heavy infantry training. I am glad that you have become
accustomed to the ideals of the place and I am convinced that you would
be glad to go to the front. But on the other hand, I believe that I need
you more urgently than you are needed at the front. As a matter of fact
I need you for the following: _From the Reich Research Council_
[Reichsforschungsrat] I got the order to carry out open country freezing
experiments and I think they will take place on the Sudelfeld. Now I
need urgently a most reliable man, acquainted with the material, and
that is you in this case. During the next few days I will go with
Sievers to the Fuehrer’s Headquarters [Fuehrerhauptquartier], and report
there in this sense, and will let you know immediately.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I expect your notice soon, and remain until then with sincerest
comradely regards,

                                                    Your old chief,
                                                       [Initialed] R.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-690
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 120

            LIST OF RESEARCH PROJECTS FROM THE FILES OF THE
                         REICH RESEARCH COUNCIL

             Cancer Research—70—copies 15 [pencil notation]

                                      25th copy.
          Worked on by: Professor Dr. K. Blome
                        Berlin SW 68
                        Lindenstr. 42 77 [pencil notation]
                        Telephone: 174871 929 [pencil notation]

Priority: “SS”

 SS-No. │    Requested by—     │      Topic       │Registration│Degree of
        │                      │                  │    No.     │ secrecy
        │                      │                  │            │
  0453  │Schwarz, Kruft        │Combating of      │  2058/15   │
        │                      │  potato bug.     │            │
        │                      │                  │            │
  0496  │Seel, Poznan          │Investigation of  │  2118/15   │
        │                      │  means for       │            │
        │                      │  combating       │            │
        │                      │  agricultural    │            │
        │                      │  parasites and   │            │
        │                      │  for disinfection│            │
        │                      │  of the soil.    │            │
        │                      │                  │            │
  0328  │Rascher, Munich       │Rewarming after   │  1879/15   │
        │                      │  general freezing│            │
        │                      │  of the human    │            │
        │                      │  body; healing   │            │
        │                      │  after partial   │            │
        │                      │  freezings;      │            │
        │                      │  adjustment of   │            │
        │                      │  the human body  │            │
        │                      │  to low          │            │
        │                      │  temperatures.   │            │
        │                      │                  │            │
  0329  │Hirt, Strasbourg      │Changes in the    │  1881/15   │
        │                      │  living organism │            │
        │                      │  under the       │            │
        │                      │  influence of    │            │
        │                      │  poison gases.   │            │
        │                      │                  │            │
  0415  │von Borstell, Colonel,│Development of    │  1975/15   │ Secret.
        │  Weimar-Nohra.       │  aircraft        │            │
        │                      │  apparatus for   │            │
        │                      │  insecticides and│            │
        │                      │  fungicides which│            │
        │                      │  can be sprayed. │            │

                                       Cancer Research
                                       Worked on by:    Prof. Dr. K. Blome
                                                        Berlin SW 68
                                                        Lindenstr. 42
                                                        Telephone: 174871
                                       Deputy:          Dr. Breuer
                                                        Berlin-Steglitz
                                                        Grunewaldstr. 35
                                                        Telephone: 726071

      No.      │      Requested by—      │             Topic
               │                         │
   0454/1857/15│Zipf, Koenigsberg        │Tests of food colors for their
               │                         │  cancer-causing effect on
               │                         │  animals.
   0473/1838/15│Spek, Heidelberg         │Physio-chemical investigations
               │                         │  on living cells.

                           [Stamp] Top Secret
The Reich Research Council                          22 [pencil notation]

The Director of the Business Management
  Committee
Cancer Research

                                                       3d copy
                                             Authorized person:
                                             Prof. Dr. Kurt Blome
                                             Berlin SW 68, Lindenstr. 42

“Nesselsted”
Prof. Dr. Blome, Commissioner for Cancer Research, Berlin SW 68.
  Lindenstr. 42

                           DE 1413—RPS—VLI/44
                       SS 4891—0242 (1739/15) 44

            EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF TRIBUNAL WITNESS
                             WALTER NEFF[30]

_EXAMINATION BY PROSECUTION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: When did the freezing experiments start?

WITNESS NEFF: The first freezing experiments started during August or at
the end of July. They were conducted by Prof. Holzloehner, Dr. Finke,
and Dr. Rascher. The freezing experiments can be divided into two
separate classes, the Holzloehner-Finke series, which were later
dropped, and a series where Dr. Rascher conducted these experiments
himself.

Q. All right. Suppose you describe the experimental basin.

A. The experimental basin was built of wood. It was 2 meters long and 2
meters high. It was raised about 50 centimeters above the floor and it
was in Block No. 5. In the experimental chamber and basin there were
many lighting instruments and other apparatus which were used in order
to carry out measurements.

Q. Now, you have stated that you can divide the freezing experiments
into two groups, one where Holzloehner and Finke were working with
Rascher and then the period after Holzloehner and Finke had left?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, will you tell the Tribunal approximately how many persons were
used over the whole period? That is, including both groups that you have
mentioned.

A. Two hundred and eighty to three hundred experimental subjects were
used for these freezing experiments. There were really 360 to 400
experiments that were conducted, since many experimental subjects were
used for more than one such experiment—sometimes even for three.

Q. Now, out of the total of 280 or 300 prisoners used, approximately how
many died?

A. Approximately 80 to 90 subjects died as a result of these freezing
experiments.

Q. Now, how many experimental subjects do you remember that they used in
the Holzloehner-Finke-Rascher experiments?

A. During that period of time approximately 50 to 60 subjects were used
for experimental purposes.

Q. Did any of these experimental subjects die?

A. Yes. During that period of time there were about 15, maybe even 18
cases of death.

Q. When was that experimental series concluded?

A. It was concluded in the month of October. I think it was at the end
of October. At that time Holzloehner and Finke discontinued these
experiments, giving the reason that they had accomplished their purpose
and that it was useless to carry out further experiments of that kind.

Q. And then Rascher continued experiments on his own?

A. Yes. Rascher conducted these experiments saying that he had to build
a scientific basis for them and he prepared a lecture for Marburg
University on the subject.

Q. How long did Rascher continue to experiment with freezing by cold
water?

A. Until May 1943.

Q. Now, were the experimental subjects for the freezing experiments
selected in the same way as for the high-altitude experiments?

A. No. Here Rascher turned to the camp administration and told them that
he needed so and so many experimental subjects. Then the political
department of the camp selected 10 inmates by name. That list was sent
to the camp commandant and was signed by the camp commandant and they
were then sent to Rascher’s station and the subjects on that list had to
be experimented on. I was able to use the original list as evidence in
the first Dachau trial.

Q. Do I understand then that the experimental subjects used in the
freezing experiments were political prisoners?

A. There were a number of political prisoners and also a number of
foreigners, but there were also prisoners of war and inmates who had
been condemned to death.

Q. These persons were not volunteers, were they?

A. No.

Q. Suppose you describe to the Tribunal exactly how these freezing
experiments were carried out, that is what tests they made, how they
measured the temperature and how the temperature of the water was
lowered in the basin and so forth?

A. These basins were filled with water, and ice was added until the
water measured 3°, and the experimental subjects were either dressed in
a flying suit or were placed into the ice water naked. During the period
when Holzloehner and Finke were active, most experiments were conducted
under narcotics because he maintained that you could not find the exact
condition of the blood, and that you would exclude the will power of the
experimental subject if he was under an anaesthetic. Now whenever the
experimental subjects were conscious, it took some time until so-called
freezing narcosis set in. The temperature was measured rectally and
through the stomach through the Galvanometer apparatus. The lowering of
the temperature to 32° was terrible for the experimental subject. At 32°
the experimental subject lost consciousness. These persons were frozen
down to 25° body temperature, and now in order to enable you to
understand this problem, I should like to tell you something about the
Holzloehner and Finke period. During the period when Holzloehner and
Finke were active, no experimental subject was actually killed in the
water. Deaths occurred all the more readily because during revival the
temperature dropped even further and so heart failure resulted. This was
also caused by wrongly applied therapy, so that in contrast to the
low-pressure experiments, deaths were not deliberately caused. In the
air-pressure chamber on the other hand, each death cannot be described
as an accident, but as willful murder. However, it was different when
Rascher personally took over these experiments. At that time a large
number of the persons involved were kept in the water until they were
dead.

Q. Now, Witness, you have identified the defendant Weltz in the
defendants’ dock. On what occasion did you meet Weltz?

A. I met Weltz in Munich. I saw him there once. According to my
recollection it was in Luftgau Kommando VII, Prinzregenten Strasse No.
2, and I saw him speak to Rascher there, and at a later date Rascher
told me that that was Professor Weltz. I remember this incident
especially since Rascher often discussed Weltz and his animal
experiments, which he carried out with reference to freezing. I never
saw Professor Weltz in Dachau or anywhere in the camp.

Q. Do you know, Witness, whether Rascher and Weltz exchanged information
on freezing problems?

A. I don’t know that. I would assume so, since Rascher discussed
Professor Weltz’ experiments, and he certainly must have had some
discussions with Weltz on the subject. However, I know of no
correspondence with Weltz.

Q. Do you recall the occasion when two Russian officers were
experimented upon in the freezing experiments?

A. Yes.

Q. Will you relate that incident to the Tribunal?

A. Yes. It was the worst experiment which was ever carried out. Two
Russian officers were carried out from the bunker. We were forbidden to
speak to them. They arrived at approximately 4 o’clock in the afternoon.
Rascher had them undressed and they had to go into the basin naked. Hour
after hour passed and while usually after a short time, 60 minutes,
freezing had set in, these two Russians were still conscious after 2
hours. All our appeals to Rascher asking him to give them an injection
were of no avail. Approximately during the third hour one Russian said
to the other, “Comrade, tell that officer to shoot us.” The other
replied, “Don’t expect any mercy from this Fascist dog.” Then they shook
hands and said “Goodbye, Comrade.” If you can imagine that we inmates
had to witness such a death, and could do nothing about it, then you can
judge how terrible it is to be condemned to work in such an experimental
station.

After these words were translated for Rascher in a somewhat different
form by a young Pole, Rascher went back into his office. The young Pole
tried at once to give them an anesthetic with chloroform, but Rascher
returned immediately and threatened to shoot us with his pistol if we
dared approach these victims again. The experiment lasted at least 5
hours until death occurred. Both corpses were sent to Munich for autopsy
in the Schwabing Hospital.

Q. Witness, how long did it normally take to kill a person in these
freezing experiments?

A. The length of the experiment varied, according to the individual
case. Whether the subject was clothed or unclothed also made a
difference. If he was slight in build and if in addition to that he was
naked, death often occurred after only 80 minutes. But there were a
number of cases where the experimental subject lived up to 3 hours, and
remained in the water until finally death occurred.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Will you describe to the Tribunal the method used for rewarming the
victims of the freezing experiments?

A. During the period when Rascher, Holzloehner, and Finke were there,
rewarming was in the beginning carried out by massage and partly by
means of injections of drugs affecting the heart, and also by means of
rewarming by electrical heaters and sometimes by means of a warm bath.
At the end of the Holzloehner period, the hot water rewarming method was
introduced, and that was carried out until the end of the rewarming
experiments with the exception of a few special experiments with animal
heat. About 10 women from the concentration camp at Ravensbrueck were
ordered to report to Dachau to supply the heat and were forced to press
themselves against the body of the frozen person in order to rewarm him
in that manner. These are the methods which were employed in order to
rewarm the frozen body.

Q. Now, Witness, did I understand you to say that the hot water bath
method of rewarming was not adopted until after Holzloehner and Finke
had left?

A. After Holzloehner and Finke had left the station, hot water rewarming
was also carried out.

Q. Do you recall receiving orders in September 1942 from Sievers to take
the hearts and lungs of five inmates who had been killed to Professor
Hirt in Strasbourg for further scientific study?

A. It is correct that I had to take specimens belonging to five persons
who died during experiments from the morgue to Hirt in Strasbourg. I
myself, of course, have never done any dissecting and therefore did not
prepare these specimens. Sievers ordered me to go to Strasbourg and
there deliver the glasses to Professor Hirt, together with an
accompanying letter. This was the end of September or the beginning of
October. The travel warrant had been made out by Sievers and the
traveling expenses were also paid by the Ahnenerbe.

Q. Had the five experimental subjects been killed shortly before you
left for Strasbourg?

A. I cannot remember with absolute certainty whether the specimens were
fresh or whether they were taken from older corpses. I do know that
among the specimens there was one from a Dutchman. I cannot recollect
for certain the nationality of the other four.

Q. Did you deliver these hearts and lungs to Professor Hirt in
Strasbourg?

A. I delivered them in Strasbourg, not to Professor Hirt himself but to
the laboratory at the University there. The letter to Professor Hirt I
handed to him personally, and he wanted me to return and see him in the
afternoon, since he had to give me something to take to Dachau. He gave
me a sealed letter to Dr. Rascher and a parcel for Sister Pia which I
handed to Rascher to pass on.

Q. Now, Professor Hirt was also a member, in fact the head of the
Department of the Ahnenerbe Society, was he not?

A. We knew that Professor Hirt was also making experiments and belonged
to the Ahnenerbe Society.

                 *        *        *        *        *

         EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT HANDLOSER[31]

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

MR. MCHANEY: Let us pass on, General. Your attorney asked you whether or
not you ever gained any information concerning the freezing experiments
carried out by Rascher, Holzloehner, and Finke. Do you deny that you
ever received knowledge on that matter?

DEFENDANT HANDLOSER: I said, no.

Q. As a result of the Eastern campaign weren’t you very much interested
in “Cold” problems?

A. Yes.

Q. Isn’t that why you sent army officers to the Luftwaffe conference in
October 1942?

A. Of course the interest in cold problems was of an important nature. I
do not know who assigned them. From May until the end of October I was
with headquarters in the Ukraine and I believe that the chief probably
telephoned me as to whether or how many people we should send, and he
may have made some proposal, and I think I would have told him on that
occasion “Yes, I am in full agreement. Send somebody there.” It is quite
a matter of course that we took people who knew something about cold
because they were the people who would be interested in it.

Q. Well, having sent them, you then immediately lost interest in the
problem, I suppose?

A. No, I did not lose interest. At some period of time somebody probably
reported to me whether something particular had happened or whether
there were any particular results or not, and what could be exploited by
us. But, at that time there was no mention of anything in particular
having occurred, nor was it said that any particular revolutionary
results were achieved. At any rate, I cannot recollect that anything
like that happened. I should merely like to point out that my interest
in cold problems was in our particular sphere of these problems, that is
the so-called earth-bound cold, at normal height or at the most in the
mountains where it concerned soldiers in mountain troops. That was
something which we discussed during various meetings, at first in 1942;
it was discussed to a great extent, and very exact directives were
contained in the reports of these meetings. You will find them in 1942
and you will find them in 1943. Naturally we were interested in cold
problems, and it is quite a matter of course that whenever we were
invited by the Luftwaffe to send our experts we did. The same thing is
done everywhere, not only in the army and in the field of medicine, but
in technical fields as well.

Q. Well, I thought that was probably correct, General; now I want to put
it to you that Holzloehner had made a very remarkable discovery and one
which I am sure came to your attention. Holzloehner and Rascher had
found out that this massive warm bath was an extremely effective way of
reviving persons from shock due to long exposure to cold, a treatment
which had been first discovered by a Russian in the 19th century but had
been forgotten somehow. Wasn’t this a matter remarkable enough so that
Schreiber, who was at this meeting, or one of the many other army
doctors who were down there, would perhaps call it to your attention,
after the extreme cold you had suffered in Russia the previous winter?

A. I said already before that we were always interested in cold problems
and as you say, very correctly, mainly because of this terrible winter
of 1941-42. I knew before that our regulations which were valid up to
the war and perhaps during the first year of the war, stated that people
who were frozen had to be rewarmed very slowly. The entire population
was informed that a frozen person should not be rewarmed too quickly.
Even before that we included in our regulations that one should
concentrate on rewarming, and certain forms of rewarming were described.
If we army people who knew the Russian front were not as impressed by
this warm bath, as you may think we were, it was probably because there
were no warm baths available along the entire Eastern front, and this
plays quite a large part in the impression any new invention may have
made on us.

Q. Well, now, General, let me put it to you this way. Did you make any
changes in the basic directives concerning the rewarming after shock
from exposure to cold after this Luftwaffe conference or after the
conference in December 1942?

A. If you look through the reports of the meetings and the directives it
is quite possible that somewhere, I can’t tell you exactly where
although I have it, something is said about warm or hot baths in regard
to freezing. You yourself brought to our knowledge again, through a
document, that in December 1942, that is, after Nuernberg, Holzloehner
spoke about his rewarming questions during a conference in the Academy.
That was reported to 300 or 400 men who transferred that information to
the front and I am sure that later on new directives contained
information about the warm bath, too.

Q. I am sure it did, too, General. That is the reason I asked you
because I think that there is no doubt that great importance was
attached to the results of this experiment in Dachau by Rascher,
Holzloehner, and Finke. I now want to ask you if you didn’t actually
hear Holzloehner speak in December 1942 at the meeting of consulting
physicians at the Military Medical Academy?

A. I cannot recollect that, and I must say once more that that is
something which was done within the various expert branches. I am sure
you will see that these expert branches dealt with these suggestions
themselves. However much one so desires, it is not possible to
participate in several expert branches simultaneously.

Q. Well, then, to put it to you, General, this speech by Holzloehner is
reported in our Document NO-922, Prosecution Exhibit 435, and it goes
on—you have a very short synopsis here of his report but he does give
clinical observations in cases of deaths resulting from cold, and I find
that you made some comments at this cold session on page 51 of the
original report. It reads:

    “Handloser stresses the extraordinary importance of education
    also in combating cold effects and appeals to all medical
    officers, in their capacity as leaders of the health service, to
    see to it that through frequently repeated explanations each
    individual is taught to observe the necessary precautionary
    measures.”

A. May I ask you where it is? Is it with reference to the lecture by
Holzloehner? At any rate, it seems to be within the framework of the
cold problem.

Q. General, I will put the German to you so that you can see for
yourself. General, let us read the little summary of the speech by
Holzloehner because the Tribunal does not have this document before it.
It reads:

    “Stabsarzt Professor Holzloehner:

                 “Prevention and Treatment of Freezing

    “In case of freezing in water of a temperature below 15°
    biological counter-measures are practically ineffective, whether
    in the case of human beings or animals. Human beings succumb to
    reflectory rigidity, increase of blood sugar, and acidosis, at
    an earlier stage and to a greater extent than animals. At a
    rectal temperature of below 30° under such conditions of
    distress at sea auricular flutter regularly sets in; at under
    28° heart failure frequently occurs in human beings.
    (Over-exertion due to unequal distribution of blood, increased
    resistance, and increased viscosity.) Treatment with drugs is
    senseless and has no effect. In the case of human beings, best
    results are also achieved with hot baths. The foam-suit was
    developed as a prophylaxis against freezing in water below 15°.”

Now, General, after that little summary of the talk by Holzloehner there
were several other lecturers on freezing problems and then at the end we
have the gentlemen who made some comments on these lectures; we find
among them Bremer, Dr. Hippke, the man who commissioned these
experiments, and Jarisch and Buechner. Now I want to ask you if this
document refreshes your recollection so that you can tell us whether or
not you heard this report by Holzloehner.

A. Yes, after reading what I have in my hand now, it is quite possible
that I listened to this lecture. At the same time, it is a proof that I
have not as good a memory as you assumed, because I already had this
document in my hands once before here in Nuernberg; you once gave it to
me and I forgot about it.

Q. Now, did Holzloehner describe clinical observations about human
deaths resulting from cold in this lecture which you heard?

A. I cannot tell you that.

Q. Does it not say so in your own report here?

A. It says here that Holzloehner belonged to the Luftwaffe and as far as
I was informed later, Holzloehner had gained a large amount of
experience from his service on the Atlantic Coast. I am sure that was
something which was mentioned during his lecture. He had an emergency
sea station near the Atlantic coast and near that there was a hospital
where he treated these frozen people who had been rescued from the sea.
There was no cause to suspect anything special behind this.

Q. Was it apparent to you that he carried out experiments on human
beings?

A. No.

Q. Well, General, we have heard some testimony here about the talk
Holzloehner gave in Nuernberg 2 months before this and, as I recall,
there was some indignation in this meeting in October 1942, because all
these gentlemen realized what had happened; are you telling me that no
rumor of this seeped up from Nuernberg to Berlin in 2 months, so when
the same man gave the same talk, you gentlemen were in complete
ignorance about the fact that these experiments had been carried out on
living human beings in a concentration camp?

A. I cannot say how far any discussions or any indignations were noted
in Nuernberg. At any rate, I never heard anything about any rejection or
any indignation. I could well imagine that if I were to hold a lecture
somewhere and I afterwards gained the impression that there was some
kind of obscurity, or some particular sensation, and if 2 months later,
I gave the same lecture at another place, I would naturally change my
lecture and would draw my conclusions from what I had learned
previously. I am sure that this might well have been the case here. At
any rate after reading this excerpt, if a few pages are missing here and
if one doesn’t look at the pages exactly, one must assume that the man
noted down here as Handloser spoke immediately after the lecture of
Holzloehner. I believe that the report of the meeting itself will show
you that a few other lectures took place between the lecture of
Holzloehner and the discussion. You will also have to admit that
considering the fact that we were approaching winter again (this meeting
took place in December 1942) my remarks did not refer so much to
Professor Holzloehner’s lecture, but were merely a reminder that we
wanted to do everything and in that way wanted to concentrate our entire
interest on the front where freezing took place in order to help our
soldiers. That is all this discussion was.

                 *        *        *        *        *

         EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT SCHROEDER[32]

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: I don’t believe you have told the Tribunal yet about the
conversation you had with Holzloehner on his freezing experiments, have
you?

DEFENDANT SCHROEDER: What experiments do you mean? What conversation do
you mean? Do you mean in 1940?

Q. General, you know as a matter of fact there apparently is some
dispute between the prosecution and yourself about the precise date, but
you knew during the course of the war that Holzloehner, Finke, and
Rascher had carried out experiments on concentration camp inmates at
Dachau?

A. Yes, I learned that in my office in 1944, as I said here before.

Q. And, I am suggesting to you that after you learned that Holzloehner
had been implicated in those experiments you called him in and talked to
him?

A. Yes, oh yes. I know when you mean now, yes. There are two things
which play a part here. I said yesterday that in 1940 Holzloehner had
furnished people who were rescued from the sea to the Rescue Station at
Witze, where he first gained experience. Then I lost sight of
Holzloehner, since I left the west in the year 1941, and I saw him again
for the first time in the fall of 1944, when for some reason that I do
not know, he visited one of the men in my office. At that time I spoke
to him briefly, and since I had learned in the meantime that he was
conducting, experiments in Dachau, I asked him whether that was correct
or how he was doing it. I remember at that time he told me that he was
conducting experiments based on the experience which he had gained on
the coast, and he was supplementing these experiments by conducting
experiments on human beings in Dachau. At that time he was speaking
about six or seven criminals who had been condemned to death were put at
his disposal for that purpose. At that time, he said nothing about any
fatalities. I gained the impression then that the entire manner of the
experiments had impressed him mentally. I had the feeling that he did
not want to speak about it; his suicide later confirmed that.

Q. Well, General, I think this is all rather significant. I think you
should have probably made some mention of it before this date. When was
this meeting with Holzloehner?

A. I mentioned it during my interrogation; I think that was in the fall
of 1944. I cannot remember the exact date. It could have been November
1944. I am not quite sure.

Q. Well, this was after you had initiated the sea-water experiments,
then; is that right?

A. Considerably later, yes.

Q. And, as I recall, you also said in this interrogation that you had
seen this report by Holzloehner, which I understand you have denied
heretofore; now, had you seen Holzloehner’s report or not?

A. No, nor did I ever say that I had. He reported to me on this, but he
did not show me a report.

Q. Now, General, I am reading from a summary of an interrogation of you
made on 21 October 1946, and one paragraph reads as follows: “Schroeder
also knows about the ‘See-Not’ and ‘Winter-Not’ reports from which he
could conclude that human beings were used for experiments. This could
also be concluded from Holzloehner’s report on the freezing experiments,
and it could furthermore be seen from the comments which Dr. Rascher
wrote on the above matter. Schroeder learned about these matters in
1944.” Now, is this summary inaccurate?

A. Very inaccurate.

Q. All right, let us get it straight. In the first part of 1943 you
received a report on the Nuernberg meeting, did you not?

A. Yes.

Q. In May 1944, Becker-Freyseng told you that Holzloehner, Finke, and
Rascher, had carried out experiments on concentration camp inmates at
Dachau, did he not?

A. That is not the right way of putting it. He said that Holzloehner had
made the experiments; nothing was said to me about Rascher and Finke. I
did not know them then. I learned their names only since I was
imprisoned.

Q. You mean you had not heard up to then that Rascher had worked with
Holzloehner on these experiments; is that right?

A. No, I did not say that. I heard Rascher’s name for the first time in
this report of 1945 when I was imprisoned.

Q. Well, I do not know, General, but I am going to look in just a
minute—I think Rascher’s and Finke’s names are mentioned in this report
which you got in the first part of 1943 on the Nuernberg meeting. You do
not recall that?

A. No.

Q. And I very well remember that Rascher had made a comment on this
rather long lecture by Holzloehner, from which it could clearly be seen
that Rascher himself was experimenting with Holzloehner; do you not
remember that?

A. I can say that now, because in the meantime I have seen these
reports, “See-Not” and “Winter-Not,” and have read them through
carefully and acquainted myself with the various names, and I know that
in this report there is an extensive report by Holzloehner and after
that a short remark by Rascher. I did not pay any attention to it at
that time because I had no connections with Rascher, nor did I see any
reason why I should; but I did interest myself in Holzloehner’s report
because I knew him from working with him on the French coast.

Q. Well, we will come back to the report in just a moment, but right now
I want to go on with your discussion with Holzloehner. Can you tell us,
more or less, exactly what he told you?

A. That is a little too much to ask me to recall a brief remark that I
made in 1944 on the occasion of a very short visit. I do recall that I
met Holzloehner outside my hut, and I asked him to step in a moment;
then I asked him about the experiments. He answered me briefly and that
was the end of our conversation. The only thing that struck me was that
Holzloehner, who previously had been a very lively and brisk person,
seemed very depressed and worn out. I attributed that to the 5 years of
war that had passed. That there were other reasons, perhaps, for this, I
could only adduce later from his tragic demise. It could be that I
commented to my adjutant on this subject. I am not sure at the moment,
but I think it is quite possible because Augustinick knew Holzloehner
very well and liked him. Perhaps Augustinick can be asked about that
later.

Q. You said a moment ago you got the impression that Holzloehner did not
want to talk about these experiments, and you also had been dabbling in
Dachau experiments yourself. I think under these circumstances it might
be expected that you would have questioned Holzloehner rather closely
about what went on in his experiments. You did not do that?

A. He told me briefly that his observations from the English channel
coast could be checked on experiments being performed in Dachau on
criminals condemned to death, and that these experiments had been
described in the report which he had submitted. That made it perfectly
clear what was going on, so why should I ask anything further? I was not
particularly interested in going into that specific result.

Q. Well, were the sea-water experiments over at that time?

A. Yes, some time before, and that must have been why Holzloehner came
to me because these experiments had long been concluded.

Q. You did not have any one in the nature of representative at the
Nuernberg meeting in October 1942?

A. No.

Q. Now, you mentioned this report which you received on that meeting;
that is Document NO-401, Prosecution Exhibit 93. You stated that you did
not know that Rascher and Finke were working with Holzloehner. I found a
statement on page 11 of this report which reads as follows: “For the
relevant statements, we have to thank the cooperation of Stabsarzt Dr.
Rascher and Stabsarzt Dr. Finke; they refer to a stay in water of 2 to
12 degrees.” That statement indicates very clearly that Rascher and
Finke were working with Holzloehner, does it not?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, I think you stated to your own defense counsel that it was
impossible for you to conclude from this report that experiments had
been carried out, but rather, you thought they were clinical
observations made on people fished out of the North Sea, is that right?

A. Yes, I based my testimony solely on the Holzloehner report which was
the only thing that interested me. There were reports by Rose and others
but I did not read them. I glanced through them briefly but gave no
further attention to them because I did not know the people who had
drawn them up.

Q. Let’s just look briefly at one or two points here and see if they
might not indicate to you, if you thought about it a little bit, that
these were really experiments and not clinical observations on people
who accidentally fell into the sea. For instance, on page 11 of the
translation it states as follows:

    “The rapidity with which numbness occurs is remarkable. It was
    determined that already 5 to 10 minutes after falling in, an
    advancing rigor of the skeletal muscles sets in, which renders
    the movement of the arms especially increasingly difficult. This
    also affects respiration. Inspiration is deepened, and
    expiration is delayed. Besides this, heavy mucous secretions
    occur.”

Now, when you read that little paragraph about a man who had been in the
water 5 to 10 minutes where it is said that he had rigor of the skeletal
muscles, where his inspiration is deepened and his expiration is delayed
and where there is a heavy mucous secretion, did you imagine that they
had Dr. Holzloehner in a lifeboat in the North Sea making these
observations on some aviator who had fallen in accidentally? Did you
think that, General?

A. Yes, that’s what I thought. You don’t know the local situation at
Visson. There were a beach and dunes, and a guard from the rescue
station always stood on the dunes to keep an eye on the water and the
surrounding country, particularly when flights to England were taking
place, so that it actually did happen that fliers bailed out and fell
into the water just in front of the shoreline. Rescue boats were ready
at that time and went out to sea immediately, so that it was altogether
possible that fliers who fell into the water close to the coast could
very quickly be observed and rescued. These are the facts of what
actually took place at that rescue station at that time.

Q. On the same page they have this remark: “With the drop of the rectal
temperature to 31°, a clouding of consciousness occurs, which passes to
a deep, cold-induced anaesthesia if the decline reaches below 30°.”

Now, do you suppose that they pulled this aviator in and inserted a
rectal thermometer and found his temperature at 31° and then tossed him
back and let it drop another degree, all the time watching closely a
clouding of consciousness, and then hauled him back in when it was 30°
and noted a deep, cold-induced anaesthesia?

A. No, that isn’t the correct way to put it either. This is one of the
observations that was new to us and to which we paid a great deal of
attention in order to explain these incomprehensible fatalities, namely,
the fact that when the people were removed from the water their
temperature still dropped and simultaneously with the drop in
temperature a fatal collapse of the heart occurred. This was one of our
fundamental and new observations. And I must report again and again that
this rescue house was a small place, but it did have the apparatus for
observing these people very exactly. That was the sense of the whole
thing.

Q. General, you’ve already covered yourself a little bit by saying you
didn’t read these discussions after Holzloehner’s lecture very
carefully; but I want to read you the one by Rascher, in any event, and
see if you won’t admit that if you had read this little comment by
Rascher that there could have been no doubt whatsoever in your mind that
experiments were carried out and not observations on aviators in the
North Sea. This is on page 15 of the translation, and Rascher has said:

    “Supplementing the statements of Holzloehner, there is a report
    on observations according to which cooling in the region of the
    neck only, even if it lasts for several hours, causes merely a
    low sinking of the body temperature up to 1° C., without
    changing the blood sugar level or the heart function. Checking
    of the rectal temperature was carried out by taking the
    temperature in the stomach and showed complete agreement. After
    taking alcohol, body temperature decreases at a quicker pace.
    After taking dextropur, the decrease is slower than with the
    experiments in both a sober and an alcoholic condition. Hot
    infusions (10 percent dextro solution, table salt solution,
    tutofusin, table salt solution with pancortex) were successful
    only for a time.”

Now, General, if you had read that, wouldn’t it have been perfectly
clear that these were experiments?

A. Today, of course, after this whole question has been exposed I
should; but at that time I never suspected the possibility from that
report that these were a special group of human experiments. I can say
that here under oath, and I should like to reiterate it. That was my
attitude toward the matter at that time and it has only been changed by
what I have discovered here.

Q. I might also point out to you that Benzinger’s comment expressly
speaks of Holzloehner’s experiments repeatedly; but I assume that that
also made no impression on you?

A. I can say one thing to that. My comrades, the medical officers in my
office at that time in Italy, had no notion either that human
experiments were the basis for these reports. Never was one single word
said about such a thing on the occasion of my inspection visits. Of
course, during my visits to the Mediterranean such matters were brought
up; but I never heard any indication that these reports were the result
of a long series of experiments on human beings. In other words, others,
too, did not see so clearly as is pointed out here that these were human
experiments.

Q. And you heard no rumors in the air force at all about these
experiments, although there had been a large meeting at Nuernberg in
October, with considerable comment there about these experiments?
Holzloehner later gave a lecture before all the consulting physicians,
at least those who attended the meeting on internal medicine where he
spoke. He gave another report there on these experiments. You never
heard any rumors in the air force about these things; is that right?

A. No.

Q. You never talked to Finke about these experiments, did you?

A. I have stated frequently that I don’t even know Finke.

                 *        *        *        *        *

          EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT SIEVERS[33]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

DR. WEISGERBER: During the subsequent period you came in contact with
the cold experiments of Dr. Rascher?

DEFENDANT SIEVERS: I once went to Dachau in order to participate in
administrative conferences at the time when Dr. Rascher, Professor
Holzloehner, and Dr. Finke were concluding a cold experiment. That is to
say, the experimental subject had just been placed into a room, but I
didn’t see anything else of this experiment.

Q. On the occasion of this experiment, or on the occasion of a
discussion which perhaps followed, did you hear anything more in detail
about Rascher concerning these experiments?

A. These three men were very busy reading the apparatus used in
connection with that experiment. I was told that it was necessary to
apply the warm covers as quickly as possible. Professor Holzloehner
stated that they had almost concluded their experiments and that further
experiments hardly seemed necessary. No scientific questions were
discussed at that time.

Q. Did you see any report or did you receive reports from Rascher about
these cold experiments?

A. No. These reports also went directly to Himmler from Rascher, as
becomes evident from the documents which have been submitted here.

Q. In Document 1611-PS (_Pros. Ex. 85_), you find a letter sent by the
Reich Leader SS to Dr. Rascher, dated 22 September 1942. In the second
paragraph it states that it was sent to SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers
for information. Paragraph 1 mentions the interim report on the cold
experiments by Dr. Rascher at the Dachau concentration camp. One could
conclude therefrom that you received this interim report.

A. This interim report went directly from Rascher to Himmler, otherwise
Himmler wouldn’t have answered Rascher direct. I don’t think, however,
that it is out of the question that Rascher had told Hitler in this
interim report, or in some other way, that when I heard of these cold
experiments I considered them to be perverse. I assume that by sending
me that report Himmler’s opinion on that subject was to be transmitted
to me, and that is why I received a copy of that letter for my
information.

Q. Now, would you be good enough to turn over one page, and you will
find there Dr. Rascher’s letter dated 3 October 1942. (_NO-285, Pros.
Ex. 86._) This letter is obviously directed to Dr. Rudolf Brandt. It
becomes evident from that letter that Rascher applied to you in a number
of matters, is that correct?

A. Yes, I shall revert to that briefly, first of all concerning the
low-pressure chamber. He says here that he turned to me in order to take
steps regarding the low-pressure chamber. I didn’t do anything about
that, at least not on the basis of this request by Rascher, only later
when Himmler arrived at Munich and when he himself ordered me to send
him this draft letter which was previously discussed. He further says
that he turned to me regarding a teletype which requested the furnishing
of women for these experiments. Since Himmler had already issued orders
regarding the furnishing of experimental subjects, there was nothing
left for me to do.

Q. Didn’t you participate in a second cold experiment?

A. Yes, together with Dr. Hirt, whom I had to accompany by order of
Himmler, as he had been included in Rascher’s experiments with Himmler’s
approval. Himmler probably had realized in the meantime that Rascher
alone would not be sufficient in order to clarify these scientifically
very extensive and difficult questions. Hirt could only come to Munich
for one day because of his state of health and for that reason asked
that everything be prepared beforehand, so that he could gain insight
into all the work results which had been obtained so far. I told Rascher
to prepare everything according to Hirt’s desire. A professional
criminal was presented for the purpose of this experiment.

Q. Was that a professional criminal who had already been condemned to
death, and how did you know whether it was such a criminal?

A. Before the experiment started Hirt wanted to look at the files
because there was a possibility that this experiment would end fatally.
The sentence was furnished by the Criminal Police Department of the Camp
Administration. We saw that this was a sentence which had been passed by
a regular court, and it became evident therefrom that this man had more
than 10 years’ penitentiary behind him, and had been recently, sentenced
to death because of murder and theft. Hirt furthermore asked the man
whether he knew that this experiment might end fatally, whereupon the
man answered that he was well aware of it. He said that he would have to
die anyway for he was a confirmed criminal, and he just could not stop
his criminal activity; therefore he deserved death.

Q. Did you convince yourself of that by asking the experimental subject
whether he was actually a volunteer?

A. After Hirt’s questioning I personally asked the man whether he agreed
to that experiment. He thereupon said that he was in full agreement,
providing it didn’t hurt him. This assurance could be given to him
because the experiment was carried out under complete anaesthesia. I
didn’t participate in the entire experiment, but I saw that this man was
given an anaesthetic.

Q. You yourself saw the files from the criminal police?

A. Yes, I read through them, together with Hirt.

Q. Well, I guess there can be no doubt that this was a professional
criminal sentenced to death by a regular court?

A. This was a very regular sentence. All previous sentences were listed
in the files, and I remember in addition to the death sentence, he had
already had 10 years’ penitentiary.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Now, would you please be good enough to turn to page 86 of the
document book before you? This is a report about a so-called “Cold
Conference” dated 26 and 27 October 1942. Did you receive this report in
the Ahnenerbe?

A. I certainly didn’t receive it and I don’t remember having seen it
anywhere.

Q. Didn’t Curator Wuest receive that report?

A. I do not believe so. The scientific work in connection with Rascher,
which only concerned Himmler personally, was always dealt with directly
by Rascher and Himmler. These matters were only sent to Wuest if Himmler
actually sent them himself. I don’t believe that has happened in this
particular case. At any rate, Wuest never told me anything about it.
These reports and the research assignments just discussed lay completely
outside the interests and sphere of Wuest.

Q. What do you know about the so-called dry-cold experiments of Dr.
Rascher?

A. I only know about these experiments on the basis of Himmler’s order
which was sent by Himmler to Pohl and Grawitz because of the furnishing
of the equipment. I don’t know whether these experiments were actually
carried out. At any rate, I only found out about that here in this
courtroom. As a prerequisite for the execution Rascher said that it was
necessary for them to be performed in the mountains. Himmler had also
ordered that these experiments be carried out in the grounds of the
mountain villa at Sudelfeld. I was to see to it that accommodation was
available there. Investigations, however, proved that the terrain at
Sudelfeld was not suitable for that purpose. At the same time I had
heard that there were a sufficient number of cases of freezing to be
found in hospitals at the front. I therefore asked Rascher why it was
necessary for him to carry out any further experiments. He evaded my
question and merely declared categorically that he would have to abide
by Himmler’s order.

Q. Which year was that?

A. That was at the end of 1942.

Q. The order was at the end of 1942?

A. The end of 1942. The conversation with Rascher about the
accommodation took place afterwards.

Q. And that was intended for the winter of 1943-44?

A. No, for 1942-43. Since the terrain at Sudelfeld was not suitable,
some other place had to be found and I handled this matter in a very
dilatory manner. Rascher pressed me on the matter and Himmler was rather
indignant, but after all I couldn’t create a house by myself. Himmler
subsequently ordered that preparations be made for these experiments to
be carried out at least in the next winter. I think I made a mistake, I
think it must have been the winter of 1943-44. I’m sure it was 1943-44,
and I think that afterwards Himmler said that preparations were to be
made for 1944-45. These experiments, however, were never carried out
because Rascher was already arrested in the spring of 1944.

Q. In that case you are saying that these dry-cold experiments were not
carried out in the mountains in the winter of 1943-44. You assisted in
preventing these experiments from being carried out by delaying the
finding of suitable accommodation?

A. Yes.

Q. I will now briefly summarize your testimony with reference to the
count concerning cold experiments.

MR. HARDY: If it please your Honor, the defense counsel has put
questions to the witness and the witness has testified to these
questions. I really think summations after each experiment are
unnecessary here. That can take place in his closing statement.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: A short summation on the part of defense counsel
might be in order, as long as it does not contain too much repetition.

DR. WEISGERBER: Yes, your Honor. You accidentally attended the
completion of a cold experiment by Dr. Rascher at Dachau. You had seen
no reports about Dr. Rascher’s experiments and received no knowledge
about them in any other way. The furnishing of the experimental subjects
for the rewarming experiments were not your business, and you actually
had nothing to do with it. You attended a further experiment under the
circumstances which you have previously described. You know nothing
about any dry-cold experiments being carried out in Dachau itself. You
succeeded in delaying and finally completely frustrating the dry-cold
experiments in the mountains. Is that correct?

DEFENDANT SIEVERS: Yes, that is correct.

Q. After searching your mind, did you do anything in that connection
which went beyond the orders given you by Himmler?

A. No, in no way at all.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[28] Figure 14, headed “Mean Values from Group of Four Experiments each
at 4° C. [39.2° F.] to 4.5° C. [40.1° F.] Water Temperature,” is a chart
showing the skin temperature and the rectal temperature of four
experimental subjects each of whom respectively in a sober state, was
given 100 cubic centimeters of alcohol one hour before the start of the
experiment, and was given 100 grams of pure dextrose one hour before
start of the experiment. The three curves indicating skin temperature
show drops to 16° C. and below after 60 to 80 minutes; the three curves
showing rectal temperature show a low of 22.3° C. and 21.3° C. after 70,
100, and 110 minutes respectively, and then an increase to 31.3° C.
after 130, 200, and 230 minutes respectively.

[29] 1616-PS, Pros. Ex. 105, see p. 249.

[30] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 17-18
December 1946, pp. 595-695.

[31] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 11, 12,
13, and 18 February 1947, pp. 2815-3104.

[32] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 25, 26,
27 February 1947, pp. 3470-3700.

[33] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 9, 10,
11, 14 April 1947, pp. 5656-5869.

                         3. MALARIA EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser, Rostock, Gebhardt, Blome, Rudolf
Brandt, Mrugowsky, Poppendick, and Sievers were charged with special
responsibility for and participation in criminal conduct involving
malaria experiments (par. 6 (C) of the indictment). Only the defendant
Sievers was convicted on this charge. In the case of the defendant
Mrugowsky the judgment of the Tribunal makes no special reference to
this charge.

Although the defendant Rose was not charged with _special_
responsibility for participation in malaria experiments, the prosecution
offered proof to show some participation by Rose in these experiments.
However, the Tribunal in its judgment refrained from making a finding of
guilt or innocence as to Rose, since malaria experiments were
particularized in paragraph 6 (C) of the indictment and since Rose was
not among those defendants who were charged with special responsibility
by name (judgment, vol. II). The Tribunal said that the manner of the
prosecution’s pleading “constituted, in effect, a bill of particulars
and was, in essence, a declaration to the defendants upon which they
were entitled to rely in preparing their defenses, [and] that only such
persons as were actually named in the designated experiments would be
called upon to defend against the specific items. Included in the list
of names of those defendants specifically charged with responsibility
for the malaria experiments the name of Rose does not appear. We think
it would be manifestly unfair to the defendant to find him guilty of an
offense with which the indictment affirmatively indicated he was not
charged.”

“This does not mean that the evidence adduced by the prosecution was
inadmissible against the charges actually preferred against Rose. We
think it had probative value as proof of the fact of Rose’s knowledge of
human experimentation upon concentration camp inmates.”

The Tribunal did make findings of guilt or innocence with regard to
several experiments which were not particularized in detail in the
indictment and concerning which the indictment did not name any
particular defendants as having special responsibility. For example, the
prosecution introduced evidence concerning phlegmon, polygal and gas
oedema experiments (_subsections 12-14, see pp. 653 to 694_) under the
general charge of paragraph 6 of the indictment, which alleges that the
criminal experiments “included, but were not limited to” the
particularized experiments. (_See also introductions to sub-section
12-14, see pp. 653-4, 669-70 and 684._)

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the malaria experiments
is contained in its final briefs against the defendants Rose and
Sievers. Extracts from these briefs are set forth below on pages 280 to
283. A corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on these
experiments has been selected from the closing briefs for the defendants
Sievers and Rose. It appears below on pages 283 to 288. This
argumentation is followed by selections from the evidence on pages 289
to 314.

        b. Selections from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                             DEFENDANT ROSE_

                 *        *        *        *        *

With respect to the malaria experiments, two questions are presented for
consideration: first, whether the malaria experiments were performed in
a criminal manner, and second, whether the defendant Rose was connected
with such experiments.

That the performance of the malaria experiments in the Dachau
concentration camp from February 1942 until the end of the war was
criminal has not been seriously disputed by any of the defendants. In
December 1941, while working in Italy, Dr. Claus Schilling met Conti who
became interested in supporting further work by Schilling on malaria
problems. A meeting was arranged with Himmler who gave his permission
for experiments to be carried out in the Dachau concentration camp.
Schilling began his work in Dachau in February 1942 and continued his
experiments until the end of the war. He was primarily concerned with
discovering a way of immunizing persons against malaria. During the
course of the experiments, approximately 1,200 concentration camp
inmates were infected with malaria either by being bitten by infected
mosquitoes or by injections of malaria-infected blood. After having been
infected, the prisoners were treated with various drugs, including
quinine, neosalvarsan, and pyramidon. Most of the experimental subjects
were non-German nationals. Of the experimental subjects infected,
approximately 30 died as a direct result of the experiments and an
additional 300 to 400 died as a result of complications.

The above facts are established by the Review of the General Military
Commission in the case of the U. S. against Weiss and others, held at
Dachau, Germany. (_NO-856, Pros. Ex. 125._) Claus Schilling was a
defendant in that case and was convicted and sentenced to death. In an
affidavit submitted in evidence before that Tribunal, dated 30 October
1945, Schilling admitted that the experimental subjects were not
volunteers.

One of the assistants to Schilling in his experiments at Dachau was Dr.
Ploetner, who was a member of the Institute for Military Scientific
Research of the Ahnenerbe under the defendant Sievers. Sievers conferred
with Ploetner regarding the malaria experiments and received reports
from him. (_3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123; entries for 30 January, 22 February,
23 May, 31 May, 1 June, 24 August._) Rose stated that he learned that
Ploetner was a collaborator of Schilling through an inquiry to the
Journal of Tropical Medicine in the year 1944. Ploetner had published an
article in that magazine and it had come to Rose’s attention. (_Tr.
6339._)

The witness August Vieweg testified for the prosecution and
substantiated the findings of the Military Commission at Dachau. Vieweg
was first subjected to the malaria experiments himself and thereafter
served as an inmate-assistant in the malaria ward. Vieweg testified that
Schilling experimented on approximately 1,100 inmates, including
Germans, Poles, Russians, and Jugoslavs. Among the Russian inmates used
were prisoners of war. Seven or eight of the subjects died in the
malaria station, primarily as a result of pyramidon poisoning. (_Tr. p.
428._) He also testified that to his knowledge, an additional 60 inmates
died after having been transferred from the experimental station. He
further stated that none of the inmates volunteered, that he personally
did not, and that the experimental subjects were not freed as a result
of undergoing the experiment. The original infection card from the files
of Schilling in Dachau, showing the date of infection of the witness
Vieweg with “Culture Rose,” was introduced. (_NO-983, Pros. Ex. 128_;
_see also Tr. pp. 584-5_.)

The defendant Rose participated in the criminal experiments of Schilling
by furnishing him material with which to carry out the experiments. This
material was furnished by Rose with knowledge of facts which would have
led any reasonable man to the conclusion that Schilling was carrying out
criminal experiments. Rose had known Schilling for many years and
succeeded him as Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine in the
Robert Koch Institute. Moreover, Rose, by his own admission, was an
adviser to Dr. Conti, who arranged for Schilling to carry out his
experiments in Dachau. It is highly unlikely that such an arrangement
would have been made without consulting Rose.

Rose furnished Schilling with malaria spleens for his experiments in
Italy during the year 1941, a fact which Rose denied on the stand until
contradicted by his letter to Schilling, dated 3 February 1941.
(_NO-1756, Prog. Ex. 486._) Rose continued to furnish infection material
to Schilling after he set up his experimental station in Dachau. Rose
and his witnesses admitted that anopheles eggs were sent to Schilling in
1942, but Rose, after that occasion, issued instructions that no more
material was to be sent to Schilling because he did not agree with his
research aims. (_Tr. p. 6415._) On 4 April 1942, Schilling wrote to Rose
asking for “Culture Rose” to continue his experiments. This letter bears
the dateline “Dachau, 3K, Hospital for Inmates,” and it was initialed by
Rose on 17 April 1942. Schilling stated that he would be “very thankful
* * * for this _new_ support of my work.” [Emphasis supplied.] That Rose
complied with this request of Schilling’s is established because the
witness Vieweg was himself infected with “Culture Rose.”

On 5 July 1943, in a letter, also with the notation “Dachau, K3, Malaria
Station,” Schilling thanked Rose for a consignment of atroparvus eggs
and accepted Rose’s offer to send him his excess eggs. This letter
mentions the “Prisoner August,” who obviously was the witness, August
Vieweg. This letter was initialed by Rose on 27 July. (_NO-1753, Pros.
Ex. 488._) On the same date Rose replied to Schilling’s letter, advising
him that at the next favorable opportunity, a shipment of anopheles eggs
would be made to him.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                           DEFENDANT SIEVERS_

                 *        *        *        *        *

Sievers had knowledge of and supported the criminal malaria experiments
in Dachau. He testified that early in 1942 he learned from Himmler that
Schilling was conducting malaria experiments in Dachau. (_Tr. p. 5692._)
In a memorandum dated 3 April 1942 concerning a consultation between
Sievers and Dr. May on the location of an experimental station for the
Ahnenerbe, Sievers mentioned as a persuasive reason for locating in
Dachau the fact that Schilling was carrying out his malaria experiments
there. (_NO-721, Pros. Ex. 126._) Although this memorandum gives the
name as “Schling”, Sievers testified that the name Schilling was
intended. (_Tr. p. 5693._)

The witness Vieweg testified that in late 1943 or early 1944 Sievers
made several visits to Schilling’s malaria station where he consulted
with Ploetner, who was a collaborator of Schilling’s. (_Tr. pp. 445-7,
464._) He stated that Sievers consulted with Schilling and also
inspected the laboratory. (_Tr. p. 423._) Sievers testified that the
purpose of these visits and consultations was to arrange for the
transfer of Ploetner to the Institute for Military Scientific Research
of the Ahnenerbe.

A number of entries in the Sievers diary for 1944 prove that Sievers was
connected with and supported the malaria experiments. On 30 January he
received a memorandum by Ploetner on malaria. A notation of 22 February
states that “further work in the matter of SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr.
Ploetner to be done through RGF [Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer Conti].”
Ploetner, in addition to his work with Schilling, was also collaborating
with Rascher in the blood coagulation experiments. (See entries of 29
January and 14 April.) On 10 May 1944, the entry indicates that
Rascher’s research work was transferred to Ploetner. This was apparently
a result of Rascher’s difficulties in connection with the kidnapping of
children by him and his wife. On 23 May 1944, Ploetner was charged with
the management of the Ahnenerbe division in Dachau. The entry for 31 May
indicates that Sievers and Grawitz reached an understanding concerning
Ploetner’s continued collaboration with Schilling. On 21 June, Sievers
conferred with Schilling about limiting Ploetner’s activities with him
after his transfer to the Ahnenerbe. Ploetner was actually appointed
department head in the Institute for Military Scientific Research of the
Ahnenerbe on 27 June. The entry for 24 August 1944 notes that
collaboration between Schilling and Ploetner had been agreed upon.
(_3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

          c. Selections from the Argumentation of the Defense

                  _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR
                           DEFENDANT SIEVERS_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                         _Malaria Experiments_

1. Under the direction of Professor Dr. Schilling, malaria experiments
were carried out in Dachau concentration camp in the years 1941-1944.

2. According to the statements in the verdict of the United States
Military Court at Dachau of 26 January 1946 (_NO-856, Pros. Ex. 125_) a
great number of people were killed in these experiments.

3. Sievers had not the slightest connection with either Professor
Schilling’s malaria experiments or with any other malaria experiments.

The prosecution charges Sievers with participation in malaria
experiments.

    “As can be seen in all spheres of this devilish experiment
    program in Nazi Germany, the defendants charged with the malaria
    experiments had on their side an extensive knowledge of
    Schilling’s activity. In some cases they worked actively with
    the late Dr. Schilling”. (_Tr. pp. 403-4._)

_For proof, the prosecution refers to NO-721, Prosecution Exhibit 126._

Regarding 3546-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 123, Sievers’ diary 1944, entries
of 22 February 1944 and 31 May 1944, the prosecution states:

    “From this document it can be seen that on or about 1 April 1942
    Wolfram Sievers had knowledge of Dr. Schilling’s activity in
    Dachau. This letter represents a proposal for planned further
    experiments and clearly shows that the distinguished Wolfram
    Sievers in his capacity as Reich Business Manager of Ahnenerbe
    had a finger in all these matters.”

The defense has proved:

Sievers stated in his cross-examination that the affairs which he
discussed with Dr. May on 1 April 1942 in Munich had nothing whatsoever
to do with malaria experiments. Sievers paid a social visit to Dr.
Schilling in Dachau in the middle of the year 1944 in order to get Dr.
Ploetner released for the manufacture of pectin. (_Cross-examination of
Sievers, German Tr. pp. 5692-93._) Neither Sievers nor the Ahnenerbe nor
the Institute for Military Scientific Research [Institut fuer
Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung] had anything to do with malaria
experiments. (_Cross-examination of Sievers, German Tr. p. 5693_;
_Statement of the witness Dr. May, German Tr. p. 5877_.) Neither can
there be proved from Point four of the memorandum of 1 April 1942
(_NO-721, Pros. Ex. 126_) any connection of Sievers with the malaria
experiments.

An affidavit of the secretary Hildegard Wolff relates how the memorandum
of 1 April 1942 and the drawing up of Point four came about. She took
down and typed the memorandum from Sievers’ dictation. (_Sievers 11,
Sievers Ex. 8._) According to this, Sievers, in the very hurried
dictation, said Frau Wolff should write down as Point four what Himmler
had said in his telephone conversation about the erection of the
institute in Dachau. Therefore, not Sievers’ but Himmler’s opinion is
stated here.

Through the discussion of 1 April 1942 between Sievers and Dr. May it
had been made completely clear that human experiments within the
framework of the research order to Dr. May were absolutely out of the
question, not only for the reason that such experiments would have been
rejected on principle, but also because human experiments had nothing
whatsoever to do with the task of developing an insecticide for insects
harmful to human beings. Moreover, no other kind of human experiment was
carried out in connection with Dr. May’s work. The witness, Dr. May,
testified concerning Sievers’ diary entry of 22 February 1944 that there
never existed any cooperation between Dr. May, Dr. Ploetner, and Dr.
Schilling. (_Witness Dr. May, German Tr. p. 5878._)

That, however, would have been a necessary condition in order to
classify Sievers’ administrative activity in this connection as
participation.

As to points four, five, six, seven, there is no occasion for statements
concerning these points.

                               _Summary_

Since Sievers took no part in the malaria experiments of Professor
Schilling at Dachau or any other malaria experiments, he is not guilty
of a crime. Thus any special responsibility and participation in malaria
experiments is excluded.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                  _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR
                             DEFENDANT ROSE_

                 *        *        *        *        *

    _Statements Concerning the Question of Responsibility of the
    Defendant Rose for the Malaria Experiments Carried Out by
    Professor Claus Schilling at the Concentration Camp Dachau and
    Concerning the Question of Rose’s Participation in These
    Experiments._

In the indictment, Professor Rose is not charged with special
responsibility for the malaria experiments carried out by Professor
Schilling at the Dachau concentration camp or with participation. The
defendant Rose is also not mentioned in Document Book No. 4 of the
prosecution which deals with these malaria experiments. In the course of
the verbal proceedings in the court, the prosecution has, however,
preferred charges against Professor Rose to this effect and introduced
several new documents in the trial during the cross-examination of
defendant Rose (_NO-1752, Pros. Ex. 487_; _NO-1753, Pros. Ex. 488_;
_NO-1755, Pros. Ex. 489_; _NO-1756, Pros. Ex. 486_) and also heard the
witness Vieweg concerning this question. (_German Tr., 13 Dec. 46, pp.
464-516._)

This evidence shows that among others also the Department for Tropical
Diseases of the Robert Koch Institute in Berlin, under the direction of
the defendant Rose, sent anopheles eggs and malaria cultures on a few
occasions to Professor Schilling at Dachau during the years 1942 to
1943. At this juncture it should be mentioned that it is completely
immaterial for the judgment of the case what the name of the culture of
malaria tertiana was and whether or not its name was first changed by
Schilling to “Culture Rose”. The above-mentioned evidence also shows
that Professor Schilling told Professor Rose in two of his letters about
his breeding of mosquitoes; finally it also shows that Professor
Schilling asked the defendant Rose from Italy to procure for him spleens
of persons whose death had been caused by malaria. This was in 1941, at
a time when Schilling was not yet working in Dachau. According to the
testimony given by the defendant Rose during cross-examination (_Tr. pp.
6412-3_), he evidently complied with Schilling’s request.

The Tribunal will have to decide whether these above-mentioned
activities of the Department for Tropical Diseases of the Robert Koch
Institute under the management of the defendant Rose or his own
activities, constitute, within the meaning of the Penal Code,
participation on the part of the defendant Rose in the deeds of
Professor Schilling. In my opinion this decision can only be a negative
one, for the followings reasons:

The delivery of material necessary for malaria research such as
anopheles eggs and malaria cultures was one of the official duties of
the Department for Tropical Diseases of the Robert Koch Institute.
(_Rose 11, Rose Ex. 27._) This department had a section which dealt
exclusively with these matters. This can be seen from both the yearly
reports of the Robert Koch Institute and from the report covering the
Third Conference East of Consulting Specialists discussing
work-projects. (_Rose 38, Rose Ex. 10_; _Rose 10, Rose Ex. 26_; _Rose
12, Rose Ex. 28_.) Deliveries of this kind are internationally common
practice and were never denied by the defendant Rose. It is also common
practice to use the organs of human corpses for the carrying out of
scientific research. (_Tr. p. 6474_; _Rose 51, Rose Ex. 50_.)

The prerequisites for such deliveries are that they are requested either
by well-known institutes or by renowned research scientists. It cannot
be denied that Schilling, a coworker of Robert Koch and a member of the
malaria commission of the League of Nations, was famous as a malaria
research scientist. In a case of this kind, the non-delivery of such
material would have been an express violation of traditional practice
and of official duty. It is also not international usage for the orderer
to be questioned about the intended use of the material before its
delivery. (_Compare Mrugowsky 4a, Mrugowsky Ex. 96_; _Rose 49, Rose Ex.
48_; _German Tr., 19 June 47, p. 9680_.) Even if Professor Rose
declared, in the witness box during examination on his own behalf, that
he assumes full responsibility for it, it should be mentioned here that
such deliveries are carried out in such a routine way that the chief of
the institute often knows nothing about it since these matters are
dispatched independently by the personnel employed by him in the
laboratory. This also was the procedure in the case in question as the
evidence shows unequivocally. (_Rose 35, Rose Ex. 32_; _German Tr., 16
Dec. 46, p. 507_; _Tr. pp. 6020, 6352_.) Thus, it is by no means
surprising that the defendant Rose could no longer remember the
correspondence with Professor Schilling put before him by the
prosecution during cross-examination especially since undoubtedly it
often happens that, as in the case in question, although the letters are
sent by the orderer to the head of such an institute personally, the
dispatching of the order is nevertheless carried out independently by
the personnel of the institute.

Besides, the delivery of these materials by the Department for Tropical
Diseases of the Robert Koch Institute to Professor Schilling was by no
means a prerequisite for the carrying out of his experiments in Dachau,
since it has already been established that Schilling obtained no less
than 12 other malaria cultures from other institutes. (_NO-1752, Pros.
Ex. 487_; _German Tr., 16 Dec. 46, p. 509_.) Professor Schilling also
obtained mosquitoes from other institutes. (_German Tr., 16 Dec. 46, p.
507._) Naturally these institutes could also not have had any scruples
about sending material to Professor Schilling. In addition to this,
Professor Schilling personally maintained a group of people to catch
mosquitoes. (_German Tr., 16 Dec. 46, p. 508._) If Professor Schilling
turned at all to the Robert Koch Institute in this matter, the main
reason for doing so was that for decades he himself had been the head of
the Department for Tropical Diseases of the Institute and that personnel
were still working there who had formerly already been employed under
his management.

The defendant Rose did, as a matter of fact, oppose Schilling’s
scientific approach to the problem as may clearly be seen from his
opinion on Schilling for the Reich Ministry of the Interior (_Tr. p.
6021_) and from his lecture in Basel. (_Rose 25, Rose Ex. 31._) However,
to judge by Professor Schilling’s personality and past he could,
nevertheless, not conceive the idea that Professor Schilling’s work at
Dachau could be anything but completely above reproach. Experiments on
human beings in malaria research are first of all, a matter of course
and common practice. Even if the defendant Rose always limited his own
work to the traditional evaluation of therapeutic malaria infections,
experiments on prisoners in this field must unquestionably be
permissible from an ethical point of view, as can be proved by the
malaria experiments on many hundreds of prisoners in American prisons.
(_Karl Brandt 1, Karl Brandt Ex. 1_; _Karl Brandt 117, Karl Brandt Ex.
103_; _Mrugowsky 80, Mrugowsky Ex. 76_; _Rose 50, Rose Ex. 49_.) Apart
from the fact that the delivery of material to Schilling by no means
obliged him to inform himself about the latter’s research work and its
ways and means, Rose really had no knowledge whatsoever of the object of
the research carried out by Schilling, and did not know the
collaborators of the latter. (_Rose 29, Rose Ex. 34_; _Rose 30, Rose Ex.
33_.) Much less was he informed about the conditions under which
Schilling was working in Dachau.

The defendant Rose himself is a well-known malaria research scientist.
Malaria research was the main study of his department at the Robert Koch
Institute in Berlin and also later in Pfaffenrode. Professor Schilling
only worked with malaria tertiana (benign tertian) in Dachau. (_NO-1752,
Pros. Ex. 487._) Professor Rose, as an experienced malaria research
scientist, knew of course that this form of malaria is not a dangerous
one and that no complications are to be expected from it. (_Rose 50,
Rose Ex. 49._) The witness Vieweg (_Tr. pp. 457-458_) also expressly
stated that none of the prisoners died of malaria, but that the cause of
death could be traced back to technical errors [Kunstfehler] or to
complications, as, for example, faulty puncture of the liver resulting
in hemorrhage due to omission of an operation and an overdose of
pyramidon in therapy, outbreak of typhus among the experimental subjects
and finally, wrong doses in the treatment with salvarsan. Just in
passing it should also be mentioned here that the defendant Rose also
opposed this last-mentioned method of treatment. This method was
prohibited in the German Luftwaffe at his suggestion. (_NO-922, Pros.
Ex. 435._)

No further explanation is necessary to show that solely the person
carrying out the experiments is responsible for technical errors and
negligence in the process. It seems to me that not even his superiors
who ordered the work, namely Himmler and Grawitz, were responsible for
them. However, a person assigned to supervise these experiments would
have been obliged to take action whenever he was informed of such
technical errors or negligence. The defendant Rose, however, was neither
assigned to supervise nor was he informed of these matters. It is also
unfair to assume that he knew about these matters, because he happened
to take part in the conference on freezing experiments which took place
in Nuernberg in October 1942. Firstly, the freezing experiments carried
out by Professor Holzloehner, although also taking place on Dachau, were
in no way connected with the malaria experiments carried out by
Professor Schilling. Furthermore, the participants of the conference
were misinformed about the method employed in these experiments and
about the status of the experimental subjects. (_Handloser 37, Handloser
Ex. 18_; _German Tr., 12 Dec. 46, p. 315_.)

Now, to be sure, it is known that Holzloehner’s, Rascher’s, and Finke’s
freezing experiments were carried out in Dachau. That, however, was
certainly not made public at the above-mentioned Nuernberg conference.
Even if one of the participants suspected that experiments at a
concentration camp were concerned, he would not have had the slightest
reason to suppose that the concentration camp in question was Dachau.

Schilling’s reports about his work were always sent to Himmler or
Grawitz but never went any further. That also explains why no reports
about Schilling’s experiments were found in the confiscated files of the
defendant Rose. (_Tr. pp. 5566, 6021_; _German Tr., 13 Dec. 46, pp.
466-7_; _German Tr., 26 Mar. 47, p. 5106_; _German Tr., 2 Apr. 47, pp.
5420-1_.)

Rose personally was the prototype of a worker above reproach in the
field of malaria research and with regard to his care for the well-being
of his malaria patients (_Rose 47, Rose Ex. 35_), as shown by the
investigation undertaken by the competent American authorities. He
risked his own life (_Rose 8, Rose Ex. 29_) in order to assure the
orderly handing-over of his Malaria Research Institute in Pfaffenrode to
the Americans—in contrast to Dachau, without burning files and the
like, and also to insure continued regular care and medical treatment
for his patients. (_Rose 31, Rose Ex. 36_; _Rose 32, Rose Ex. 37_; _Rose
33, Rose Ex. 38_; _Rose 34, Rose Ex. 39_.) It would be completely
incomprehensible if such a man were to be made responsible for the
technical errors and negligence of another who was not even under his
influence.

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_

 Doc. No.         Pros. Ex. No.  Description of Document             Page

 NO-856                125       Extracts from the review of the      289
                                   proceedings of the general
                                   military court in the case of
                                   the United States vs. Weiss,
                                   Ruppert, et al., held at Dachau,
                                   Germany.

                           _Defense Documents_

 Doc. No.          Def. Ex. No.  Description of Document             Page

 Rose Document 11  Rose Ex. 27   Extracts from report of Professor    298
                                   Dr. E. Gildemeister concerning
                                   the activities of the Robert
                                   Koch Institute—Reich institute
                                   for the fight against infectious
                                   diseases.
 Rose Document 47  Rose Ex. 35   Affidavit of Professor Dr. Hans      300
                                   Luxenburger, 24 March 1947,
                                   concerning Rose’s interest in
                                   therapeutical malaria
                                   treatments.
 Rose Document 50  Rose Ex. 49   Extract from the affidavit of        302
                                   Professor Dr. Ernst Georg Nauck,
                                   M. D., Hamburg 4,
                                   Bernhard-Nocht-Institute for
                                   nautical and tropical diseases.

                               _Testimony_

 Extracts from the testimony of prosecution witness August H.         303
   Vieweg
 Extracts from the testimony of defendant Rose                        308

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-856
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 125

           EXTRACTS FROM THE REVIEW OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE
         GENERAL MILITARY COURT IN THE CASE OF THE UNITED STATES
          _VS._ WEISS, RUPPERT, ET AL., HELD AT DACHAU, GERMANY

                 *        *        *        *        *

A series of experiments concerning the treatment of malaria were
conducted under the supervision of the accused, Dr. Schilling (_R
157_).[34] Three hundred to four hundred persons died as a result (_R
204, 206_). The facts elicited with respect to these experiments are set
out in detail _infra_ in connection with Dr. Schilling.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_B. The common design at the Kaufering Branch Camps of Dachau_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_C. The Individual Defendants_

                 *        *        *        *        *

15. _Dr. Claus Karl Schilling._ A special experimental station had been
set aside in the hospital for the performance of malaria experiments
under the supervision of the accused Dr. Schilling (_R 191, 157, 482_).
Schilling performed his research for the purpose of determining
immunization for and treatment of malaria (_R 192_). Requests for
prisoners were made by Schilling (_R 159-160_). One such request which
was admitted into evidence, stated that Polish prisoners were requested
(_R 160, Pros. Ex. 38_).[35] A list of inmates was prepared in the camp
physician’s office, the inmates being of all nationalities which were
represented in the camp, and was sent to the labor office which made a
copy of the list (_R 284, 285, 287, Pros. Ex. 47, 48, 157_). There the
list was confirmed by the Schutzhaftlagerfuehrer who sometimes made a
few changes in the list (_R 285_). These lists appeared about once every
month since about 1943 (_R 285_). None of the 1,200 selectees ever
consented or volunteered (_R 160-161_). Priests were often selected for
these experiments (_R 356, 353_). An inmate, a priest named Father Koch,
related his experience in that connection (_R 356_). He was first
X-rayed and then sent to the malaria station (_R 356-357, 353, 215_). He
was put into a little room where he received a box with mosquitoes which
he had to hold in his hands for about half an hour (_R 358_). That
occurred every day for one week (_R 358, 363_). Every afternoon another
box of mosquitoes was put in between his legs while he was in bed (_R
358, 363_). Each morning a blood smear was taken from his ear and his
temperature was measured each day and night (_R 358, 364_). He was given
quinine (_R 358, 364_). In about 17 days he left the hospital (_R 359,
364_). After being released from the hospital he had to report back
every Saturday (_R 360, 364_). Eight months later he had an attack of
malaria, which recurred precisely every 3 weeks for 6 months (_R 359,
363, 364, 365_). The symptoms he felt were high fever, chills, and pains
in the joints (_R 359_). Koch did not volunteer for the experiments nor
did the other prisoners who were mostly Poles and Russians, who
underwent the treatment with him (_R 356, 362_).

The prisoners were infected with malaria by the injections of the
mosquitoes themselves or the injections of extracts of the mucous glands
of the mosquitoes (_R 157_). After having contracted malaria the
prisoners were treated in different ways (_R 157_). Some, as Father
Koch, were given quinine (_R 358_). Others were given neosalvarsan,
pyramidon, antipyrin, a drug numbered 92516, and several combinations of
these (_R 157_). Some people died as a result of these experiments (_R
158_). Schilling was present when autopsies were performed on some of
those persons (_R 158_). Whenever anyone died who had been injected with
malaria, a report of that death was made to the accused Schilling and
the chief doctor (_R 158_). Some of the victims died from the
intoxication of neosalvarsan and pyramidon, for many individuals could
not withstand large doses of these drugs (_R 159_). From the autopsy it
could be determined that a patient died of neosalvarsan since the
reactions were similar to arsenic (_R 193, 194_). In the beginning of
1944 three deaths resulted from the use of pyramidon (_R 194_). These
people were brought directly from the malaria ward to the autopsy room
(_R 197_). Two young Russian boys who were transferred from the malaria
ward to the general medical ward died within a day after their arrival
because of overdoses of pyramidon (_R 394-395, 405_). They had been sent
to the general ward so that the official cause of death which would be
stated would not be malaria (_R 405_). Pyramidon has a toxic on the
blood corpuscles which causes them to disintegrate (_R 195_). Malaria
was the direct cause of 30 deaths and as a result of complications, 300
to 400 more died (_R 196, 197_). People who had died directly from
malaria had come straight from the malaria ward while the 300 to 400
others had undergone the malaria experiment (_R 204_). These people who
had been subjected to malaria may later have died of tuberculosis,
pneumonia, or dysentery (_R 196_). Some of the patients whom Dr.
Schilling used had had tuberculosis before undergoing the experiments
(_R 11_). Fever type diseases have adverse effects on tuberculosis (_R
211_). An index of the malaria diseased people was kept in the hospital
office (_R 198_).

Schilling received various visitors such as Dr. Rabbit, who was a Reich
SS physician at Oranienberg (_R 192_).

A pretrial affidavit of the accused Schilling executed in his own
handwriting on 30 October 1945 before 2d Lieutenant Werner Conn was
admitted into evidence (_R 827, Pros. Ex. 122_). This statement reads in
pertinent part and in translation as follows:

    “My name is Professor Dr. Claus Schilling. I have already worked
    on tropical diseases for 45 years. I came to the experimental
    station in Dachau in February 1942. I judge that I inoculated
    between 900 and 1,000 prisoners. Those were mostly inoculations
    for protection. These people, however, were not volunteers. The
    inmates whom I gave protective inoculations were not examined by
    me but by the current camp doctor. Before the inoculation there
    was usually an observation of several days. The last camp doctor
    was Dr. Hintermayer. As well as I can remember, in 3 years there
    were 49 patients who died outside the malaria station. The
    patients were always released by me as cured only after 1 year.

    “As remedy I used quinine, atabrine, and neosalvarsan. I know
    for sure of six cases where I used pyramidon tablets to hold
    down the fever (_Pros. Ex. 122_).”

                 *        *        *        *        *

_V. Evidence for the Defense._

                 *        *        *        *        *

15. _Doctor Claus Karl Schilling_

The accused Doctor Schilling elected to testify and made the following
unsworn statement: He was 74 years old, married, had one son, and was a
physician. He had specialized in tropical diseases, particularly
malaria, since 1898 (_R 1490, 1500_). Dr. Schilling studied under
Professor Koch of Berlin, and graduated from Munich as a physician in
1894 (_R 1894_). He did research work in Africa on malaria, sleeping
sickness, and tsetse fly diseases (_R 1497, 1498_). Dr. Schilling worked
for the Rockefeller Foundation in Berlin, receiving a grant in 1911 for
the study of various diseases and for a trip to Rome (_R 1499, 1500,
Def. Ex. 19_).[36] In December 1941 in Italy Dr. Schilling met Dr.
Conti, the Reich physician leader, who invited him to see Himmler (_R
1500, 1501, 1508_). Schilling went to Himmler who gave him the order to
continue his studies at Dachau (_R 1502_). Schilling had selected Dachau
because it was near his birthplace (_R 1568-1569_). The question of
using prisoners for experiments was not discussed (_R 1502_). In January
1942, Schilling went to Dachau (_R 1502_). Schilling only accepted this
commission at Dachau because the League of Nations, of which he was a
member, told him of the importance of curing the seventeen million known
cases of malaria. He believed it was his duty to humanity (_R 1540_). He
never became a member of the SS or the Nazi Party (_R 1503_). He was a
“free, independent, research man.” (_R 1568._)

Dr. Schilling infected thousands of prisoners with malaria “Benign
Tertian” which is not fatal (_R 1503_). The purpose for this was to find
a vaccination against malaria and today there is no vaccination against
malaria except the one discovered by Schilling (_R 1503_). Dr. Schilling
used mosquitoes and blood transfusions to infect the patients and
received patients already infected (_R 1503, 1504_). The patients were
divided into groups and were constantly watched, one group for the
purpose of keeping up the strain and another for immunization purposes
(_R 1505-1506_). The latter were injected repeatedly to step up their
immunity (_R 1506_). Schilling re-infected about 400 to 500 patients and
used quinine, atabrine, and neosalvarsan, and a dye No. 2516 which made
the patients immune; to prove this he had to test by infecting them
again (_R 1507_).

Dr. Schilling could not work with animals because they are not receptive
to malaria and men are used throughout the world (_R 1507_). He assumed
that Admiral Stipp and Mark Boyd, two malaria authorities, used humans
in their experiments (_R 1508_). Infected malaria has been used to cure
paralysis (_R 1508_).

Only about four or five of the patients refused to be immunized, but
they consented after Schilling explained the importance of the work (_R
1509_). The selections of the patients were made as follows: Berlin
allowed him thirty patients a month and he would requisition them
through the camp physician from the commandant who contacted the labor
leader (_R 1510_). The latter selected healthy prisoners and Schilling’s
assistants chose the final names and sent them to Berlin, where the
selection was approved (_R 1509, 1510_). These patients were carefully
inspected and could not be refused by Schilling by order of Himmler (_R
1511_).

The doses of neosalvarsan were 1.54 grams and at no time failed (_R
1512_). He used pyramidon to lower the body temperature although the
drug has a bad effect on the blood corpuscles (_R 1513, 1514_). He used
this drug only in 15 cases and found that two grams were not harmful.
This was important so the body could react without fever (_R 1515_).
Nobody died from pyramidon (_R 1515_). Malaria has been used to cure
syphilis and neosalvarsan can destroy parasites in a fever (_R 1515_).

Dr. Schilling never dealt with Dr. Blaha on any autopsies involving
neosalvarsan poisoning. Discharged patients were told to report back if
they felt sick (_R 1516_). Periodic checks were made of them and any
patient was received back if there was sign of relapse (_R 1517_). If
Schilling was asked to resume his work, he would do so only on
volunteers (_R 1518_).

Dr. Schilling was withdrawn as a witness, at this point, but resumed the
stand later and testified as follows: In death through neosalvarsan all
organs are affected (_R 1536_). Blood cells may die, but nothing like
this happened in his cases (_R 1536, 1537_). It is impossible to
determine death by malaria by a mere autopsy without a microscope,
especially where there may be other complications (_R 1537_). Pyramidon
is rarely the cause of death (_R 1537_).

Out of the 100 people infected by Dr. Schilling with malaria, not a
single one of them died of uncomplicated malaria (_R 1538_).

Weight of the patients during experiments increased. Additional food was
given and people suffering from contagious disease would be isolated (_R
1539_). Dr. Schilling never stated the wrong cause of death (_R 1539_).

Dr. Schilling stated he couldn’t experiment on himself because he had
had malaria in 1933 and men like him cannot be reinfected in most cases
although malaria is a recurring disease (_R 1541_). If there is chronic
malaria, the heart muscles will suffer as in all chronic diseases (_R
1543_). Malaria will increase the watery substance in the blood and the
brain will suffer under chronic malaria (_R 1544_). Chronic malaria will
weaken the body to make it susceptible to other diseases and one may die
of another disease while having malaria (_R 1546_). Schilling had SS
doctors helping him and examined all patients personally and supervised
the records (_R 1546_). Schilling recognized Prosecution Exhibit 131
which stated that 19 cases were treated with pyramidon, three of whom
died (_R 1547_). He declared these patients were suffering from typhus
and were removed from the ward (_R 1547, 1548_).

Although there was a typhus epidemic in November 1944 and he knew that
people were dying, he continued his experiments (_R 1550_). Everyone who
was inoculated remained at the station (_R 1550_). One patient was
injected three times and later died of typhus (_R 1551_). He was given
neosalvarsan, atabrine, and quinine. Pyramidon doses of three grams per
day for five successive days were given. Dr. Blaha did not inform
Schilling of the deaths due to pyramidon poisoning. If Schilling had
been notified he would have stopped the experiment. An Italian named
Calveroni was infected with blood and might have gotten typhus (_R
1556_).

If a man is suffering from malnutrition, a big dose of neosalvarsan is
not advisable (_R 1557_). If it would save his life, Schilling would
give it to him (_R 1557_). It depended on the physical condition of the
man and of what he was suffering; yet, Schilling gave the drug to Father
Wicki who only weighed 50 kilos (_R 1558_), but Schilling says that
Wicki was not a severe case (_R 1559_). Schilling gave 3 grams of
neosalvarsan in 5 days, which was the largest dose he ever gave over
that period of time. He does not remember giving drugs to sufferers of
dysentery (_R 1562_).

Schilling did not remember specific cases where he did not use caution
(_R 1566, 1567_). He recalled the priest Stachowski who died, but
doesn’t remember he died from neosalvarsan (_R 1567, 1568_).

Dr. Schilling was not under the control of the SS (_R 1568_). He heard
rumors about beatings, but did not concern himself with “things that
were not my business” (_R 1569_). All his records had been burned (_R
1570_). Schilling denied all accusations against him other than what he
admitted as part of his duty (_R 1572, 1573_). He declared that his work
was unfinished and that the court should do what it could to help him
finish his experiments for the benefit of science and to rehabilitate
himself (_R 1574_).

Mrs. Hubner, who knew Professor Schilling for 30 years, stated that she
often saw him in Italy and in Germany and has known him to be of good
reputation and of good veracity (_R 1519, 1520, 1521_). He told her his
only aim was to help cure malaria (_R 1522_). She believed his
intentions at Dachau were good (_R 1523_).

Frau Durck, the wife of a university professor of anatomical pathology
who was interested in malaria research, knew Professor Schilling since
1924 (_R 1525, 1526_). Schilling was always regarded in his field as a
serious scientist (_R 1527_). She knew what he was doing at Dachau but
her husband would not have done it (_R 1527_).

Dr. Eisenberger, a lawyer for 52 years, knew Dr. Schilling for 30 years
(_R 1527_). He considered Schilling highly respectable and reliable, and
said Schilling was seeking to benefit science and would never do
anything wrong (_R 1528_).

Heinrich Stoehr, a male nurse at Dachau, testified it was known that
Schilling worked on orders from Himmler (_R 1608, 1609_). The camp
physician’s and Schilling’s assistants examined the patients prior to
experimentation (_R 1609_). Dr. Brachtel, an SS doctor and assistant to
Schilling, also performed atabrine experiments (_R 1610_). If a patient
had a relapse from malaria, he was treated by Dr. Schilling (_R 1611,
1612_). Others were given quinine by some of the hospital staff (_R
1611, 1612_).

Max Kronenfelder worked in the malaria station under Schilling from
February 1941 to June 1943 (_R 1614_). He knew about a Dr. Brachtel, who
also made private experiments on malaria without the knowledge of Dr.
Schilling (_R 1615_). Kronenfelder took blood smears and performed minor
details such as cleaning up (_R 1616_). Brachtel experimented with
patients who had tuberculosis, helped by a man named Adam (_R 1617_).
Adam was often in the morgue with Dr. Blaha (_R 1618_).

Father Rupieper had been subjected to the malaria experiment in August
1942 (_R 921_). Other priests who were also subjected were Peter Bower,
Gustav Spitzick, Amon Burckhardt, Fritz Keller, and Kasinemer Gasimer
Rikofsky (_R 921_).

                 *        *        *        *        *

 VI. Prosecution Rebuttal Evidence.
 _Common Design._

                 *        *        *        *        *

15. _Dr. Claus Karl Schilling._ When one of Dr. Schilling’s patients
died there were orders to report that fact to the malaria station even
though the man had died in another section of the hospital (_R 1712_).
Toward the end of 1942 Professor Schilling was personally present at the
autopsy of a man who died of neosalvarsan and he requested the brain,
liver, kidneys, spleen, and a piece of stomach (_R 1712, 1731_). In that
case Dr. Schilling dictated part of the findings with respect to the
cause of death (_R 1712_). When the first three patients died from
pyramidon in February 1945, a member from the malaria station and Dr.
Hintermayer were present (_R 1713, 1723, 1731_). Dr. Blaha stated that
in his experience as a physician the average patient could receive 3.3
pyramidon a day, and that the largest dose would be 2 grams per day, but
that of course assumed that the individual was healthy and strong (_R
1713_). In Dr. Blaha’s judgment, the prison inmates could not be given
more than 1½ to 2 grams for a few days (_R 1714_). If these people were
to receive 3 grams per day for three successive days, signs of poisoning
would be revealed (_R 1714_).

Dr. Blaha stated that an autopsy revealed that death from pyramidon was
the result of sudden suffocation which was not true in the case of
typhus (_R 1725_). Death from typhus could be determined by certain
indicia without a microscope (_R 1725_).

Dr. Blaha explained that the ordinary mydol tablet contained 3 pyramidon
and that it is sold over the open counter (_R 1722_). If taken in
moderate doses it will not have any ill effects (_R 1722_).

A leaflet of I. G. Farben, Indiana, which held the neosalvarsan
contained the following instructions: “In between the individual
infections, spaces of time should be permitted to elapse, from 3 to 7
days.” (_Pros. Ex. 134_) These were instructions for syphilis (_R
1564_). In paragraph five in the leaflet it read in part, “such caution
in the use of neosalvarsan is recommended for undernourished and severe
anaemic patients, tuberculosis, diseases of the lungs, heart, kidneys,
liver, and intestines.” (_R 1564, 1565._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

X. Merits and Defense.

                 *        *        *        *        *

15. _Dr. Claus Karl Schilling._ Dr. Schilling, at the call of Himmler,
began conducting his malaria experiments at Dachau in February 1942. He
continued these experiments until liberation of the camp. It was
undisputed that the inmates whom Dr. Schilling used in his work were not
volunteers. Dr. Schilling’s research was performed for the purpose of
determining immunization for and treatment of malaria. His requests for
inmates were made about every month. These lists were prepared in the
camp physician’s office and then sent to the camp commander and labor
office. About 1,200 selectees were thus chosen for subjection. Many of
them were priests. The number of people who died from the malaria or
from the drugs such as pyramidon or neosalvarsan is not known. Certainly
some died. It is reasonable to infer that the deaths of many of the
inmates from tuberculosis, dysentery, typhus, and other diseases were
caused in part by the fact that those people had been subjected to
malaria. Although Dr. Schilling’s motive may have been simply and purely
a scientific one, his activities exemplified the Nazi scheme which
existed at Dachau. The part he played in that scheme is clear.

                 *        *        *        *        *

XIV. Sentences.

                 *        *        *        *        *

In many respects the accused Schilling was the most reprehensible. He
voluntarily came to Dachau fully cognizant of the nature of the work he
intended to perform. Being the educated and learned person that he was,
Schilling undoubtedly must have realized the manner in which his work
suited the needs of the Nazis. Although his personal motives may have
stemmed from his desire to aid humanity, he permitted himself to utilize
Nazi methods in contrast to other eminent German artists and scientists
who either fled or refused to make themselves a part of the Nazi system.
It is believed that the sentence of the Court, which was aware of
Schilling’s position in the scientific world, should be approved.

                 *        *        *        *        *

XVI. Actions.

A form of action designed to carry the foregoing recommendations into
effect, should they meet with your approval, is submitted herewith.

                    [Signature] Charles E. Cheever
                        [Typed] CHARLES E. CHEEVER
                                Colonel, JAGD,
                                Staff Judge Advocate.

               MILITARY GOVERNMENT COURT ORDER ON REVIEW

                                                           Order No. 3.

Whereas Martin Gottfried Weiss, Friedrich Wilhelm Ruppert, et al., were
convicted of the offenses of Violations of Laws and usages of war in
that they acted in pursuance of a common design, did encourage, aid,
abet, and participate in the subjection of Allied nationals and
prisoners of war to cruelties and mistreatments at Dachau concentration
camp and its subcamps by the General Military Court appointed pursuant
to paragraph 3, SO 304, Hq., 2 November 1945, at Dachau, Germany and
each accused was sentenced to death by hanging except four: Peter Betz
who was sentenced to life imprisonment, Hugo Alfred Erwin Lausterer who
was sentenced to confinement at hard labor for 10 years, Albin Gretsch
who was sentenced to confinement at hard labor for 10 years, and Johann
Schoepp who was sentenced to confinement at hard labor for 10 years by
judgment dated the 14th day of December 1945, and

Whereas the case has now come before me by way of review and after due
consideration and in exercise of the powers conferred upon me, I hereby
order:

    That the findings and the sentence in the cases of Weiss,
    Ruppert, Jarolin, Trenkle, Niedermeyer, Seuss, Eichberger,
    Wagner, Kick, Hintermayer, Witteler, Eichelsdorfer, Foerschner,
    Schilling, Knoll, Boettger, Betz, Endres, Kiern, Rewitz, Welter,
    Suttrop, Tempel, Lausterer, Becher, Kramer, Filleboeck,
    Schoettl, Gretsch, Kirsch, Langleist, Lippmann, Degelow, Moll,
    Schulz, and Wetzel be upheld.

    That the sentence imposed in the case of Eisele be reduced to
    confinement at hard labor for life.

    That the sentence imposed in the case of Puhr be reduced to
    confinement at hard labor for 20 years.

    That the sentence imposed in the case of Mahl be reduced to
    confinement at hard labor for 10 years.

    That the sentence imposed in the case of Schoepp be reduced to
    confinement at hard labor for 5 years,

and for so doing this shall be sufficient warrant.

Dated this 24th day of January 1946.

                                        [Signed] L. K. TRUSCOTT, JR.,
                                             Lieutenant General, U.S.A.
                                                          Commanding.

                                 PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF ROSE DOCUMENT 11
                                 ROSE DEFENSE EXHIBIT 27

  EXTRACTS FROM REPORT OF PROFESSOR DR. E. GILDEMEISTER CONCERNING THE
 ACTIVITIES OF THE ROBERT KOCH INSTITUTE—REICH INSTITUTE FOR THE FIGHT
                      AGAINST INFECTIOUS DISEASES

                 *        *        *        *        *

2. Malaria Research.

_a. Cultures of strains._ The strain “Greece” of plasmodium vivax was
bred in the department by Miss Lange till 31 December 1942, in the 30th
continuous passage of man-mosquito-man. The number of infected patients
up to that date was 379. The main work concerned the malaria treatment
of paralytics and schizophrenics. In addition, however, there were a few
therapeutic experiments with other diseases, in cases where the clinics
concerned required mosquito bite infections in order to obtain a
reliable malaria free from lues. The number of clinics and hospitals
obtaining part or all their requirements of therapeutical malaria
infection from the department rose to 11. In addition to the strain
“Greece”, various other malaria strains were taken into the mosquito
passage for comparative experiments; they were, however, not permanently
maintained. This considerable amount of incoming clinical material was
continuously collected and sorted although it has not yet been used.

In the course of the research two more laboratory infections occurred
due to mosquito bites.

The following examinations by Dr. Hoering, Professor Rose, and Dr. Emmel
were made possible by the maintenance of the anopheles colony and the
malaria breed.

_b. Parasite straining._ Dr. Hoering continued her work on the
improvement of the microscopic presentation of malaria parasites.
Despite certain improvements of the microscopic picture it was not
possible to develop a procedure easily applicable in practice and
superior to the established methods.

_c. Artificial feeding and artificial infection of anopheles._ Dr.
Hoering continued to develop the methods of artificial blood feeding of
anopheles, evolved by Dr. Olzscha. In this artificial feeding the
anopheles would not take citrated blood even though sugar had been
added. Blood haemolized with water and saturated with sugar was taken,
as well as liquid blood, although the addition of sugar was preferred.
Artificial feeding of blood is biologically not altogether equal to
natural feeding. The duration of life was almost the same with
artificial feeding as with the normal feeding of the animal. However,
females which were merely artificially fed, only laid eggs in
exceptional cases.

It is known that with anopheles which suck blood from the animal, the
blood enters the duodenum without previously entering the sucking
stomach, while other nutritious matter first reaches the sucking and
reserve stomachs. It was previously assumed that the nature of the food,
especially the number of cells, acted as indicative irritation. Dr.
Hoering’s experiments with artificial blood nutrition showed this
assumption to be wrong. Sweetened as well as unsweetened blood, which is
used for artificial feeding, first enters into the reserve stomachs in
the same way as a sugar solution. Further experiments proved that the
piercing of a membrane also causes no indicative irritation.

After the method of the artificial feeding with blood had been
developed, Dr. Hoering carried out experiments with the feeding of
infected blood containing malaria. Finally, it was possible to infect
anopheles by artificial feeding of blood, so that normally developed
sporozoites grew inside them. This is the first time that such an
experiment was successfully carried through.

_d. Conservation of malaria parasites._ Professor Rose had the
experiments continued concerning the conservation of malaria parasites
in liquids suitable for the conservation of blood. Even after 150 days
malaria parasites could be demonstrated morphologically in individual
cases. However, attempt at infection with such blood did not succeed.
The continuation and repetition of these experiments are planned.

The as yet unknown possibility of keeping malaria parasites alive in
vitro for such long periods raises the problem of whether malaria
parasites may become also dormant in human beings. The fact that an
infection could be achieved in human beings with 90-day-old parasites
proves that these preserved parasites did not lose their development and
multiplying properties. The assumption of such dormant forms in the
human being would offer new explanations for malaria relapses after long
intervals of recovery. The department is engaged in morphologically
characterizing the dormant forms observed in a test tube and in
searching for the existence of such forms in clinical malaria cases.

_e. The appearance of anopheles in the Warthegau._ Dr. Olzscha
investigated the appearance of anopheles in 221 hamlets, villages, and
scattered settlements of the Warthegau. Anopheles were found practically
everywhere. The investigation of 600 individual clusters proved beyond
doubt that except in a few cases where a definite determination was not
possible, they belonged to the genus of messaeae of anopheles
maculipennis. Only in one case were A. m. artroparvus found.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_h. Malaria treatment._ Professor Rose in cooperation with
Obermedizinalrat Dr. Sagel, director of the Country Mental Institution
in Arnsdorf-Saxony, and Dr. Mertens, Dr. Koenig, and Dr. Peters,
Leverkusen, tested the efficacy of new synthetic remedies against
mosquito sting malaria. The best method of administering a new and
proved preparation was developed.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                 PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF ROSE DOCUMENT 47
                                 ROSE DEFENSE EXHIBIT 35

 AFFIDAVIT OF PROFESSOR DR. HANS LUXENBURGER, 24 MARCH 1947, CONCERNING
          ROSE’S INTEREST IN THERAPEUTICAL MALARIA TREATMENTS

I, Professor Dr. med. Hans Otto Luxenburger, born on 12 June 1894 in
Schweinfurt, residing in Munich, 22 Liebigstrasse 35/II, have been
informed that I will be liable to punishment if I make a false
affidavit. I declare under oath that my statement is true and was made
in order to be submitted in evidence to Military Tribunal No. 1 at the
Palace of Justice, Nuernberg, Germany.

Being a psychiatrist myself, I took an interest in Professor Rose’s
malaria research insofar as we talked now and again about Rose’s
progress and the results of his research. For me as a psychiatrist it
was always noteworthy that Rose regarded cooperation with the
psychiatrists of hospitals for the insane by no means only from the
point of view of his interest in malaria research. On the contrary, he
always showed definite interest in the related psychiatric-therapeutic
questions. Contrary to the opinion formerly advocated by Wagner-Jauregg,
he hoped to attain more thorough and permanent success in treatment by
infection with mosquitoes as advocated by him (Rose) instead of the
formerly customary blood transfusion, because in his opinion endothelia
infection was also attained thereby.

He also was particularly interested in the question of finding a benign
tropical strain and employing it in treatment, in order to carry out
thorough and long fever treatments on cases of paralysis relapse; this
is generally unsuccessful when employing the usual tertiana strains in
cases of relapse.

He was especially interested in the possibility of therapeutic influence
upon schizophrenia. In the well-known psychiatrist Dr. Sagel, he had a
co-worker who advocated the opinion that schizophrenia, apart from its
hereditary basis, must be caused by an additional external impairment,
and he suspected that these causes lay in infectious diseases,
especially rheumatic infections. Working from this assumption, he hoped
for success with this disease similar to that with paralysis. This idea
was not a new one. Similar experiments were conducted earlier. Rose was
especially encouraged in this work by some impressive isolated successes
in quite hopeless cases of schizophrenia. I can recall his joy as he
told me, apart from other, cases, of a woman who was about to be
divorced, after the head of the institution had declared her condition,
which had existed for more than 3 years, to be incurable. In this case
Rose’s treatment, according to his report, not only resulted in
completely restoring the sick woman’s health but also led to her return
to her family and the reestablishment of the marriage.

Munich, 24 March 1947

                                    [Signed] PROF. DR. HANS LUXENBURGER

The above signature of Professor Dr. med. Hans Otto Luxenburger,
residing in Munich, 22 Liebigstrasse 35/II, given before me, Notary,
Theobald Petri, Administrator, is herewith certified and attested.

Munich, 24 March 1947.

                                             [Signed] _Petri_, Notary
                                                (Theobald Petri), Notary
                            Administrator of the Notary’s Office, Munich
                                                                    XVII
Seal

I certify that the above document is a true and correct copy. Nuernberg,
10 April 1947.

                                           [Signature] Dr. HANS FRITZ
                                                     (Dr. Hans Fritz)
                                                        Defense Counsel

                                 PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF ROSE DOCUMENT 50
                                 ROSE DEFENSE EXHIBIT 49

        EXTRACT FROM THE AFFIDAVIT OF PROFESSOR DR. ERNST GEORG
          NAUCK, M. D., HAMBURG 4, BERNHARD-NOCHT-INSTITUTE FOR
                     NAUTICAL AND TROPICAL DISEASES

                 *        *        *        *        *

Experimental infections of human beings with malaria tertiana (mild
tertian malaria) have proved to be harmless and have very frequently
been carried out on voluntary experimental subjects. It is well known
that artificial infection with tertiana is also carried out as a cure
against other diseases (paralysis, rabies). If the artificial infection
is carried out carefully and under medical supervision, death or
permanent damage to health should not occur. If the experiment with
malaria tertiana, as carried out by Claus Schilling, was carried out
with the same care, no danger to the experimental persons should have
been entailed. Since Claus Schilling was a prominent scientist of
international fame, it must be assumed that he carried out his
investigations with the intention or the knowledge not to harm human
life. This we find confirmed in the following:

1. Stitt’s diagnosis, Prevention and Treatment of Tropical Diseases, by
Richard P. Strong, 7th edition, London, H. K. Lewis & Co., Ltd., 1945,
page 59:

    “The question of the occurrence of immunity in malaria has been
    extensively studied in recent years, not only from the
    epidemiologic standpoint but from experimental inoculations
    which have been carried on in both men and animals. However, in
    interpreting the results of the inoculations in man which have
    been carried out by direct injection of blood containing
    schizonts or by the injection of sporozoites from mosquitoes or
    by the bites of infected mosquitoes, many factors regarding the
    virulence or number of the parasites inoculated, the species and
    conditions of infectivity of the mosquitoes, the temperature at
    which they have been kept, and other factors, must be taken into
    consideration in drawing conclusions with regard to the
    susceptibility of individuals to infection. Much of the work is
    still in the experimental stage, though some definite progress
    has recently been made.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

           EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF PROSECUTION WITNESS
                          AUGUST H. VIEWEG[37]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. HARDY: While you were an inmate at the concentration camp, did you
ever undergo any medical experiments?

WITNESS VIEWEG: I was used for malaria experiments by Professor
Dachfinney at the Dachau concentration camp.

Q. How many times were you subjected to the malaria experiments by Dr.
Schilling?

A. On five occasions I received injections of 5 cubic centimeters of
highly infectious malaria blood.

Q. Would you kindly tell the Tribunal what effect these experiments had
on you; that is, did you have high fever, serious illness, and so forth?

A. Quite often I ran a very high temperature. I got into a very
exhausted condition, and after the injection I received large doses of
medical drugs, quinine, ephedrine, and many others. I was in bed for
weeks, and after one treatment there were 20 to 26 occasions in the
course of the years 1943, 1944, 1945, and 1946, when I had malaria
attacks, so that for a long time I was unable to work.

Q. At the present time, do you have recurrences of this malaria fever?

A. This last year I was in the hospital from August 1st to 15th, again
with malaria attacks.

Q. How many recurrences of malaria have you endured since you were
experimented on by Dr. Schilling?

A. After my treatments in the experimental station had been concluded I
stayed with Dr. Schilling, and there were 20 occasions when I was
treated for recurrences.

Q. Are you completely cured now, Witness?

A. No.

Q. After you had undergone the various experiments at the hands of Dr.
Schilling, did you then become a worker in Dr. Schilling’s laboratory?

A. After my first so-called immunization treatment had been concluded,
the chief medical officer of that department sent me over to Dr.
Schilling’s department for laboratory duties.

Q. On what date did you assume those duties?

A. I am afraid I can’t tell you that exactly, but it must have been on
or about August 1942.

Q. What were your duties in Dr. Schilling’s experimental station?

A. In Dr. Schilling’s department I was in charge of animals. In other
words, I cultivated animals, white mice, and canaries; in fact, I was in
charge of that department.

Q. Did you have any other or additional duties, such as file clerk or
typist, Witness?

A. For a certain period, I substituted for the clerk and I was in direct
contact with Dr. Schilling on various occasions. I had a certain amount
of business with the chemistry department, purchases from Dachau, and I
was also in charge of the detachment which had to search the water near
Dachau for anopheles mosquitoes.

Q. While with Dr. Schilling, did you have the opportunity to read any of
Dr. Schilling’s correspondence?

A. I had frequent occasions to see the reports which Dr. Schilling sent
in every 3 months, and sometimes I saw the answers which Dr. Schilling
received from Berlin, as well as from some other chemical manufacturers.

Q. Witness, can you recall to whom those reports were sent, in Berlin?

A. These quarterly reports, which Dr. Schilling used to prepare, went to
the SS Obergruppenfuehrer Dr. Grawitz, Reich Medical Officer.

Q. You have referred to the fact, today, that you saw some of the
answers Dr. Schilling received from Berlin; who was the originator of
those letters that Dr. Schilling received from Berlin?

A. As far as I can recollect, these replies were sent to Professor
Schilling by Dr. Grawitz.

Q. Do you know where Dr. Schilling received his material to be used in
this research, that is, infected blood for the malaria experiments, fly
eggs, and so forth?

A. I can remember that Dr. Schilling received malaria fly eggs,
so-called eggs from which he bred other flies, from Duesseldorf; they
came from an insane asylum, but I can’t remember the name, and some from
the Medical Institute at Rome that used to receive eggs. In fact, his
material used to come from Berlin. According to my memory, it came from
Professor Rose, and also from Athens; but I am afraid I cannot recollect
the name there.

Q. Do you know whether Professor Rose had any correspondence with Dr.
Schilling?

A. I remember that in connection with previous breeding attempts we were
not too successful, and subsequently I saw a number of letters given to
a stenographer by Dr. Schilling. They were addressed to Professor Rose.
He was making certain explanations in them regarding certain types of
insects, in connection with which my name was used. I am certain it went
to Berlin and I am certain that answers were received on numerous
occasions.

Q. Did Dr. Schilling ever send any reports of these experiments to
Professor Rose, to your knowledge?

A. Whether he sent reports about malaria patients, I don’t know. At any
rate, as far as these fly-breeding experiments are concerned, he had
sent reports. I know that for certain.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, we will go back to the malaria experiments for the moment.
What was the nationality of the people used for the malaria experiments,
what type of people were they?

A. The biggest proportion, approximately two hundred patients, used for
the malaria experiments were Germans, a large proportion were Polish
priests, and the rest were partly Russians, some Yugoslavs, and some
Poles.

Q. Were any prisoners of war used in these experiments?

A. Of the Russians, many were prisoners of war.

Q. What was the total number of people used in these malaria experiments
from your knowledge?

A. According to my knowledge, 1,084 experimental subjects were used for
the malaria experiments.

Q. Will you kindly tell us, Witness, how many of these subjects used in
the malaria experiments died as a result of the experiments?

A. According to my knowledge seven or eight died at the malaria station,
either directly or because of the treatment with drugs. I can describe
the details if you like. The first case was an Austrian who afterwards
became ill because of these malaria experiments. The assistant at that
time, Dr. Brachtel, who was at the same time the deputy physician at the
hospital, made a liver puncture and the patient bled to death.

Q. Witness, then you state from your knowledge that seven or eight died
from the experiments. Of that number who died, did the deaths occur in
the malaria station itself?

A. This was the number of dead who were not transferred by us to another
department, but who died at our station or a few hours after they had
been transferred to another station.

Q. Have you any knowledge as to what happened to some of the other
patients who were transferred to some other station after they were
experimented on? That is, did some others die after they were
experimented on?

A. Of our patients, during the years after they came to us for
observation, I can recollect that another 60 patients died. I cannot say
for certain they died of malaria or other results of the experiments.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

DR. FRITZ: I have a few questions to ask the witness. Witness, on Friday
you seemed to be fairly well acquainted with certain malaria questions,
obviously on the basis of knowledge gained with Professor Schilling. I
would now like to ask you the following questions concerning some very
important details: During your examination by the prosecuting counsel
you spoke of certain regrettable incidents. A number of deaths had
occurred during the course of the malaria experiments conducted by
Professor Schilling. At the time you mentioned about seven cases, but
you only described one in detail. The patient had yellow fever in
addition to malaria and then bled to death because the liver was
punctured. I now ask you to tell me something about the reasons for the
other six deaths.

WITNESS VIEWEG: The other six patients were the so-called “medicament
death” cases. One patient died as a result of the salvarsan drug. The
other one died as a result of the so-called “periphery” experiment, and
the last four died as the result of a pyramidon experiment.

Q. Were the patients who, after being released from the station of
Schilling, suffered relapses sent back to Professor Schilling’s station?

A. If they reported back to us, they were taken back to the station.

Q. In that case did any patients die in Professor Schilling’s department
who later on had malaria or relapses?

A. Patients who were in danger of death were transferred to another
station.

Q. Do you remember whether malaria tertiana is a fatal illness?

A. As far as I know nobody with us died of malaria tertiana. The deaths
were a result of the secondary diseases which appeared because of the
drugs used in the malaria experiments.

Q. Did Professor Schilling say anything to you about these fatal cases
which were under his responsibility and observation, and if so, what?

A. The first two cases, the patient who died as a result of the
punctured liver and the one who died because of the salvarsan injection,
Dr. Schilling regretted very deeply. He tried to prevent such happenings
as much as possible. In the last four cases, concerning the pyramidon
experiment, he was told that the patients were in a very bad condition.
Nevertheless, he insisted that they continue to receive the pyramidon
drugs—I think it was 3 grams per day—and when these patients arrived
at the delirium stage, they were transferred from our ward shortly
before their death.

Q. And now something else. On Friday you testified that Dachau received
anopheles from Dr. Rose’s institute and that there was an exchange of
correspondence about the difficulties you had in breeding these eggs. Do
you know where Dr. Rose worked, in which institute?

A. I think these letters were addressed to the Robert Koch Institute in
Berlin.

Q. Do you know from this correspondence whether these replies came from
Dr. Rose personally or from his assistant?

A. That I cannot state from memory. I recall one reply from a lady who
was in charge of the breeding of these eggs in Berlin.

Q. That was probably an assistant who had worked with Rose for many
years?

A. Yes, but I think Professor Schilling first turned to Professor Rose,
and probably the replies primarily came from Professor Rose.

Q. Can you remember the name of the lady?

A. No.

Q. Do you know with whom Dr. Schilling had dealings and correspondence
in addition to Dr. Grawitz and Dr. Rose?

A. I cannot remember. I know that he corresponded with an institution in
Duesseldorf called Graefenrad or something like that, and he requested
the breeding of these eggs there, and they sent us flies, live flies.

Q. Did you have the name “Rose” in mind, or did you only recall his name
when you were first examined?

A. No. The name “Rose” remained in my recollection because I, myself,
was infected with the malaria called “Rose”. He had these various
immunization groups, the so-called malaria stock, which had various
different names, and I was with a group which was infected with a
so-called Rose Culture.

Q. You have testified before that you received eggs from Rome. You could
not however remember the name. Was it perhaps Professor Vissireli, Dr.
Rosni, or Dr. Raphaeli?

A. I think it was Vissireli.

Q. Did you also receive these eggs from Hamburg?

A. We received no eggs from the Tropical Institute in Hamburg, but
Professor Schilling corresponded with that Institute.

Q. Can you remember in which year you received these eggs from the
Robert Koch Institute, or rather from Professor Rose?

A. It was in the summer of 1942.

Q. You have told us about a number of these flies which you had to breed
in the vicinity of Dachau. Were you present?

A. There was one special detachment for this purpose, including an SS
man and one or two inmates. That was in the swamps surrounding Dachau
during the summer months. Various water tests were made, and according
to the degree of heat of the swamps, Dr. Schilling ordered the waters to
be infected with a mixture of pig food. This special detachment went
around the cellars of the Dachau camp during the winter months and
worked on that matter. Our laboratories then examined these anopheles
flies, and used them for breeding purposes.

Q. Can you state anything about the quantities caught?

A. It varied in the winter—sometimes they brought 10, sometimes 30 to
50, and sometimes 60.

Q. Did your department in Dachau deliver any such eggs to other
departments?

A. We delivered such eggs on one occasion, but I cannot remember where.

Q. I now come to the question of malaria culture. From where did
Professor Schilling receive his malaria cultures?

A. I cannot say exactly. I know that he received malaria cultures from
Essen and from Berlin. But this was in February 1942, when I had not yet
arrived at the ward. I remember we had 12 different malaria cultures. I
know that Professor Schilling used one, and another man used one—I
think his name was Flugg—in order to give one such culture the name of
“Flugg.”

           EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT ROSE[38]

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: Let’s go back to the malaria experiments. What contact did
you have with Schilling in 1941?

DEFENDANT ROSE: During my direct examination I testified that in 1941 I
saw reports about Schilling’s malaria work in Italy on behalf of the
Italian Government and with the support of the Reich Ministry of the
Interior; then, either at the end of 1941 or the beginning of 1942, I
gave an opinion, a written opinion, on an application which Professor
Schilling had sent to State Secretary Conti, or rather to the Reich
Ministry of the Interior. Then I saw Professor Schilling personally in
1941. I am not certain whether he was in Germany again at that time, but
I can’t deny it with certainty under oath, because after all that was 6
years ago.

Q. Did you supply him with any material while he was working in Italy?

A. No, nothing.

Q. Who was Fraeulein von Falkenberg?

A. You mean Fraeulein von Falkenhayn?

Q. No, I mean Fraeulein von Falkenberg.

A. I don’t know any Fraeulein von Falkenberg.

Q. You are sure you didn’t supply Schilling with any material in 1941?

A. I cannot remember it. It might have been done by my department
without my knowledge. Then, of course, I would take the responsibility
for it, but I did not learn of it until now. My assistants did not tell
me anything about it, if it happened. If you can prove it happened, I
shall, of course, assume responsibility for it, even if it was done
without my knowledge.

Q. Well, it is not terribly important, but let us let you have a look at
Document NO-1756. In the meantime, when did this incident occur about
your giving material to Schilling, after he had set up his institute at
Dachau?

A. I beg your pardon, I didn’t understand your question.

Q. When did you give Schilling material, after he had gone to Dachau?

A. I cannot give any information about that myself. I have to depend on
the testimony of my assistant, von Falkenhayn, and my secretary, Block.
My secretary, Block, testified here that it was the end of 1941, but I
would assume that she is mistaken about that, since Fraeulein von
Falkenhayn testified that this material was given in the year 1942. I
think the latter is more likely.

Q. Document NO-1756 will be marked as Prosecution Exhibit 486 for
identification.

Q. Isn’t there a Fraeulein von Falkenberg mentioned in this letter of
yours to Schilling, dated 3 February 1941?

A. No. In the German copy of the document which you showed to me, it
says Fraeulein von Falkenhayn.

Q. That is a mistake then in the English translation.

A. Fraeulein von Falkenhayn was an assistant in my department. She had
formerly worked for Professor Schilling. There is an affidavit from her.
Since I have this letter I can give you some information about the
matter. Professor Schilling wanted to have a serological reaction in
malaria, the so-called Henry reaction; that is a reaction which is
carried out for the purpose of malaria diagnosis. As in the antigen
reaction, in this reaction also the spleen of dead persons is used.
Professor Schilling apparently wrote to me to find out whether I, as
head of the tropical medical department, was in a position to obtain a
spleen from a corpse where the patient had died of malaria. I answered
saying that such material would hardly be available in Berlin. Malaria
was very rare in Berlin and consequently deaths from malaria were also
very rare. The only cases of this type occurred in insane asylums, in
the treatment of paralytics. It is well known that the first work of
Wagner-Jauregg shows that in the course of malaria treatment paralysis
deaths occur, just as death occurs following operations, and such
malaria deaths, of course, occurred in Berlin insane asylums. As far as
I can remember the matter, my assistants contacted various pathological
institutes in Berlin and asked that if such an autopsy should occur
there, the spleen should be preserved so that it could be sent to
Professor Schilling. This was what this letter was about.

Q. Did you ever supply any to him?

A. As far as I can recall, in the course of several months, one or two
such cases occurred and the material was sent to Schilling, but I cannot
say for certain today.

Q. Well, you are now qualifying at least the answer you gave to my
earlier question as to whether you gave him any material in 1941; isn’t
that right?

A. I beg your pardon. I didn’t understand the question.

Q. I say you now wish to qualify the answer you gave me a few moments
ago, before you saw the letter, to the effect that you had not given him
any material in 1941. You now, after having seen the letter, state you
did in fact give him some.

A. Yes. I am sorry. My attention was entirely devoted to the question of
the malaria parasite strains and mosquitoes. I did not think of
negotiations between Schilling and the pathological institute in Berlin.

Q. Let’s go back to what we were discussing. You stated that although
Frau Block said that the malaria eggs were supplied to Schilling in the
latter part of 1941, you think probably it was 1942?

A. Yes. That is what I said. Perhaps I may correct myself. When you
speak of malaria eggs you mean anopheles eggs probably. There are no
malaria eggs.

Q. Yes, that is right.

A. I am inclined to agree that von Falkenhayn and Block think
differently. I think that von Falkenhayn was right and that it was in
1942.

Q. Did you know anything about this before it was sent?

A. I cannot remember it. I don’t believe so. As far as I remember I was
informed of it by Fraeulein von Falkenhayn, after I had been given a
letter from Professor Schilling that the mosquitoes were thriving in
Dachau.

Q. Did you thereafter issue orders that no more material was to be sent
to Schilling; is that right?

A. I did not issue a precise order. I said that since we ourselves were
using so many mosquitoes I didn’t want any more material to be sent to
Mr. Schilling because I was not convinced of the scientific value of his
work. But Fraeulein von Falkenhayn in her testimony says that there was
further correspondence with Fraeulein Lange. I have not been able to
find this correspondence and I can’t clear up the question completely. I
have to rely fully on my assistant in this respect and I can’t answer
from my own knowledge. In our first conversation on the subject when I
told you that Schilling got anopheles eggs from us, which you didn’t
know at the time, I did not tell you that he got a malaria strain from
my department. I didn’t know that at the time. I learned it only a short
time ago from Fraeulein von Falkenhayn. That was not in the affidavit.
Apparently she was afraid of some objections and sent a letter to that
effect to my lawyer. I am not so timid. I am not afraid to tell you
about it.

Q. In other words you did supply a Rose strain to Schilling?

A. No. As I said on direct examination, the Rose strain could not come
from my department because we didn’t have any strain with the name Rose.
Where this strain with the name Rose comes from is a puzzle to me. I
don’t know of any Rose strain in malaria literature. But I don’t think
there is any point in quarreling about this name. The information given
by Fraeulein von Falkenhayn, which I believe fully, that a malaria
strain was sent—that is quite sufficient—no matter whether it is
called Rose or some other name.

Q. Your witness, Frau Block, testified you had no correspondence with
Schilling in 1942 and 1943, as I recall. Is that right?

A. That is what Frau Block said. I myself would not have been so
definite in my testimony if you asked me the same question. I would say
I can’t answer that question definitely. I only know one thing, that I
never corresponded with Professor Schilling on the subject of his work.
Whether Schilling and I ever exchanged letters in those years I don’t
know, since I don’t have my files. Concerning any information about such
infrequent correspondence and whether he wrote a certain letter 5 or 6
years ago, he says, “I would like to look that up in my files.”
Unfortunately I cannot do so but perhaps you would be kind enough, if
you have copies of such a letter, to make it available to me. You have
my files and they are much more easily available to you than to me. For
example, I am trying to find my malaria opinion from the year 1941. That
was in the same filing cabinet from which you got the record of the
typhus meeting on 29 December 1941 in the Ministry of the Interior.

Q. You overestimate the prosecution, Herr Professor, but we needn’t
dwell on that. Now, is your memory good enough to tell us how long you
continued to furnish Schilling with material for his Dachau experiments?
You say that somewhere along in 1942 you told them not to send any more.
Are you clear about it?

A. Yes, I think I can remember reliably.

Q. Well, when did this malaria strain go down?

                 *        *        *        *        *

A. I don’t know. Fraeulein von Falkenhayn merely told me that the
malaria strain was given to Schilling. I don’t know when. She didn’t
mention that in her letter to Dr. Fritz.

Q. Let’s look at Document NO-1752. This will be marked as Prosecution
Exhibit 487 for identification. Suppose you read the letter aloud,
Professor?

A. “Prof. Claus Schilling

                                               “Dachau, 4 April 1942
                                          “3 K, Hospital for Inmates

    “To Prof. Dr. Rose
    “Berlin, Fohrerstrasse 2
    “Robert Koch Institute

    “Dear Colleague:

    “I inoculated a person intracutaneously with sporocoides from
    the salivary glands of a female anopheles you sent me. For the
    second inoculation I do not have the sporocoides material
    because I do not possess the Strain Rose in the anopheles yet.
    If you could find it possible to send me a few anopheles
    infected with Strain Rose during the next few days (in the last
    consignment 2 out of 10 mosquitoes were infected), I would be
    able to continue this experiment and I would naturally be very
    grateful to you for this new support of my work.

    “The mosquito breeding and the experiments are proceeding
    satisfactorily; I am working now on six tertiary strains. I
    remain with hearty greetings and

                                                  “Heil Hitler!
                                                     “Yours truly
                                         “[Signed] CLAUS SCHILLING”

Q. Schilling apparently thought there was a “Strain Rose.”

A. Yes. That is indicated by the letter. That clears up the matter. He
must have renamed this strain which came from my department and called
it Rose. That is very unusual. Normally a malariologist would not do
that.

Q. Are those your initials on the bottom of this letter, “L. g. RO
17/4”?

A. Yes, that indicates that 13 days after the letter was mailed, 12 days
after it arrived at the Robert Koch Institute, I saw it. There is also
the file note “Settled EVF.” That is Erna von Falkenhayn on 17 April
1942. I find that in spite of my instructions to the department,
Fraeulein von Falkenhayn still sent mosquitoes to her old chief although
she denies it now; but I should like to emphasize that, of course, I am
responsible for what Fraeulein von Falkenhayn did even if she did not
tell me about it.

Q. Well, you saw the letter of 17 April 1942. Did you reaffirm your
instructions that no more material was to be sent to Schilling?

A. I cannot tell you now. That is quite possible. It is not even certain
that I was in the Robert Koch Institute when I saw the letter. It is
much more likely that Frau Block brought this letter to my home where
such things were generally settled. And, from the fact that it had been
dealt with 10 days before, you can see that such letters were opened by
my secretary.

Q. I thought we would be a bit generous with Frau Block and assume she
hadn’t seen the letter since she was so firm in the testimony that you
hadn’t corresponded with Schilling during these years.

Did you ever send Schilling any atroparvus eggs?

A. Yes. Those are a type of anopheles eggs which he got from us. As a
type of anopheles I had anopheles eggs maculipenis atroparvus in my
laboratory.

Q. Suppose I put Document NO-1753 to you. This will be marked as
Prosecution Exhibit 488 for identification. This is another letter from
Schilling. This one is dated a year later—5 July 1943, acknowledging,
“with appreciation the receipt of your letter of 30 June and the
consignment of atroparvus eggs.”

I would also like to direct your attention, Professor, to the last
paragraph of the letter where it says: “Please give Fraeulein Lange, who
apparently takes care of her breed with greater skill and better success
than the prisoner August, my best thanks for her troubles.”

Do you remember the Christian name of the witness Vieweg?

A. No, I am sorry I do not remember the name of this man.

Q. If you search the record I think you will find his forename was
August.

Now, Doctor, apparently they completely ignored your orders of the year
previous not to send any more material to Schilling. Apparently you had
a change of heart yourself. Isn’t that right?

A. I have already stated expressly that my orders not to send any more
material to Schilling meant that we did not have too much material
ourselves. It did not mean that I had any misgivings about the way in
which Schilling was carrying out his work. It is quite possible that
when we again had plenty of mosquito eggs we gave some to Schilling
again. I am in a very difficult position. It is difficult for me to
testify anything from memory. You see here again that this matter was
apparently dealt with by Fraeulein Lange and Schilling himself wrote to
me again.

Q. Well, I didn’t read it that way, Professor. The first line
acknowledges your letter of June 30th.

A. Well, then it’s possible that I wrote to Schilling.

Q. Frau Block suffered from bad memory about your correspondence with
Schilling in 1943 as well as 1942, didn’t she?

A. Yes, I am rather astonished because one would assume that a secretary
remembers such things better, but it is, of course, possible to make
mistakes if one doesn’t have access to the files. I have told you that I
cannot testify with any certainty to the details of such correspondence
because I had too much correspondence.

Q. Well, isn’t it possible you supplied material to him in 1944?

A. I consider that quite impossible. We have the testimony of Fraeulein
von Falkenhayn that the department for fever therapy never gave them any
material and, at that time, I no longer had an office in Berlin.
However, I must again rely on Fraeulein von Falkenhayn’s testimony. I
myself was at Pfaffenrode once a month at the most, and I called up once
or twice over long distance.

Q. I put in Document NO-1755. This will be marked “Prosecution Exhibit
489” for identification. This is a reply from you to Schilling, dated 27
July 1943. This letter speaks about shipping eggs to Schilling, doesn’t
it?

A. Yes, apparently. There must have been plenty of mosquito eggs, so
that we could give up some of them.

Q. There wasn’t as big a shortage as you thought; is that right?

DR. FRITZ: Mr. President, I ask that the photostat be shown to the
defendant Rose. It is not impossible that it was written by an assistant
and initialed “R.” I know the signature of Professor Rose, and I think
the “R” looks a little different. Perhaps he might be shown the
photostat.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Let the photostat be shown to the witness.

DEFENDANT ROSE: I must say I do not understand this signature at all.
When I signed a letter I signed my name, but I don’t think it’s very
important.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[34] All “R” references in Document NO-856 are to pages of the Record of
the case of the United States _vs._ Weiss, Ruppert, et al.

[35] “Pros. Ex.” references in this document are to prosecution exhibits
in the case of the United States _vs._ Weiss, Ruppert, et al.

[36] “Def. Ex.” references in this document are to defense exhibits in
the case of the United States _vs._ Weiss, Ruppert, et al.

[37] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 13 and
16 December 1946, pp. 418-468.

[38] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 24, 25
April 1947, pp. 6410-6484.

                   4. LOST (MUSTARD) GAS EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser, Rostock, Gebhardt, Blome, Rudolf
Brandt, and Sievers were charged with special responsibility for and
participation in criminal conduct involving mustard gas experiment
(indictment, par. 6 (D)). On this charge the defendants Karl Brandt,
Rudolf Brandt, and Sievers were convicted and the defendants Handloser,
Rostock, Gebhardt, and Blome were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the Lost (mustard) gas
experiments is contained in its final briefs against the defendants Karl
Brandt and Sievers. Extracts from these briefs are set forth below on
pages 315 to 324. A corresponding summation of the evidence by the
defense on these experiments has been selected from the closing briefs
for the defendants Karl Brandt and Sievers. It appears below on pages
324 to 334. This argumentation is followed by selection from the
evidence on pages 336 to 354.

        b. Selections from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                         DEFENDANT KARL BRANDT_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                           _Gas Experiments_

The treatment of wounds caused by chemical warfare agents was of
considerable interest to military medical circles of Germany. On 1 March
1944, the Fuehrer gave Karl Brandt broad powers in the field of chemical
warfare. (_NO-012, Pros. Ex. 270._) The decree itself is not available,
but there is no dispute that Brandt’s jurisdiction extended to
pharmaceutical products to treat gas wounds. So much he admits. (_Tr. p.
2629._) This necessarily involved a determination of the most effective
method of treatment. That the decree included medical research on gas
wounds can also be concluded from the fact that copies of the decree
which Brandt sent to Himmler (_NO-012, Pros. Ex. 270_) were forwarded to
Grawitz and Sievers who had previously worked on this problem.
(_NO-013a, Pros. Ex. 271_; _NO-013b Pros. Ex. 272._)

In any event, on 31 March 1944, Sievers reported to Brandt about the
research activities of Hirt. (_NO-015, Pros. Ex. 275._) Hirt had been
experimenting on inmates of the Natzweiler concentration camp since
November 1942. (_NO-098, Pros. Ex. 263._) For a detailed description of
Hirt’s experiments, see the brief against Sievers (p. 318 ff). Brandt
admitted that Sievers gave him the written report by Hirt, which was
introduced as Prosecution Exhibit 268 (_NO-099_) and that this report
shows on its face that experiments on human beings were performed by
him. (_Tr. p. 2626._) It is significant to note that the report speaks
of heavy, medium, and light wounds caused by Lost. Moreover, Brandt
admitted he talked to Hirt in Strasbourg in April after the meeting with
Sievers. (_Tr. p. 2610._) Approximately 220 inmates of Russian, Polish,
Czech, and German nationality were experimented on with gas, of whom
about 50 died. They did not volunteer. (_Tr. pp. 1052, 1057._) Hirt
continued his gas experiments at Natzweiler during the summer of 1944.
(_Tr. p. 1058._) His gas research was classified “urgent” by Rostock in
August 1944. (_NO-692, Pros. Ex. 457._)

In addition to his participation in the gas experiments of Hirt, Karl
Brandt personally furthered the criminal experimentation of Otto
Bickenbach. Brandt testified that the gas experiments of Bickenbach came
to his attention in the fall of 1943 on the occasion of a visit to
Strasbourg to see a cyclotron; that later he helped him to arrange a
laboratory; that he assisted him in obtaining experimental animals; that
Bickenbach did not conduct experiments on human beings; that he helped
him in 1944 after he had established this laboratory. (_Tr. pp. 2619,
2620._)

The Sievers’ diary for 1944 contains the following entry under 2
February:

    “Met Professor Bickenbach in Karlsruhe and he advises that he
    has put his research work under the control of General
    Commissioner Professor Dr. Brandt.

    “Discussion with SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Hirt: 1. Professor Dr.
    Bickenbach, without instructions from Hirt and Professor Stein,
    contacted General Commissioner Professor Dr. Brandt concerning
    the phosgene experiments that were [and was] in Natzweiler with
    him. Commission is to be withdrawn; for our part Natzweiler is
    to be closed.” (_3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123._)

Phosgene is a chemical warfare agent. (_Tr. p. 2630._) Brandt admits he
was in Natzweiler, but insists that only animal experiments were
conducted. This is in direct contradiction to statements contained in an
official war crimes report of the Government of the Netherlands.
(_NO-1063, Pros. Ex. 328._) Josef Kramer, former camp commander at
Natzweiler, also stated that Bickenbach experimented on prisoners.
(_NO-807, Pros. Ex. 185._)

Brandt testified that he later assisted Bickenbach in establishing a
laboratory in Fort Franzeky, which is near Strasbourg, and that he saw
animal experiments there. (_Tr. p. 2630._) Bickenbach was a professor at
the University of Strasbourg with Hirt and Haagen. (_Tr. p. 2631._)

The Bickenbach reports sent to Karl Brandt not only prove that
Bickenbach and his collaborators Helmut Ruehl and Fritz Letz carried out
phosgene experiments on 40 Russian prisoners of war, but that four of
the subjects were killed as a result. (_NO-1852, Pros. Ex. 456._) This
document completely destroys the credibility of the defendant Brandt.

These reports on the phosgene experiments are designated top military
secret and are numbered 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. They are all addressed to
Plenipotentiary General Brandt. These reports obviously cover the same
series of experiments which culminated in experiments on 40 prisoners
detailed in the 7th report. They were found in the apartment of
Professor Bickenbach by French authorities. The purpose of these
experiments was to determine the effectiveness of a drug called
hexamethylentetramine against phosgene poisoning. Certain preliminary
studies are detailed in the 4th report, dated 11 August 1944, and
mention is made of tests carried out on a “nervous Russian prisoner of
war, who could not be calmed down because of language difficulties * *
*”.

The 7th report, which is undated, concerns experiments carried out
shortly after 11 August 1944 (the date of the 4th report) as Strasbourg
was overrun by the Allies a few months later. These experiments were
performed on “40 prisoners on the prophylactic effect of
hexamethylentetramine in cases of phosgene poisoning. Twelve of those
were protected orally, twenty intravenously and eight were used as
controls.” On the basis of the 4th report, it can only be concluded that
the 40 prisoners referred to were Russian prisoners of war. The
experimental subjects are further described as being “persons of middle
age, almost all in a weak and underfed condition. On principle, the
healthier ones were used as controls, only control number 39 (J. Rei)
and the orally protected experimental subject No. 37 (A. Rei) had a
localized cirrhotic productive tuberculosis of the lungs. With the
others, no pulmonary disease could be found.” (_1852-PS, Pros. Ex.
456._)

The experimental persons were subjected to phosgene poisoning with
resulting death to no less than four subjects. (_Tr. p. 3404._) Other
subjects suffered severe lung oedema.

Defense counsel for Karl Brandt urged the possibility that this report
was not received by him. Assuming _arguendo_ that the report was not
mailed to Brandt, and, if received, not read, the fact remains that the
experiments were performed by Bickenbach and his collaborators, whose
work was directly controlled by Brandt. (_Supra._) Were there no other
evidence on this point, the circumstances of the report having been
addressed to Karl Brandt are sufficient proof of his responsibility.
Moreover, the research of both Bickenbach and Hirt was classified urgent
by Brandt’s Office for Science and Research under Rostock. (_NO-692,
Pros. Ex. 457._)

The continued interest of Brandt in research on chemical warfare agents
and his knowledge of experiments on concentration camp inmates are shown
by the report dated 31 March 1945 concerning experiments at the
Neuengamme concentration camp. (_NO-154, Pros. Ex. 446._) Water
decontamination experiments were carried out there on inmates. The
report states that the “third series of experiments was carried out with
an agent of the Lost group, the asphyxiating gas Lost; in accordance
with the suggestion made by Oberstarzt Dr. Wirth at the conference on 4
December 1944 with Reich Commissioner Brandt.”

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                           DEFENDANT SIEVERS_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                    _Lost (Mustard) Gas Experiments_

From the winter of 1942 until the summer of 1944, experiments to
determine the most effective treatment for wounds caused by Lost
(mustard) gas were conducted in the Natzweiler concentration camp under
the supervision of Professor Hirt of the Reich University of Strasbourg.
The experiments were ordered by Himmler and the Luftwaffe, and sponsored
by the Reich Research Council. The Ahnenerbe Society and the defendant
Sievers supported this research on behalf of the SS. (_492-PS, Pros. Ex.
267._) The arrangement for the payment of the research subsidies of the
Ahnenerbe was made by Sievers. (_NO-3819, Pros. Ex. 550._)

The defendant Sievers participated in these experiments by actively
collaborating with the defendants Karl Brandt and Rudolf Brandt, and
with Hirt and his principal assistant, Dr. Wimmer.

The record shows that Sievers was in correspondence with Hirt at least
as early as 1942, and that he established contact between Himmler and
Hirt. (_NO-791, Pros. Ex. 256_; _NO-792, Pros. Ex. 257_.)

On 9 April 1942 Sievers wrote to Hirt that Himmler wanted detailed
information from Hirt on his Lost experiments. Sievers went on to say:

    “We are sure to be in a position to put at your disposal for the
    furtherance of these experiments unique facilities in connection
    with special secret experiments which we are at present
    conducting at Dachau. Could you not some day write a brief
    secret report for the Reich Leader SS on your Lost experiments?

    “But you should by no means go to Berlin for the time being,
    especially since the Reich Leader SS is staying permanently at
    the Fuehrer’s Headquarters. I, therefore, intend to pay you a
    visit at Strasbourg as soon as possible. But perhaps it would be
    easier for you to come to Munich, where I would have the
    opportunity of introducing you to the Chief of our Institute for
    Entomology and would be able to give you an insight into our
    secret experiments at Dachau.” (_NO-793, Pros. Ex. 258._)

The wording of the letter makes it apparent that it was Sievers himself
who brought Hirt’s research activities concerning Lost gas to Himmler’s
attention. This is also proved by the fact that on 9 February 1942, he
had already submitted to the defendant Rudolf Brandt, Hirt’s report
concerning the creation of a skeleton collection and research in the
field of intravital microscopy. The latter experimentation involved the
effect of Lost on the living tissue. (_NO-085, Pros. Ex. 175._) Brandt
informed Himmler about Hirt’s report on 27 February, and directed
Sievers to report again on Hirt’s work. (_NO-090, Pros. Ex. 176._) It
was thus Sievers’ report on Hirt’s research activities which prompted
Himmler to take an interest in Hirt’s Lost experiments.

On 27 June 1942 Sievers forwarded to the defendant Rudolf Brandt the
information of Hirt concerning the use of mustard gas on combatting
rats. In this letter he mentioned that he would have another conference
with Hirt on this subject. According to Sievers, Hirt had voiced his
expert opinion that Lost even “in a dilution of 1-100 is dangerous for
man if it contacts the body in an adequate amount.” (_NO-794, Pros. Ex.
259._) It was Sievers who forwarded on 2 June 1942 Hirt’s report on his
experiments in treating gas wounds by vitamins. In his covering letter
to this report, Sievers informed the defendant Rudolf Brandt that he was
to meet Hirt “in order to discuss with him a more intensive application,
continuation, and promotion of his research work”. In the report itself,
Hirt stated that he had not been able to conduct experiments with Lost
gas on human beings because of the offensive against France, but
suggested such experiments particularly in order to determine the
protective effect of vitamin treatment. (_NO-097, Pros. Ex. 260._)

In a memorandum of 26 June 1942 concerning support by the Ahnenerbe of
the research work of Hirt on mustard gas, Sievers proposed that an
Institute for Military Scientific Research be established within the
Ahnenerbe to bring together Hirt’s and similar research and thus
facilitate the organizational and technical execution of the
experiments. He proposed appointing Hirt as an active member of the new
institute as chief of Department H (Hirt). He also stated that Rascher,
who was then performing high-altitude experiments in collaboration with
Ruff and Romberg, should be appointed as chief of Department R
(Rascher). He stated that the necessary supplies for the new institute
would be easier to explain and more reasonable than if applied for under
the name of Ahnenerbe alone. (_NO-2210, Pros. Ex. 483._)

As a result of this suggestion by the defendant Sievers, Himmler
directed the establishment of the Institute for Military Scientific
Research within the Ahnenerbe in July 1942. In his letter to Sievers,
Himmler requested that the new institute “support in every possible way
the research carried out by SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Professor Dr. Hirt and
promote all corresponding research and undertakings; to make available
the required apparatus, equipment, accessories and assistants, or to
procure them * * *.” (_NO-422, Pros. Ex. 33._)

Sievers proceeded to make all the necessary arrangements for carrying
out the Lost gas experiments in the Natzweiler concentration camp. On 27
August 1942 in a letter to Gluecks of the WVHA, he stated that in
connection with a visit to Hirt in Strasbourg he would like to take Hirt
with him to Natzweiler on 31 August 1942 and he asked Gluecks to make
the necessary arrangements with the commander of the camp. (_NO-935,
Pros. Ex. 481._) In a file note dated 17 September 1942 Sievers stated
that the conference mentioned in his letter to Gluecks had been held in
Natzweiler on 31 August 1942, and that the working conditions there for
the proposed experiments were favorable. Professor Hirt, Stabsarzt Dr.
Wimmer, and Dr. Kieselbach would require automobile transport for part
of the trip from Strasbourg to Natzweiler in order to perform their work
there, and accordingly 20 liters of gasoline would have to be made
available to the camp authorities each month. (_NO-977, Pros. Ex. 482._)
In a letter of 11 September 1942 to Gluecks, Sievers stated that the
necessary conditions existed in Natzweiler “for carrying out our
military scientific research work * * *”. He requested that Gluecks
issue the necessary authorization for Hirt, Wimmer, and Kieselbach to
enter Natzweiler, and that provision be made for their accommodation and
board. He also stated that:

    “The experiments which are to be performed on prisoners are to
    be carried out in four rooms of an already existing medical
    barrack. Only slight changes in the construction of the building
    are required, in particular the installation of the hood which
    can be produced with very little material. In accordance with
    attached plan of the construction management at Natzweiler, I
    request that necessary orders be issued to same to carry out the
    reconstruction. All the expenses arising out of our activity at
    Natzweiler will be covered by this office * * *.” (_NO-978,
    Pros. Ex. 480._)

In a memorandum on 3 November 1942 to the defendant Rudolf Brandt,
Sievers complained about certain difficulties which had arisen in
Natzweiler because of the lack of cooperation from the camp officials.
Sievers was particularly outraged by the fact that the camp officials
were asking that the experimental prisoners be paid for. He said that:

    “When I think of our military research work conducted at the
    concentration camp Dachau, I must praise and call special
    attention to the generous and understanding way in which our
    work was furthered there and to the cooperation we were given.
    Payment of [for] prisoners was never discussed. It seems as if
    at Natzweiler they are trying to make as much money as possible
    out of this matter. We are not conducting these experiments, as
    a matter of fact, for the sake of some fixed scientific idea,
    but to be of practical help to the armed forces and beyond that
    to the German people in a possible emergency.” (_NO-098, Pros.
    Ex. 263._)

Brandt was requested to give his help in a comradely fashion in setting
up the necessary conditions at Natzweiler. The defendant Rudolf Brandt
replied to this memorandum on 3 December 1942, and told Sievers that he
had had occasion to speak to Pohl concerning these difficulties, and
that he had reported that they would be remedied. (_NO-092, Pros. Ex
180._)

The witness Holl gave in his testimony an accurate and detailed
description of the manner in which the Lost gas experiments were carried
out. The execution of the experiments was supervised by Hirt in the
experimental station Ahnenerbe in the Natzweiler concentration camp. In
the middle of October 1942 the preparation for these experiments was
finished and the actual experimentation began sometime in October or
November, after the experimental subjects were given the same food as
the SS guards for approximately 14 days. The first series of experiments
was carried out by Hirt on 30 experimental subjects with a liquid gas
substance. (_Tr. p. 1051._) In spite of the fact that Hirt, before
selecting these experimental subjects, had promised them that he would
intervene with Himmler in order that they should be released as a reward
if they would volunteer for the experiments, none of the experimental
subjects of all the experiments carried out by Hirt volunteered.
Political prisoners, Russians, Poles, Czechs, and also some German
nationals were among the experimental subjects used. (_Tr. p. 1052._)

The first series of experiments was carried out by Hirt and an officer
of the Luftwaffe in the following manner: One drop of the liquid was
applied to the lower arm of the experimental subject. Approximately 10
hours later burns began to appear and spread over the whole body in
every place where drops of the fluid contacted the skin. Some of the
experimental subjects became partially blind. The victims of these
experiments suffered terrible pain. Photographic pictures of the burns
were taken daily. After the fifth or sixth day of the experiment, the
first fatality occurred. The corpse of the victim was dissected and the
autopsy showed that the greater parts of the lungs and other organs had
been destroyed. On the following day, that is, on the seventh day of the
experiment, another seven of the experimental subjects died. The
remaining 22 were sent to another concentration camp after approximately
2 months when they had recovered sufficiently and became fit for
transport. (_Tr. pp. 1052-3._) Other experiments on concentration camp
inmates of the Natzweiler concentration camp were carried out in the gas
chamber approximately 500 meters distant from the camp. The experimental
subjects had to enter this gas chamber two by two. They had to smash
small ampules which contained the liquid. This liquid evaporated and the
experimental subject then had to inhale the resulting vapor. Usually the
experimental subjects became unconscious and were returned to the
Ahnenerbe station for further observation of the results of the
experiments. (_Tr. pp. 1053-4._) These results were approximately the
same as those observed in the first series. The breathing organs of the
experimental subjects were likewise destroyed. Their lungs had been
eaten away by the gas. About 150 concentration camp inmates were
experimented upon in this manner. (_Tr. pp. 1034-5._) Approximately the
same percentage as in the first series died as a result of this type of
experimentation. (_Tr. p. 1056._)

Other Lost gas experiments were carried out by means of injection. These
experiments were carried out in a special room adjoining the
crematorium. The victims of these experiments died without exception.
(_Tr. p. 1056._) Another type of experiment was carried out on the
experimental subjects, who had to take the liquid orally. As Holl was
transferred before Christmas 1943 to an outside camp, he was not able to
give information on the results of this type of experiment. (_Tr. p.
1056._) He, however, returned once a month to the Natzweiler
concentration camp and was therefore able to observe that the Lost gas
experiments continued until autumn 1944, when the Natzweiler
concentration camp was liberated by the Allies. (_Tr. pp. 1057-8._)

From Holl’s testimony it is proved that approximately 220 inmates of
Russian, Polish, Czech, and German nationalities were experimented upon
with gas by Hirt and his collaborators. About 50 of them died. None of
the experimental subjects volunteered. (_Tr. pp. 1052, 1057._)

On 7 April 1943, when the Lost experiments were well under way
(_supra_), Himmler ordered an intensification of Lost research. At about
this time the progress of Hirt’s Lost research was threatened by the
transfer of Hirt’s assistant, Wimmer, a medical officer of the
Luftwaffe. Since personnel matters fell within the scope of Sievers’
duties, he wrote to Rudolf Brandt protesting the proposed transfer of
Wimmer and stating that if Wimmer left the Institute for Military
Scientific Research, the Lost experiments would have to end. Sievers
then outlined the proper procedure for securing the future services of
Wimmer at the Ahnenerbe Institute. (_NO-193, Pros. Ex. 264._)

Again, on 3 November 1943, Sievers, in order to further the Lost
experiments and assure their continuation, made a certificate which
enabled two of Hirt’s research assistants to obtain increased food
rations. Sievers stated that the research activities in which these
persons were engaged with Department H (Hirt), Strasbourg, of the
Institute for Military Scientific Research of the Ahnenerbe involved
health-damaging poisons which had caused injuries to their health.
(_492-PS, Pros. Ex. 267._)

The evidence clearly indicated that during the entire period covered by
the Lost experiments, Hirt was associated with the Ahnenerbe Society. In
early 1944 Hirt and Wimmer summarized their findings from the Lost
experiments in a report entitled “Proposed Treatment of Poisoning caused
by Lost”. The report was described as from the Institute for Military
Scientific Research, Department H of the Ahnenerbe, located at the
Strasbourg Anatomical Institute. Light, medium, and heavy injuries due
to Lost gas are mentioned. Sievers received several copies of this
report. (_NO-099, Pros. Ex. 268._) On 31 March 1944, after Karl Brandt
had received a Fuehrer Decree giving him broad powers in the field of
chemical warfare (_NO-012, Pros. Ex. 270_), Sievers informed Brandt
about Hirt’s work and gave him a copy of the report. This is proved by
Sievers’ letter to Rudolf Brandt on 11 April 1944. (_NO-015, Pros. Ex.
275._) Karl Brandt admitted that the wording of the report made it clear
that experiments had been conducted on human beings. (_Tr. p. 2626._)

The proof has also shown that in October 1943 the defendant Blome, in
his capacity as a Plenipotentiary in the Reich Research Council, issued
a research assignment for Hirt in support of his gas experiments. This
is proved by the file index card on Blome’s research assignment in the
Reich Research Council, where the assignment to Hirt by Blome is listed
under SS priority number 0329. (_NO-690, Pros. Ex. 120._) Sievers
admitted that a Reich research assignment to Hirt “on the behavior of
Lost gas in living organisms” was made. (_Tr. p. 5817._) He further
admitted that at a conference in April 1942, Himmler told him that Hirt
should make Lost experiments on human beings other than volunteer
military cadets. (_Tr. p. 5679._)

Sievers testified that on 25 January 1943, he went to Natzweiler
concentration camp and consulted with the camp authorities concerning
the arrangements to be made for Hirt’s Lost experiments. These
arrangements included the obtaining of laboratories and experimental
subjects. (_Tr. pp. 5842-43._) Sievers testified that the Lost
experiments were harmful. (_Tr. p. 5810._) On the visit of 25 January
1943, Sievers saw ten persons who had been subjected to Lost experiments
and watched Hirt change the bandages on one of the persons. Sievers said
that the experimental subjects told him that they were volunteers and
Hirt confirmed this to Sievers. (_Tr. p. 5732._) The testimony of
Sievers was contradictory as to his knowledge that the Lost experiments
caused deaths. Sievers testified that in March 1943 he asked Hirt
whether any of the experimental subjects had suffered harm from the
experiments and was told by Hirt that two of the experimental subjects
had died due to other causes. (_Tr. p. 5733._) On the other hand,
Sievers seemed to be referring to Lost experiments when he stated that
he knew of one condemned criminal who had died from the experiments.
(_Tr. p. 5810._) As to the nationality of the experimental subjects,
Sievers was of the opinion, in view of their manner of speech, that the
test persons were Germans. (_Tr. p. 5812._) The proof, however, clearly
shows that Sievers already, as early as January 1942, had knowledge that
nonvolunteers were to be used for the Lost experiments of Hirt. In his
letter of 3 January 1942, Sievers requested Hirt to submit comprehensive
research reports to him in order that he might forward them to Himmler.
Sievers assured Hirt that Himmler would permit Hirt to conduct
experiments of any kind “on prisoners and real criminals who would never
be released anyhow and on persons scheduled for execution.” (_NO-3629,
Pros. Ex. 547._)

Sievers’ diary entries indicate that his primary concern was making the
necessary arrangements for the carrying out of the Lost experiments. On
25 January 1943 Sievers visited Natzweiler and consulted with the camp
administration; on 28 January 1943 Sievers consulted with Pohl
concerning the continuation of the Lost experiments and undoubtedly
arranged for the allocation of test persons, although he testified that
his conversation related to obtaining space for animals. (_Tr. p.
5736._) On 24 and 25 January Sievers received reports from Hirt on Lost
experiments and on 17 March 1943 Sievers attended a conference at the
Institute for Military Scientific Research where Lost experiments were
reported. (_NO-538, Pros. Ex. 122._)

          c. Selections from the Argumentation of the Defense

             _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT
                              KARL BRANDT_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_I. Experiments performed._ Counsel for the defense does not wish to
make a statement in this connection.

_II. Order to carry out the experiments._ The defendant Karl Brandt is
not mentioned in connection with the order to carry out these
experiments.

1. _Drug F 1001._ NO-199, Prosecution Exhibit 253, and NO-198,
Prosecution Exhibit 254, show that the order to carry out these
experiments in the Sachsenhausen concentration camp was given by Himmler
or Reich Physician SS Grawitz in 1939. This is confirmed by the fact
that the reports on the concluded experiments were submitted to Grawitz
or Himmler.

2. _“Lost” experiments._ According to NO-098, Prosecution Exhibit 263,
the order to Hirt was given on 13 July 1942 as shown in the letter dated
3 November 1942, which contains a research commission of the SS
Institute for Applied Military Scientific Research of the Ahnenerbe.
According to 492-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 267, the order to carry out
experiments was given by Himmler or Goering.

In accordance with Sievers’ testimony (_Tr. pp. 5733-34_) Himmler, on 8
March 1944, ordered Hirt to carry out human experiments despite the
latter’s arguments that only animal experiments could achieve further
results. The issuing of this order is supported by the fact that the
reports were sent to Reich Physician SS Grawitz to be passed on to Reich
Leader SS Himmler. NO-085, Prosecution Exhibit 269, contains a
preliminary final report made by Hirt of the year 1941; NO-097,
Prosecution Exhibit 260, Hirt’s final report of 2 June 1942 to be
submitted to the Reich Leader SS; also NO-099, Prosecution Exhibit 268,
Hirt’s 1944 proposals for treatment. This is also supported by the
correspondence between Sievers and Hirt. NO-793, Prosecution Exhibit
258, reports on a conference with Himmler.

3. _N-substance._ The order to carry out the experiments was issued by
Reich Physician SS Grawitz in connection with Schwab and after Gebhardt,
Gluecks, and Panzinger had been heard. Reference is made to an
instruction from Hitler and an order from Himmler of 15 May.

_III. Reason for and aim of the experiments._ Statement of the defendant
Karl Brandt. (_Tr. p. 2383._)

1. _“Lost” and Drug F 1001._ Research work on a healing drug for
injuries, not poisoning, caused by “Lost”. Experiments of this kind have
been carried out by all nations since World War I, England being the
leading nation in these experiments on human beings. The general need
for experiments on human beings, and only those are relevant here, has
been recognized by all nations as a military necessity. (_Karl Brandt
106, Karl Brandt Ex. 49_; _Karl Brandt 107, Karl Brandt Ex. 50_.)

The necessity to carry out experiments increased in Germany,
particularly during World War II, as all nations were eagerly engaged in
the manufacture of “Lost” gas. The need became imperative in 1944 when
reliable sources reported that the enemy was getting chemical-warfare
agents ready. (_Karl Brandt 103, Karl Brandt Ex. 42_; _Karl Brandt 101,
Karl Brandt Ex. 41_; _Karl Brandt 11, Karl Brandt Ex. 10_; _Karl Brandt
12, Karl Brandt Ex. 11_.)

2. _N-substance._ Reasons for and aim of the experiments are unknown.
N-substance is the name for “normal” substance. It is not a chemical
warfare agent but a fuel substance, intended to be used for ignition.
This N-substance is not to be mistaken for N-“Lost”, that is,
nitrogen-Lost. (_Karl Brandt 88, Karl Brandt Ex. 36_; _Karl Brandt 103,
Karl Brandt Ex. 42_.)

_IV. Participation in the performance of the experiments._

1. _Drug F 1001._ The experiments were carried out exclusively at SS
offices on the orders of the Reich Leader SS. They were performed before
the defendant Karl Brandt received his first official appointment.

2. _“Lost”._ The experiments were made by Hirt and Wimmer in the SS
Institute for Military Scientific Research in Strasbourg. According to
Sievers’ testimony (_Tr. p. 5788_) the defendant Karl Brandt did not
have any influence on these institutions. The “Lost” chemical warfare
agent does not act like gas, but in a dried form injures the skin.
Ordinarily, experiments are made by all nations by applying small drops
of “Lost” to the skin. They cause injuries to the tissue, which are
treated with healing drugs. This procedure is demonstrated in Holl’s
testimony. (_Tr. p. 1052._)

3. _N-substance._ Sievers’ testimony (_Tr. p. 5738_) shows that the
experiments were not carried out due to a laboratory experiment of
Professor Thyssen and an expert opinion sent to Himmler.

_V. The experimental subjects._

_A. Number of experimental subjects._

1. _Drug F 1001._ No statement.

2. _“Lost”._ The statements made by the witness Holl about the number of
persons experimented upon must be treated with caution, since they do
not originate with Holl, but were stated by the prosecution and merely
confirmed by Holl. The testimony of Nales about experiments cannot refer
to “Lost”.

3. _N-substance._ Since there were no experiments, no statement is made.

_B. Consent of the experimental subjects._

1. _Drug F 1001._ No statement.

2. _“Lost”._ Sievers’ testimony (_Tr. p. 5732_) shows that Hirt said
that the experimental subjects had volunteered, following a lecture by
Hirt. This testimony seems to be quite trustworthy, as it was usual to
make similar experiments on officer candidates of the Academy of
Military Medicine in Berlin. Testimony of Becker-Freyseng (_Tr. p.
8072_) as well as testimony of Sievers (_Tr. pp. 5730-31_); also
testimony of the witness Nales (_Tr. pp. 10409-10471_).

3. _N-substance._ No experiments, no statement.

_C. Type of experimental subjects._

1. _F 1001._ The documents submitted do not reveal the nature of the
experimental subjects, though the year 1939 indicates that in no case
were foreigners used.

2. _“Lost”._ According to Sievers’ testimony, the persons used in the
experiments in the Natzweiler concentration camp volunteered, so that
the nature of the experimental subjects would appear to be of no
significance as a basis for judgment. The testimony of the defendant
Rudolf Brandt (_NO-372, Pros. Ex. 252_) is no basis to judge the true
state of affairs, as Rudolf Brandt’s testimony (_Tr. pp. 4930-34_) shows
that he himself never witnessed an experiment and that his statements
are conclusions drawn from documents and statements submitted by the
interrogators.

3. _N-substance._ No experiments, no statement.

_D. Danger involved for the experimental subjects._

1. _Drug F 1001 and “Lost”._ The usual forms of the “Lost” experiments,
applying a drop to the skin, as described by Holl (_Tr. p. 1052_) do not
entail any danger to life, because the aim is to ascertain the most
detailed reactions of the skin towards tiny drops of “Lost”. Experiments
with deadly quantities would prevent this being ascertained. The
relevant statements of the witness Holl must be due to ignorance of the
manner of the experiment. Holl’s statement (_Tr. p. 1050 ff._) and the
affidavit of Wagner (_NO-881, Pros. Ex. 280_) also, to a certain degree,
contradict each other. Holl, a miner by profession, who was hospital
Kapo [inmate trusty] in Natzweiler, makes scientific statements with
illustrations, to which one can hardly attach any value. The affidavit
of Wagner who, as a scientific designer, held, during the experiments,
an elevated position within the inner working circle, is far more
reserved. He knows nothing of deaths occurring during “Lost”
experiments. His conclusions as to how dangerous the “Lost” experiments
were are based on a chart which was most likely intended for a
committee. Sievers’ statement (_Tr. p. 5732_) reports a visit to Wimmer
at Strasbourg during which the latter did not mention that there had
been any deaths. Hirt also confirms this in March 1943; though he cites
two deaths, they had not resulted from “Lost” experiments. The
experiments with drug F 1001, too, are “Lost” experiments. The danger
involved in the experiments has been described accurately. There are no
deaths and health is not impaired permanently. In 23 cases general
condition was not impaired. (_NO-199, Pros. Ex. 253._) In contrast to
this, NO-198, Prosecution Exhibit 254, mentions serious disturbances of
the general condition in eight cases. Yet it must be assumed that these
disturbances were of a temporary nature and occurred only when the
climax of the injury was reached. They did not last throughout the
duration of the experiments.

2. _N-substance._ The experiments were not carried out. Over and above
that, NO-005, Prosecution Exhibit 279, discloses that the experiments
would, most probably, not result in any permanent bodily harm.

_VI. Special responsibility and participation of the defendant Karl
Brandt._

1. The defendant Karl Brandt did not issue any order to carry out
experiments. Karl Brandt did not have authority to issue orders.

2. The decree of 1 March 1944 concerning defense equipment in chemical
warfare has been reconstructed by means of the following affidavits:
(_Karl Brandt 103_, _Karl Brandt Ex. 42_; _Karl Brandt 5_, _Karl Brandt
Ex. 6_; _Karl Brandt 11_, _Karl Brandt Ex. 10_; _Karl Brandt 4_, _Karl
Brandt Ex. 5_; _Karl Brandt 101_, _Karl Brandt Ex. 41_; _Karl Brandt
89_, _Karl Brandt Ex. 37_). They show that this decree does not refer to
an authorization to give orders concerning chemical-warfare agents and
their research, but that it represents a production order referring to
defense equipment in chemical warfare. Document NO-015, Prosecution
Exhibit 275, proves that Hirt’s experiments had been completed when the
defendant Karl Brandt received, through Sievers, Hirt’s
treatment-instructions for injuries caused by “Lost” following the
decree of 1 March 1944. The very fact that in this way, for the first
time, he gained knowledge of the results of the experiments proves that
this was an SS affair of Himmler and Hirt and that it belonged to a
sphere where interference was denied to Karl Brandt by strict orders
(see statements on participation in experiments by virtue of contacts
with Himmler). (_Also Karl Brandt 120_, _Karl Brandt Ex. 35_.) The
affidavit of Rudolf Brandt (_NO-372, Pros. Ex. 252_) is refuted by Karl
Brandt 13, Karl Brandt Exhibit 12, as well as statements made by Rudolf
Brandt. (_Tr. pp. 4930-34._) As a matter of fact the name of the
defendant Karl Brandt is never mentioned in the numerous documents
extending over a period of several years. The special secrecy
surrounding the Noli Decree and its contents with regard to poison gas
defense is made sufficiently clear by the necessity of safeguarding the
inadequate poison gas defense in the least possible time, and to hide
this from the enemy. (_Karl Brandt 103_, _Karl Brandt Ex. 42_; _Karl
Brandt 101_, _Karl Brandt Ex. 41_; _Karl Brandt 11_, _Karl Brandt Ex.
10_.)

3. Karl Brandt’s efforts not to experiment on human beings are proved by
the fact that he had animal material, i. e., man-like apes, brought from
Spain and Africa by the Luftwaffe at great expense. Had he been
predominantly inclined to experiment on human beings, to be had free of
cost, he would hardly have gone to such expense. (_Karl Brandt 12_,
_Karl Brandt Ex. 11._) The exhaustive enumeration of parties engaged on
work with N-gas (_NO-005, Pros. Ex. 279_) proves that the defendant Karl
Brandt did not participate. The N-gas problems belong to a very
different sphere, as shown by the Documents Karl Brandt 88, Karl Brandt
Exhibit 36, and Karl Brandt 103, Karl Brandt Exhibit 42. This is further
confirmed by Sievers’ letter to Hirt of 9 April 1942. (_NO-793, Pros.
Ex. 258._) In it, reference is made to the possibility of advancing
experiments by “single possibilities”.

NO-422, Prosecution Exhibit 33, contains an order by Himmler of 7 July
1942 to Sievers and the SS Institute Ahnenerbe to support Hirt’s
researches in every possible way.

4. The codefendant Rudolf Brandt does not know the contents of the
decree of 1 March 1944, though he distinctly alludes to it in his
affidavit, (_NO-372, Pros. Ex. 252_; _Tr. pp. 4941-42_.)

             _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT
                                SIEVERS_

                 *        *        *        *        *

1. Lost gas experiments were carried out from November 1942 on by
Professor Dr. Hirt in the Natzweiler concentration camp.

2. According to the statement of the witness Nales in the session of 30
April 1947, three experimental persons died. Other experimental persons
are supposed to have suffered from severe burns.

3. Sievers did not personally participate in these experiments. The
prosecution has submitted the following evidence to prove Sievers’
participation in the Lost gas experiments:

    Letter of Sievers to Dr. Hirt of 17 January 1942 (_NO-791, Pros.
    Ex. 256_) concerning experiments with insecticides.

    Letter of Dr. Hirt to the Ahnenerbe of 20 January 1942 (_NO-792,
    Pros. Ex. 257_) concerning answer to Sievers’ letter.

    Sievers’ letter to Dr. Hirt of 9 April 1942 (_NO-793, Pros. Ex.
    258_) concerning Dr. Hirt’s treatises on intravital microscopy
    and Lost experiments.

    Sievers’ letter to Dr. Brandt of 27 August 1942 (_NO-794, Pros.
    Ex. 259_) concerning the passing on of a message of Dr. Hirt on
    the results of Lost experiments.

    Letter of the Ahnenerbe to Dr. Brandt of 2 June 1942 (_NO-097,
    Pros. Ex. 260_) concerning Dr. Hirt’s report on Lost wounds.
    Experiments on human beings could not be made as Hirt was at the
    front.

    Note of the Reich Business Manager of 3 November 1942 (_NO-098,
    Pros. Ex. 263_).

    Letter of the Reich Business Manager of the Ahnenerbe to Dr. R.
    Brandt of 22 April 1943—concerning release of Staff Physician
    Dr. Wimmer from the air force so that he can do further work
    with Dr. Hirt on Lost experiments. (_NO-193, Pros. Ex. 264._)

    Letter of the personal staff of the Reich Leader SS to
    Ministerial Councillor Dr. Goernert, of 9 June 1943—concerning
    Dr. Wimmer’s transfer. (_NO-195, Pros. Ex. 266._)

    Certificate of the Institute for Military Scientific Research of
    8 November 1943—concerning the sending of special rations of
    food to Dr. Wimmer and Frl. Schmitt. (_492-PS, Pros. Ex. 267._)

    Proposed treatment of poison-gas injuries through Lost.
    (_NO-099, Pros. Ex. 268._)

    Letter of the Reich Business Manager of the Ahnenerbe to Dr.
    Brandt of 9 February 1942—concerning forwarding Dr. Hirt’s
    report on his medicinal experiments and a microscope, which
    enables one to observe a living tissue. (_NO-085, Pros. Ex.
    269._)

    Letter of the personal staff of the Reich Leader SS to the
    Ahnenerbe of 10 March 1944—concerning the transmission of a
    Fuehrer Decree of 1 March 1944. (_NO-013, Pros. Ex. 272._) The
    Fuehrer Decree mentioned—of 1 March 1944—has not been
    submitted.

    Letter of the Office “A” to Dr. R. Brandt of 11 April 1944
    concerning Sievers’ report to SS Brigadefuehrer Prof. Dr. Brandt
    on the research work of Dr. Hirt. (_NO-015, Pros. Ex. 275._)

    Letter of Sievers to SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks of 11 September
    1942 (_NO-978, Pros. Ex. 480_) concerning military scientific
    research in connection with the Natzweiler concentration camp.

    Letter of Sievers to SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks of 27 August 1942
    concerning military scientific research in connection with the
    Natzweiler concentration camp. (_NO-935, Pros. Ex. 481._)

    Sievers’ memorandum concerning the carrying out of military
    scientific research in the Natzweiler concentration camp of 17
    September 1942. (_NO-977, Pros. Ex. 482._)

The defense refers to the following evidence:

Lost experiments were carried out at the Military Medical Academy in
Berlin. The experimental persons were cadets studying at this Academy.
(_NO-097, Pros. Ex. 260_; _Tr. p. 5679_; _Tr. pp. 8071-72_.) Professor
Dr. Hirt, later Director of the Anatomical Institute at the University
of Strasbourg, took part in carrying out these experiments. (_Tr. p.
5731._) Professor Hirt also carried out Lost experiments on himself.
(_Tr. p. 5733._) Hitler then decreed that experiments were no longer to
be carried out on cadets, as they were more important as soldiers.
Himmler gave Dr. Hirt orders to carry out a few practical experiments on
human beings in addition to his animal experiments. Then on 9 April 1942
Himmler asked Sievers, who in his discussion with him at Easter 1942 had
also mentioned the research done by Professor Hirt, to ask the latter in
writing to submit a secret report on his Lost experiments. (_NO-793,
Pros. Ex. 258._) Hirt then gave this report to the Ahnenerbe, from where
it was forwarded, with a letter on 2 June 1942 to the personal staff of
the Reich Leader SS. (_NO-097, Pros. Ex. 260._) The heading of this
