letter contains the report and the assent to the publication of the
scientific results. Here the date of the letter must be pointed out, 26
August 1942, which was many weeks after the altitude experiments had
come to an end, in May 1942.

Dr. Brandt’s reply to Sievers, dated 29 August 1942 (_NO-222, Pros. Ex.
69_):

    “The letter of the Reich Leader SS, with which he has forwarded
    the report to Field Marshal Milch, was only signed and sent off
    a few days ago. Copy of the letter of the Reich Leader SS dated
    25 August 1942 is enclosed for your information.”

Here it is to be observed that this letter likewise was written long
after the conclusion of the altitude experiments and, like the preceding
one, contains nothing at all concerning the experiments. It cannot be
inferred from the letter dated 29 August 1942 that a copy of the report
sent to Field Marshal Milch was also sent to the Ahnenerbe.

Brandt sends Sievers a copy of his letter to Dr. Rascher dated 6
September 1942 (_NO-223, Pros. Ex. 71_). It contains the information
that Field Marshal Milch will ask Dr. Rascher and Dr. Romberg to meet
shortly and report.

Letter from Rascher to Himmler, dated 9 October 1942 (_1610-PS, Pros.
Ex. 73_). Sievers is mentioned in connection with the unsuccessful
report to Milch. It is worth noting that Rascher asks that the
low-pressure chamber may still be left at his disposal for further
experiments.

Letter from the Reich Business Manager of the “Ahnenerbe” to the
personal staff, for the attention of Dr. Brandt, dated 21 October 1942
(_NO-226, Pros. Ex. 75_ (_Pros. Ex. 110 in Milch case_); _1617-PS, Pros.
Ex. 111 in Milch case_). This letter contains the information that the
freezing experiments are finished and that the altitude experiments
desired by the Reich Leader SS can now be continued. For this purpose
the low-pressure chamber will be needed again, and the Reich Leader SS
is to write personally to Field Marshal Milch. The rough draft of a
letter of the Reich Leader SS to Field Marshal Milch was enclosed with
this letter. This rough draft is submitted by the prosecution as NO-226,
Prosecution Exhibit 75. This draft was submitted by Sievers because of
an assignment given to him by Himmler. The rough draft was drawn up in
accordance with Rascher’s suggestions. (_German Tr. p. 5682._)

This letter, dated 13 December 1942, contains several research
commissions given personally by Himmler to Rascher (_1612-PS, Pros. Ex.
79_). Number 5 reads:

    “The procuring of the apparatus necessary for all experiments is
    to be discussed separately with the offices of the Reich
    Physician SS of the SS Economic and Administrative Main Office,
    and with the Ahnenerbe Registered Association.”

A copy went to the Ahnenerbe.

This is a letter from the Vorstand [Board of Directors] of the
Siemens-Schuckert-Werke, Berlin, and concerns the ordering of an
electrocardiograph (_NO-3675, Pros. Ex. 548_). This apparatus was never
delivered because the “SS priority grade” was not certified. Let it be
remarked here, for the sake of understanding, that the designation “SS
priority grade” was in general use and had nothing to do with the “SS”,
the so-called “Schutzstaffeln” of the NSDAP.

Letter from Sievers to the Rector of the University of Munich concerning
the loan of different pieces of apparatus (_NO-3674, Pros. Ex. 549._)
Dr. Wuest was, as repeatedly pointed out, office chief of the Ahnenerbe.
As such he had exact information concerning the research commissions of
the Institute for Military Scientific Research. A simple way to obtain
the apparatus would have been an agreement made over the telephone. If
Sievers chose to do it by letter it was only because of the delaying
tactics practiced by him. This is seen clearly from the postscript
intended for Rascher, telling him not to participate. It is also worthy
of note that the apparatus was to be used in Munich and not in Dachau.

Sievers had no right to issue orders or instructions in connection with
the low-pressure experiments, as is seen from part III of the closing
brief. Sievers had not the slightest influence on the carrying out of
the experiments.

Sievers could have had no knowledge that the experiments might be
inhuman, because he, or the Ahnenerbe, was only brought in when the
experiments had already been in progress for over a month.

The question still to be examined is whether and when Sievers received
knowledge of Rascher’s reports concerning his experiments. To this the
following details are pointed out: On 5 April 1942 Rascher sent an
interim report on his low-pressure experiments direct to Himmler. He
asked that the report should be treated as secret. (_1971-A-PS, Pros.
Ex. 49._)

The acknowledgment of the receipt did not go through the Ahnenerbe but
went directly from Rudolf Brandt to Rascher. (_1971-C-PS, Pros. Ex.
50._) It is nowhere mentioned that a copy went to the Ahnenerbe. From
the distribution of the order issued by Himmler thereon (_1971-B-PS,
Pros. Ex. 51_), it is clearly seen that the Ahnenerbe received no copy
of the order.

On 11 May 1942 Rascher sent a further secret report direct to Himmler,
so that Sievers here too had no possibility of acquiring any knowledge
of this report. (_NO-220, Pros. Ex. 61._)

On 22 September 1942 the German Experimental Station for Aviation sent
copies of Nos. 2, 3, and 4 of the report “Experiments on Rescue from
High Altitudes” as “top secret” matter to the Reich Leader SS “to be
filed there”. (_NO-402, Pros. Ex. 66._) Even if the first page of the
report bears the note, “The investigations were conducted in conjunction
with the Research and Instruction Association the Ahnenerbe”, no kind of
proof is thereby furnished that a copy of the report reached the
Ahnenerbe. It is true that Sievers does not exclude the possibility that
such a report came to the Ahnenerbe, but he denies that he read such a
report, because it did not concern him, and it also did not interest him
as it dealt with medical matters. If he did read any of it, it was at
the most the short summary to be found at the end. (_German Tr. p.
5681._)

It must also be pointed out that there is nothing in this report which
could lead to the conclusion that the experiments had fatal results. The
prosecution’s expert Professor Ivy also confirmed this in answer to the
Court’s question: “Is there anything mentioned in the
Ruff-Romberg-Rascher report about experiments concerning which it can be
asserted with absolute certainty that fatalities, permanent injury, or
great pain have resulted in the case of human experimental subjects?”
The expert’s answer was “No.” (_German Tr. p. 9217._) In addition this
report was sent to Himmler on 22 September 1942, thus, long after the
close of the experiments. Sievers cannot then have gained any insight
into Rascher’s criminal activity from Rascher’s reports.

Sievers had not the power or the opportunity of preventing Rascher’s
criminal experiments or of bringing them to a standstill. It is true
that at the Easter conference in 1942 he tried to move Himmler to
discontinue all experiments in the concentration camps, or at least to
bring about the suppression of the research of Rascher and Professor Dr.
Hirt, which were not in harmony with the character of the Ahnenerbe.
Both his suggestions were refuted by Himmler’s declaration that “all
that” was no concern of Sievers and that he (Himmler) bore the sole
responsibility. (_German Tr. p. 5714._)

In spite of Himmler’s declaration, Sievers endeavored to halt further
low-pressure experiments, when the low-pressure chamber had been removed
from Dachau at the beginning of June 1942.

Already on 27 November 1942, the chief of the personal staff of the
Reich Leader SS, SS General Wolff, had applied to Field Marshal Milch in
order to make possible Rascher’s further experiments in Dachau. In the
closing sentence of this letter the loan of the low-pressure chamber is
once again requested. (_NO-269, Pros. Ex. 78_ (_Pros. Ex. 118 in the
Milch Case_).)

That General Wolff by Himmler’s orders laid great stress on making
further experiments possible is seen from the fact that a copy of the
letter went also to SS Oberfuehrer Dr. Wuest, who was office chief of
the Ahnenerbe. Thereby the special importance of the affair was to be
shown also to the Ahnenerbe, on which the obligation rested to procure
the requisite apparatus in accordance with figure three of Himmler’s
order of 7 July 1942 (_NO-422, Pros. Ex. 33_) and repeated later under
figure five of Himmler’s order of 13 December 1942 (_1612-PS, Pros. Ex.
79_).

When the Luftwaffe did not make the low-pressure chamber available
again, Sievers was commissioned to buy a special portable low-pressure
chamber for the SS. (_German Tr. p. 5800._) And then Sievers did
something unheard of and rang up Dr. Romberg of the German Experimental
Station for Aviation. Romberg was very much surprised at this telephone
call. (_German Tr. pp. 6839-40._)

Through his communication that he had been commissioned by Himmler to
procure a low-pressure chamber for Rascher, who at that time was still a
member of the Luftwaffe, he aroused the attention of the Luftwaffe. For
Dr. Romberg communicated this news to his superior Dr. Ruff, who, on his
side, informed Dr. Becker-Freyseng of the Medical Inspectorate of the
Luftwaffe. (_German Tr. pp. 6607-08, 7878_; _Becker-Freyseng 24,
Becker-Freyseng Ex. 11_.) This was what Sievers counted upon. The
consent of the Luftwaffe would have been necessary for the purpose of
sanctioning the requisite priority grade for a low-pressure chamber. The
Luftwaffe denied this necessity and thus the low-pressure chamber under
consideration for Rascher was not procured.

When Himmler in the year 1943—probably at Rascher’s urging—ordered
Sievers again to procure a low-pressure chamber, Sievers was able once
more to prevent one from being procured. This time he pointed out that
the research management of the Luftwaffe did not consider it necessary
to continue with altitude experiments. Sievers advanced this statement
at random, profiting by the fact that Rascher, though probably known to
the Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe, was not known to the research
management of the Luftwaffe. (_German Tr. p. 5801._)

                               _Summary_

Criminal action on the part of Sievers cannot be proved in connection
with the low-pressure experiments. The carrying out of the experiments
was neither ordered nor arranged for by him. He did not come into
contact with the experiments until they had been in progress for over a
month. What Sievers saw, heard, and read about the experiments could not
in any way give him the knowledge that inadmissible experiments were
being made. Sievers had no knowledge of Rascher’s criminal experiments
while the experiments were in progress, because Rascher kept these
experiments completely secret. Sievers’ activity was of a completely
subordinate nature. Apart from that, however, Sievers helped to prevent
Rascher (whom Sievers could not bear, for he was a pompous fellow and a
protégé of Himmler) from being put again in a position to carry on
further low-pressure experiments.

There is no criminal guilt then on the part of Sievers, as far as
Sievers’ contact with the low-pressure experiments is concerned.

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
              Pros.
Doc. No.     Ex. No.             Description of Document              Page
1602-PS         44    Letter from Rascher to Himmler, 15 May 1941,     141
                        concerning high-altitude experiments on
                        human beings.
1582-PS         45    Letter from Rudolf Brandt to Rascher, undated,   143
                        nforming him that prisoners would be made
                        available for high-altitude research.
1581-A-PS       48    Letter from Rudolf Brandt to Sievers, 21 March   144
                        1942, concerning Rascher’s participation in
                        high-altitude experiments.
1971-A-PS       49    Letter from Rascher to Himmler, 5 April 1942,    144
                        and report, undated, on high-altitude
                        experiments.
1971-C-PS       50    Letter from Rudolf Brandt to Rascher, 13 April   147
                        1942, regarding his success with
                        high-altitude experiments.
1971-B-PS       51    Letter from Himmler to Rascher, 13 April 1942,   148
                        requesting a repetition of high-altitude
                        experiments on prisoners condemned to death.
1971-D-PS       52    Teletype from Rascher to Rudolf Brandt, 20       149
                        October 1942, requesting clarification on
                        the pardon granted by Himmler.
1971-E-PS       53    Teletype from Rudolf Brandt to Schnitzler, 21    149
                        October 1942, concerning the pardon granted
                        by Himmler.
NO-218          56    Letter from Rascher to Himmler, 16 April 1942,   150
                        reporting on high-altitude experiments with
                        fatal results and on experiments conducted
                        together with Romberg.
NO-264          60    File note for SS Obersturmfuehrer Schnitzler,    151
                        28 April 1942.
NO-220          61    Letter from Rascher to Himmler, 11 May 1942,     152
                        and secret report concerning high-altitude
                        experiments.
NO-402          66    Letter, 29 September 1942, and report, 28 July   155
                        1942, from Romberg and Ruff to Himmler
                        concerning experiments on rescue from high
                        altitudes.
343-A-PS        62    Letter from Milch to Wolff, 20 May 1942,         172
                        regarding continuation of experiments.
343-B-PS        70    Letter from Milch to Himmler, 31 August 1942,    172
                        acknowledging receipt of reports by Rascher
                        and Romberg on high-altitude experiments.
NO-289          72    Letter from Hippke to Himmler, 8 October 1942,   173
                        thanking the latter for his assistance in
                        high-altitude experiments in Dachau.
NO-224          76    Note by Romberg on showing of film in office     174
                        of State Secretary Milch and proposed report
                        to Milch, 11 September 1942.
1612-PS         79    Letter from Rudolf Brandt to Rascher, 13         176
                        December 1942, and Himmler’s order assigning
                        Rascher to high-altitude experiments.
NO-610          41    Inmates of the Dachau concentration camp in      898
                        different stages of simulated altitude in
                        the low-pressure chamber; postmortem
                        dissections of experimental subjects who
                        died from the effects of high-altitude
                        experiments. (_See Selections from
                        Photographic Evidence of the Prosecution._)

                               _Testimony_

Extracts from the testimony of tribunal witness Walter Neff            177
Extracts from the testimony of defendant Rudolf Brandt                 183
Extracts from the testimony of defendant Romberg                       186

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1602-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 44

 LETTER FROM RASCHER TO HIMMLER, 15 MAY 1941, CONCERNING HIGH-ALTITUDE
                      EXPERIMENTS ON HUMAN BEINGS

                                                              [Stamp]
Sigmund Rascher, M. D.
                                          Personal Staff Reich Leader SS
                                             Archives File No. Secret/58
Munich, Trogerstrasse 56, 15 May 1941
Highly esteemed Reich Leader,

My most sincere thanks for your cordial wishes and flowers on the birth
of my second son. This time, too, it is a strong boy, though he arrived
3 weeks too early. I shall take the liberty and send you a small picture
of both children some time.

Since I want a third child very soon, I feel very grateful to you that
with your help, highly esteemed Reich Leader, the wedding is made
possible. Today I was informed by SS Standartenfuehrer Sollmann on the
telephone that the 165 marks as required for a wedding will be charged
to the account “R” and will be transmitted by the Ahnenerbe. I thank you
heartily! I only need a short certificate concerning Aryan descent for
the Luftwaffe, where the permit was already submitted. Tomorrow, prior
to my departure, I shall dictate a rough text to Nini D; she will then
forward the note to you, highly esteemed Reich Leader.

I also thank you very cordially for the generous regular allowance of
fruit; this is at present extremely important for mother and children.

For the time being, have been assigned to the Luftgau Kommando VII,
Munich, for a medical selection course. During this course, where
research on high-altitude flying plays a prominent part, determined by
the somewhat higher ceiling of the English fighter planes, considerable
regret was expressed that no experiments on human beings have so far
been possible for us because such experiments are very dangerous and
nobody is volunteering. I therefore put the serious question: is there
any possibility that two or three professional criminals can be made
available for these experiments? The experiments are being performed at
the Ground Station for High-Altitude Experiments of the Luftwaffe
[Bodenstaendige Pruefstelle fuer Hoehenforschung der Luftwaffe] at
Munich. The experiments, in which the experimental subject of course may
die, would take place with my collaboration. They are absolutely
essential for the research on high-altitude flying and cannot, as it has
been tried until now, be carried out on monkeys, because monkeys offer
entirely different test conditions. I had an absolutely confidential
talk with the representative of the Luftwaffe physician who is
conducting these experiments. He also is of the opinion that the
problems in question can only be solved by experiments on human beings.
(Feeble-minded individuals also could be used as experimental material.)

For the time being, SS men and some SS officers as well are detailed to
the antiaircraft school IV, for studying the range-finding technique.
The material is excellent. Nevertheless, I suggest that selection of
range-finding men among SS troops should be carried out according to the
methods of examination as used by the Luftwaffe. A still better
selection would thus be the result. I am able to judge because I am the
specialist for medical selection with the Luftwaffe range-finding unit,
and all those detailed to these courses once more have to pass my
examination. I therefore take the liberty to send to you from Schongau
the method of selection as drafted by me. For this, I received the War
Merit Cross, 2d Class, with Swords. It will not be a note for
instruction but a draft for a lecture. I prefer to have it forwarded the
direct way rather than that any SS officer should put it down in a
mutilated way during my lectures. A similar instructional note was
submitted to the Reich Ministry for Aviation.

Thanks to your generosity, the cancer research is progressing well, in
spite of the war.

I do hope that you, highly esteemed Reich Leader, are in perfect health,
in spite of your tremendous amount of work!

   With my most hearty wishes, I am with
                                                         Heil Hitler!
                              [handwritten] Yours, gratefully devoted,
                                                   [Signed]  S. RASCHER
[Handwritten]  RUSH

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1582-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 45

   LETTER FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO RASCHER, UNDATED, INFORMING HIM THAT
      PRISONERS WOULD BE MADE AVAILABLE FOR HIGH-ALTITUDE RESEARCH

AK/104a/LO Bra/V
                                   [Stamp unintelligible May 2 (?) 1941]
SS Untersturmfuehrer Sigmund Rascher M. D.
Munich
Trogerstr. 56
Dear Dr. Rascher:

Shortly before flying to Oslo, the Reich Leader SS gave me your letter
of 15 May 1941, for partial reply.

I can inform you that prisoners will, of course, be gladly made
available for the high-flight researches. I have informed the Chief of
the Security Police of this agreement of the Reich Leader SS, and
requested that the competent official be instructed to get in touch with
you.

I want to use the opportunity to extend my cordial wishes to you on the
birth of your son.

I shall refer as soon as possible to the second part of your letter.

   By order
                                                         Heil Hitler!
                                       [initials] R BR [Rudolf Brandt]
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer
[illegible markings]

                                       TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1581-A-PS
                                       PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 48

          LETTER FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO SIEVERS, 21 MARCH 1942,
           CONCERNING RASCHER’S PARTICIPATION IN HIGH-ALTITUDE
                               EXPERIMENTS

The Reich Leader SS Personal Staff

Journal No. AR 704/2 A/Bn.

                                                   [Stamp]
                                     Personal Staff Reich Leader SS
                                     Documentary Administration
                                     Record number AR/704/2 A/Bn. 58
                                     Fuehrer Headquarters, 21 March 1942

To the Reich Chief Manager [Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer] of the “Ahnenerbe”

SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers

Berlin—Dahlem

Dear Comrade Sievers,

I refer to your inquiry of 9 March 1942 B/151/r1 S/Wo—concerning Dr.
Rascher.

Reference is made to the subatmospheric pressure experiments which are
being carried out on concentration camp inmates in the Dachau camp by
the air force. The Reich Leader SS has approved these experiments under
the condition that SS Untersturmfuehrer Dr. Rascher, who is an
Obersturmfuehrer of the air force, takes part in them. I am sure that
Dr. Rascher will be able to give you further details.[22]

                                                         Heil Hitler!
                                                       [Signed] BRANDT
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

                                       TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1971-A-PS
                                       PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 49

       LETTER FROM RASCHER TO HIMMLER, 5 APRIL 1942, AND REPORT,
                  UNDATED, ON HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS

Sigmund Rascher, M. D.

                                                            5 April 1942
                               [Marginal note] Very interesting. 8-4-42.
                                                 [Apparently by Himmler]
Highly esteemed Reich Leader:

Enclosed is an interim report on the low-pressure experiments so far
conducted in the concentration camp of Dachau. May I ask you
respectively to treat the report as secret?

A few days ago Reich Physician SS [Reichsarzt SS] Professor Dr. Grawitz
made a brief inspection of the experimentation plant. Since his time was
very limited, no experiments could be demonstrated to him. SS
Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers took a whole day off to watch some of the
interesting standard experiments and may have given you a brief report.
I believe, highly esteemed Reich Leader, that you would be
extraordinarily interested in those experiments. Is it not possible that
on the occasion of a trip to southern Germany you have some of the
experiments demonstrated to you? If the results so obtained by the
experiments are confirmed by further experimentation, entirely new data
will be secured for science; simultaneously, entirely new aspects will
be opened to the Luftwaffe.

I hope that, thanks to the intended efforts of SS Obersturmbannfuehrer
Sievers, the Luftwaffe will make no difficulties from now on. I am very
much indebted to Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers as he has shown a very
active interest in my work in every respect.

I thank you respectfully, highly esteemed Reich Leader, for the generous
realization of my proposition to conduct such experiments in the
concentration camp.

With my best wishes for your personal well-being, I am

                                                     With Heil Hitler
                                                     Gratefully yours,
                                                    [Signed] S. RASCHER
           _FIRST INTERIM REPORT ON THE LOW-PRESSURE CHAMBER
            EXPERIMENTS IN THE CONCENTRATION CAMP OF DACHAU_

1. The object is to solve the problem of whether the theoretically
established norms pertaining to the length of life of human beings
breathing air with only a small proportion of oxygen and subjected to
low pressure correspond with the results obtained by practical
experiments. It has been asserted that a parachutist, who jumps from a
height of 12 km. would suffer very severe injuries, probably even die,
on account of the lack of oxygen. Practical experiments on this subject
have always been discontinued after a maximum of 53 seconds, since very
severe bends [Hoehenkrankheit] occurred.

2. Experiments testing the length of life of a human being above the
normal breathing limits (4, 5, 6 km.) have not been conducted at all,
since it has been a foregone conclusion that the human experimental
subject [Versuchsperson—VP] would suffer death.

The experiments conducted by myself and Dr. Romberg proved the
following:

Experiments on parachute jumps proved that the lack of oxygen and the
low atmospheric pressure at 12 or 13 km. altitude did not cause death.
Altogether 15 extreme experiments of this type were carried out in which
none of VP’s died. Very severe bends together with unconsciousness
occurred, but completely normal functions of the senses returned when a
height of 7 km. was reached on descent. Electrocardiograms registering
during the experiments did show certain irregularities, but by the time
the experiments were over the curves had returned to normal and they did
not indicate any abnormal changes during the following days. The extent
to which deterioration of the organism may occur due to continuously
repeated experiments can only be established at the end of the series of
experiments. The extreme fatal experiments will be carried out on
specially selected VP’s, otherwise it would not be possible to exercise
the rigid control so extraordinarily important for practical purposes.

The VP’s were brought to a height of 8 km. under oxygen and then had to
make 5 knee bends with and without oxygen. After a certain lapse of
time, moderate to severe bends occurred and the VP’s became unconscious.
However, after a certain period of accustoming themselves to the height
of 8 km. all the VP’s recuperated and regained their consciousness and
the normal functions of their senses.

Only continuous experiments at altitudes higher than 10.5 km. resulted
in death. These experiments showed that breathing stopped after about 30
minutes, while in 2 cases the electrocardiographically charted action of
the heart continued for another 20 minutes.

The third experiment of this type took such an extraordinary course that
I called an SS physician of the camp as witness, since I had worked on
these experiments all by myself. It was a continuous experiment without
oxygen at a height of 12 km. conducted on a 37-year-old Jew in good
general condition. Breathing continued up to 30 minutes. After 4 minutes
the VP began to perspire and to wiggle his head, after 5 minutes cramps
occurred, between 6 and 10 minutes breathing increased in speed and the
VP became unconscious; from 11 to 30 minutes breathing slowed down to
three breaths per minute, finally stopping altogether.

Severest cyanosis developed in between and foam appeared at the mouth.

At 5-minute intervals electrocardiograms from three leads were written.
After breathing had stopped, the electrocardiogram was continuously
written until the action of the heart had come to a complete standstill.
About ½ hour after breathing had stopped, dissection was started.

_Autopsy Report_

When the cavity of the chest was opened the pericardium was filled
tightly (heart tamponade). Upon opening of the pericardium 80 cc. of
clear yellowish liquid gushed forth. The moment the tamponade had
stopped, the right auricle began to beat heavily, at first at the rate
of 60 actions per minute, then progressively slower. Twenty minutes
after the pericardium had been opened, the right auricle was opened by
puncturing it. For about 15 minutes, a thin stream of blood spurted
forth. Thereafter clogging of the puncture wound in the auricle by
coagulation of the blood and renewed acceleration of the action of the
right auricle occurred.

One hour after breathing had stopped, the spinal marrow was completely
severed and the brain removed. Thereupon the action of the auricle
stopped for 40 seconds. It then renewed its action, coming to a complete
standstill 8 minutes later. A heavy subarchnoid oedema was found in the
brain. In the veins and arteries of the brain a considerable quantity of
air was discovered. Furthermore, the blood vessels in the heart and
liver were enormously obstructed by embolism.

The anatomical preparations will be preserved and so I shall be able to
evaluate them later.

The last-mentioned case is to my knowledge the first one of this type
ever observed on man. The above-described heart actions will gain
particular scientific interest, since they were written down with an
electrocardiogram to the very end.

The experiments will be continued and extended. Another interim report
will follow after new results have been obtained.

                                                [Signed]  DR. RASCHER

                                       TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1971-C-PS
                                       PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 50

          LETTER FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO RASCHER, 13 APRIL 1942,
          REGARDING HIS SUCCESS WITH HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS

1174/42 BRa/V
                                     Fuehrer Headquarters, 13 April 1942
                               Top Secret
SS Untersturmfuehrer Rascher, M. D.
Munich, Trogerstrasse 56
Dear Comrade Dr. Rascher,

Your report of 5.4.1942 has been seen by the Reich Leader SS today. The
tests on which SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers gave a brief report
interested him very much.

For the further tests I wish you a continuation of the success you have
had so far.

Best regards also to your wife.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                               Yours,
                                               [Signed]  B. [R.] BRANDT
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

                                       TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1971-B-PS
                                       PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 51

       LETTER FROM HIMMLER TO RASCHER, 13 APRIL 1942, REQUESTING
         A REPETITION OF HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS ON PRISONERS
                           CONDEMNED TO DEATH

The Reich Leader SS
                                     Fuehrer Headquarters, 13 April 1942
SS Untersturmfuehrer Dr. Rascher
Munich 27, Trogerstrasse 56
Dear Dr. Rascher:

I want to answer your letter with which you sent me your reports.
Especially the latest discoveries made in your experiments particularly
have interested me. May I now ask you the following:

1. This experiment is to be repeated on other men condemned to death.

2. I would like Dr. Fahrenkamp to be taken into consultation on these
experiments.

3. Considering the long-continued action of the heart the experiments
should be specifically exploited in such a manner as to determine
whether these men could be recalled to life. Should such an experiment
succeed, then, of course, the person condemned to death shall be
pardoned to concentration camp for life.

Please keep me further informed on the experiments.

Kind regards and

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours
                                                   [Signed]  H. HIMMLER

2. Chief of the Security Police and SD.

3. SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks.

Copy for your information.

                                         by order [I. A.]
                                         [initialed] BR. [Rudolf Brandt]
                                         SS Sturmbannfuehrer

                                       TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1971-D-PS
                                       PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 52

        TELETYPE FROM RASCHER TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 20 OCTOBER 1942,
            REQUESTING CLARIFICATION ON THE PARDON GRANTED BY
                                 HIMMLER

                       REICH SECURITY MAIN OFFICE
                             Communication
Communication No. 11194                                           Urgent
RFSS Munich—Teletype No. 2020, 20 October 1942, 5:25 p. m.
To: SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Brandt
Field Command Post [Feldkommandostelle] Hegewald
Highly esteemed Obersturmbannfuehrer:

Will you please clarify the following case with the Reich Leader SS as
soon as possible?

In communication RFSS [Reich Leader SS] of 13-1-42 under paragraph 3 it
is ordered that if prisoners in Dachau condemned to death live through
experiments which have endangered their lives, they should be pardoned.
As up to now only Poles and Russians were available, some of whom had
been condemned to death, it is not quite clear to me yet as to whether
the above-mentioned paragraph also applies to them, and whether they may
be pardoned to concentration camp for life after having lived through
several very severe experiments.

Please answer by teletype via Adjutant’s Office, RFSS, Munich.

   Obedient Greetings,
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours
                                                    [Signed] S. RASCHER

                                       TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1971-E-PS
                                       PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 53

 TELETYPE FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO SCHNITZLER, 21 OCTOBER 1942, CONCERNING
                     THE PARDON GRANTED BY HIMMLER

                                TELETYPE
To SS Obersturmfuehrer Schnitzler
Munich

Please inform SS Untersturmfuehrer Dr. Rascher with regard to his
teletype inquiry that the instruction given some time ago by the Reich
Leader SS concerning amnesty of test persons does not apply to Poles and
Russians.

                                                      [Signed] BRANDT
                                                 SS Obersturmbannfuehrer
21 October 1942
Bra/Dr.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-218
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 56

      LETTER FROM RASCHER TO HIMMLER, 16 APRIL 1942, REPORTING ON
    HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS WITH FATAL RESULTS AND ON EXPERIMENTS
                    CONDUCTED TOGETHER WITH ROMBERG

                                 Munich, Trogerstrasse 56, 16 April 1942
Highly esteemed Reich Leader:

May I thank you for your letter of 13 April. I am delighted with the
great interest which you, highly esteemed Reich Leader, are taking in
the experiments and their results. I thank you for the inspiration you
have given me in your letter.

The experiment described in the report of 4 April was repeated four
times, each time with the same results. When Wagner, the last test
person had stopped breathing, I let him come back to life by increasing
pressure. Since test person “W . . .” was assigned for a terminal[23]
experiment, as a repeated experiment held no prospect of new results,
and since I had not been in possession of your letter at that time, I
subsequently started another experiment through which Test Person Wagner
did not live. Also in this case the results obtained by
electrocardiographic registration were extraordinary.

In accordance with your orders, I tried to contact Dr. Fahrenkamp
immediately upon receipt of your letter. However, I could not speak to
him since he is laid up with angina. In a few days I shall ask again if
Dr. Fahrenkamp is available.

Meanwhile, at times together with Dr. Romberg, I have carried out
falling experiments from heights of from 16 to 20 kilometers. There,
contrary to theoretical assumptions, it was proved that falling through
space after jumping from an airplane in the stratosphere (pressure
cabinplane) is quite possible, as after severe unconsciousness the test
person regained complete consciousness in each case, at between 7 and 8
kilometers height when the parachute lever, installed in the chamber,
was pulled.

Within the next few days, I shall report at length on these experiments
as well as on the above-mentioned Test Person Wagner.

I also have a request to make: May I take pictures of the various
dissection preparations in the dissecting room of the concentration camp
to make a record of the strange formations of air embolism? In this
connection, my wife has already written to SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr.
Brandt.

Highly esteemed Reich Leader, allow me to close by assuring you that
your active interest in these experiments has a tremendous influence on
one’s working capacity and initiative.

I am with devoted greeting and

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                             Yours gratefully devoted
                                                    [Signed] S. RASCHER

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-264
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 60

      FILE NOTE FOR SS OBERSTURMFUEHRER SCHNITZLER, 28 APRIL 1942

Frau Rascher was here today in the office and stated the following to me
for you in a few words:

Oberstabsarzt Dr. Weltz still insists on participation in the
experiments and on full responsibility. If not, the assignment of Dr.
Rascher to the Weltz Institute must be changed. Weltz personally is
_not_ interested in these experiments. RLM [The Reich Air Ministry] asks
Oberstabsarzt Dr. Weltz how long the experiments will last and whether
it is justifiable to detail a medical officer for so long a time. RLM
demands from Weltz an opinion on the experiments which he, however,
cannot give, unless he is fully informed about them. Weltz will be in
Berlin with Generaloberstabsarzt Hippke on Friday. Weltz demands a
statement by Friday as to whether he should consider himself as still
participating in the experiments, or whether it is requested that he
should not participate in the experiments.

The assignment of Dr. Rascher must immediately be changed to “Assignment
to Aviation Test Institute Berlin—Adlershof, Dachau Branch” (not Weltz
Institute), because Weltz—as he stated—intends to cancel the
assignment immediately, if he is not to participate in it.

_For personal confidential information_

Dr. Weltz confidentially informed Dr. Rascher that there is great
mistrust against him in the RLM because of the experiments (SS
membership); there is also animosity in the air force administrative
command (Luftgau) Munich for this reason.

Munich, 28 April 1942.
Gr.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-220
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 61

     LETTER FROM RASCHER TO HIMMLER, 11 MAY 1942, AND SECRET REPORT
                  CONCERNING HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS

Sigmund Rascher M. D.
                                   Munich, Trogerstrasse 56, 11 May 1942
Highly esteemed Reich Leader:

Enclosed I am forwarding a short summary on the principal experiments
conducted up to date. A detailed report on the practical as well as the
theoretical results will take some more time. I shall hurry. Since the
material has to be processed the exploitation of the pathological
preparations will take about ½ year though the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute
for Brain Research will help us, I hope.

Tonight I succeeded in seeing Dr. Fahrenkamp who has relatively
recovered. He appeared to be very interested and I think there will be a
fine and fruitful cooperation. Dr. Fahrenkamp who has an enormous
knowledge most amiably promised to help me in everything. He will give
to you himself his opinion on my heart experiments. From our
conversation I have had the impression that a great field of work will
open up to me yet. I thank you, highly esteemed Reich Leader, for having
opened these opportunities to me to such an extent.

Unfortunately, the extension of my assignment has not been settled yet;
in accordance with the present regulations, my assignment will be
terminated on 15 May.

Thanking you again, I am with most obedient greetings and

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                    Yours gratefully,
                                                    [Signed] S. RASCHER
Munich, 11 May 1942
                            _SECRET REPORT_

Based on results of experiments which up to now various scientists had
conducted on animals only, the experiments in Dachau were to prove
whether these results would maintain their validity on human beings.

1. The first experiments were to show whether the human being can
gradually adapt himself to higher altitudes. Some 10 tests showed that a
slower ascent without oxygen taking from 6 to 8 hours kept the functions
of the senses of the various VP’s [Versuchspersonen—human experimental
subjects] fully normal up to a height of 8,000 meters. Within 8 hours
several VP’s had reached a height of 9.5 kilometers without oxygen when
bends occurred suddenly.

2. Normally it is impossible to stay without oxygen at altitudes higher
than 6 kilometers. Experiments showed however that after ascent to 8,000
meters without oxygen, bends combined with unconsciousness lasted only
about 25 minutes. After this period the VP’s had mostly become
accustomed to that altitude; consciousness returned, they could make
knee bends, showed a normal electrocardiograph and were able to work (60
to 70 percent of the cases examined).

3. Descending tests on parachutes (suspended) without oxygen.

These experiments proved that from 14 kilometers on down severest bends
occurred which remained until the ground was reached. The detrimental
effects caused by these experiments manifested themselves at the
beginning as unconsciousness, and subsequently as spastic and limp
paralysis, catotomy, stereotypy, and as retrograde amnesia lasting
several hours. About 1 hour after the end of the experiment the VP’s for
the most part were still disoriented as to time and locality. The blood
picture often showed a shift to the left; albumen and red and white
blood corpuscles were regularly found in the urine after the experiment;
cylinders were sometimes found. After several hours or days the blood
and urine returned to normal. The changes of the electrocardiograph were
reversible.

Contrary to descending tests on parachutes without oxygen, descending
tests with oxygen were carried out from heights up to 18 kilometers. It
was proved that on the average the VP’s regained the normal function of
their senses at 12 to 13 kilometers. No disturbances of general
conditions occurred during any of these experiments. Brief
unconsciousness at the beginning of the experiment caused no lasting
disturbances. Urine and blood showed only a slight change.

4. As the long time of descent on parachutes, under actual conditions,
would cause severe freezing even if no detrimental effects were caused
by lack of oxygen, VP’s were brought by sudden decreases in pressure
with a cutting torch from 8 to 20 kilometers, simulating the damage to
the pressure-machine of the high-altitude airplane. After a waiting
period of 10 seconds, corresponding to stepping out of the machine, the
VP’s were made to fall from this height with oxygen to a height where
breathing is possible. The VP’s awoke between 10 and 12 kilometers and
at about 8 kilometers pulled the parachute lever.

5. In experiments of falling from the same height without oxygen, the
VP’s regained normal function of their senses only between 2 and 5
kilometers.

6. Experiments testing the effect of pervitin on the organism during
parachute jumps, proved that the severe after-effects, as mentioned
under No. 3, were considerably milder. The ability to withstand the
conditions at high altitudes was only slightly improved, while the
bends, since they were not noticed, occurred suddenly
(restraint-loosening effects of pervitin).

7. Dr. Kliches, of the Charles University in Prague, reports in the
publication of the Reich Research Council: “By prolonged breathing of
oxygen, human beings should theoretically be kept fully fit up to 13
kilometers. In practice, the limit is around 11 kilometers. Experiments
which I carried out in this connection proved that with pure oxygen no
lowering of the measurable raw energy (ergometer) was noticeable up to
13.3 kilometers. The VP’s merely became unwilling since pains of the
body cavities grew too severe, due to the lowering of pressure between
body and thin air. When pure oxygen was inhaled bends occurred in all 25
cases only at heights above 14.2 kilometers.”

As practical result of the more than 200 experiments conducted at
Dachau, the following can be assumed:

Flying in altitudes higher than 12 kilometers without pressure-cabin or
pressure-suit is impossible even while breathing pure oxygen. If the
airplane pressure-machine is damaged at altitudes of 13 kilometers and
higher, the crew will not be able to bail out of the damaged plane
themselves since at that height the bends appear rather suddenly. It
must be requested that the crew should be removed automatically from the
plane, for instance, by catapulting the seats by means of compressed
air. Descending with opened parachute without oxygen would cause severe
injuries due to the lack of oxygen, besides causing severe freezing;
consciousness would not be regained until the ground was reached.
Therefore the following is to be requested: 1. A parachute with
barometrically controlled opening. 2. A portable oxygen apparatus for
the jump.

For the following experiments Jewish professional criminals who had
committed race pollution were used. The question of the formation of
embolism was investigated in 10 cases. Some of the VP’s died during a
continued high-altitude experiment; for instance, after one-half hour at
a height of 12 kilometers. After the skull had been opened under water
an ample amount of air embolism was found in the brain vessels and, in
part, free air in the brain ventricles.

To find out whether the severe psychic and physical effects, as
mentioned under No. 3, are due to the formation of embolism, the
following was done: After relative recuperation from such a parachute
descending test had taken place, however, before regaining
consciousness, some VP’s were kept under water until they died. When the
skull and the cavities of the breast and of the abdomen had been opened
under water, an enormous amount of air embolism was found in the vessels
of the brain, the coronary vessels, and the vessels of the liver and the
intestines, etc.

That proves that air embolism, so far considered as absolutely fatal, is
not fatal at all, but that is reversible as shown by the return to
normal conditions of all the other VP’s.

It was also proved by experiments that air embolism occurs in
practically all vessels even while pure oxygen is being inhaled. One VP
was made to breathe pure oxygen for 2½ hours before the experiment
started. After 6 minutes at a height of 20 kilometers, he died and at
dissection also showed ample air embolism, as was the case in all other
experiments.

At sudden decreases in pressure and subsequent immediate falls to
heights where breathing is possible, no deep reaching damages due to air
embolism could be noted. The formation of air embolism always needs a
certain amount of time.

                                                 [Signed] DR. RASCHER

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-402
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 66

 LETTER, 29 SEPTEMBER 1942, AND REPORT, 28 JULY 1942, FROM ROMBERG AND
  RUFF TO HIMMLER CONCERNING EXPERIMENTS ON RESCUE FROM HIGH ALTITUDES

German Aviation Research Institute
Berlin-Adlershof, Rudower Ch. 16-25
                                                       [Stamp] Secret
To the Reich Leader SS
Berlin SW 11
Prinz-Albrechtstr. 8
Your Ref.
                Your communication of DVL-Ref.      Day

                                      R/Ru/Ko 2098/42, 22 September 1942
                                      Military Secret

Re: Report “Experiments on Rescue from High Altitudes”

                                               [handwritten] to files
                                                             B [initial]

Enclosed we submit copies Nos. 2, 3, and 4 of the report “Experiments on
Rescue from High Altitudes” for your files.

                   German Aviation Research Institute
                              per procura
                                                 [Signed] DR. ROMBERG
                                                              L. RUFF

[handwritten]
Report-3-received 2 November
[Signed] SIEVERS, SS Oberfuehrer

_3 enclosures_

Personal Staff Reich Leader SS 29 September 1942
Diary No. 1348/42 To RF

                                                      [handwritten] 1943
                           Top Secret [stamp]
             EXPERIMENTS ON RESCUE FROM HIGH ALTITUDES.[24]

_Abstract_:    A report is to be made on experiments in which the
               possibility of rescue from high altitudes in the
               low-pressure chamber is studied. Experiments were made at
               parachute sinking speeds up to 15 km. [49,200 ft.] without
               oxygen, and up to 18 km. [59,100 ft.] with oxygen
               breathing, as well as falling experiments speeds up to 21
               km. [68,900 ft.] altitude with and without oxygen. The
               results with practical significance will be discussed
               below.
Organization:     I. Introduction and statement of the problem.
                 II. Procedure of the experiment.
                III. Results of the experiment.
                     1. Descending experiments without    O_{2} breathing.
                     2. Descending experiments with       O_{2} breathing.
                     3. Falling experiments without       O_{2} breathing.
                     4. Falling experiments with          O_{2} breathing.
                 IV. Discussion of the results.
                  V. Conclusions from the results.
                 VI. Summary.
                     Bibliography.
               The report includes 28 pages with 3 figures and 6 tables.

German Aviation Research Institute
For the Institute
 [signed]: L. RUFF
                                                       The Authors:
                                   [Draft copy signed by] DR. RASCHER
                                                      Stabsarzt der Lw.
                                                [signed] DR. ROMBERG.

Berlin, Adlershof, 28 July 1942.
Rf 401/20
[page 2 of original]

              I. Introduction and Statement of the Problem

It is theoretically possible for man to reach as high altitude as he may
wish in an aircraft with a pressure cabin. However, the question must be
settled as to what results or effects the destruction of the pressure
cabin will have upon the human being, who in such cases is exposed in a
few seconds to the low air pressure and thereby to the lack of oxygen,
which is characteristic of high altitude. Of particular practical
interest is the question from what altitudes and by what means the
safest rescue of the crew can be made. In the work at hand, a report is
presented on experiments in which the various possibilities of rescue
were studied under special experimental conditions. Since the urgency of
the solution of the problem was evident, it was necessary, especially
under the given conditions of the experiment, to forego for the time
being the thorough clearing up of purely scientific questions.

                    II. Procedure of the Experiment

The experiments were carried on in a portable low-pressure chamber with
equipment for explosive decompression. The performance of this apparatus
limited the highest altitude attainable to about 21,000 meters [68,900
feet].

In this experimental series, which was to clarify the possibilities of
rescue from high altitudes, the experiments, simulating actual
conditions, were carried out in such a way that rescue with parachute
unfolded (designated as descending experiments) and with parachute
folded (designated as falling experiments) were studied sometimes with
and sometimes without oxygen breathing. Since the altitude or posture of
the body is of essential significance for the demands made by the lack
of O_{2} on the circulation, the experiments were carried out in sitting
and prone positions; and, in descending experiments, in a suspended

[page 3 of original]

position in a parachute harness corresponding to the actual position.
For purposes of demonstration certain of the experiments were recorded
on film. Electrocardiograms were made of several experiments in the
experimental series. Oxygen was breathed out of the customary
low-pressure apparatus with continuous flow at altitudes over 10 km.
[32,800 ft.]. The following experimental sequence was chosen:

   1. Descending experiments without      O_{2} breathing.
   2. Descending experiments with         O_{2} breathing.
   3. Falling experiments without         O_{2} breathing.
   4. Falling experiments with            O_{2} breathing.

The sinking and falling times which were used in the experiments are
tabulated in figures 1 and 2. [Figure 2 not reproduced.]

                    III. Results of the Experiments

_1. Sinking experiments without oxygen breathing_

Since a thoroughly dependable parachute oxygen apparatus is not yet
generally available, experimental tests were made to determine from what
altitudes a rescue with open parachute without oxygen is possible.
Therefore, sinking experiments were carried out in which the mask was
taken off after ascent with O_{2} (for speed of ascent of the chamber
see fig. 1), and, after a waiting period of 10 seconds the sinking was
begun.

In the experiment no altitude sickness occurred at 9 km. [29,500 ft.] as
was expected.

In the sinking experiments, from 10 km. [32,800 ft.] altitude, typical
altitude sickness occurred after about 2 minutes, i. e., at an altitude
of about 8.6 km. [28,200 ft.], which was indicated by a very pronounced
scrawling in the writing test. However, no loss of consciousness
occurred. (Kloos’ writing test.)

[page 7 of original]

The experiments from 12 to 15 km. altitude were made partly during
suspension in a parachute harness, partly in a sitting position, and
partly in a prone position. These experiments show that the body
attitude has a very essential influence on the tolerance for a high
degree of lack of oxygen. Since, besides this, every bodily exertion is
of great importance, in one portion of the experiments six knee bends
were made by the subject during the waiting period before beginning the
descent. These six knee bends consisted of three knee bends while
breathing oxygen followed by deep inhaling and holding of the breath,
and then three more knee bends without oxygen breathing. This procedure
was chosen in order not to neglect the bodily work involved in an actual
parachute jump. The descending experiments from 12 km. [39,400 ft.]
altitude yielded the following average times:

                                Table 1

   Descending experiment    │  Unconsciousness  │Recovery of consciousness
  from 12 km. [39,400 ft.]  │      after—       │         after—
                            │                   │
Sitting without knee bends  │1′39″ = 10.85 km.  │6′38″ = 7.45 km.
                            │   [35,600 ft.].   │      [24,440 ft.].
Sitting after 6 knee bends  │55″ = 11.4 km.     │6′55″ = 7.25 km.
                            │   [37,400 ft.].   │      [23,786 ft.].
Suspended in parachute      │37″ = 11.65 km.    │7′40″ = 6.77 km.
harness                     │                   │
                            │   [38,220 ft.].   │      [22,212 ft.].
                            │                   │

It is to be noted in connection with the stated time and altitude values
that the beginning of unconsciousness, or of the recovery, was
calculated from the withdrawal of oxygen, while in most experiments the
sinking or free fall was begun at the expiration of the 10-second
waiting period. Since in addition to this the stages of altitude were
read off at the moment of unconsciousness, small variations from the
times given in figs. 2 and 3 [not reproduced] are possible

[page 8 of original]

since, especially in the falling experiments, variations occurred
because of the somewhat crude valve control. These variations, however,
are small and may be overlooked since in any case the fall and sinking
time under practical conditions are dependent on the flying attitude at
the moment of the leap from the catapult seat. In addition to this, the
calculated fall and sinking time are influenced to a high degree under
actual conditions by weight and air resistance.

It should be kept in mind in regard to the experiments conducted in the
sitting position that the subjects fell over at the beginning of
unconsciousness and so passed the critical time of greatest load on the
circulatory system in a prone position, while those suspended in the
parachute harness remained throughout the experiment in a vertical
position, the most unfavorable position for loading the circulatory
system.

[Illustration: Figure 1. Speed of ascent in the portable low-pressure
chamber.]

In the writing test shown above [not reproduced] the occurrence of
altitude sickness in a sinking experiment for 12 km. [39,400 ft.]
altitude is shown in this manner: For example, after 1 minute and 20
seconds at 11 km. [36,100 ft.] altitude, the writing is interrupted
because of sudden altitude sickness with unconsciousness, and is resumed
after 4½ minutes at an altitude of 8.8 km. [28,870 ft.], with erroneous
writing. At 8.3 km. [27,230 ft.] altitude the writing becomes free of
errors. This is worthy of special attention because in this case a
person has fully recovered mentally at an altitude of 8.3 km. [27,230
ft.], after 3 minutes of the most severe lack of oxygen, while in
altitude endurance experiments at this altitude severe altitude sickness
sets in after about 3 minutes. Here we are dealing with a process which
in any case is very favorable but which is not yet entirely clear and
which was already observed in earlier experiments of parachute jumps
from great altitudes. Still, it appears from this that a rather long
oxygen lack at altitudes up to 13 km. does not present any great strain
in

[page 12 of original]

the sense of using the last reserves, but, on the contrary, the human
organism seems to react to this loading with a certain increase in
resistance to altitude.

In descending experiments from 13 km. [42,700 ft.] altitude the waiting
time of 10 seconds was retained, but on the other hand exertion in the
form of knee bends was omitted since technical difficulties interfered
with this procedure.

The experiments involving suspension could be done only in the large
low-pressure chamber, since suspension was impossible in the small
low-pressure chamber for reasons of space. Therefore, the ascent to 13
km. [42,700 ft.] altitude was carried out slowly in the main chamber
(without explosive decompression) so that when 13 km. [42,700 ft.] was
reached a certain oxygen lack existed. With this oxygen lack the knee
bends would have presented a great burden which would have falsified too
greatly the results of the experiment. The same conditions were also
given in further experiments at higher altitudes in the main chamber.
For this reason, the 13 km. [42,700 ft.] descending experiments were
carried out partly in the sitting position, partly in the sitting
position strapped in, and partly suspended. They yielded the following
average data:

                                Table 2

   Descending experiment   │  Unconsciousness   │Recovery of consciousness
 from 13 km. [42,700 ft.]  │       after—       │         after—
                           │                    │
Seated (lying during       │50″ = 12.4 km.      │8′ 12″ = 7.2 km.
unconsciousness)           │                    │
                           │   [40,672 ft.].    │      [23,620 ft.].
Seated strapped in         │35″ = 12.6 km.      │10′ 30″ = 5.85 km.
                           │   [41,340 ft.].    │      [19,190 ft.].
Suspended                  │20″ = 12.8 km.      │19′ = 1.6 km.
                           │   [41,980 ft.].    │      [5,250 ft.].

[page 13 of original]

Since in unfavorable cases in these experiments, namely while suspended,
recovery of consciousness did not occur until 1.6 km. [5,250 ft.]
altitude, it had to be concluded that in jumps from altitudes over 13
km. [42,700 ft.], recovery of consciousness would follow only after 0
km., which would mean that in an actual situation the landing would be
made in an unconscious condition. This raised the question of a safe
means of rescue.

Descending experiments were made in larger numbers from 15 km. altitude,
since it became evident that at this altitude the approximate limits for
what was possible in emergencies had already been reached or essentially
surpassed. After an ascent made as rapidly as possible, using oxygen
apparatus with free flow, the mask was removed immediately upon
attaining 15 km. [49,200 ft.] altitude and the descent was begun. Since
the results of these descending experiments were very typical and
especially impressive it is necessary to present one of these
experiments in detail. The record of an experiment is represented as
follows:

15 km. [49,200 ft.]                  Lets the mask fall, severe altitude
                                       sickness, clonic convulsions.
14.5 km. [47,560 ft.] 30 sec.        Opisthotonus.
14.3 km. [46,900 ft.] 45 sec.        Arms stretched stiffly forward; sits
                                       up like a dog
                                       (“Pfoetchenstellung”), legs spread
                                       stiffly apart.
13.7 km. [44,950 ft.] 1 min. 20 sec. Suspended in opisthotonus.
13.2 km. [43,310 ft.] 1 min. 50 sec. Agonal convulsive breathing.
12.2 km. [40,030 ft.] 3 min.         Dyspnea, hangs limp.
7.2 km. [23,620 ft.] 10 min.         Uncoordinated movements with the
                                       extremities.
6 km. [19,690 ft.] 12 min.           Clonic convulsions, groaning.
5.5 km. [18,040 ft.] 13 min.         Yells loudly.

[page 14 of original]

2.9 km. [9,520 ft.] 18 min.          Still yelling, convulses arms and
                                       legs, head sinks forward.
2-0 km. [6,560-0 ft.] 20-24.5 min.   Yells spasmodically, grimaces, bites
                                       his tongue.
0 km.                                Does not respond to speech, gives
                                       the impression of someone who is
                                       completely out of his mind.
5 min. (after reaching ground        Reacts for the first time to vocal
level).                                stimulation.
7 min.                               Attempts upon command to arise, says
                                       in stereotyped manner: “No,
                                       please”.
9 min.                               Stands up on command; severe ataxia;
                                       answers to all questions: “Just a
                                       minute”. Tries spasmodically to
                                       recall his birth date.
10 min.                              Typical stereotypes of attitude and
                                       movement (catatonia); mumbles
                                       number to himself.
11 min.                              Holds his head turned convulsively
                                       to the right; tries repeatedly to
                                       answer the first question
                                       concerning his birth date.
12 min.                              Questions of the subject: “May I
                                       slice something?” (Note: In
                                       civilian work he was a
                                       delicatessen clerk.) “May I pant,
                                       will it be all right if I inhale?”
                                       Breathes deeply, then says, “All
                                       right, thank you very much.”
15 min.                              On being ordered to walk, steps
                                       forward and says: “All right,
                                       thank you very much”.
17 min.                              Gives his name; says he was born in
                                       1928 (born 1 November 1908).
                                       Experimenter asks: “Where?”
                                       “Something 1928” “Profession?”
                                       “28—1928”.
18 min.                              “May I inhale?” “Yes.” “I am content
                                       with that.”
25 min.                              Still the question continues:
                                       “Pant?”
28 min.                              Sees nothing; runs against open
                                       window sash upon which the sun is
                                       shining, so that large lump is
                                       formed on his forehead; says:
                                       “Excuse me please.” No expression
                                       of pain.

[page 15 of original]

30 min.                              Knows his name and place of birth.
                                       Upon being asked for the day’s
                                       date: “1 November 1928”. Shivering
                                       of the legs; stupor continues;
                                       cannot be frightened by the report
                                       of a shot. Dark objects are still
                                       not discerned; subject bumps
                                       against them. Is aware of bright
                                       light; knows his profession;
                                       spacially disoriented.
37 min.                              Reacts to pain stimuli.
40 min.                              Begins to observe differences. Falls
                                       continually into his previous
                                       speech stereotypes.
50 min.                              Spacially oriented.
75 min.                              Still disoriented in time;
                                       retrogressive amnesia over 3 days.
24 hours                             Normal condition again attained; has
                                       no recollection of the experiment
                                       itself.

The events of the descending experiments from 15 km., as shown here
through this example, repeated themselves in a similar way in all the
rest of the experiments. The average data from 20 experiments with 15
different subjects are as follows:

                                Table 3

             │                     │                       │    Clear
    15 km.   │   Unconsciousness   │Subconscious awakening │consciousness
 [47,200 ft.]│       after—        │       movements       │  at 0 km.
             │                     │                       │
 Suspended   │16″ = 14.7 km.       │20½′ = 1.8 km.         │
             │    [48,220 ft.].    │     [5,910 ft.].      │      18′-90′
             │                     │                       │
 Lying       │20″ = 14.6 km.       │14′ = 5 km.            │      15′-80′
             │    [47,890 ft.].    │     [16,400 ft.]      │

Unconsciousness after discontinuation of oxygen occurs following a short
motor restlessness with severe altitude sickness, whereupon light
spasmodic and then very severe tonic convulsions follow in a condition
of complete unconsciousness. These tonic convulsions lasting virtually a
minute are followed rather suddenly by a phase of complete

[page 16 of original]

flacidity with a drop in breathing rate and transition to convulsive
breathing with 3 to 4 breaths per minute until complete cessation of
breathing of 45 seconds duration (post-hypoxemic pseudo-death—Lutz).
Then follows a period of improvement in breathing, until the first
subconsciousness movements announce the gradual recovery of
consciousness, during which, nevertheless, the higher mental functions
are temporarily entirely absent. Further recovery proceeds slowly during
the course of the following ½ to 1½ hours as may be seen from the above
case record. During the time of complete unconsciousness, there was
defecation and urination in the case of most subjects, increased
salivation and, in some cases, vomiting.

Here we obviously have the conditions which Lutz and Wendt in their
animal experimentation which is referred to in greater detail later
found in falling experimentation with O_{2} breathing and designated as
“post-hypoxemic twilight state” (“Posthypoxaemischen Daemmerzustand”)
since we are dealing with a slow recovery of consciousness, especially
also in view of the mental behavior of the experimental subjects. The
post hypoxemic pseudo-death observed by Wendt and Lutz was not found in
any experiments in the form which they had observed. The severe
condition described above we could designate as hypoxemic pseudo-death
only because it was limited to the period of the most severe O_{2} lack
(on the average, between 13.3 and 12.3 km.).

In spite of the relatively large number of experiments, the actual cause
of the severe mental disturbances and bodily failures (paralysis,
blindness, etc.) attendant upon post-hypoxemic twilight state remains
something of a riddle. It appeared often as though the phenomena of
pressure drop sickness had combined with the results of severe oxygen
lack. In this connection, the subjective accounts made by the authors in
two experiments each were interesting. In the case of Ro. during a half
hour stay at 12 km. [39,400 ft.] with oxygen,

[page 17 of original]

only the usual pains attendant with bends occurred. In a further
experiment with a stay of 40 minutes duration at an altitude of between
13 [42,650 ft.] and 13.5 km. [44,290 ft.] there developed very gradually
a condition of weakness, combined with a peculiar headache, which then
led to a considerable slackening of strength in the arms and hands. As a
result of this, Ro. could no longer hold the breathing mouthpiece (for
special reasons in these experiments, Ro. had to breathe with a
mouthpiece and nose clamp) so that it slid out of his mouth. All these
phenomena were still clearly observed by Ro. Ra. returned the mouthpiece
to Ro. However at this point Ro. failed rather suddenly with paleness,
strong cyanosis of the lips and complete unconsciousness. After Ro. had
regained clear consciousness through descent and sufficient O_{2}
breathing, he determined the existence in himself of a complete
paralysis of the legs, weakness of the arms and severe disturbances of
vision. These serious disturbances developed although the time of oxygen
lack and unconsciousness had lasted only about 5 seconds. Following
descent soon after this to 0 km., the paralysis of the legs continued
for about 5 minutes more and the very severe visual disturbances only
cleared up after 2 hours. While this episode of Ro.’s occurred in an
experiment at a special altitude, the disturbances occurred in Ra. at an
altitude of between 12 [39,400 ft.] and 13 km. [42,700 ft.] while he was
breathing sufficient oxygen with a mask and continuous flow into the
circuit. After 10 minutes stay at this altitude, pains began on the
right side with a spastic paralytic condition of the right leg which
increased continually as though Ra.’s whole right side were being
crushed between two presses. At the same time there were most severe
headaches as though the skull were being burst apart. The pains became
continually more severe so that at last the discontinuation of the
experiment became necessary. The pains disappeared when ground level was
reached while the disturbances of the right leg continued about 5
minutes more. Shortly before the

[page 18 of original]

second experiment, Ra. took two tablets of “Antineuralgica” (a coal tar
derivative) and two tablets of pervitin. In the course of the
experiments there occurred only light pains in the right arm and leg,
moderate headaches, but a very severe uncontrollable urge to cough,
actually less severe difficulties than in the foregoing experiment,
although this one was made at 1,000 m. [3,280 ft.] higher.

Ro. experienced disturbances which in quality resembled the severe
disturbances in the 15 km. [49,200 ft.] sinking experiment, although the
degree of oxygen lack in this experiment was negligible in comparison to
the 15 km. [49,200 ft.] experiment, so that the idea of a combination of
pressure drop phenomena with the phenomena of oxygen lack is definitely
suggested.

_2. Descending experiments with O_{2} breathing_

Since obviously the utmost limits of these experiments had been reached
with the descending experiments from 15 km. [49,200 ft.] without oxygen
breathing, descending experiments with oxygen breathing were conducted
from greater heights.

In the experiments, the following experimental procedure was chosen:
ascent to 8 km. [26,300 ft.], remaining there 5 to 10 minutes with
oxygen breathing; then turning on the oxygen blower explosive
decompression to a predetermined altitude; 10 seconds waiting time
(experiments from 17 [55,800 ft.] and 18 km. [59,100 ft.], altitude
without waiting time) and descent at sinking speed. In order to imitate
the perpendicular body position as occurs in suspension in a parachute
harness, the experimental subjects had to stand during the experiments
since suspension was not possible in the small decompression chamber.

In the descending experiments from 15 km. [49,200 ft.] altitude there
was no altitude sickness or only a slight temporary kind. In the further
descending experiments, the following results were obtained (Table 4):

[page 19 of original]
         Table 4.—Descending experiments with oxygen breathing

      Unconsciousness      │       From—        │       Recovery of
          after—           │                    │  consciousness after—
                           │                    │
23 sec. = 15.75 km.        │16 km. [52,500 ft.] │2 min. 35 sec. = 13.55
                           │                    │km.
       [51,660 ft.]        │                    │      [44,460 ft.]
10 sec. = 16.8 km.         │17 km. [55,800 ft.] │3 min. 50 sec. = 13 km.
       [55,120 ft.]        │                    │      [42,700 ft.]
7 sec. = 17.9 km.          │18 km. [59,100 ft.] │10 min. 35 sec. = 8.5 km.
       [58,740 ft.]        │                    │      [27,890 ft.]

Thus it was shown that unconsciousness developed relatively early in
spite of oxygen breathing, while the following convulsive stage ran its
course in a much less severe form than in the experiments without oxygen
breathing. Primarily spasmodic convulsions with only occasionally light
tonic convulsions developed. Breathing paralysis never set in and upon
recovery of consciousness the experimental subjects were again
completely in control of themselves. The markedly quick development of
unconsciousness was caused by the fact that the subjects were standing
during the experiments (to be considered in comparison with the
corresponding times in the falling experiments with oxygen breathing).
Descending experiments from still greater altitudes were not undertaken,
since in practice there is no need to escape from such altitudes with
open parachute and thus to expose oneself to the danger of severe
freezing.

_3. Falling experiments without oxygen_

Since the results of falling experiments from 12 km. altitude were known
from earlier experimentation and indeed descending experiments up to 15
km. [49,200 ft.] without oxygen had been conducted within the scope of
this work, falling experiments were begun at an altitude of 14 km.
[45,900 ft.], in order not to increase unnecessarily the number of
experiments.

[page 20 of original]

The ascent preceded by explosive decompression from 8 to 14 and 15 km.
altitude, in which the ascent to 8 km. was made with oxygen and the
explosive decompression with continuous flow, followed after 5 to 10
minutes waiting time. After the removal of the oxygen mask directly in
connection with the explosive decompression, five knee bends were made
during the waiting period of 10 seconds, then descent at free fall
speed. During the explosive decompression the oxygen supply was
interrupted from the outside. The results of these experiments were
(Table 5):

          Table 5.—Falling experiments without O_{2} breathing

      Unconsciousness      │      From—       │ Recovery of consciousness
          after—           │                  │          after—
                           │                  │
30 sec. = 13.2 km.         │14 km.            │65 sec. = 9.7 km.
       [43,310 ft.]        │   [45,900 ft.]   │       [31,830 ft.]
28 sec. = 14.3 km.         │15 km.            │96 sec. = 7.6 km.
       [46,900 ft.]        │   [49,200 ft.]   │       [24,940 ft.]

The further experiments up to 20 km. [65,600 ft.] altitude were made
with the same procedure as those up to 15 km. [49,200 ft.], although
without knee bends during the waiting period of 10 seconds, since
unconsciousness would have occurred too soon as a result of the knee
bends and the experimenters had become convinced that rescue from these
altitudes would have to be brought about by abandonment of the aircraft
without bodily exertion (catapult seat).

                          (Table 5—Continued)

      Unconsciousness      │      From—       │ Recovery of consciousness
          after—           │                  │          after—
                           │                  │
32 sec. = 14.7 km.         │16 km.            │118 sec. = 6.6 km.
       [48,220 ft.]        │   [52,500 ft.]   │       [21,650 ft.]
27 sec. = 15.9 km.         │17 km.            │126 sec. = 6.3 km.
       [52,150 ft.]        │   [55,800 ft.]   │       [20,660 ft.]

[page 21 of original]

      Unconsciousness      │      From—       │ Recovery of consciousness
          after—           │                  │          after—
                           │                  │
23 sec. = 17 km.           │18 km.            │156 sec. = 4.6 km.
       [55,800 ft.]        │   [59,100 ft.]   │       [15,090 ft.]
20 sec. = 18.5 km.         │19 km.            │173 sec. = 3.7 km.
       [60,700 ft.]        │   [62,300 ft.]   │       [12,140 ft.]
17 sec. = 19.75 km.        │20 km.            │178 sec. = 3.2 km.
       [61,520 ft.]        │   [65,600 ft.]   │       [10,500 ft.]
15 sec. = 20.875 km.       │21 km.            │1 min., 10 sec. after
       [68,490 ft.]        │   [68,900 ft.]   │       reaching 0 m.

From 21 km. [68,900 ft.] altitude only one experiment was made in this
series, just as in the falling experiments, with oxygen breathing since
the pumps achieved the evacuation of the main chamber necessary for a
pressure drop to 21 km. altitude only after hours of overloading and the
fact that the mercury barometer used in these experiments had its limit
of measurement at this altitude. The two experiments were considered
only as an orientation on the behavior of the human organism at this
altitude at which the ebullition point of the blood had already been far
surpassed. A systematic working over of these altitudes must be carried
on with perfected measuring instruments and a two-stage pump aggregate
in a new experimental series.

The result of this falling experiment from 21 km. altitude was made
unreliable through the fact that the subject experienced a paralysis of
breathing from 11 to 7 km., through which his recovery was doubtless
greatly delayed. However, no permanent damage occurred.

_4. Falling experiments with oxygen breathing_

Falling experiments with oxygen breathing were undertaken only in small
numbers for crude orientation for the following reasons: The altitude

[page 22 of original]

was limited by the available equipment to a maximum of 21 km. [68,900
ft.], but indeed from this altitude falling experiments without oxygen
breathing had already been profitably carried out. It is self-evident
that oxygen breathing during parachute jumps from such extreme altitudes
greatly increases in any case the chances of success of the jump and,
therefore, is to be unconditionally demanded. For that reason it
devolved upon the experimenters only to determine to what degree the
results of the experiments are influenced by oxygen breathing,
especially in regard to the recovery of consciousness, which, of course,
followed without oxygen only at relatively low altitudes. As was to be
expected, these experiments showed clearly the favorable effect of
oxygen breathing. (Table 6):

           Table 6.—Falling experiments with oxygen breathing

      Unconsciousness      │      From—       │ Recovery of consciousness
          after—           │                  │          after—
                           │                  │
21 sec. = 19.5 km.         │20 km.            │87 sec. = 10.55 km.
       [63,980 ft.]        │   [65,600 ft.]   │       [34,620 ft.]
15 sec. = 20.875 km.       │21 km.            │60 sec. = 12.9 km.
       [68,490 ft.]        │   [68,900 ft.]   │       [42,320 ft.]

The astonishing value of 60 seconds = 12.9 km. [42,320 ft.] for the
recovery of consciousness in the 21 km. [68,900 ft.] experiment is
explained on the basis that this value was obtained from a single
experiment with one subject, who had shown himself in numerous other
experiments to be especially resistant to altitude. On the other hand
the 20 km. [65,600 ft.] values are the average of a series of
experiments.

                     IV. Discussion of the Results

The descending experiments without oxygen show that the limit for a safe
escape with an open parachute lies approximately at a jumping altitude
of 13 km. [42,700 ft.], since in a jump from 13 km. [42,700 ft.]
recovery of consciousness occurred only at an altitude of 1.6 km. [5,250
ft.], and so one must already consider the possibilities of landing in
an unconscious condition with all the attendant dangers. This still does
not take into account the heavy demands made on the body by the cold and
the consequent risk. The great effect of the body position during the
experiment makes it obvious how severe is the effect of every additional
demand. While, for example, in the 13 km. [42,700 ft.], experiment upon
a seated subject, recovery of consciousness took place after 8 minutes
12 seconds at an altitude of 7.2 km. [23,620 ft.], the suspended
subjects recovered consciousness only after 19 minutes at 1.6 km. [5,250
ft.] altitude. Correspondingly also, unconsciousness occurred in the
suspended subjects much more rapidly than in those who were seated. The
same observation was made in the 15 km. [49,200 ft.] experiments, and
indeed those who went through the experiment lying down could already
state name and birth date immediately upon reaching ground level
although they were paralyzed, while those who had been suspended did not
respond at all to speech within this time. Except for one mentally very
sluggish subject, the return of normal condition occurred much earlier
to those who were lying down, namely within 15 minutes. The descending
experiments extended to 18 km. [59,100 ft.] altitude with oxygen
breathing showed that, except for the danger of cold, escape with an
open parachute is possible from these altitudes even though,
practically, no need exists for it.

Before we go into a discussion on the falling experiments it seems
essential for us to cite the work of Lutz and Wendt on “Animal
Experiments on Parachute Jumping from High-Pressure Cabins.”
Unfortunately this work was not available to us during these experiments
so that we could not build upon the valuable results contained in it and
derived from numerous animal experiments, or upon the experience of the
authors. Although both authors approach with necessary scepticism the
problem of “reaching decisions through animal experimentation upon
questions in

[page 24 of original]

which, in the final analysis, the behavior of the human being in
identical situations is of exclusive interest,” they could, and had to
depend upon the previously proved experience that no fundamental
qualitative differences in the manner of reaction to oxygen lack is to
be expected between animals and human beings although there are
considerable quantitative differences which, in this case, mean temporal
differences. However, the results of our experiments show that to some
extent quantitative as well as qualitative differences are present to
the extent that the above animal experiments must lead to great
fallacies which are significant to future developments. This appears
especially in a comparison of results obtained with animals with the
collective results of human experimentation upon escape from high
altitudes through free fall without oxygen. On the basis of animal
experiments, Lutz and Wendt were forced to the conclusion that if oxygen
is breathed before the pressure drop “jumps from 14 km. [45,900 ft.]
altitude can theoretically be survived—at any rate, that is the maximum
altitude * * *,” whereas we were able to carry out human experiments up
to 21 km. [68,900 ft.] altitude without any harm whatever. In all
experiments at 20 km. [65,600 ft.] the subjects recovered clear
consciousness with spontaneous control above 3 km. [9,800 ft.], and so
within a sufficient altitude for actual parachute jumping. As instructed
before the experiment, the subject rang a cowbell hung up in the chamber
by pulling a handle (the equivalent of pulling the rip cord) without a
new order to do so, so that under actual conditions they would certainly
have also pulled the rip cord at the right time.

Experiments with a pressure drop from 4 km. [13,100 ft.] without
previous breathing in of oxygen were not carried out by us because we
proceeded from the viewpoint that when contact with the enemy is
possible, pressure cabin machines fly with a pressure corresponding to 8
km. [26,200 ft.] altitude and, therefore, the crews would already be
breathing oxygen in case of a possible pressure drop as a result of
damage to the cabin.

[page 25 of original]

Since the falling experiments without oxygen had already given such good
results, falling experiments were begun only at 20 km. [65,600 ft.]
altitude, and, because of the limitations described above, could be
carried out only to 21 km. [68,900 ft.]. In these the results obtained
by Lutz and Wendt were fully corroborated in this respect, that jumps
from above 21 km. [68,900 ft.] can probably be made without danger, and
that ebullition of the blood does not yet take place up to 21 km.
[68,900 ft.] altitude. On the other hand in a falling experiment with
human beings, neither a post-hypoxemic pseudo-death nor a post-hypoxemic
twilight sleep were ever observed (Lutz).

In conclusion, we must make it particularly clear that, in view of the
extreme experimental conditions in this whole experimental series, no
fatality and no lasting injury due to oxygen lack occurred.

                    V. Conclusions from the Results

For practical rescues by parachute jump from the highest and higher
altitudes the experiments yielded the following:

The parachute jump without oxygen with immediate opening of the
parachute is possible up to a jumping altitude of 13 km. [42,700 ft.];
the jump with oxygen equipment can be made at jumping altitudes up to 18
km. [59,100 ft.]. Advice must be given against jumping and immediate
opening of the parachute since there is considerable danger of freezing
and there is no need to pull the rip cord at high altitudes. However the
experimental data give some indication of the chances of the parachute
jumper whose parachute has become unfolded from whatever cause.

The jump with a free fall and opening of the parachute at low altitudes
can be made without oxygen equipment up to altitudes of 20 km. [65,600
ft.], with oxygen up to 21 km. [68,900 ft.], and probably considerably
higher.

In all the experiments at great height, even in experiments with oxygen
breathing, unconsciousness occurred extraordinarily rapidly and was
naturally preceded by loss of control before that. In one unfavorable
case of a subject in the standing position during a descending
experiment with oxygen, jumping from an altitude of 18 km. [59,100 ft.],
unconsciousness occurred after 7 seconds. One may not count on a longer
time than 10 seconds before loss of control occurs at high altitudes
even with the body at rest. So within that time the airplane must be
abandoned or at least one must activate the ejection seat. The technical
solution of this problem must be found through a different approach. It
is certain only that it will be impossible to climb out under one’s own
power, that one must avoid absolutely all bodily exertion, and that the
time must be kept as short as possible. Rescue is still possible from
very great heights; the critical part is the abandoning of the aircraft.

Oxygen equipment is absolutely necessary at these altitudes, since it
assures the most favorable conditions for the jump. In case of failure
of the equipment, loss of the mouthpiece or other mishaps, we still need
not count upon serious disturbances or injuries up to 20 km. [65,600
ft.]. Even jumps from 21 km. [68,900 ft.] will go well if there is
automatic opening of the parachute through barometrical control at 7 to
4 km. [23,000 to 13,100 ft.] altitude.

The automatic opening is also essential for several other reasons:

1. In particular cases the parachute jumper is not able to regain
consciousness at a sufficient altitude above the ground because of
collapse or injury.

2. As a result of cold the jumper may be handicapped by immobility of
his hands, and thus be hindered in pulling the rip cord.

3. As a result of the unconsciousness resulting from anoxia, the

[page 27 of original]

parachute jumper loses all sense of the time which has elapsed since his
jump, as was shown in all experiments, so that it is impossible for him,
with failing eyesight, to estimate his altitude.

On the other hand it is desirable, on the basis of the reason adduced
under number 3 above, that the opening of the parachute at altitudes
above 7 km. [23,000 ft.] be prevented, since very often the parachute
jumper would pull the rip cord immediately after recovering from his
altitude sickness, which may be too soon and at too high an altitude.

The best conditions for explosive decompression itself and for the
seconds elapsing until the appearance of altitude sickness are provided
if flying is done at a cabin pressure corresponding to 8 km. [26,300
ft.] and with oxygen breathing.

Since it may become necessary to abandon the aircraft for reasons other
than damage to the pressure cabin, the pressure equalization at a
predetermined rate must be made possible by means of a valve.

In case abandonment does not appear necessary in spite of the loss of
cabin pressure the danger of oxygen lack is still less with the
automatic diving control mechanism than in a parachute jump, since the
dive may be made with considerably greater rate of descent.

                              VI. Summary

Experiments were instituted upon the possibility of rescue from
altitudes up to 21 km. [68,900 ft.].

Without parachute oxygen equipment, rescue in descending experiments is
still possible from 13 km. [42,700 ft.], with equipment, from 18 km.
[59,100 ft.]. The danger arising from cold must be considered.

In falling experiments, rescue from 21 km. [68,900 ft.] altitude with
and without oxygen was proved possible. Automatic parachute opening is
necessary. Ebullition of the blood does not yet occur at 21 km. [68,900
ft.] altitude.

[page 28 of original]

Oxygen must be breathed before explosive decompression. Abandonment must
be by means of the ejection seat. The dive to safe altitude offers good
possibilities of rescue if abandonment of the plane is not necessary
after loss of the cabin pressure.

                              Bibliography

Lutz and Wendt—“Animal Experiments on Parachute Jumping from
High-Pressure Cabins.” Communications in the Field of Aviation Medicine,
Research Report 5/42.

Romberg—“The Parachute Jump from Great Heights.” German Aviation
Research, Research Report No. 1416.

                                        TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 343-A-PS
                                        PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 62

   LETTER FROM MILCH TO WOLFF, 20 MAY 1942, REGARDING CONTINUATION OF
                              EXPERIMENTS

Field Marshal Milch
                                 Secret
                             Berlin W 8, 20 May 1942 Leipzigerstrasse 7
Dear Wolffy!

In reference to your telegram of 12 May our medical inspector reports to
me that the altitude experiments carried out by the SS and Air Force at
Dachau have been finished. Any continuation of these experiments seems
essentially unreasonable. However the carrying out of experiments of
some other kind, in regard to perils at high sea, would be important.
These have been prepared in immediate agreement with the proper offices;
Major (M. C.) Weltz will be charged with the execution and Captain (M.
C.) Rascher will be made available until further orders in addition to
his duties within the Medical Corps of the Air Corps. A change of these
measures does not appear necessary, and an enlargement of the task is
not considered pressing at this time.

The low-pressure chamber would not be needed for these low-temperature
experiments. It is urgently needed at another place and therefore can no
longer remain in Dachau.

I convey the special thanks from the Supreme Commander of the Air Corps
to the SS for their extensive cooperation.

I remain with best wishes for you, in good comradeship and with

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                         Always yours
                                                      [Signed] E. MILCH

SS Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff
Berlin SW 11.

                                        TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 343-B-PS
                                        PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 70

 LETTER FROM MILCH TO HIMMLER, 31 AUGUST 1942, ACKNOWLEDGING RECEIPT OF
      REPORTS BY RASCHER AND ROMBERG ON HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS

Field Marshal Milch
                           Berlin, W 8, 31 Aug. 1942 Leipzigerstrasse 7
Dear Herr Himmler!

I thank you very much for your letter of 25 August. I have read with
great interest the reports of Dr. Rascher and Dr. Romberg. I am informed
about the current experiments. I shall ask the two gentlemen to give a
lecture combined with the showing of motion pictures to my men in the
near future.

Hoping that it will be possible for me to see you on the occasion of my
next visit to Headquarters, I remain with best regards and

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                               Yours,
                                                     [Signed]  E. MILCH

Reich Leader SS and Chief of the German Police Himmler
Berlin SW 11.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-289
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 72

 LETTER FROM HIPPKE TO HIMMLER, 8 OCTOBER 1942, THANKING THE LATTER FOR
         HIS ASSISTANCE IN HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS IN DACHAU

                            Berlin W 8, 8 October 1942 Leipziger Str. 7
                                                     Telephone 52 00 24

To the Chief of the German Police, Reich Fuehrer SS Himmler, Berlin SW.
11, Prinz Albrecht Str. 8

Subject: Letter 1309/42 of 25 August 1942 to State Secretary Milch
concerning experiments for rescue from high altitudes.

Very honored Reich Leader SS,

In the name of German research on aviation medical problems, I beg to
thank you very obediently for the great help and all the interest shown
in the Dachau experiments; these experiments form a complement which is,
for us, of great value and importance.

The fact that an atmosphere with so little oxygen can be endured at all
for some time is most encouraging for further research.

It is true that no conclusions as to the practice of parachuting can be
drawn for the time being, as a very important factor, namely cold, has
so far not yet been taken into consideration; it places an extraordinary
excess burden on the entire body and its vital movements, so that the
results in actual practice will very likely prove to be far more
unfavorable than in the present experiments.

In the meantime the supplementary tasks required now have been begun. In
part they will have to be finished only after completion of the new
Research Institute for Aviation Medicine of the Reich Air Ministry in
Tempelhof, whose low-pressure chamber will include all cold generating
apparatus and also an installation for producing conditions at a height
of 30 kilometers.

Freezing experiments in another direction are, in, part, still being
made at Dachau.

When the work will need once more your sympathetic assistance, may I be
allowed to get in touch with you again through Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher?

                                                        Heil Hitler
                                            [Signed] PROF. DR. HIPPKE

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-224
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 76

 NOTE BY ROMBERG ON SHOWING OF FILM IN OFFICE OF STATE SECRETARY MILCH,
            AND PROPOSED REPORT TO MILCH, 11 SEPTEMBER 1942

On 11 September 1942, at 9:45 o’clock, Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher and Dr.
Romberg met, according to telephonic and oral agreements with Colonel
Pendele, in the antechamber of the State Secretary. We were informed
that the State Secretary had ordered this conference at the present
stage, in the course of which a report on experiments concerning “rescue
from great heights” was to be made, and the motion picture concerning
these experiments was to be shown. The gentlemen waiting in the
antechamber of the State Secretary and in the corridor (most of them
from the experimental staff) were informed that previous to the
conference a motion picture was to be shown, so that all went to the
projection room on the fifth floor. Here quite a large number of people
were already present, so that 30-40 persons were there in all. Among
them were officers, medical and engineer officers—we know some of them
personally—some whose presence surprised us in view of the top secret
nature of the motion picture and of the experiments. No checking of the
persons present was done, nor was there an attendance list. As, after a
short time of waiting, the State Secretary had not come, the motion
picture was shown, without giving us an opportunity for preliminary or
explanatory remarks. During the intermission between the two parts of
the motion picture, Dr. Rascher referred once more to the strict
obligation of secrecy ordered by the Reich Leader SS. After completion
of the showing of the motion picture—the State Secretary had not come,
as he had been summoned to see the Reich Marshal [Goering]—the persons
present still talked a little while about the motion picture, on which
occasion less interest was shown in the subject itself than in the place
of the experiments and the individuals who had been the subjects. After
this period of time, during which we were neither called upon to make
any statements whatsoever nor were we, considering the great forum and
the absence of the State Secretary, inclined to give any reports the
greater part of those present went back to the development conference,
while Oberstarzt Wuerfler, Oberstarzt Professor Kalk, Stabsarzt Bruehl
and Regierungsrat Benzinger asked us to make a report to a small medical
circle. As, however, the State Secretary had prohibited that any report
be made before the distribution had been decided on, we refused to
disclose the results of the experiments. Oberstarzt Kalk stated that he
was willing to report to the State Secretary our wishes concerning the
distribution of the report and the continuation of the experiments. The
film was handed to Colonel Vorwald.

According to the conference with Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers, I tried
to get the film back on the same day, but Colonel Vorwald was still at
the development conference. When I telephoned the next day and requested
that the film be handed back, Colonel Vorwald declared that he would
like to keep the film until after Sunday, 13 September, since on this
day the Reich Marshal was coming and might perhaps desire to see the
film. Accordingly, I let Colonel Vorwald keep the film for that day. On
14 September, I went to fetch the film from Colonel Vorwald, and was
informed that it had not been shown. On the same day I spoke with
Stabsarzt Bruehl, who informed me that Oberstarzt Kalk had transmitted,
still on 11 September, our wishes concerning distribution and
confirmation of the experiments to the State Secretary. The State
Secretary had approved the distribution schedule, and said that a
continuation of the experiments was not urgent. A few days later the
distribution schedule accepted by the State Secretary was sent to the
German Aviation Research Institute by Colonel Pendele, and the report
was subsequently transmitted by the Institute to the offices concerned.
Since that time I have not received any news either concerning the film
or concerning the report.

                                                 [Signed] DR. ROMBERG




                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1612-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 79

 LETTER FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO RASCHER, 13 DECEMBER 1942, AND HIMMLER’S
          ORDER ASSIGNING RASCHER TO HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS

The Reich Leader SS

                                                       Field Command Post
                    [Rubber stamp]: Personal Staff of Reich Leader SS
                                    Documentation Section
                                    File No.: Confidential
                                     Field Command Post, 13 December 1942
The Reich Leader SS
Personal Staff
Journal No. 19/10/43 g, Bra/Secret
1.  Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. med. Rascher [illegible] * * * SS
2.  Reich Leader SS Berlin
3.  Medical Office in SS Fuehrungshauptamt (SS Operational Main Office)
      Berlin
4.  SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl, Berlin
5.  Ahnenerbe Berlin-Dahlem

Enclosed I am sending you a letter of the Reich Leader SS (copy of same)
with an order for SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Rascher.

You are requested to duly note and accord needed assistance to
Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Rascher in the carrying through of his
experiments.

     By order
                                                       [Initialed] B.
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

                                                    Prinz Albrechtstrasse
                     [Rubber stamp] Personal Staff of Reich Leader SS
                                    Documentation Section
                                    Journal No.: Confidential

SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Rascher is being assigned by me to carry
through the following experiments:

1. Low-pressure chamber experiments—to be carried out under conditions
corresponding to those actually prevailing under normal operating
conditions—for rescue from high and extremely high altitudes.
Determination of changes in chemical equilibrium, as well as gas
equilibrium of human body. Experiments are to be repeated until a
scientifically incontestable basis for findings is established. Testing
of pressure-proof protection garments for the highest altitudes to be
carried out with the assistance of manufacturers of such protective
suits.

2. Tests for reimparting warmth after total chilling of the human body,
recording all changes of chemical and gas characteristics, are to be
further continued until complete clarification of doubtful questions. I
attach particular value to conditions for experiments coming as close to
actual conditions as possible, particularly as regards reimpartation of
warmth. Sauna equipment available in Dachau should be used in connection
with experiments on reimpartation of warmth.

3. Experiments on removal of effects due to freezing of parts of human
system, especially the extremities, to be carried through in suitable
form (e. g. applications with Gastein water).

4. Experiments concerned with adaptation to freezing cold in snow huts
(igloos) to be carried out under varying diets in order to establish
whether adaptation to cold [German text says “Gewaehrung”, i. e.
consent, which evidently is a typographical error] and resistance
increase against freezing is possible. These experiments are to be
carried out on the site of the SS Mountain Retreat Sudelfeld.

5. The procurement of the apparatus needed for all the experiments
should be discussed in detail with the offices of the Reicharzt SS, of
the SS Main Office for Economic Administration and with the Ahnenerbe.
The necessary chemical products, medical supplies, and glassware will be
made available by the SS Medical Office, Berlin.

6. Publication of results obtained in such tests subject to my approval
only.

                                                  [Signed] H. HIMMLER
    EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF TRIBUNAL WITNESS WALTER NEFF[25]

_EXAMINATION BY PROSECUTION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: * * * When did the high-altitude experiments begin in
Dachau?

WITNESS NEFF: The first high-altitude experiments were on 22 February
1942. The so-called low-pressure chambers had been brought in earlier
and dismounted. The exact time when the chambers came is not known to
me.

Q. Why do you remember the date when the first experiments were made in
the low-pressure chambers so well?

A. The 22d of February is my birthday and the tubercular patients gave a
party for me. On that date the experiments started, and that is why I
remember the date.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Will you tell the Tribunal who worked on these experiments?

A. The experiments were conducted by Dr. Rascher and Dr. Romberg. Ten
prisoners were selected and were taken to the station as permanent
experimental subjects; and they were told that nothing would happen to
them. In the beginning, the first 3 weeks, the experiments went off
without incident. One day, however, Rascher told me the next day he was
going to make a serious experiment and that he would need 16 Russians
who had been condemned to death, and he received these Russians. Then I
told Rascher that I would not help, and I actually got Rascher to send
me away to the tubercular ward. On that day I know for certain that
Rascher’s SS man Endres or other SS men conducted these experiments. Dr.
Romberg was not there that day. The SS man Endres took the Russian
prisoners of war to Rascher and in the evening the parties were taken
out. On the next day when I returned to the station, Endres was already
there and he said that two more, two Jews, would be killed. I am quoting
what he said. I left the station again, but I watched to see who would
be taken for the experiments. I saw the first one getting into the car.
I could only see his profile. It seemed familiar to me. I knew that man
worked in the hospital as a tailor. I tried to find out if it was really
that man. I went to the place where he worked, and I was told that
Endres had just taken the man away. The first person that I informed was
Dr. Romberg whom I met in the corridor. I told Romberg that this was not
a person who had been condemned to death, that this was a clear case of
murder on the responsibility of Endres. Romberg went with me to see
Rascher to clear the matter up, but it was discovered that Endres had
put this man in the experimental car because he had refused to make a
civilian suit for him. Rascher sent the man back; Endres went with him
and remarked: “Well, then you will get an injection today.” I must say
that Rascher interfered once more and put the man in safety into the
bunker. In the meantime, Endres had brought a second man up, a Czech,
whom I knew very well. Again it was Romberg together with me who talked
to Rascher to stop this experiment or to inquire why a man like Endres
was simply taking people who had never been condemned to death. Rascher
went to the camp commandant, Piorkowski, who personally came to the
station and Endres was transferred to Lublin immediately.

And now I come to the subject: it was actually the day on which my
comrade and I reached the decision that under all circumstances, no
matter what happened, I would not remain at this——

Q. Now, Witness, let me interrupt you just a minute. We will come back
and you can tell the full story then.

                 *        *        *        *        *

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: I will ask the Secretary General to turn this
book over to counsel for the prosecution, and defense counsel may
examine the book.

MR. MCHANEY: Now, Witness, before the recess, you had been telling the
Tribunal about the high-altitude experiments which you stated began on
22 February 1942, and you had related how early in March Rascher had
experimented upon some 15 Russians who were killed and you stated that
neither you nor the defendant Romberg were present on that occasion and
you then had gone on to relate that an SS man in Dachau named Endres had
brought in the tailor at the camp and wanted him to be experimented upon
and how you recognized the tailor and interceded with Romberg and had
this man returned. Now, before you continue with your story, I would
like to put some specific questions to you. It is true, is it not, that
concentration camp inmates were experimented on during these
high-altitude experiments?

WITNESS NEFF: Yes.

Q. About how many concentration camp inmates were subjected to these
high-altitude experiments?

A. There were 180 to 200 inmates who were subjected to the high-altitude
experiments.

Q. When, to the best of your recollection, did the high-altitude
experiments end?

A. The incident of the dead—I am afraid I didn’t quite get your
question. Will you repeat it?

Q. I am asking you, Witness, when the high-altitude experiments ended,
that is, when they were completed.

A. During the course of June—maybe the beginning of July, the
low-pressure chambers were taken away. I don’t recollect the exact date,
however.

Q. And you state that between 22 February 1942 and the end of June, or
the beginning of July 1942, approximately 180 to 200 concentration camp
inmates were experimented on?

A. Yes.

Q. What nationalities were the experimental subjects?

A. I cannot say that with certainty but I think that approximately all
nations were represented there; that is, all nations that were in the
camp, mostly Russians, Poles, Germans, and Jews belonging to any nation.
I do not remember any other nationalities being represented there.

Q. Were any of these experimental subjects prisoners of war?

A. Yes.

Q. What nationalities were they? Do you recall?

A. They were Russians.

Q. Now, will you tell the Tribunal how these experimental subjects were
selected?

A. The experimental subjects who had to be subjected to severe
experiments, experiments that would end in death, were requested by
Rascher from the camp administration and then furnished by the SS;
however, this procedure differed with the so-called series of
experiments and a number of other experiments. For those experiments,
the people were brought into the experimental station straight from the
camp, that is, from the blocks.

Q. Now, did they, to your knowledge, make any effort in the camp to
secure volunteers for these experiments?

A. There were certain volunteers for these experiments. That was because
Rascher promised certain persons that they would be released from the
camp if they underwent these experiments. He sometimes promised them
that they would be detailed to more favorable work.

Q. Now, about how many of such volunteers would you say there were for
the high-altitude experiments?

A. I do not know the exact number. It was not very high; approximately
10 inmates volunteered for that purpose.

Q. Did these volunteers come one at a time, or did they come in a body,
or just how did they present themselves to the experimental stations?

A. Rascher moved around the camp quite a lot and on that occasion the
inmates spoke to him.

Q. In other words, the camp officials and Rascher and Romberg made no
effort to find volunteers, did they?

A. I don’t know, but I should not think so. I should not think that they
made great efforts to get volunteers.

Q. Now, other than these approximately 10 persons who you state
presented themselves as volunteers, were all the rest of the
experimental subjects simply picked out and brought in and experimented
on?

A. Yes.

Q. Were any of these prisoners experimented upon released from the
concentration camp because they underwent the experiments?

A. There is only one man who was released after the high-altitude
experiments.

Q. And who was that?

A. An inmate with the name of Sobota.

Q. And did Sobota assist Rascher in his experimental work other than
simply undergoing the experiment? Was he something in the nature of an
assistant to Rascher?

A. No. Sobota was one of those persons who had to undergo most of the
experiments and he was also used on one experiment which was conducted
in the presence of the Reich Leader SS. On that occasion he was asked by
the Reich Leader how long he had been in the camp and he promised him
that he would be released. He was later sent to the Group Dirlewanger.

Q. Was it considered a privilege to be released to the Group
Dirlewanger?

A. No. The inmates who later were forced to transfer to the Group
Dirlewanger thought that this was the worst thing that could happen to
them.

Q. Will you tell the Tribunal just what the Group Dirlewanger was?

A. The Group Dirlewanger was an SS division who received their education
in Oranienburg and who were used for special purposes. At one time 200
German political inmates in this group were transferred to Russia. All
persons who were forced to join this group were very disgusted at being
forced to join the SS and fight for them. They considered being selected
to join the SS as the very worst disgrace.

Q. Was the Dirlewanger a special commando group?

A. Yes, it was a special commando group and was assigned to the most
dangerous spots. However, I only know that from comrades to whom I have
spoken about this matter after the liberation.

Q. Other than the prisoner Sobota, were there any other concentration
camp inmates released as a result of undergoing the high-altitude
experiments?

A. I know of no case except Sobota.

Q. Do you know of any cases where a prisoner condemned to death had his
sentence commuted to life imprisonment because he underwent the
high-altitude experiments?

A. No.

Q. Witness, were any political prisoners used in these high-altitude
experiments?

A. Yes, there were political prisoners who were used in these
experiments. All foreigners were considered political prisoners.

Q. Witness, tell the Tribunal how one could tell the difference between
a political and a criminal prisoner in a concentration camp?

A. All inmates had certain squares with letters; the political inmates
had red squares; the German political inmates had a plain red square;
the Poles had a red square with a “P” marked on it; the Russians with an
“R”; all nationalities could be identified by the first letter of their
country. The red square with a yellow star was the Jew. The green
square, on the other hand was the sign of the so-called professional
criminal. Here it must be said that there were quite a number of people
with green squares who did not fall under the classification of
professional criminals, but who were sent to the camp with that square
since the Gestapo could find no excuse to send them into the camp as
political prisoners.

Q. Now, was this square really a square or a triangle?

A. It was really a triangle with the head of the triangle pointed down
to the earth. If it pointed upward, it indicated a member of the
Wehrmacht who was sent to the camp for punishment.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, were any Jews experimented on in these high-altitude
experiments?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, tell the Tribunal approximately how many prisoners were killed
during the course of the high-altitude experiments?

A. During the high-altitude experiments 70 to 80 persons were killed.

Q. Did they experiment on prisoners other than those condemned to death?

A. Yes.

Q. Were any of those prisoners who had not been condemned to death
killed during the course of the high-altitude experiments?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you have any idea how many may have been killed?

A. There could have been approximately 40 persons.

Q. That is, 40 persons were killed, who had not been condemned to death,
out of a total of 70, did you say?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, were some of those killed political prisoners?

A. Yes.

Q. Is there any way of telling whether or not a prisoner had been
condemned to death—that is, when the experimental subject arrived in
the pressure chamber, was there any way to know whether he had been
condemned to death?

A. Once the experimental subjects came from the Bunker, that is, if the
SS brought them out, we could always tell they were prisoners who had
been condemned to death. When the inmates were sent by the camp leader,
and were brought there by him, then we could also tell they were persons
who came from the camp, and that they were not persons who had been
condemned to death.

Q. Could Romberg know this just as you did?

A. He could only know it if he tried to find out about it, because he
could hardly differentiate whether the person concerned came from the
Bunker or came from the camps.

Q. But you could tell that yourself?

A. Yes.

Q. Did Romberg ever ask you whether or not these experimental subjects
had been condemned to death?

A. I do not remember Romberg ever asking me about that.

Q. Were records kept in the concentration camp which showed whether or
not a man had been condemned to death?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know whether Romberg ever checked these records?

A. I do not know that.

Q. You do not know if he ever checked them, is that right?

A. No.

Q. Can you remember, approximately, how many deaths Romberg witnessed
during these high-altitude experiments, if any?

A. I can remember five cases where Romberg was present during cases of
death; whether he was present on other occasions, I do not know. It is
possible, but I am not sure of it.

Q. You are sure of only five cases?

A. Yes.

Q. Did Romberg ever make any objections concerning these deaths?

A. I do not know of Romberg having made any protests against it.

Q. He did not make any protest in your presence?

A. Only at the time when we were concerned with the incident which I
spoke of earlier. I do not know anything about anything else.

                 *        *        *        *        *

       EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT RUDOLF BRANDT[26]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. KAUFFMANN: Now I should like to speak to you about Document Book No.
2, concerning the high-altitude experiments of Dr. Rascher. You said
this morning that you knew Rascher?

DEFENDANT RUDOLF BRANDT: Yes.

Q. Did you see him frequently?

A. Very few times in the course of 4 to 5 years.

Q. Did he come to your office and speak with you?

A. Twice when I was about to leave Munich by train, he and his wife
brought a letter for Himmler to the station and gave it to me.

Q. And what did he want when he came to Himmler’s front office and saw
you?

A. Either he brought a report or a letter; as I said, this could not
have happened more than 4 or 5 times.

Q. Were you ever present when Himmler talked with Rascher?

A. No. I was never present at those conferences.

Q. Did Rascher ever tell you personally, either before or after a
conference with Himmler, why he had come?

A. No. Afterwards we never spoke about these visits because I had no
time for that.

Q. But you do not want to deny that you knew that Rascher was carrying
out experiments on human beings in Dachau?

A. Yes, that I knew.

Q. Did you ever visit Dachau yourself?

A. No. I was never in Dachau nor in any other concentration camp.

Q. Did you yourself ever take part in experiments on human beings?

A. No.

Q. Did you see these photographs which are supplements to the document
books?

A. I cannot recall ever having seen them.

Q. Now, please turn to page 53. This is a letter from Rascher to Himmler
in which he makes suggestions to Himmler for the first time that human
being experiments should be carried out in Dachau. In this letter he
says that in these experiments he would certainly have to count on fatal
consequences for some of the subjects. Do you remember receiving this
letter? If not, can you say how you probably would have handled this
letter when it came?

A. I do not remember the letter. As in all cases I certainly would have
put this letter among the mail that Himmler would read personally, after
one glance through it had assured me that it was a medical matter in
which Himmler was generally interested.

DR. KAUFFMAN: We are speaking now, your Honor, of 1602-PS, Prosecution
Exhibit 44.

Q. Now, please look at page 57 of the German document book. This is
1582-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 45, a letter from you to Rascher in which
you tell him that, of course, prisoners will gladly be made available
for high-altitude experimentation. Was this letter written on your own
initiative or is it a case similar to all the others that you have
brought up here, namely, a letter written on orders from Himmler?

A. This letter does not originate with me. It can be traced back to
clear orders from Himmler.

Q. Now, please take a look at 1581-A-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 48, a
letter that bears your signature, addressed to Sievers. Here you write
that low-pressure experiments are being carried out by the Luftwaffe in
Dachau on prisoners there. Then look at the next Document, 1971-A-PS,
Prosecution Exhibit 49, a letter from Rascher to Himmler. In the first
sentence of this letter there is mention of an enclosed interim report,
and there is no doubt that this interim report was enclosed. Now, did
you read this interim report?

A. I should assume that I did not because firstly, such medical reports
were quite incomprehensible to me as a layman; and, secondly, because of
all the work which I had to do, I did not have enough time to concern
myself with reports which, first of all, I didn’t understand and,
secondly, did not interest me. Thus it is that I put this report in with
the mail that Himmler was to read without reading it myself.

Q. Now, please look at 1971-D-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 52, apparently a
teletype message from Rascher to you. Here Rascher asks whether Poles
and Russians are also to be pardoned if they have survived several
severe experiments. In 1971-E-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 53, your answer is
to be found, a teletype message to Obersturmfuehrer Schnitzler in
Munich. In this letter you say that experimental subjects are not to be
pardoned if they are Poles or Russians. This document was given
particular stress by the prosecution, and its cruel and atrocious nature
was emphasized. Do you remember this document or can you give us any
explanation of how it came about that you signed this teletype message?

A. I cannot remember this communication. Of course, I cannot here state
under oath whether this is one of those cases in which a teletype
message was sent on Himmler’s orders with my signature to it. It is also
quite possible that I saw this message and knew its contents and sent it
off, after receiving instructions from Himmler.

Q. But I should think that you would still remember a document with such
contents today; and yet you say that you do not remember it?

A. No, I do not. In view of the enormous number of orders that I got
from Himmler, I could not concern myself enough with the details of each
matter in order to be able to remember them for any length of time.

Q. Do you perhaps know whether you discussed this matter with Himmler
and then waited for his orders?

A. I cannot say that. I assume that I put the teletype message among his
mail and then received his instructions along with all the rest of his
orders.

Q. Now, I want to discuss NO-402, Prosecution Exhibit 66. This is a
letter to the German Research Institute for Aviation. This letter
accompanies a long report, the subject of which is rescuing pilots from
high altitudes. Do you have that report now in front of you?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you work on this report or at least give a cursory glance at it?

A. I certainly did not work on it, and I did not even give it a cursory
glance, first of all because it is a medical report, and secondly,
because it is much too long.

                 *        *        *        *        *

          EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT ROMBERG[27]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. VORWERK: Now, we’ll go back to the point of Rascher’s position in
the experiment.

DEFENDANT ROMBERG: I said that without Rascher there would never have
been any intention of carrying out the experiments and it would never
have been possible. This can be seen from Himmler’s original assignment.
Practical proof of this is the fact that the experiments were stopped
immediately when there were difficulties with Rascher’s assignment. This
is proved by the letter from Frau Rascher to the Reich Leader SS, dated
24 February 1942. (_NO-263, Pros. Ex. 47._) In this letter Frau Rascher
writes that there were difficulties of command and that the experiments
were stopped; that Rascher had gone back to Schongau. That was the time
when I went back to Berlin. Later on when the experiments were actually
carried out, Rascher had expressly forbidden me to perform experiments
in Dachau without his permission or his presence, so that I never did
perform any experiments without Rascher. I always waited until he was
there. On the days when he was in Schongau no experiments were
performed. Generally, I did not even go to the experimental station.
Sometimes I went to write—but certainly never to carry out experiments.
This rule, although, of course, it often delayed the work, seemed
justified to me because Rascher had permission from Himmler to perform
these experiments and was responsible to him for the experimental
subjects. Also, I myself was under the authority of the camp at Dachau
which seriously restricted my independence, for example, my freedom of
movement or talking to prisoners and similar things. Rascher himself, on
the other hand, had a very free position on the basis of the powers
which he had received from Himmler and because of a special pass. The
Dachau camp was under Himmler’s authority. This is shown by the letter
from Himmler to Milch of November 1942. (_1617-PS, Pros. Ex. 77_ (_Pros.
Ex. 111, Milch Case_).) In this letter Himmler spoke of Holzloehner’s
conduct and adds that the Dachau camp was under his orders, and
Holzloehner would have to submit. It was under these conditions that
Rascher took the low-pressure chamber from the SS in Munich and set it
up there.

Q. Who took care of the maintenance work on the chamber during the
experiments?

A. There was not a great deal of maintenance work necessary; loading the
batteries or supplying the oxygen for the experiments was taken care of
by Rascher and was probably paid for by the camp.

Q. Was Rascher responsible to you for that?

A. No, Rascher was not responsible to me at all. He was responsible to
the Medical Inspectorate because the chamber belonged to them.

Q. Did you have ah opportunity to give Rascher any orders or
instructions, or to prohibit anything?

A. No, that can no doubt be seen from what I have already said. I could
not give him any orders. I certainly could not forbid him to do
anything. Concerning the conduct of these experiments on rescue from
high altitudes, I merely had a certain advisory right as is customary
for two scientists who are working together on the same task when one of
the two has greater knowledge pertinent to the specific task.

Q. You said the experiments began on 22 or 23 February; was that when
you saw the experimental subjects for the first time?

A. Yes. On that day I went out to Dachau with Rascher for the first time
and met the experimental subjects for the first time.

Q. About how many were there?

A. There were 10 or 12.

Q. Could it have been 5?

A. Five? No, there were certainly more than that.

Q. Could it have been 15?

A. Yes, that is possible.

Q. Did you talk to the experimental subjects on that day before the
experiments began?

A. I believe on that day we mostly talked. Whether any proper
experiments were done at all on that first day, I don’t remember. At any
rate I talked to the experimental subjects and got to know them a little
on the first day.

Q. What did you talk about with the experimental subjects?

A. They were quite new surroundings for me, of course. They were all
professional criminals who were in custody.

Q. How do you know that?

A. They told me that gradually in the course of conversation. They
didn’t, of course, have complete confidence on the first day and did not
tell me all about their previous convictions. But after careful
inquiries one discovered that they had been condemned for certain
crimes, repeatedly convicted, and finally had been condemned to
protective custody.

Q. Why did you talk to the experimental subjects on this day?

A. It is quite natural when one begins to work with such a group that a
certain personal contact is necessary. We had to get to know each other.
I talked to them about their profession, if I may call it that, and of
course I told them something about the experiments, what the whole thing
was all about, what they themselves had to do to cooperate in the same
way as my usual experimental subjects.

Q. Was the reason for this investigation to prepare the subjects for
their activity or to check whether these people were actually
volunteers?

A. No. It was more to get to know the subjects personally. The situation
was this: in the discussion with the camp commandant on the basis of the
agreement with Rascher and his authorization from Himmler, a very
definite agreement had been reached to the effect that these people were
to be selected from the volunteers. Therefore, a clear agreement had
been reached on the conditions, about which there could be no doubts
basically. When I met the subjects for the first time personally and
talked to them about the principle of the experiments and their duties,
and so forth, of course I also inquired why they had volunteered—not
because of any distrust of the camp commandant, but just for that
reason.

Q. You thought, accordingly, that they were volunteers?

A. I didn’t only think they were. They told me so themselves.

Q. How do you know that so definitely for each case?

A. In the course of time—not on the first day but in the course of
time—I talked to all of them frequently in some detail, and gradually
they told me about their previous convictions and what other prisons and
penitentiaries they had been in before they came to the camp, and they
also told me the reasons why they had volunteered.

Q. Do you mean to say that all the experimental subjects used for the
high-altitude experiments were volunteers?

A. Yes.

Q. Now before these subjects entered the chamber did you prepare them
for what they had to do and tell them the significance of the whole
thing?

A. Yes, of course. First I explained the whole question to them in broad
outline, so that they would know what it was about and what the purpose
of the experiment was. In detail I told them specifically what they had
to do in the experiments. There was the writing test during which they
had to write numbers from 1,000 backwards; then the cardinal point was
that after the altitude sickness during the experiments, as soon as they
came to, they had to pull the rip cord. We had a handle in the chamber
connected to a bell. This was to represent pulling the rip cord of the
parachute. This had to be explained to them carefully, otherwise they
wouldn’t have understood it and wouldn’t have reacted correctly.

Q. Now, before the experiments began, did you have an electrocardiogram
of each separate subject?

A. Yes and again later on.

Q. Please explain that.

A. Rascher had first examined the people to see if they were suitable
for the experiments, so there would be no heart defects or anything like
that. Then in order to get an exact control, before the beginning of the
experiments we took an electrocardiogram of all the subjects. In almost
all the experiments the electrocardiograms were registered and at the
end, when the experiments were finished, we took another
electrocardiogram of all the subjects in order to have material because
perhaps even if there was no visible injury, there might still be some
effects which could only be determined by such tests.

Q. Now, how long did these experiments on rescue from high altitude
last, approximately?

A. Well, they really began on about 10 or 11 March and they lasted until
19 or 20 May.

Q. Following that, you prepared the report which has been submitted by
the prosecution?

A. Yes.

Q. In this report you have a sentence saying that during the experiments
on rescue from high altitudes there were no deaths and there had been no
injury to health; is that correct?

A. Yes, it is correct that that sentence is in the report, and it is
also true that there were no deaths or other injuries.

Q. But here in the testimony of the witness Neff you heard that there
were deaths?

A. Yes.

Q. What do you have to say about that?

A. In addition to our joint experiments on rescue from high altitudes,
Rascher conducted experiments of his own. He did not tell me the exact
problem; he merely said that he was performing these experiments for
Himmler and that they had to do with explosive decompression sickness
and electrocardiograms. He had apparently carried out secret experiments
for some time on this problem, but then in my presence he continued them
with special subjects. In the course of these experiments the first
death occurred at the end of April in my presence. He told me in the
course of our conversations that he wanted to qualify as a lecturer on
the basis of these experiments which were ordered by Himmler. He wanted
to get Dr. Fahrenkamp into it but this cooperation never came about
because the experiments were broken off.

Before this death I had no reason to object to the experiments in any
way since Rascher was using other subjects and had a separate assignment
from Himmler for them. My assignment was to perform the experiments on
rescue from high altitudes and I carried it out together with Rascher.

Q. How many deaths took place in your presence?

A. Three.

Q. But Neff spoke of five deaths at which you were present.

A. There could only have been three.

Q. Why could there only have been three?

A. Because I remember. After all they were deaths and they made a
definite impression on me; I know it.

Q. Why did death in the low-pressure chamber make such an impression on
you?

A. In the innumerable low-pressure-chamber experiments not only
performed by us, but everywhere in Germany in other institutes, we never
had any deaths at all, and the opinion at that time was that any
necessary problem of aviation medicine could be solved without deaths.

Q. Now, how did it happen that you were present at these deaths, since
you say these experiments did not belong to your series of experiments?

A. At the beginning of April or in the middle of April, Rascher told me
for the first time that he was performing experiments with slow
ascension and that he had attempted to work with Fahrenkamp but the work
had been interrupted when the latter was sent away. I said that had
nothing to do with our experiments and was quite unimportant and
uninteresting from our point of view. He admitted that, but said it was
a specific question which especially interested him personally and which
he had to work on. I did not see these experiments, which according to
records here lasted 8 to 10 hours. He probably always performed them on
the days I was absent because these 8 to 10 hours would have interfered
considerably with our experiments. He expanded these experiments and
performed time-reserve experiments at certain altitudes to test the
adaptation which he had been testing before in the slow-ascension
experiments. This was an experiment in which the subject remains at the
same altitude, in contrast to the falling or sinking experiments where
the pressure is constantly increased, that is, when the altitude is
decreased. As his interim reports show, he extended these experiments to
high altitudes and the time reserve was studied either with or without
oxygen. The suggestion for this in part came obviously from other work,
such as that of Dr. Kliches.

I sometimes observed these experiments. He performed them correctly; he
watched the subjects so that there was, in itself, no objection to these
experiments. The only thing was that they interfered with our
experiments from the point of view of time, and Rascher’s lack of
punctuality was a much greater annoyance in this respect. According to
the documents, as well as the witness Neff, Rascher apparently had
deaths in these experiments. The first deaths were evidently unexpected.
In these unexpected deaths the electrocardiogram and the autopsy
findings, together with his reports, apparently gave Himmler the idea
that these experiments should be carried on further, and in addition
that Fahrenkamp should be called in to extend them as far as possible
scientifically. The fact that Himmler was covering them apparently
induced him in my presence to perform experiments which were dangerous,
and in which deaths occurred. The fact that I had been present several
times at previous experiments brought about my presence at that fatal
experiment, too.

Q. Did you not think it unusual that during an experimental series which
you and Rascher were to carry out together, Himmler suddenly gave
Rascher orders for special experiments?

A. Yes. I did not have any specific experience in this direction, but on
principle it is nothing unusual if when two people are working together
on a certain job, one of them receives an additional assignment from his
chief to carry out other work on his own. In addition, Rascher was also
working in Schongau at the same time on behalf of Luftgau VII. I,
myself, had work of my own in the DVL, which my associates were carrying
on and which I inquired about when I happened to be in Berlin. No one
could dispute the fact that Himmler, as Reich Leader SS and Chief of the
German Police and as Rascher’s boss insofar as he was an SS member, had
the right to give assignments to his subordinates and to order them to
carry out experiments on experimental subjects in a concentration camp.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Now, in your opinion, what is the distinction between your presence
at the experiments on rescue from high altitudes and your occasional
presence during Rascher’s experiments?

A. In the experiments on rescue from high altitudes I was not merely
present. I performed the experiments myself. That is, I called the
experimental subjects myself, or sometimes Rascher called them. Of
course, then I explained to the people what they had to do, what they
had to write, what they had to pay special attention to, and that when
they registered the electrocardiogram, in order not to interfere with
it, they had to keep still; and then when the experiment had started I
directed the experiment myself. I watched the altitude of the mercury
indicator, and the calculated speed of ascension and descension, which I
checked with the stop watch. Of course, at the same time I observed the
subject, in other words, the persons in the experiments. In Rascher’s
experiments which were at a certain altitude—that is, the subjects were
ascended to a certain altitude and then remained at that altitude—I
sometimes watched if I happened to be in the low-pressure chamber, but
otherwise he performed these experiments alone just as he did when I was
not present. He even laid great stress on performing them alone. It is
clear to me now that he did not want me to observe any special results;
that is apparently why he performed the other experiments in the evening
or when I was away.

Q. After the first death was there an autopsy?

A. Yes, there was an autopsy.

Q. Did you participate in it?

A. No, I did not participate. I was present and I watched the autopsy.

Q. Why did you watch the autopsy if it was not your experiment?

A. Today, of course, it looks different than it did at the time. It was
a matter of course for me then. Rascher was a colleague of mine. He had
had a fatal accident in his experiments. He asked me to watch the
autopsy, and, of course, I went. I also had a quite natural scientific
interest in the cause of death, and in the findings, and I admit it
frankly, although I am aware of the danger that someone may say I was
interested in the death of the person too, but it happens in every
hospital; all doctors watch the autopsies. If, for example, in the
surgical ward, a patient died after an operation, then the chief
physician, or if he had no time, the senior physician, and the other
doctors who had nothing specifically to do with the patient, watched the
autopsy, and generally even X-ray doctors came over who didn’t know the
patient at all. Besides if I had not been present, that would today be
considered as an incomprehensible lack of interest in the death—if I
had not accepted Rascher’s invitation. If such a death happened during a
centrifugal experiment in our institute, if such an accident had
happened which was not in my field of work, I certainly would have gone
to watch the autopsy. One must learn from the findings; that is one’s
duty as a doctor. One has to look at such things so that one can draw
one’s own conclusions and be able to avoid subsequent accidents.

Q. Did you see any further autopsies of Rascher?

A. No.

Q. Why not?

A. After this death there was a basic change in my attitude toward
Rascher and the plan to break off the experiments, so that in the case
of later deaths I was not present because of this attitude. I do not
believe he invited me to the autopsies either, and under the conditions
in Dachau I could not go there on my own initiative.

Q. Did you ask Rascher how this death came about, or did you warn him
before the death?

A. Yes, I have already said I was present at the experiments just as I
had sometimes been present at the other series of his experiments,
purely out of curiosity, just as in our institute if centrifugal
experiments were performed, I sometimes watched them, too. There was no
reason for distrust but at that time I just watched the experiments out
of curiosity. That was how it happened that I was present by accident at
the experiment and looked at the electrocardiogram of this subject. On
the screen of the electrocardiograph one can see a little point of light
which moves, and that is determined by the heart action. When it seemed
to me that it was getting dangerous, that the heart action was
lessening, I said to Rascher: “You had better stop now.”

Q. And what did Rascher do?

A. Nothing. He kept that altitude and later death suddenly occurred.

Q. When you observed the electrocardiogram was it quite clear to you
that the person would die in the next second?

A. No, of course not. First of all I had never seen a death from high
altitude. That was the first one I ever saw. I couldn’t know that, and,
in the second place, this death certainly resulted from aero-embolism
and, therefore, suddenly. In the third place, the electrocardiogram
change was, shall we say, doubtful. I myself would have stopped the
experiment at this stage but he didn’t. I only spoke up because I would
have stopped the experiment at that moment.

Q. Did you speak to Rascher about this after the experiment?

A. It was not possible for me to object in view of Rascher’s position,
but I told him that such things should not happen.

Q. And what else did you do?

A. After this death I went to Berlin and told Ruff about it. Ruff agreed
with me that death should not be allowed to occur in high-altitude
experiments and it had never occurred before. Since Rascher, however,
performed these experiments for Himmler on men who were condemned to
death, we saw no way of preventing Rascher after we had made an official
report. In general when objections were made Rascher simply referred to
the orders from Himmler and to the fact that he was covered by them. It
was quite impossible to remove the chamber from Dachau against Himmler’s
and Rascher’s will. And to give this death as a reason for removing the
chamber was even more impossible. In the first place, Himmler would not
have reacted. He would certainly not have given up the chamber. He might
have started proceedings for treason or for sabotage of an essential war
experiment. In fact, I had reported this to Ruff against my signature to
the contrary in a concentration camp. Like every other visitor to a
concentration camp I had to sign a statement to the effect that
everything I saw and so forth in the camp would be secret. Besides, at
the beginning of the experiments Rascher had received a special telegram
from Himmler ordering silence about these experiments. A specific
obligation to secrecy was strengthened by this order from Himmler. Since
I had reported the matter to Ruff against the secrecy obligation, I also
had to be covered in this respect, and for this reason again we could
not give the death as the reason for removing the chamber from Dachau,
aside from the fact it would not have met with success.

Therefore, after some consideration we decided that the only possibility
was for Ruff to go to Milch or Hippke and ask to have the chamber
removed, giving the excuse that it was needed at the front. On the other
hand, I was to conclude our experiments quickly so that Himmler could be
told that the experiments were finished and that we could prove this so
that we could claim the right to remove the chamber from Dachau.
Otherwise Himmler would doubtless have ordered the experiments to be
continued until the original goal had been reached, that is, the
clarification of the question of rescue from high altitudes, and he
would doubtless have gone to Goering or even Hitler and arranged to keep
the chamber longer. He would have said that the use of this chamber at
the front was unimportant compared to its use at Dachau in the
experiments, and he would not have released the chamber.

If I myself had not gone back to Dachau, then Rascher would have carried
out the experiments on rescue from high altitudes alone; and he would
doubtless also have continued his own experiments. That was the reason
why I reluctantly went back to Dachau.

Q. Now, what was the purpose of your trip to Berlin?

A. The purpose was this report to Ruff.

Q. Was that the only purpose?

A. Yes.

Q. How did you explain this trip to Rascher?

A. I told Rascher that I was going because of my wife’s condition. My
wife had had a child in March, and that was a good reason for my going
to Berlin.

Q. How long were you in Berlin?

A. Only 1 or 2 days; then I went back to Dachau.

Q. Now, before you left did you make sure whether Ruff had done anything
in response to your report, whether he had done anything to get the
chamber out of Dachau?

A. Yes. Ruff tried to get Hippke but was not able to at that time, so
that I really did not know what was going on and what would be
accomplished.

Q. Did you notice anything special about the chamber when you came back
to Dachau?

A. Yes. When I came back, the barometer was broken, as Neff has already
said; and I had to go right back to Berlin to have the barometer
repaired.

Q. How long did you stay in Berlin this time?

A. As long as the repair required; about 2 weeks.

Q. Then during this time there were no experiments?

A. No.

Q. When did the experiments begin again?

A. The beginning of May or the middle of May I went back with the
repaired apparatus; then we concluded the experiments as quickly as
possible.

Q. Did you abbreviate the program which you had planned, or did you
change it in any way, or did you keep it the way it was?

A. No. We shortened it. We had fewer experiments at the various
altitudes in order to conclude the whole thing as quickly as possible
but in such a way that it was actually completed with adequate results.

Q. When was the second death at which you were present?

A. That was a few days after my return to Dachau.

Q. Did the death of the experimental subject occur in a manner similar
to the first case?

A. In general, yes. I don’t know exactly what happened. As far as I
recall, it was an experiment at a rather high altitude, and death
occurred quicker, more suddenly.

Q. And when was the third death at which you were present?

A. That was right after that, on the next day, or the second day.

Q. After these deaths, did you ever have any arguments with Rascher
about his experiments and the way in which he performed them?

A. Yes, we had some minor arguments resulting from my objections, which
he always refused to accept; but after the third death when I started to
object again, he said first that Himmler had ordered it and I wasn’t to
interfere. When I later brought the subject up once more, he lost his
patience, and we got rather excited. I asked him why he was carrying out
these experiments; what he wanted to achieve. He said he wanted to
clarify the problem of caisson diseases, that is bends or aero-embolism,
because Himmler had ordered it. He was the first man to prove these air
bubbles in the blood during an autopsy under water. Also the question of
the electrocardiogram in bends and altitude sickness had to be clarified
as Himmler had given him a special assignment for it, and Fahrenkamp was
to do this work together with him. In addition he wanted to qualify as a
professor with Schittenhelm through this work.

Then he brought out a letter and read to me that the experiments were to
be continued; that Professor Fahrenkamp was to be called in; and that
people condemned to death who survived the experiments would, of course,
be pardoned. Then he held the letter out to me and asked me whether I
could read Himmler’s signature and whether I wasn’t satisfied with that.

Q. Was this the letter 1971-B-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 51?

A. Yes, 1971-B-PS, as Prosecution Exhibit 51.

Q. And what does this letter indicate?

A. Well, it showed that Himmler had actually ordered these experiments
and that he, therefore, had complete official coverage, that the
subjects were to be pardoned. It says in the letter: “Of course the
person condemned to death shall be pardoned to concentration camp for
life.” Then it says that Fahrenkamp is to be consulted. On the next page
it says that this order from Himmler goes to the Chief of the Security
Police and the SD and to SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks, with a copy for
their information.

Q. Did Rascher give you any further explanation of this letter?

A. Since this letter prevented me from doing anything, I calmly asked
him what idea he had of these experiments, what he wanted to do, what he
wanted to achieve. He said that Dr. Fahrenkamp would help him and that
he would have electrocardiograms for heart failure from the most various
reasons and would compare them with electrocardiograms in the case of
death at high altitudes with the change in severe altitude sickness and
with later recovery. In addition, in the hospital in Munich he had taken
electrocardiograms in cases of heart failure. In Dachau, he said, he had
also registered electrocardiograms when there were executions by
shooting. If he really had evaluated all this material together with a
heart specialist, then it would, of course, have been quite valuable.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Now, did you do anything, and what did you do in order to stop
Rascher’s experiments and did you incur any danger and, if so, what?

A. What I did against Himmler’s orders and against my signed promise to
keep secrecy, the fact that I reported the incidents to my boss who
passed the information on—all this was dangerous. One probably
understands enough about conditions under Himmler to realize that. The
witness Neff has described my attitude to Rascher’s experiments. He
confirmed that I intervened in one case when he was present. Perhaps he
knows nothing about my other objections. In general, the discussions
between Rascher and myself did not take place in the presence of the
prisoners. The low-pressure chamber was removed from Dachau earlier than
intended at our instigation. Against Rascher’s and Himmler’s wishes, it
was never returned to Dachau. The extent of the accusations made by the
SS in this direction is shown by the document. These efforts begin with
Wolff’s telegram to Milch on 12 May, which is answered in the negative
in Milch’s letter of 20 May. (_343-A-PS, Pros. Ex. 62._) In answer to
further efforts from Himmler, Milch ordered that the chamber was to
remain 2 months longer in Dachau. (_NO-261, Pros. Ex. 63._) At this
time, we had already removed the chamber. On 5 June, Rascher again
writes to Himmler about the low-pressure chamber. Document NO-284,
Prosecution Exhibit 64, is the answer to this letter of 5 June. The
