letter clearly indicated an understanding on his part that Haagen’s
vaccine research in Natzweiler was contemporaneous with the epidemic.
This, Haagen testified, he could not understand. Haagen also had
considerable difficulty explaining why, in his letter of 19 September
1944, in reply to Kahnt’s inquiry, he didn’t state that he had conducted
no vaccinations or experiments in Natzweiler since January 1944 and that
his vaccinations had caused no illness in the subjects, let alone caused
a typhus epidemic. Haagen simply stated in his letter that, “We hereby
inform you that no connection existed between the cases of typhus in
Natzweiler and the examinations dealing with typhus vaccine _that is to
be tested_.” [Emphasis added.] (_NO-132, Pros. Ex. 310._) Indeed, Haagen
himself stated in his reply that the vaccine was still under test,
contrary to his testimony before this Tribunal.

Haagen would have the Tribunal believe that he had no typhus virus
strain which was pathogenic to human beings, that he could not have
brought on a serious case of typhus even had he tried to do so. (_Tr.
pp. 9608, 9612._) In the very same breath he testified “that there was
considerable danger of infection in working about the laboratory and
that he gave his assistants a “risk bonus.” (_Tr. p. 9608._)

Haagen testified that he performed no vaccinations after January 1944.
He reiterated this time and again during the course of his examination.
(_Tr. pp. 9614-5._) When asked his reason for not vaccinating during the
typhus epidemic in Natzweiler in the spring and summer of 1944, which
offered an opportunity to test the anti-infectious effect of his vaccine
under natural conditions, he lamely answered that he had to make so many
official military trips that he had no time. (_Tr. p. 9614._) Although
he had sufficient vaccine to justify his asking for 200 additional
experimental victims in May 1944, his only effort in the typhus
epidemic, according to his testimony, was to send them decontamination
equipment. (_Tr. p. 9614._) It is not readily apparent, to say the least
of it, just why some other doctor or an assistant of Haagen could not
have performed the vaccinations which Haagen would have the Tribunal
believe he was so anxious to have done for the protection of the camp.

All of the above contradictions and falsifications appear upon the face
of Haagen’s testimony as well as from the documents which he had so
carefully studied before his appearance. The documents submitted to him
during cross-examination reveal his testimony to have been perjurious
from start to finish. Haagen repeatedly testified that he carried out no
vaccinations in Schirmeck after May 1943. He stated that in Schirmeck he
only performed a single vaccination and not the series of vaccinations
to test “anti-infectious immunity” because at that time his “knowledge
hadn’t progressed so far.” (_Tr. p. 9636._) In connection with the Ipsen
vaccine, about which Rose had corresponded with him, he especially
denied that he ever proposed to Rose that experiments be carried out
with it. Haagen’s letter to Rose of 4 October 1943 squarely contradicts
him on both of these significant points. (_NO-2874, Pros. Ex. 520._) He
stated in his letter that:

    “I already reported to you the numeral results of experiments on
    human beings. _The serum titer is considerably higher, also
    after a single vaccination, in comparison with three
    vaccinations with deactivated vaccines._ I regret that it was
    not possible so far to perform infectious experiments on the
    vaccinated persons; I requested the Ahnenerbe of the SS to
    provide suitable persons for vaccination, but have not received
    an answer yet. _We are now performing a further vaccination of
    human beings_; I shall report later about the result. I guess we
    will then have reached the point of being able to recommend the
    introduction of our new vaccine for the time being without
    infectious experiments.” [Emphasis added.]

                 *        *        *        *        *

In this same letter of 4 October 1943, Haagen discussed Rose’s report
concerning the Ipsen vaccine from Copenhagen. He concluded his letter by
stating: “If we can get experimental subjects from the SS for test
vaccinations, it would be an opportunity to test the liver vaccine as
well on its anti-infectious effect. I would then suggest that our
material be used parallel with the Ipsen tests.” Thus, Haagen testified
falsely when he said that he did not propose experiments with Ipsen
vaccine. In his letter he very specifically proposed performing
anti-infectious experiments with the Ipsen vaccine as well as his own
vaccine. This again proves that the use of the phrase “infectious
experiments” could not possibly mean multiple vaccinations with living
typhus vaccine. The Ipsen vaccine was a dead vaccine; it contained no
attenuated virulent virus. Three vaccinations with a dead vaccine could
not be designated an “infectious experiment” even by Haagen. (_Tr. p.
9655._) Moreover the defense’s own proof shows that the Ipsen vaccine
had already been tested for tolerability and found comparable with other
vaccines used by the Wehrmacht. This is clear from Rose’s letter to the
Behring-Works and Haagen, among others, dated 29 September 1943. (_Rose
88, Rose Ex. 21._) It is quite clear that the only type of experiment
left open for the Ipsen vaccine was precisely the kind that Haagen
proposed, namely, after-infection of the vaccinated and control subjects
with typhus.

Haagen was further impeached by the notes kept on his typhus experiments
by his assistant, Miss Crodel. (_NO-3852, Pros. Ex. 521._) Haagen
definitely identified these notes as having been written by Miss Crodel.
(_Tr. p. 9691._) Miss Crodel had been an assistant of Haagen’s for many
years and he found her most reliable. (_Tr. p. 9701._) He conceded that
Miss Crodel was very careful in her work. (_Tr. p. 9697._) On page three
of the notebook appears a series of entries dating from 30 April 1943 to
27 January 1944 concerning a series of experiments in Schirmeck. The
entry for 19 May 1943 shows that two out of four mice injected with his
vaccine died. The entry for 26 May reads: “(4 weeks) 3-6, 0.5 _per
person_ and 6 mice 0.5 i. p., 5 dead, after 10, 14, 14 days, the rest
after 4 weeks.” This entry proves that on that date human beings were
inoculated with Haagen’s vaccine. To say the least of this entry, five
mice who were similarly vaccinated died as a result. The phrase “the
rest after 4 weeks” can obviously refer also to deaths among
experimental persons since it is quite impossible that this phrase could
be used to refer to the one remaining mouse. The entry for 6 July
indicates that on that date Haagen and his assistants appeared in
Schirmeck for the purpose of withdrawing blood from ten persons, who had
been previously vaccinated, for a Weil-Felix reaction test. The entry
gives the serum titer value of eight of the experimental subjects. The
entry is ended with the laconic note, “the other two were not here
anymore.” This entry is conclusive corroboration of the testimony of the
witness, George Hirtz, who stated that Haagen had tested his vaccine at
Schirmeck in the summer of 1943. Approximately 20 Polish inmates were
used in these experiments and, following the inoculations, two of the
experimental subjects died. Hirtz testified that he himself sewed up the
bodies of the inmates in paper bags and delivered them for cremation.
The other experimental subjects had reactions such as high fevers,
shock, and impairment of speech. (_Tr. pp. 1293-1299._) His testimony is
further corroborated by Haagen himself, who stated that two groups of
ten inmates were inoculated by him in Schirmeck. The entry in the Crodel
notes obviously has reference to one of these groups of ten, and upon
arrival of Haagen and his assistants in the camp for the purpose of
withdrawing blood, it was found that two of the subjects had died.

The entry for 4 October 1943 on page three of the Crodel notes reads
“(six months) inoculated 20 persons in Schirmeck, Tube—2 cc. distilled
water, 0.5 per person.” (_NO-3852, Pros. Ex. 521._) This proves not only
that Haagen testified falsely when he stated that he carried out no
typhus vaccinations in Schirmeck after May 1943 but also that multiple
vaccinations with his vaccine were performed. This entry bears the same
date as Haagen’s letter to Rose, referred to above, which also stated
that he was performing further vaccinations. The last entry on page
three is dated on the original as 27 January 1943 and reads: “(9 months)
mixed with the same amounts (as 21 May) distilled water tube, 20 persons
1.1 cc. each.” The date 1943 is obviously a mistake on the part of Miss
Crodel in making the entry. This is proved by the fact that the period
of time indicated in parentheses in the notes refers to the period of
time the vaccine had been stored. Haagen so admitted. (_Tr. p. 9711._)
Thus the reference “(9 months)” means that the vaccine being used in
that series of experiments had been stored for nine months since 30
April 1943, the date of the first entry on page three and the time the
vaccine was first prepared. That 1943 in the original entry should
really be 1944 also is apparent from page four of the notes wherein the
last entry is for 27 January 1944. It is a common mistake for one to use
the date of the old year during the first month of the new year.

Haagen inoculated another group of ten persons in Schirmeck on 10
October 1943 and 20 more on 27 January 1944 as seen from the entries on
page four of the Crodel notes. Again on page five of the original, the
entry for 14 October 1943 proves that ten persons were inoculated _for
the third time_ with 1.0 cc. of Haagen’s new vaccine. That this entry
refers to the virulent murine vaccine and not to the Gildemeister dead
vaccine can be seen from the preceding entry which speaks of four
control persons being inoculated three times with Gildemeister vaccine.
This fact is further apparent by comparing the quantity of the
injections plus the amount of distilled water used per tube of Haagen’s
new vaccine as set forth in other entries.

The entry for 25 May 1944 on page 7 of the Crodel notes states that 30
persons were inoculated in Natzweiler. “The inoculation took place
during the incubation period (in a transport containing also sick
people). Thirteen became sick in the period from 29 May to 9 June, of
these, two died.” Haagen had repeatedly testified that he performed no
vaccinations after January 1944 in Natzweiler. Not only did he perform
experiments after January 1944, but as proved by the entry quoted above,
subjects died during the course of such experiments. By his own
testimony Haagen proves that these entries deal with an experiment
during which the subjects were artificially infected with typhus.
Although the entry euphoniously states that the vaccinations “took place
during the incubation period,” Haagen testified, as had been repeatedly
suggested by the prosecution, that it is impossible to know when persons
are in the incubation period. The incubation period is that time between
the infection and the first manifestations of the disease. Accordingly,
it is impossible to know that a vaccination takes place during the
incubation period unless the person has been artificially infected so
that the date of infection is known. (_Tr. pp. 9701-2._)

It is significant to note also that the chart on page 14 of Miss
Crodel’s notes uses the word “nachimpfung,” meaning after-vaccination or
re-inoculation, in connection with multiple vaccination experiments on
two mice (both of which incidentally died), rather than the word
“nachinfektion,” meaning after-infection or subsequent infection, which
was repeatedly used by Haagen in his letters concerning experiments on
human beings.

Haagen testified that the defendant Schroeder visited him on 25 May
1944, the very day on which he was carrying out experiments in
Natzweiler. (_Tr. p. 9632._) While it is, of course, entirely possible
that Schroeder may have visited Haagen on 24 or 26 May, rather than on
25, the fact is quite clear that in any event Haagen’s very important
experiments on typhus were discussed with Schroeder, contrary to the
testimony of both men. The same is true with respect to the visit of the
defendant Becker-Freyseng which took place shortly after that of
Schroeder (_Tr. p. 9569_) and of Rose who visited Haagen both in 1943
and 1944. (_Tr. p. 9570._) Haagen’s statement that Becker-Freyseng came
all the way from Berlin to discuss with him the procurement of rabbits
and mice is as incredible as the rest of Haagen’s testimony.

The defendant Schroeder testified that Haagen’s research assignment was
not secret and attempted to argue on that basis that nothing criminal
could have happened. (_Tr. p. 3654._) Without pausing to point out the
stupidity of such an argument, suffice it to say that Schroeder’s
testimony was proved to be false by a list of research assignments
issued by Schroeder’s office in 1944. Haagen’s typhus work was
classified secret. (_NO-934, Pros. Ex. 458._)

The testimony of the witness Nales corroborates the proof outlined
herein above: That Haagen performed experiments to test the immunity of
his vaccine by artificially infecting the subjects with typhus. Nales, a
Dutch citizen, was arrested by the Gestapo in 1940 for allegedly
participating in a resistance movement. Although he was tried and
acquitted, he was committed to Buchenwald concentration camp in April
1941. In March 1942 he was transferred to Natzweiler and in November
1942 he became a nurse in the Ahnenerbe experimental station there.
(_Tr. pp. 10409-12._) He stated that in the latter part of 1943, 100
gypsies were sent to Natzweiler from Auschwitz for Haagen’s typhus
experiments. Haagen found them physically unsuitable and thereafter an
additional 90 gypsies were shipped in. These were divided into two
groups and confined in separate rooms in the Ahnenerbe experimental
station. One group was vaccinated against typhus. Approximately 14 days
later, both groups were artificially infected with typhus. As a result,
about 30 of the subjects died. Nales nursed the victims himself and saw
the bodies. He talked to the subjects frequently and knows they did not
volunteer, as indeed Haagen himself admitted on the stand. The gypsies
were of various nationalities including Poles, Czechs, Hungarians, and
Germans. (_Tr. pp. 10419-23._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

Haagen’s long continued activity in Schirmeck and Natzweiler can be
clearly seen from his account book on research tasks on yellow fever and
typhus. His work in Schirmeck began as early as 20 April 1943. He was
placing telephone calls to Schirmeck late in August 1944, over a year
after Haagen’s alleged “last vaccination” there. These accounts were
charged to the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe. (_NO-3837, Pros. Ex.
542._) They were in such detail as to reveal on their face his activity
in the concentration camps. (_NO-3450, Pros. Ex. 519._)

Haagen admitted that by infection experiments one could mean only one of
three things—(1) subsequent artificial infection with typhus, (2)
vaccinations of large groups of people and then studying efficacy during
a natural epidemic, and (3) Weil-Felix reaction tests carried out before
and after a subsequent vaccination. (_Tr. p. 9601._) He admitted that
the prosecution’s interpretation of “infection experiments” and
“subsequent infection” was equally consistent with his own. (_Tr. p.
9611._) He admitted that the word “nachimpfung” (subsequent vaccination)
could have been used as well as “nachinfektion” (subsequent infection).
(_Tr. p. 9611._)

There are no refined questions of documentary interpretation presented
to the Tribunal. The simple issue is whether Haagen committed crimes
during the course of his experiments. There is no dispute that these
were “experiments”. Haagen repeatedly used the word in his own letters.
There is no dispute that the inmates used as subjects were
nonvolunteers, among whom were nationals of German occupied countries.
Haagen admitted as much. The documents and the testimony prove that a
substantial number of subjects were killed during the course of these
experiments. Against this overwhelming proof stands the testimony of
Haagen and Rose, both of whom perjured themselves repeatedly on the
stand. Indeed, their own testimony is the best circumstantial proof as
to the criminality of the experiments. One does not gratuitously testify
falsely. Those who fear the light of truth commit perjury. These men
regard their oaths as lightly as they did the lives of their helpless
victims.

The guilt of Rose and Haagen is the measure of the guilt of Schroeder.
As a medical officer of the Luftwaffe, Haagen was subject to his orders.
(_Tr. p. 3636._) The office of Schroeder issued the research assignments
pursuant to which these experiments were carried out. It provided the
funds with which to carry them out. It received reports on the
experiments and knew they were performed on concentration camp inmates.
(_Tr. p. 1758._) Schroeder was himself in Strasbourg at the very time
the experiments were going on. His guilt is clear and unequivocal.

          c. Selections from the Argumentation of the Defense

             _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT
                                  ROSE_

    _Statements Regarding the Question of Responsibility of the
    Defendant Rose for the Typhus Experiments of Professor Eugen
    Haagen in the Concentration Camps at Schirmeck and Natzweiler
    and the Question of the Participation in These Experiments_

In order to reach a decision on the question of whether punishable
behavior on the part of the defendant Rose is established, the Tribunal
will have to examine the following: Did Professor Rose, in his capacity
as consulting hygienist with the Luftwaffe Medical Inspectorate, have
any commanding authority or the right and obligation of supervision at
all over Professor Eugen Haagen at the University of Strasbourg? Did the
defendant Rose participate in a penally relevant form in the experiments
with typhus vaccine conducted by Haagen in the concentration camps at
Natzweiler and Schirmeck? If so, the question of whether Haagen made
himself liable to punishment or not can be left completely undecided.

As far as the first question is concerned, one thing is certain. Above
all, Professor Haagen was a full professor at the University of
Strasbourg at the time and also director of the Institute for Hygiene at
this University. At the same time he was consultant on hygiene for the
civil administration of Alsace. (_German Tr. p. 9526._) During the war,
in addition to this, he was a part-time consulting, hygienist with an
Air Fleet. Finally, he applied for so-called research assignments for
his experiments, including his typhus experiments, that is, in practice,
financial aid.

First of all, it must be ascertained in which of his many capacities
Professor Haagen conducted his experiments. In this connection the facts
are perfectly clear. As a witness, Professor Haagen himself explained
that he requested and received the research assignments which made
possible his experiments, not as an officer of the Luftwaffe, but as
director of a civilian research institute. As usual, therefore, the
initiative was taken by the scientist. (_Becker-Freyseng 70,
Becker-Freyseng Ex. 48; Tr. pp. 6251-3_; _German Tr. pp. 7941-2, 8399,
9583-5_.) The correctness of this description can be seen from the
letter of Professor Haagen, submitted by the prosecution, addressed to
the rector of the University of Strasbourg, dated 7 October 1943.
(_NO-137, Pros. Ex. 189._) In this letter Haagen requests his _civilian_
superior, the rector of the University of Strasbourg, for special
privileges for the Institute for Hygiene of the University (i. e., a
civilian institution) based on the research commissions assigned to him.

The fact that the position of Professor Haagen was also interpreted by
the Luftwaffe in this manner can be seen, for example, from the style of
the letters addressed to him in matters relevant to his research and
vaccine production assignments. They are not clothed in the manner of
military orders, but possess the character of correspondence with a
civilian office which was not subordinate to the Luftwaffe, either in
the matter of receiving orders or of being under its supervision. A
number of those invested with such research assignments have described
to the Tribunal how they accepted these assignments for opportunistic
reasons, e. g., to obtain priority grading and to protect their
personnel from being drafted to military service. However, the fact that
no subordinate relationship or supervisory right arose through the
acceptance of such an assignment, can be seen likewise from the numerous
statements of the recipients of such Luftwaffe assignments. (_Schroeder
30, Schroeder Ex. 22_; _Schroeder 31, Schroeder Ex. 23_;
_Becker-Freyseng 79, Becker-Freyseng Ex. 63_; _German Tr. p. 6720_.)
Obligations arose solely with regard to the computation of the money
allowed, the reporting of any possible results achieved, as well as the
mention of assistance in the event of a scientific publication.

Moreover, such financial aid is in no way limited to Germany but is
common in many countries. No responsibility for possible errors and
crimes, which the recipients might commit, can result from such
financial assistance. As a matter of fact, Haagen never received a
special individual assignment to carry out a certain series of
experiments, but he was accorded, as per request, assistance for “typhus
research.” However, financial assistance for typhus research is
something quite normal. Incidentally, Haagen not only utilized the means
put at his disposal by the Luftwaffe, but also contributions from the
Reich Research Council and, most important, the personnel and equipment
of his institute. Therefore, his typhus research was not a part of his
military activities but was carried out within the scope of his civilian
activities. Also, the fact that a reserve officer of the Luftwaffe,
namely, Staff Physician [Stabsarzt] Graefe, appears as a collaborator in
his typhus research work, alters none of the facts of the case. It is
true that Graefe was a reserve officer in the same way as Haagen.
However, his main profession was that of assistant in the Institute for
Hygiene of the University of Strasbourg, and in this capacity he was
subordinate to Professor Haagen who was, of course, the director of this
institute. He was in no way subordinate to Haagen in the military sense,
but to the Air Force Area VII. (_German Tr. p. 9718._) Staff Physician
Graefe, who was drafted into the Luftwaffe, was transferred, therefore,
for purposes of further training, to the civilian institute where he
worked as an assistant in peacetime. Such incidents occurred quite
frequently in order to enable research activities in civilian institutes
to be continued in wartime. As a result of this assistance given in
respect of personnel, these civilian offices did not fall under the
command and supervision of the military authorities.

The fact that Professor Haagen felt himself to be completely independent
in his research activities can also be seen unequivocally from the fact
that he procured further assistance from other offices disregarding his
subordinate position with respect to the military. This means, without
going through the military channels which were prescribed as binding in
military matters. In his capacity as Oberstabsarzt of the Luftwaffe, he
could not deal with the Reich Research Council without informing his
superior thereof. Even less could he deal with the Reich Leader SS, with
other offices of the SS, or, for example, with the Generalarzt
Schreiber, who belonged to the army. He was, however, well able to do
all of this in his capacity as director of the Institute for Hygiene of
the University of Strasbourg. The correctness of this statement is shown
most clearly in the important point, namely the procurement of
experimental subjects in the concentration camps. In this case he did
not conduct negotiations through military channels via the Medical
Inspection of the Luftwaffe, but through his civilian channels, through
the mediation of his university colleague, Professor Hirt, via the
Ahnenerbe. He never informed his military superiors of these
negotiations nor asked for their assistance therein, for as matters
were, there was no reason to do so. The files show quite clearly that
Professor Haagen had already conducted his experiments on prisoners in
Schirmeck in May of 1943 in the same way as he continued them until the
middle of 1944. In May of 1943, however, Haagen was—in a military
sense—on leave of absence, and as far as his activities were concerned
he was in no way subject to the supervision of the Luftwaffe. His
appointment as consulting hygienist did not ensue until after 14 July
1943, because the letter from the Reich Minister of the Luftwaffe dated
14 July 1943 was not addressed to Consulting Hygienist Haagen, but to
Staff Physician [Stabsarzt] Haagen, who had been given leave to work in
his institute. (_NO-297, Pros. Ex. 316._) After his appointment as
consulting hygienist, however, his research activities do not differ in
any way from those which he performed before this appointment. They
remained civilian research activities as formerly.

Further attention should be called to the fact that the Luftwaffe showed
no special interest in Professor Haagen’s research work. The only real
interest of the Luftwaffe might have been in the actual production of
vaccine. They tried to influence him in this connection, but without
practical success. The Luftwaffe received no typhus vaccine from Haagen.
His research activities had no connection with the wishes of the
Luftwaffe regarding production; they were even in conflict with these
interests.

The prosecution, it is true, has submitted a number of accounts from
which it can be seen that telephone calls to Schirmeck and Natzweiler
were paid for from Luftwaffe funds. (_NO-3450, Pros. Ex. 519_; _NO-3837,
Pros. Ex. 542_.) Even if one were to consider the fact proved that these
calls were in connection with his work in concentration camps, the whole
nature of the accounts shows that Haagen treated his research work as a
unit and divided the costs according to his own point of view among the
different funds which had been placed at his disposal. The purpose
served by the telephone calls cannot be inferred from the accounts
alone. The arbitrary division of costs can be seen, for example, from
the fact that a whole series of expenditures entered under “Influenza
Account” referred to his typhus work. The department receiving the
expense sheets had no possibility of checking in detail the purpose to
which each enumerated item was put, and who the participants in the
telephone conversations were.

Sufficient facts have already been produced to show that, in general,
the Luftwaffe bore no responsibility for the research activities of the
University Professor Haagen. Nevertheless, it is proposed to examine the
question of whether a responsibility on the part of the defendant Rose
for Haagen’s research work can be deduced from the fact that Professor
Rose was consulting hygienist with the Medical Chief of the Luftwaffe;
because the prosecution is mainly attempting to construe responsibility
on the part of the defendant Rose from (1) the existence of the research
assignments given by the Luftwaffe; and (2) the fact that Professor
Haagen belonged to the Luftwaffe as a reserve officer.

There can be no doubt that Haagen was the medical officer of the
Luftwaffe. First of all, he was consulting hygienist with the Air Fleet
1 until the year 1941. Then he was given leave to work in his Institute
for Hygiene until a certain time, which must have been shortly after 14
July 1943. Then he became consulting hygienist with the Air Fleet
“Mitte” which was later renamed Air Fleet “Reich”.

However, he did not conduct his experiments in his capacity as
consulting hygienist. The tasks of a consultant did not include
scientific research. They lay in other fields. Professor Haagen was
never subordinate to the defendant Rose even in this military position
as consulting hygienist of an Air Fleet. On the other hand, the
defendant Rose had neither commanding authority, and neither the right
nor the duty of supervision as far as Haagen was concerned.

From a military standpoint Haagen was subordinate to his air fleet
physician in every respect. Incidentally, the defendant Rose had no
superior rights nor supervisory obligations either with respect to
Professor Haagen or to all the other consulting hygienists of the
Luftwaffe. His official duties were exclusively limited to consultations
with the Medical Inspector, that is, the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe. (_Compare Rose 6, Rose Ex. 6_; _Rose 7, Rose Ex. 7_;
_Rose 8, Rose Ex. 29_; _Handloser 12, Handloser Ex. 12_; _Tr. pp. 2987,
6259_; _German Tr. p. 3346_.)

There is no need to comment further on the fact that the defendant Rose
particularly did not possess such rights and obligations with respect to
Haagen in his capacity as a research scientist and director of the
institute of the University of Strasbourg, which was in no way
subordinate to the Luftwaffe. The correctness of these statements was
unequivocally confirmed on the witness stand during my examination, not
only by Professor Haagen himself (_German Tr. pp. 9679-80_) but also by
the defendant Schroeder, who, after all, should know, having been the
former Chief of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe. (_German Tr. p.
3734._) These facts should be sufficient to show that the defendant Rose
had neither the power of command and neither the right nor obligation of
supervision over Professor Haagen.

We still have to examine the second question of the possible
participation of the defendant Rose in Professor Haagen’s research work
in the concentration camps at Natzweiler and Schirmeck.

It is incontestable that the defendant Rose was cognizant of the fact
that the Luftwaffe gave several research assignments to Professor
Haagen, and that the reports issued by Haagen within the framework of
these assignments were sent to him for his information. However, these
reports never contained details from which a criminal activity on the
part of Professor Haagen could have been inferred or assumed. Even the
prosecutor, Mr. McHaney, during his interrogation of the defendant
Rostock, expressly declared that even he doubted whether Haagen would
have disclosed such details. (_German Tr. p. 3346._) This interpretation
corresponds completely with the facts. Professor Haagen’s reports
consisted purely of scientific research work which was designated for
publication. No reader could gather that they were based on illegal
experiments. A plan of experiments was never submitted by Haagen in
detail.

As has already been stated, it is true that the defendant Rose knew of
the research commissions which had been assigned to Professor Haagen by
the Luftwaffe. According to the nature of his official position,
however, he exercised no influence on the assignment of such
commissions. There were no misgivings about the assignments as such, for
nothing of a suspicious or objectionable nature could be seen from their
formulation. (_Becker-Freyseng 37, Becker-Freyseng Ex. 23._)

This situation is not altered by the fact that the defendant Rose
visited Professor Haagen twice in Strasbourg during the course of the
war, the first time in the year 1943 and the second time in 1944.
Clearly outlined assignments were dealt with on both occasions. During
the first visit the question was discussed whether Haagen wished to
reassume in addition the functions of a consulting hygienist of an Air
Fleet. The second visit resulted from the desire of the medical
inspection of the Luftwaffe that Haagen should comply with the request
repeatedly made to him, to take up the production of vaccine. This
second visit further served the purpose of discussing the question of a
particularly expensive but necessary installation for reproducing
various climates for the rabbit hutch in Professor Haagen’s Institute.

The reasons just mentioned for these two visits will be substantiated by
documents submitted. The question regarding Professor Haagen’s
assumption of the functions of a consulting hygienist with the Air Fleet
“Mitte” is mentioned in the letter from Rose addressed to Haagen, dated
9 June 1943, (_NO-306, Pros. Ex. 296_) the procurement of the climate
installation in Document NO-2874, Prosecution Exhibit 520. Moreover, the
first of these two documents just mentioned shows quite clearly that the
defendant Rose had no influence on the assignment of research
commissions to Haagen. In answering a question from Haagen relevant to
this matter, Rose had to limit his reply to the statement that the
competent expert was absent.

In examining the relationship between Rose and Haagen, their further
exchange of correspondence must also be mentioned.

Rose met Haagen when they were both division chiefs at the Robert Koch
Institute in Berlin from 1937 until 1941. Both were specialists in the
field of research into infectious diseases. Haagen specialized in virus
diseases including typhus. The defendant Rose specialized in tropical
diseases, parasitology, and vermin control. This fact explains the
existence of a scientific private correspondence, part of which can be
found in the files. According to the testimony of the witness, Olga
Eyer, this correspondence was extremely cursory and consisted of only
five to six letters from 1941 to 1944, during which time Fraeulein Eyer
was Haagen’s secretary. (_German Tr. p. 1781._)

The prosecution is obviously in possession of the entire exchange of
correspondence between Rose and Haagen. The letters the prosecution has
submitted from this correspondence deal with two subjects: The first
group consists of the two letters of 5 June 1943 and 9 June 1943
(_NO-305, Pros. Ex. 295_; _NO-306, Pros. Ex. 296_) which contain an
answer to the questions on the production technique of typhus vaccine.
Rose, who himself is not a specialist in this field, had requested
technical information and had received it. (In passing, it should be
stated that the 30 to 40 persons mentioned in this exchange of
correspondence signified the required manpower figure and not possible
experimental subjects, as the prosecution asserts.) (_German Tr. p.
9063._)

The principal letter of Haagen to Rose, dated 4 June 1943, which is
mentioned in Rose’s reply dated 9 June 1943, would clear up the matter
absolutely unequivocally. Unfortunately, it has not been submitted by
the prosecution.

The second part of the correspondence between Rose and Haagen concerns
the attitude of Haagen to the Copenhagen vaccine. Among others, Rose had
also informed Professor Haagen, one of the leading German
typhus-research scientists, about the result of his conversation with
Dr. Ipsen in Copenhagen, as can be seen from the distribution of the
report on the Copenhagen trip. (_Rose 22, Rose Ex. 21._) This second
part of the correspondence developed as a result of the transmission of
this strictly scientific information, and the following letters from it
were introduced by the prosecution during the trial:

Letter from Haagen to Rose dated 4 October 1943 (_NO-2874, Pros. Ex.
520_).

Letter from Haagen to Rose dated 29 November 1943 (_NO-1059, Pros. Ex.
490_).

Letter from Rose to Haagen dated 13 December 1943 (_NO-122, Pros. Ex.
298_).

Professor Rose furnished a detailed explanation of this exchange of
correspondence during his direct examination. At the time he was only in
possession of his aforementioned letter to Haagen dated 13 December
1943, whereas the two other letters were still withheld by the
prosecution. Although, as a result of this, he was put in the difficult
position of having to testify regarding an exchange of correspondence
which took place four years ago, only a part of which he had available
for reference, the correctness of his statements was completely
confirmed in the essential points by the two other letters which were
not introduced until later in the trial. (_Tr. p. 6281._) It can be seen
quite definitely from the first paragraph of Haagen’s letter to Rose
dated 4 October 1943 that the actual interest of the defendant Rose lay
in inducing Professor Haagen to produce a proven vaccine.

The question hinged on the climate installation which was necessary for
the production of the Giroud vaccine from the lungs of rabbits. It was
only necessary to establish an additional production plant for the
Luftwaffe because the vaccine concerned was obtained from dead typhus
bacilli and had been introduced for some time. At the end of his letter
Professor Haagen once more refers to this purely technical question of
production. In his letter Haagen also expresses his opinion and
valuation of the Ipsen method. The penultimate paragraph of this letter
is particularly important. It describes the great importance Professor
Haagen attached to the serological experiments in weighing the results
of the vaccination and of the state of immunity. He writes in this
connection:

    “I generally regret that, in judging immunity, much too little
    consideration is being given to the serological reaction. My
    experiments with the nonphenolized vaccine particularly proved
    again that the titer of agglutination should be considered. No
    doubt, much greater importance must again be attached to the
    serological result when judging the state of immunity in
    accordance with our present opinion on the course of the
    infection of the virus diseases, especially in their initial
    stages.” (_NO-2874, Pros. Ex. 520._)

At the end of his letter, Haagen suggests that his own vaccines and the
Ipsen vaccine be compared by examination. This is unequivocal proof of
the proposal having been made by Haagen. The defendant Rose had not the
slightest reason to assume that Professor Haagen intended to perform an
immunity check with a virulent virus causing disease in human organism,
since the Professor particularly stressed the importance of serological
methods when testing the condition of immunity. On the contrary, he had
to assume that Professor Haagen considered such an infection
superfluous.

The prosecution objects to the fact that Haagen, when discussing the
planned experiments in his correspondence with Rose, used such terms as
“experiments of infection” and “subsequent infection.” But Professor
Rose knew that Haagen was engaged in the development of live vaccine
nonpathogenic to human beings. He even mentioned this in his lecture on
typhus and malaria at Basel in 1944. (_Rose 25, Rose Ex. 31._) Every
expert knows that the application of living virus for the purpose of
protective vaccination is a procedure of infection.

He was aware that Haagen worked on the further development of the method
evolved by the Frenchman Blanc. This, too, can be found in the same
passage of his Basel lecture mentioned above. The fact that the term
“subsequent infection” was used by Professor Haagen in distinguishing
protective vaccinations from live and weakened vaccines could in no way
surprise or startle him. (_Rose 69, Rose Ex. 59_; _Rose 60, Rose Ex.
60_; _Tr. pp. 6295-6_; _German Tr. 9639_.)

It must be pointed out in this connection that the notes of the
Natzweiler camp physician himself distinctly describe the vaccination
which Haagen had occasionally called “subsequent infection,” as
“vaccination”. His entries of 22 March 1944 state that “the actual
‘vaccination’ will now be carried out after two protective vaccinations
have taken place.” (_German Tr. p. 9782._)

The report taken from the Tropical Diseases Bulletin which I introduced
in this trial shows, however, quite clearly that these infections were
not dangerous and could, in the main, be controlled. (_Rose 58, Rose Ex.
58._)

This report states that the Blanc live typhus vaccine was used by the
French Government in Algeria in 3.5 million cases to combat typhus, and
that as a result of these protective vaccinations, real typhus illness
was found in only 5-6 cases per thousand. If one compares this figure of
5-6 per thousand with the total number of the vaccinations, it appears
that in the course of this vaccination action carried out by the French
Government, 17,500 to 21,000 cases of typhus illness took place as a
result of vaccination. This result may justly give weight to the
assumption that the French Government considered these incidents a
justifiable and tolerable risk in view of the extent of the threatened
danger.

It would be unfair to blame the defendant Rose for having taken no steps
at all on learning that another research scientist, namely Haagen (who
was not subordinated to him) was using a method which he knew was widely
practiced. He had much less reason to do so since it was Haagen who
tried by preliminary vaccinations with dead vaccines to avoid and to
reduce the extent of the vaccination reactions and the danger of
sickness as a result of the vaccination. Haagen’s reports and
publications only deal with this object of a preliminary vaccination
with dead vaccines and of the subsequent vaccination with a live,
virulent vaccine nonpathogenic to human beings (subsequent infection).
This field, with which he was not so familiar, was described in detail
by the defendant Rose in his direct testimony. When interrogated,
Professor Haagen, as the actual originator of the plans, substantially
enlarged and in some instances corrected this description.

It does not seem feasible to me to classify as criminal, experiments
which tend to make more bearable and less dangerous a recognized method
already applied on millions of people.

In addition, there is no reply from the defendant Rose to this letter
from Professor Haagen of 4 October 1943. It is not certain whether he
actually received it. However, the possibility that he did receive it
cannot be denied.

Chronologically, the next letter in this correspondence is Haagen’s
letter to Rose of 29 November 1943. (_NO-1059, Pros. Ex. 490._) The
defendant Rose cannot remember ever having received this letter.

It is true that after this letter had been submitted to him by the
prosecution during cross-examination, Professor Rose assumed that he
must have received it, judging by the date and the conditions of the
postal service at that time. (_Tr. p. 6428._) However, he was misled
when making this statement by a mistake in the reproduction. Whereas
this letter is actually dated 29 November 1943, the date on the letter
is given as 29 November 1942 in the German mimeographed copies
distributed by the prosecution in the course of the cross-examination.
Thus it was sent at a time when large quantities of mail were destroyed
in trains or at post offices by the heavy air raids on German towns and
communications. According to the resultant state of affairs, it is
probable that he actually did not receive this letter. In this very
letter Professor Haagen mentions that 18 of the 100 inmates had already
died en route. The answers the defendant Rose gave on cross-examination
before this letter had been submitted to him show clearly that he could
not remember such information. (_Tr. p. 6424-5._) He would hardly have
been able to forget such a gruesome report if he had actually received
this letter.

It also cannot be stated that the defendant Rose could only have written
his letter to Haagen of 13 December 1943 (_NO-122, Pros. Ex. 298_) after
having received Haagen’s letter of 29 November 1943. Prosecuting
counsel, Mr. McHaney, however, alleged this when cross-examining Rose
(_Tr. p. 6431_) thus causing confusion in the mind of the defendant
Rose. For, in reality, Rose’s letter of 13 December 1943 is the reply to
a further letter from Haagen dated 8 December 1943, as appears clearly
from the introductory sentence in Rose’s letter of 13 December 1943.
From this state of affairs it can only be concluded that either
Professor Haagen did not mail this letter at all—perhaps in view of the
information contained therein about the unfavorable conditions of health
of the inmates—or else the defendant Rose did not receive the letter
because it was destroyed along with a lot of other mail of the same date
in the heavy air raids. The prosecution, no doubt, would not have failed
to introduce this letter into evidence if the defendant Rose had replied
to Haagen’s letter dated 29 November 1943. Professor Haagen’s suggestion
in his letter of 4 October 1943 that the Copenhagen vaccine be tested,
is again dealt with in Rose’s letter of 13 December 1943. In this letter
Rose exclusively speaks of the testing of vaccine, without mentioning
infections at all. In the letter a parallel is drawn to the Buchenwald
typhus experiments only insofar as he indicated the advantage of the
simultaneous testing of several vaccines. On direct examination, that
is, prior to the submission of other documents which give greater
clarification to the whole matter, the defendant Rose stated quite
clearly and in agreement with subsequent evidence and the later
testimony of Haagen, that the point in question was the application of
the Copenhagen vaccine for preliminary vaccination, aiming at the
weakening of the vaccination reaction in connection with subsequent
vaccination with a live, avirulent vaccine nonpathogenic to human
beings.

The two biologically parallel conditions which are obvious to every
layman, one, the weakening of a reaction following vaccination with a
live vaccine, and two, the weakening of a natural sickness, were
explained in detail by Professor Rose on direct examination. (_Tr. p.
6281._)

Finally, it must be emphatically pointed out that the plan discussed in
this correspondence to test the effect of the Copenhagen vaccine on the
weakening of vaccination reactions followed by the application of the
new live avirulent typhus vaccine pathogenic to human beings as compared
with other vaccines, was not carried out at all. After Haagen had
succeeded in weakening the reaction in another way, namely by long
storage, he was no longer interested in the Copenhagen vaccine.
(_Becker-Freyseng 62_[58]; _German, Tr. 9614-5_.)

Therefore, there only remains the examination of the question of whether
the defendant Rose was responsible for Haagen’s activities, knowing that
Professor Haagen had performed experiments on inmates with live
avirulent typhus vaccines still in the testing stage. Apart from the
correspondence discussed just now (part of which did not deal with
experiments at all, while the other part referred to the discussion of
an experimental plan which had been temporarily under consideration),
the defendant Rose was only informed of Haagen’s activities through the
latter’s reports which were sent to him for information and comments by
the chief of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe, through official
channels. These, however, either contained simple information about the
fact that Professor Haagen had asked for and received a commission for
research, or else they were scientific publications containing nothing
to which objections could be made.

The prosecution concluded from the letter of the Luftwaffe Medical
Academy, dated 7 July 1944 to the Luftlottenarzt Reich [Air Fleet
Physician Reich] that Haagen must have infected human beings with
virulent typhus bacilli which were pathogenic to human beings because
“control persons” were mentioned in this letter. (_NO-128, Pros._ _Ex.
307._) This letter approves the publication of Professor Haagen’s work
and that of his assistant Crodel: “Experiments with a New Dried Typhus
Vaccine.” This work which had been submitted to the defendant Rose prior
to publication actually shows clearly that these controls were meant to
be a comparison of the results of serological examinations on patients
from the camp epidemic with the serological examinations on persons
protectively vaccinated. Haagen, whose main interest was in serological
examinations, as already mentioned, had no reason whatsoever to perform
artificial infections since the epidemic in the concentration camp at
Natzweiler offered an abundance of persons for the purposes of
comparison.

Finally it must be stated, in addition, that the experimental plans
discussed in Haagen’s letter of 27 June 1944 to Professor Hirt never
became known to the Luftwaffe Medical Inspectorate nor to Rose.
(_NO-127, Pros. Ex. 306._) Moreover, the general development of the
situation (Haagen’s absence from Strasbourg, evacuation of the camp at
Natzweiler, etc.,) shows that this planned experiment could never have
been performed. The truth of this statement is further clearly proved by
the testimonies of the witnesses Broers and Nales, according to which no
more typhus vaccinations took place after April 1944.

                 *        *        *        *        *

              _EXTRACTS FROM THE FINAL PLEA FOR DEFENDANT
                             MRUGOWSKY_[59]

The prosecution stated in its plea: If Grawitz were still alive, he
would sit here as one of the principal defendants on the defendants’
bench. This is certainly true. But Grawitz passed sentenced on himself.
And what does the prosecution do? It indicts Mrugowsky instead of
Grawitz. It does not consider in its arguments that Mrugowsky was not a
private person but a medical officer in the Waffen SS, that is a
soldier, and that Grawitz and Himmler were his military superiors. It
speaks of conspiracy but it does not examine thereby to what extent a
conspiracy may be conceived when military subordination plays its part.
In its summing-up, both written and oral, the prosecution merely
submitted the original allegations of the indictment. It completely
ignored the evidence produced by the defendants, and merely pointed out
a little scornfully that this evidence was mostly composed of
affidavits. But this is no fault of the defendants. They would have
preferred to be able to produce counter-proof taken from their own
records. But all the documents belonging to the defendants and to other
offices, from which the prosecution evidence emanates, are in the hands
of the prosecution. It merely submitted those parts of the documents
which, torn from their context, seem to incriminate the defendants. On
the other hand, the prosecution made it impossible for the defendants to
find the records connected with the prosecution evidence which would
ensure a complete elucidation of the true facts.

I would ask the Tribunal to consider in particular this difficult
position of the defendants with regard to evidence. It places particular
emphasis on the old legal principle that the defendant is considered not
guilty until his guilt has been proved, and in doubtful cases the Court
is to decide in favor of the defendant.

The charges against Mrugowsky are composed of three groups:

(1) The typhus experiments and the aconitine execution which did not
concern volunteers. In these cases the Tribunal will have to consider
whether state emergency contended by Mrugowsky really existed, and if
so, if the typhus experiments and the aconitine execution were
justified. If the answer is in the affirmative, then neither the typhus
experiments nor the aconitine execution is criminal, since there is no
objection raised as to the manner in which they were performed. If the
question is answered in the negative, then the next consideration is, if
and to what extent Mrugowsky participated in them and if he is
responsible under criminal law.

(2) The second group consists of the actions of Ding which he performed
on his own initiative, e. g., his participation in a killing by phenol
and the poison experiment on 6 persons.

(3) The third group consists of the protective vaccinations for which
volunteers were available, according to the evidence produced by the
prosecution.

The defendant Mrugowsky is indicted first of all for his alleged
participation in the typhus experiments at Buchenwald and in other
medical experiments. In its submission of evidence, the prosecution
treated these experiments as criminal and as experiments performed by
doctors. During the examination of the experts, Professor Leibbrandt and
Professor Ivy, the prosecution also treated these medical experiments as
experiments performed by doctors and asked the experts if these
experiments were to be considered as admissible from the point of view
of medical ethics.

I am convinced that the experiments on which the prosecution bases its
indictment were in no way experiments which originated from the
initiative of the executive physicians themselves. The experiments were
a form of research work necessitated by an extraordinarily pressing
state emergency, and ordered by the highest competent governmental
authorities.

Professor Ivy also admitted that there is a fundamental difference
between the physician as a therapeutist and the physician as a
scientific research worker. When asked by Dr. Tipp: “So you admit that
to the physician as a therapeutist, the physician who cures, other rules
and, therefore, other paragraphs of the oath of Hippocrates apply,” he
gave the answer: “Yes, I do, very definitely.”

Consequently, experiments on human beings, performed for urgent reasons
of a public character and ordered by the competent authorities of the
state, cannot simply be considered as criminal merely because the
experimental persons chosen by the state for the research work were not
volunteers.

The prosecution ought to have brought additional evidence with regard to
the individual experiments to prove why they were criminal, apart from
the fact that the experimental persons were not volunteers.

The largest space in the indictment against Mrugowsky is taken up by the
typhus experiments at Buchenwald. The prosecution does not contend that
Mrugowsky participated in them personally, but I further think I have
proved in my written arguments that he neither suggested nor ordered nor
controlled these experiments; that he did not further them nor even
approve of them.

Nevertheless for precaution’s sake, I also must prove that the
experiments in question were not illegal and that under no aspect can
they be considered as criminal since they were caused by an urgent state
emergency. This proof can be produced in a particularly impressive
manner in the case of the typhus experiments.

In the Flick trial,[60] the prosecution submitted Document NI-5222 which
I have offered to the Tribunal. (_Mrugowsky, Ex. 99._) This document,
which comes from the Labor Office Westphalia and is dated 3 February
1942, states that according to information from military quarters, until
recently the number of Soviet prisoners of war dying of typhus was still
15,000 _daily_.

I think I need no longer emphasize that a most pressing state emergency
is considered to exist if from one single epidemic there are, I repeat,
15,000 deaths daily in the camps for Russian prisoners alone.

On the other hand, the prosecution stated that from the beginning of
1942 until the beginning of 1945, a total of 142 persons died as a
result of the typhus experiments at Buchenwald. I place these two
figures intentionally at the beginning of my argument. They show that
during the entire period of the experiments in Buchenwald, the number of
fatalities amounted to one percent of the toll taken _every day_ by
typhus in the _Russian prisoner camps alone_ in winter 1941-42. In
addition to these victims in the Russian P. W. camps, one has to
consider the enormous number of people who died of typhus among the
civil population of the occupied eastern territories and the German
Armed Forces.

It is clear that under these conditions drastic measures had to be
taken. When judging the typhus experiments carried out in the
concentration camp Buchenwald one must not forget that Germany was
engaged in war at the time. Millions of soldiers had to give up their
lives because they were called upon to fight by the state. The state
employed the civil population for work according to state requirements.
In doing so it made no distinction between men and women. The state
ordered employment in chemical factories which was detrimental to
health. It ordered work on the construction of new projectiles which
involved considerable danger. When unexploded enemy shells of a new type
were found at the front, or unexploded bombs of new construction were
found after an air raid at home, it ordered gunnery officers to dismount
such new shells or bombs with the aid of assistants in order to learn
their construction. This implied great danger. Then the fillings of the
new shells and bombs had to be examined by analytical chemists to
determine their composition. In certain cases this work was detrimental
to the health of the chemists and their assistants and always
considerably dangerous.

In the same way the state ordered the medical men to make experiments
with new weapons against dangerous diseases. These weapons were the
vaccines. The fact that during these experiments not only the
experimental persons but also the medical men were exposed to great
danger was proved when Dr. Ding infected himself unintentionally at the
beginning of his typhus experiments and became seriously ill with
typhus.

With regard to such medical experiments, one has to agree on principle
with the opinion of Professor Ivy and Professor Leibbrandt that such
experiments may only be performed on volunteers. But even Professor Ivy
admitted that there is a difference between those cases in which a
scientific research worker starts such experiments on his own initiative
and the cases in which the competent organs of the state authorize him
to do so. He answered the question of whether the organ of the state is
responsible in the affirmative; but he added that this has nothing to do
with the moral responsibility of the experimenter towards the
experimental subject.

If the experiment is ordered by the state, this moral responsibility of
experimenter towards the experimental subject relates to the way in
which the experiment is performed, not to the experiment itself.

The prosecution did not contest that the experiments at Buchenwald were
carried out correctly. By way of precaution, I offered evidence for the
correct execution in my closing brief.

In answer to a question by Dr. Sauter, Professor Ivy observed that he
did not think the state could take the responsibility of ordering a
scientist to kill a man in order to obtain knowledge.

The case with the typhus experiments is different. No order was given to
kill a man in order to obtain knowledge. But the typhus experiments were
dangerous experiments. Out of 724 experimental persons, 154 died. But
these 154 deaths from the typhus experiments have to be compared with
the 15,000 who died of typhus _every day_ in the camps for Soviet
prisoners of war, and the innumerable deaths from typhus among the
civilian population of the occupied eastern territories and the German
troops. This enormous number of deaths led to the absolute necessity of
having effective vaccines against typhus in sufficient quantity. The
newly developed vaccines had been tested in the animal experiments as to
their compatibility.

I explained this in detail in writing.

The Tribunal will have to decide whether, in view of the enormous extent
of epidemic typhus, in view of the 15,000 deaths it was causing daily in
the camps for Russian prisoners of war alone, the order given by the
government authorities to test the typhus vaccines was justified or not.
If the answer is in the affirmative, then the typhus experiments at
Buchenwald were not criminal, since the prosecution did not contest that
they were carried out according to the rules of medical science. In this
case, any responsibility of Mrugowsky for these experiments is excluded.
If, on the other hand, the Tribunal answered the question in the
negative and declared the typhus experiments at Buchenwald to be
criminal, then examination would have to be made as to whether Mrugowsky
was responsible for them in any way.

In my written statement I explained in detail that Block 46 at
Buchenwald, where the experiments were carried out, was not subordinate
to Mrugowsky, but that Dr. Ding worked under the immediate orders of
Grawitz. Out of the extensive evidence I offered to prove this fact, I
only want to stress, one, the letter addressed by Grawitz to Mrugowsky
in which Grawitz declared explicitly on 24 August 1944 that he gave his
_consent_ for the series of experiments he mentioned in the letter to be
performed in Block 46 at Buchenwald, and two, the letter addressed by
Mrugowsky to Grawitz on 29 January 1945 in which he suggests the testing
of a jaundice virus and writes: “Please obtain permission from the Reich
Leader SS to perform the infection experiments _in the typhus
experimental station of the concentration camp Buchenwald_.”

These two letters demonstrate that even in autumn 1944 and early in 1945
Mrugowsky could still only have performed a series of experiments in
Block 46 with special permission. This refutes the assumption of the
prosecution that Block 46 was subordinate to Mrugowsky.

But above all, I want to stress again the affidavit given by Dr. Morgen
on 23 May 1947 in which he stated that when he investigated the
occurrences in Block 46 at Buchenwald, Dr. Ding showed him an order
signed by Grawitz in which Ding was commissioned explicitly to carry out
the experiments.

Dr. Morgen has further stated that he had to report to Grawitz
personally about the result of his investigations as an examining
magistrate at Buchenwald. The results here, too, according to the
affidavit given by Dr. Morgen showed that Grawitz ordered the
experiments. On this occasion he called Dr. Ding “his man,” and said he
would be very sorry if the investigation caused any charges to be
brought against Dr. Ding, since he had employed him for the experiments.
Morgen emphasized that the name of Mrugowsky was not mentioned in the
course of his conversations with Ding and Grawitz. This clearly shows, I
think, that Mrugowsky had nothing to do with Block 46 at Buchenwald. As
further evidence that Ding was actually subordinate to Mrugowsky in
Block 46, the prosecution referred to the sketches designed by
Mrugowsky. (_NO-416, Pros. Ex. 22 and NO-417, Pros. Ex. 23._) These
pictures show that the Division for Typhus and Virus Research in
Buchenwald was subordinate to Mrugowsky; Mrugowsky does not deny this.
Division for Typhus and Virus Research was only Block 50. Block 46 was
called as formerly “Experimental Station of the Concentration Camp
Buchenwald.” Mrugowsky’s letter just quoted shows this. Block 46 was
merely attached to the Division for Typhus and Virus Research without
establishing thereby any relationship of subordination to Mrugowsky.
This is described and proved in detail in my closing brief.

From the two sketches designed by Mrugowsky, showing that the Division
for Typhus and Virus Research was under his control from its
establishment to the end of the war, nothing can be deduced, therefore,
about whether he was Ding’s superior in Block 46.

This fact and the further evidence brought in my closing brief
demonstrate that Block 46 at Buchenwald was not subordinate to
Mrugowsky. Therefore, Mrugowsky bears no responsibility for the typhus
experiments in Block 46.

In this connection, I want to emphasize that Mrugowsky never denied that
he knew the typhus experiments at Buchenwald were ordered by Grawitz and
carried out by Dr. Ding. He never denied that he saw, for instance, the
report about the series I of the experiments, which he rewrote in his
letter of May 5, 1942, and that he saw Ding’s essay about acridine which
Ding sent to Grawitz for approval to publish 18 months after the
experiments were completed, and which Grawitz then gave to Mrugowsky to
return to Ding. But from this knowledge, no responsibility on the part
of Mrugowsky can be deduced for the typhus experiments. The experiments
were ordered by Himmler and Grawitz as his highest military superiors.
As a medical officer of the Waffen SS, Mrugowsky had no possibility at
all of opposing these experiments ordered by his superiors. When Grawitz
first suggested the experiments, he resisted at once, and induced him to
ask for a decision from Himmler as the highest superior. Himmler decided
against Mrugowsky. Under these conditions Mrugowsky could do no more.
His opposition, however, resulted in the fact that he was not
commissioned with the experiments, but that Ding received the order for
execution.

Nor has the prosecution brought any evidence to show that Mrugowsky
subsequently intervened in any way in the typhus experiments at
Buchenwald; that he furthered them, or participated in them in any way.
On account of the fact that Mrugowsky knew about the typhus experiments,
no charge can be made against him under criminal law, because neither in
law nor in fact had he any possibility of preventing the experiments or
enforcing their cessation later on.

The prosecution further based its charge against Mrugowsky on the
depositions of several witnesses to the effect that he had been Ding’s
chief in Block 46, also insofar as the experiments carried out by Ding
in Block 46 were concerned. I have energetically contested this. All the
statements produced by the prosecution in this respect originate from
Ding. None of these statements comes from anybody who worked in Block 46
himself. It is significant that the prosecution has not been able to
submit one single order given by Mrugowsky to Ding for the execution of
typhus experiments, although its witness, Balachowsky, stated that Kogon
had managed to collect and secure extensive evidence which he had handed
over to the American Army. If there had been any written orders from
Mrugowsky to Ding, the latter would certainly not have destroyed them
for the sake of his own protection, and Kogon would have given them to
the American Army with his other documents. It is true that the witness
Kogon (whose unreliability I shall prove later) maintains that Mrugowsky
gave mostly only oral orders to Ding. But he further testified that from
the year 1943 onwards, Ding was no longer satisfied with oral orders
from Mrugowsky but asked for them to be given in writing. In spite of
this, not a single written order from Mrugowsky to Ding concerning the
execution of a series of typhus experiments was produced.

The only witness who might be able to state from his own knowledge
anything about the order given to Ding in respect of the typhus
experiments is the witness Dr. Morgen. I just indicated that Morgen saw
the order given by Grawitz to Ding for the execution of the typhus
experiments, and that Grawitz personally told Dr. Morgen that Ding was
his man at Buchenwald and said he employed him there.

The error of the witnesses, who stated that Mrugowsky had been Ding’s
chief, results from the fact that Ding was dependent on Mrugowsky in
respect of the production of vaccine in Block 50 and also concerning his
activity as a hygienist. I proved in my closing brief that from 1942 to
1945 Ding was only working on the typhus vaccine experiments for about
2½ months, if one adds up all the hours he worked on them. All the rest
of his activity in approximately 3 years was devoted to the vaccine
production and the work of a hygienist, that is, work in which he was
Mrugowsky’s subordinate. It is comprehensible that during the
approximate period of 33 months when he worked for Mrugowsky, he
received many more orders from him than from Grawitz for the execution
of the 13 typhus vaccine experiments. It is, therefore, comprehensible
that the main part of his correspondence under these circumstances was
carried on with Mrugowsky.

In consequence of the description of the prosecution which hardly spoke
of anything except the typhus vaccine experiments, and only produced
documents thereon, the impression was certainly given that the typhus
vaccine experiments were Ding’s main activity at Buchenwald. That is not
so. In his main activity at Buchenwald, Ding was Mrugowsky’s
subordinate. Therefore, because his main correspondence was with
Mrugowsky and he called Mrugowsky his superior, one cannot assume that
also in respect of the typhus vaccine experiments there was some
connection between Mrugowsky and Ding, and that Mrugowsky participated
in these experiments in any way or was responsible for them. The
prosecution did not deny that such double subordination, as it existed
between Ding on the one hand and Grawitz and Mrugowsky on the other, is
possible in a military organization and happened frequently. I can refer
also in this respect to the statement in my closing brief.

The testimony of the witness Kogon and Ding’s diary (_NO-265, Pros. Ex.
287_) are the chief items of evidence submitted by the prosecution
against Mrugowsky. This is why, in my closing brief, I explained in
detail that neither Kogon’s statement nor the Ding diary furnish any
substantial proof. As to Kogon’s testimony, I want to emphasize once
more the principal points:

Kogon described on the witness stand the dramatic circumstances under
which he pretends to have saved the so-called Ding diary. I needn’t
point out that the particular occurrences which happened when he saved
the diary would have impressed him so much that he would not forget them
if his statement were true. Therefore, he couldn’t possibly give a
different description of this event on several different occasions. In
fact, in the doctors’ trial and in the Pohl trial,[61] he gave two
reports about the way he allegedly saved the diary. These reports differ
so fundamentally and in a manner which could only be possible if his
contention that he saved the diary is untrue, and the descriptions he
gives of this event are pure invention.

Kogon stated in the doctors’ trial that Ding sorted the secret documents
to be burned in Block 46. While Ding and Dietzsch went into the
adjoining room for a moment, he threw the diary and a heap of papers
into a box to save them from destruction. Two days later he had told
Ding that he had saved the diary and a heap of other papers from being
destroyed and received permission to fetch them from Block 46;
otherwise, he wouldn’t have been able to get them out. He fetched them
and kept them ever since. This description is quite plausible and would
be hard to refute if there was not Kogon’s own testimony in the Pohl
trial.

In the Pohl trial, the same Kogon testified about three months later
that he was standing with Ding and Dietzsch at the same table when the
secret documents were sorted for destruction. Suddenly Ding pushed the
diary and other papers towards him. He took them and carried them to
Block 50, together with Ding. Ding did not know at this time that Kogon
had the diary and the other documents with him, but he told Ding this on
the same day.

A more striking contradiction than these two statements about the saving
of the diary is hardly possible. If Kogon had really saved the diary in
the way he described in the doctors’ trial, then the moment when he
threw the diary into the box and his reflections during the two days
before he told Ding that the diary had not been burned would have
remained indelibly in his memory. He would have remembered the way from
Block 46 to Block 50 to fetch the diary and the way back with the diary
so well, that a different description would be impossible. Also, if the
preservation of the diary had occurred in the way described by Kogon in
the Pohl trial, it certainly would have been recollected by him so
clearly that a different description would also be impossible. So the
two descriptions about the preservation of the diary, differing so
fundamentally from each other, can only be explained in two ways. Either
Kogon’s statement is untrue and he didn’t save the diary at all—in this
case, if he told the Tribunal a falsehood about such an important point,
then his whole testimony is unreliable—or Kogon must have such a bad
memory that his contradictions in his testimony can be explained
therefrom. In this case, too, his entire testimony would have no
probative value on account of his bad memory.

The Dietzsch testimony submitted by me speaks against the correctness of
Kogon’s statement on the saving of the diary. Dietzsch states that
during the destruction of the secret documents in Block 46 Ding tore up
the diary in his presence and threw it into the lighted stove where it
was burned. Dietzsch declared explicitly that Ding made sure that all
the documents were entirely burned after the destruction of the papers
was finished.

I should say that Dietzsch’s statement combined with the contradiction
between the two statements of Kogon’s proves that what Kogon said about
the saving of the diary is a falsehood.

In my closing brief I dealt in detail with still further points on which
the statements made by Kogon in the doctors’ trial and in the Pohl trial
contradict each other in a similarly marked manner concerning the
preservation of the diary. It will not be necessary to repeat all these
arguments here. I should like to refer the Tribunal to them.

The second main evidence of the prosecution against Mrugowsky is the
diary which is said to have been saved. The two fantastic descriptions
of the saving of the diary given by Kogon are unreliable. Therefore,
Dietzsch must be believed. He said that Ding burned the original diary
of Block 46 in his presence. This statement is supported by the opinion
given by the handwriting experts, Zettner and Nastvogel, treated in
detail in my closing brief.

In the meantime the prosecution declared while discussing the Beiglboeck
evidence that it could have handwriting examined to determine the date
of its origin at an institute in Frankfurt and also documents
investigated in every way. The prosecution thereupon stressed explicitly
that I also had the Ding diary examined by experts.

The Ding diary is of importance for the prosecution for the charges
against several defendants. Therefore, the prosecution ought to have
found it more important to have the genuineness of the Ding diary
examined rather than the Beiglboeck documents. Ding signed in ink. So
the institute at Frankfurt would have been able to ascertain without any
difficulty whether the signature on the first page is several years
older than the signature on the last page. Furthermore, the institute
could have ascertained without any difficulty whether the whole diary
from the end of the year 1941 till spring 1945 was written on exactly
the same paper or not. But the prosecution did not hand the diary to
this institute for examination. This fact shows that it was itself
convinced that such examination would not have given a result favorable
to the prosecution.

In my opinion, this is a particularly strong argument for the assumption
that the diary was really composed and written subsequently. I also want
to refer the Tribunal to my closing brief with reference to this point.
The probative value of a diary lies in the fact that the man who kept it
cannot foresee the future development when making his entries. Therefore
it is to be presumed that the entries portray the events objectively and
in their entirety. If a document which is subsequently composed is given
the external form of a diary, one can deduce therefrom the intention to
influence the reader in a certain direction and also to deceive him for
this purpose. That is the reason why any record written subsequently and
made up in the form of a diary has no probative value.

The prosecution tried to show that the Ding diary is of probative value
by comparing its contents with a number of documents having the same
contents as the entries in the diary. In my closing brief I dealt with
these documents in detail and proved that they all, without exception,
came from Ding. All documents which the prosecution compared with the
diary, Ding still had at hand when he made the belated compilation after
the original diary had been burned. They are vouchers he used for the
entries he made in the diary we have now. Therefore, it cannot be
deduced from the conformity of these documents and the diary that the
latter is good evidence.

One of the documents the prosecution compared with the diary is the
so-called work report of Ding. This work report is really only a draft
which was not signed and was not sent to Mrugowsky. I explained this in
detail in my closing brief and offered evidence for it. According to
Kogon’s statement, this draft of the report was written in Block 50 by
the second compound clerk. Such draft has no probative value unless it
is signed by the person who should sign it. In this instance, it would
have been Ding. Mr. Hardy admitted that this work report was only
prepared for signature by Ding. He thereby admitted that it was not
signed. Therefore, the draft has no probative value. If these three main
elements of evidence fail, Kogon’s statement, the work report, and the
Ding dairy, the chief part of the evidence brought forward against
Mrugowsky fails.

The prosecution contended in its summing-up that the experimental
subjects volunteered neither for the typhus experiments nor for the
other experiments at Buchenwald. In respect of the other experiments,
this is not correct. I shall deal with this later. In respect to the
typhus experiments, it may be correct that most of the experimental
subjects did not volunteer.

On the other hand, the closing brief of the prosecution shows no
allegation for the period up to the fall of 1943 that Mrugowsky had
anything to do with the selection of the prisoners for the experiments.
This is correct and was also put in in my closing brief. In autumn 1943
according to the contentions of the prosecution, again relying on
Kogon’s testimony, Ding is said to have asked Mrugowsky for the
experimental subjects to be chosen by the Reich Leader SS. This
statement of Kogon’s is also untrue. I have pointed this out in detail
in my written statement.

In this connection, the prosecution mentions Himmler’s order of 27
February 1944 relating to the selection of the prisoners by the Reich
police agency. But this order of Himmler was not given pursuant to a
suggestion made by Mrugowsky. It is really due to the attempts of Dr.
Morgen. He explained this accurately in his affidavit of 23 May 1947,
which I offered in evidence.

So it is an established fact that until autumn 1943 Mrugowsky had
nothing to do with the selection of the prisoners, and that from this
time on, the prisoners for the typhus experiments were chosen by the
Reich criminal police agency pursuant to Himmler’s order suggested by
Dr. Morgen, so that _after_ this time Mrugowsky had _also_ nothing to do
with the choice of the prisoners.

The prosecution calls the typhus experiments criminal, in particular,
because control persons were used and above all because of the alleged
“passage persons”.[62] As to the control persons, I explained at length
in my closing brief that such vaccine experiments are impossible without
the use of control subjects and lead to no practical result without
them.

If one takes the Ding diary for information, it appears that in a number
of test series the cultural virus used was no longer pathogenic to human
beings. If no control persons had been infected, the fact that the
experimental persons were not taken ill would have been explained as a
consequence of the protection obtained by the vaccination. This would
have led to entirely wrong deductions and to the use of inferior
vaccines in practice. If one considers the typhus experiments as
admissible, the use of control subjects is, therefore, indispensable. I
explained this in detail in my closing brief.

On the other hand there was no justification for the use of passage
persons who were infected merely in order to have live virus always on
hand. I have demonstrated in my written arguments that such passage
persons were never used. Until April 1943 there was no reason to use
them. For until April 1943 it is stated explicitly in the Ding diary
that in each series of experiments the infection was performed by means
of cultural virus bred in the yolk sacs of hens’ eggs which Ding
obtained from the Robert Koch Institute in Berlin. After 11 April 1943,
Ding infected with fresh blood taken from persons suffering from typhus.
But during this period, too, the use of passage persons was superfluous
because Ding always had persons at his disposal who had contracted
typhus spontaneously, and he could take the fresh infected blood from
them.

If the prosecution had wanted to bring evidence to show that passage
persons were used in Block 46, this could have been done best of all by
Ding and Dietzsch. The prosecution produced statements from both in
which the question of the passage persons is not mentioned. The
prosecution knew from the examination of Mrugowsky on the witness stand
that he denied the use of passage persons. When I said at the end of the
presentation of my evidence that I did not call Dietzsch to the witness
stand but only offered an affidavit from him, Mr. Hardy asked the
Tribunal for permission to interrogate Dietzsch on certain facts.

However, he never produced a record of such an interrogation. This is
further evidence that Dietzsch did not confirm the use of passage
persons. All the witnesses who testified on the use of passage persons
did not work in Block 46. They, therefore, know nothing from their own
observation, but only through third persons. Dr. Morgen discovered
nothing about passage persons during his investigations as an examining
magistrate in Block 46 in Buchenwald. So there is no conclusive evidence
of any kind to show that passage persons were used in Block 46. On the
contrary, I proved in my closing brief that passage persons actually
were _not_ used.

If the Tribunal were, nevertheless, to assume that the use of passage
persons was proved, there would be no guilt of Mrugowsky involved in the
use of these passage persons because I demonstrated that Ding was not
his subordinate in respect of his activity in Block 46, and also there
is no evidence whatever to show that he even as much as knew about the
use of passage persons.

In my written statements, I then dealt in detail with the experiments
with acridine preparations within the framework of the typhus
experiments. I proved that Ding did not obtain these preparations from
Mrugowsky but from the I. G. Farbenindustrie A. G. There is no evidence
whatever to show that Mrugowsky had any knowledge of these experiments
performed by Ding.

Ding’s report on the acridine experiments submitted for publication was
handed to Mrugowsky by Grawitz only about 18 months after the
termination of the experiments. Therefore, no charge can be made against
Mrugowsky under criminal law for the experiments with acridine
preparations which caused a particularly high number of deaths.

                  _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR
                          DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Convalescence Serum, Blood Conservation, and Blood Serum Conservation_
                          CONVALESCENCE SERUM

In Ding’s diary (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287_) two entries are found
concerning the taking of blood for the purpose of extracting
convalescence serum. During the period from 26 May to 12 June 1944,
6,500 cc. of blood were taken from 15 defervescent typhus patients, and
between 13 October and 31 October 1944, 20,800 cc. of blood were taken
from 44 defervescent typhus patients. The blood was taken between the
12th [14th] and the 21st day following the disappearance of the fever.
Thus an average of 465 cc. for each patient can be calculated. The
witness for the prosecution, Kogon, has testified on this question.
(_Tr. pp. 1192-3._) His statement contains several serious
misinterpretations. In the first place, it must be stressed that the
taking of blood from a convalescent patient by no means constitutes an
“experiment,” as indicated by Mr. McHaney. What would be the experiment
in that case? The only thing to find out is whether the person in
question is suitable or not for the taking of blood.

Even Kogon admits that the taking of blood from convalescent patients is
an ordinary procedure. I have proved the same thing through Mrugowsky
14, Mrugowsky Exhibit 37. The same appears from the affidavit of the
expert, Professor Dr. Siebeck. (_Mrugowsky 15, Mrugowsky Ex. 38._) There
it says:

    “* * * It is correct that in the case of typhus, convalescence
    serum is frequently used for therapeutical purposes * * *.”

The expert, Professor Dr. Vollhardt, also confessed to the same opinion.
It is then a fact that the taking of blood from former typhus patients
during convalescence is, in principle, in accordance with medical usage.

It has been proved that no objections can be raised against the
treatment in Block 46. Accordingly, it is very improbable that the
physician in charge should have exposed particularly asthenic patients
to the taking of blood. The witness Dorn has stated that the delivery of
drugs to Block 46 took place through the prison hospital and that he
personally discharged the deliveries twice a week. Furthermore, the
examining judge, Dr. Morgen (_Mrugowsky 23, Mrugowsky Ex. 26_)
demonstrated that even in 1944—

    “* * * the treatment and supply of the sick persons was careful
    and good in every respect. According to the impression I gained,
    the sick persons were treated similar to those in a good
    military hospital.”

This is also confirmed through the indictment of Morgen against Koch.
(_NO-2366, Pros. Ex. 526._)

Consequently, there is no reason to doubt that they were in a condition
favorable to the taking of blood and that this constituted no danger for
them. Mrugowsky expressed his opinion on this question during his
examination. (_Tr. p. 5166._) He pointed out that the taking of blood in
a quantity not exceeding 500 cc. is in complete compliance with medical
regulations and that the convalescent patients received additional food
as compensation for the loss of blood. In his affidavit Dr. Ellenbeck
propounded his view concerning the extraction of typhus convalescence
serum. (_Mrugowsky 120, Mrugowsky Ex. 110._) From this it appears that
Ellenbeck also received blood from patients belonging to the Waffen SS,
consequently not exclusively from prisoners in the concentration camps.
In the above-mentioned document (_Mrugowsky 15, Mrugowsky Ex. 38_)
Professor Siebeck expressly points out:

    “It is at least quite improbable, if not impossible, for human
    beings, who are in the convalescent stage of typhus, to be so
    harmed by a single bloodletting of 439 cc. that they die after a
    certain period has elapsed in consequence of the loss of blood.”

The same opinion is endorsed by Professor Dr. Vollhardt.

In face of this evidence no support is to be found for the assertion of
Kogon that many convalescent patients died at that time, nor for his
suspicion that they died as a consequence of the taking of blood. The
result of this exposition then is that:

1. The taking of blood for the purpose of extraction of convalescence
serum is not an experiment but a medical measure. It is not criminal but
customary throughout the world.

2. The bleedings were carried out according to the regulations of
medical science.

3. The quantities taken were below the usual limit, probably even very
far below.

4. It is absolutely impossible that any person whatsoever died as a
consequence of the taking of blood.

On the other hand, the blood pressure of persons convalescing from
typhus, in particular, is often too low. Their blood vessels are still
not as elastic as before. In such cases, a withdrawal of blood within
the normal limits is very often a practiced method of relieving the
circulation.

                      PRESERVATION OF BLOOD SERUM

Furthermore, Kogon states that Dr. Ellenbeck carried out the taking of
blood in the small camp to obtain a stock of blood serum. (_Tr. p.
1192._) Kogon further states that in the part of the Buchenwald
concentration camp, where blood was taken, there were enough volunteers
and they received additional food. He answered the question as to
whether anybody died as a consequence of the taking of blood as follows:

    “* * * It is impossible to establish whether anybody died
    directly or indirectly as a consequence of the taking of blood *
    * *.”

Dr. Ellenbeck made the following statement concerning that question:

    “From the fall of 1944 onwards, as far as I know by request of
    the leading physician of the concentration camps, the department
    for the conservation of blood produced a conserved blood serum
    to be used for the emergency treatment of prisoners since drugs
    became more and more scarce. I had nothing whatsoever to do with
    the drawing of blood and the supply. I had the blood sent to
    Berlin. On account of reasons to be found in the aerial warfare,
    the production of this conserved blood serum was only very
    small.

    “Kogon maintained that SS medical personnel from Berlin drew the
    blood for this conserved blood serum. That is untrue. No SS
    medical personnel came from Berlin to Buchenwald in order to
    fetch blood, but ordinary couriers came who were not in a
    position to draw the blood.” (_Mrugowsky 120, Mrugowsky Ex.
    110._)

Therefore these amounts of blood, too, were only small. Ellenbeck can
state positively that such stocks of serum were not made for other
purposes in his laboratory. The medical officer of the concentration
camp gave him the order. The stocks of serum he had prepared were made
available to him again. * * *

    “To the question as to whether people died after the removal of
    blood, I refer to the above-quoted statements of the
    specialists, Professor Dr. Vollhardt and Professor Dr. Siebeck.”

I would also like to point out that according to Kogon’s statement, Dr.
Ellenbeck himself saw to it that the prisoners actually received their
additional food after the removal of blood. The prisoners volunteered
for the removal of blood and received additional food for it. That
somebody died as a consequence of the removal of blood is a statement
without any basis.

I cannot imagine how a criminal character can be attached to this
removal of blood. The taking of blood from volunteers is not criminal in
any way.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_

Doc. No.    Pros. Ex. No.           Description of Document          Page
NO-429           281       Extract from the affidavit of defendant     555
                             Hoven, 24 October 1946, concerning
                             typhus and virus experiments.
NO-265           287       Diary of the division for typhus and        557
                             virus research at the Institute of
                             Hygiene of the Waffen SS, 1941 to 1945
                             (Ding diary).
NO-257           283       Extract from the affidavit of Dr. Erwin     572
                             Schuler, 20 July 1945, concerning
                             typhus experiments.
NO-571           285       1943 work report for department for         573
                             typhus and virus research.
NO-121           293       Letter from Haagen to Hirt, 15 November     578
                             1943, concerning prisoners to be used
                             as experimental subjects for tests with
                             typhus vaccine.
NO-122           298       Letter dictated by Rose, addressed to       579
                             Haagen, 13 December 1943, concerning
                             experimental subjects for vaccine
                             experiments.
NO-123           303       Letter from Haagen to Hirt, 9 March 1944,   580
                             concerning experiments conducted with
                             typhus vaccine and requesting
                             experimental subjects.
NO-139           317       Letter from Dr. Grunske to Haagen, 7        581
                             March 1944, concerning reports on
                             yellow fever virus experiments
                             requested by a Japanese medical
                             officer.

                           _Defense Documents_

Doc. No.    Def. Ex. No.            Description of Document          Page
Rose 16        Rose 12     Extracts from the affidavit of Professor    581
                             Otto Lenz, director of the Robert Koch
                             Institute in Berlin.
Rose 46        Rose 20     Extract from a certified statement, 4       582
                             March 1947, of J. Oerskov, M. D.,
                             director of the State Serum Institute
                             in Copenhagen.

                               _Testimony_

Extracts from the testimony of prosecution witness Eugen Kogon         583
Extracts from the testimony of defendant Rose                          586
Extract from the testimony of defendant Mrugowsky                      595
Extracts from the testimony of defense witness Dr. Eugen Haagen        606

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-429
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 281

    EXTRACT FROM THE AFFIDAVIT OF DEFENDANT HOVEN, 24 OCTOBER 1946,
                CONCERNING TYPHUS AND VIRUS EXPERIMENTS

I, Waldemar Hoven, being duly sworn, depose and state:

                 *        *        *        *        *

                     _Typhus and Virus Experiments_

4. In the latter part of 1941 an experimental station was established in
the Buchenwald concentration camp in order to determine the
effectiveness of various typhus vaccines. This section was called the
“Typhus Experimental Station—Division for Typhus and Virus Research”
and was under the direct supervision of Dr. Ding, alias Schuler. This
experimental station was set up in Block 46 of the camp. The Hygiene
Institute of the Waffen SS in Berlin, under the command of Dr. Joachim
Mrugowsky, received all the reports of these activities and Dr. Ding
took orders from Mrugowsky. In the early days, that is, between 1941 and
the summer of 1943, Dr. Ding had many meetings in Berlin with Dr. Karl
Genzken concerning his work at Buchenwald in connection with the typhus
experiments. Dr. Ding told me that Dr. Genzken had a special interest in
these matters and that he sent him reports at various times. Dr. Ding
also said that Dr. Karl Genzken was one of his superiors. From my
association with Dr. Ding, I understood that the chain of command in the
supervision of the typhus experimental station was as follows:
Reichsarzt SS Grawitz, Genzken, Mrugowsky, and Ding.

5. I can recollect that Dr. Genzken gave orders to Dr. Ding in January
1943 to enlarge the experimental station. At this time Block 60 was
cleaned out and made into a station for the production of the various
vaccines to be used in the experiments at Block 46. From this time on
the experimental station was known as the “Division for Typhus and Virus
Research of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS”. Then in the summer
of 1943, Dr. Genzken turned all his duties over to Dr. Mrugowsky, and
from that time on Genzken no longer actively participated in these
matters. I can recall meeting Dr. Mrugowsky in the home of Dr. Ding on
one of his visits to Buchenwald.

6. Inasmuch as I was constantly associated with Dr. Ding at Buchenwald,
we became very friendly. I frequently discussed matters with Ding and
visited his experimental station from time to time. As a matter of fact,
Dr. Ding had to go to Berlin for discussions with Dr. Mrugowsky and
others nearly 3 days out of every two weeks, and on such occasions I was
in charge of the typhus institute. However, when Ding went to Berlin the
experiments were discontinued until he returned.

7. The experiments in Block 46 in the Buchenwald concentration camp were
conducted as follows: One group of victims was first vaccinated with the
typhus vaccine and then infected with the typhus virus. In order to
contrast the effectiveness of the vaccine, another group of inmates was
merely infected with the typhus virus without previous vaccination.
Between the autumn of 1942 and the summer of 1943 about 500 inmates of
the Buchenwald concentration camp were used in these experiments. During
my time about 10 percent of the total number of the inmates used, died
as a result. I heard that a larger number of the victims died after my
time, that is, about 20 percent.

8. The selection of inmates to be used for the purposes of medical
experiments in Block 46 by the Division for Typhus and Virus Research
was as follows: Whenever Dr. Ding needed human beings for his work, a
request was made to the office of the camp commandant and referred to me
for action. Usually a man named Schober, an SS Hauptsturmfuehrer,
notified me to select the necessary number of prisoners for these
purposes. In accordance with this request I selected various inmates, at
random, from the roster of the camp. They were placed on a list over my
signature and returned to Schober, who often removed certain names from
the list for political reasons. In the event of particular prisoners
being removed from the list, I was requested to select substitutes in
order to provide Dr. Ding with the desired number of victims. After I
returned the completed list to Schober, it was given to Dr. Ding for
approval. He made a final check to ascertain, from a medical point of
view, the physical condition of the selected inmates and to determine
whether or not they met with his requirements.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-265
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 287

DIARY OF THE DIVISION FOR TYPHUS AND VIRUS RESEARCH AT THE INSTITUTE OF
          HYGIENE OF THE WAFFEN SS, 1941 TO 1945 (DING DIARY)

_29 Dec 41_:

Conference between Army Sanitation Inspection [Inspector], General Chief
Surgeon Professor Dr. Handloser; State Secretary for the Department of
Health of the Reich, SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr. Conti; President Professor
Reiter of the Health Department of the Reich; President Professor
Gildemeister of the Robert Koch Institute (Reich Institute to Combat
Contagious Diseases) and SS Standartenfuehrer and Lecturer [Dozent] Dr.
Mrugowsky of the Institute of Hygiene, Waffen SS, Berlin.

It has been established that the need exists to test the efficacy of,
and resistance of the human body to, the typhus serum extracted from the
egg yolks. Since tests on animals are not of sufficient value, tests on
human beings must be carried out.

_2 Jan 42_:

The concentration camp Buchenwald is chosen for testing the typhus
vaccines. SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Ding is charged with these tests.

_5 Jan 42_:

Preliminary test A:

Preliminary test to determine the surest and most practical way of
infecting human beings artificially. Five experimental subjects received
intramuscular and subcutaneous injections of vitelline membrane diluted
1:25 with an emulsified Rickettsia-Prowazeki strain from the Robert Koch
Institute in doses of 1 cc. Infection was not possible.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                   SS Hauptsturmfuehrer

_10 Jan 42_:

Preliminary test B:

Preliminary test to establish a sure means of infection: Much as in
smallpox vaccination, 5 persons were infected with vitelline membrane
culture virus (strain Rickettsia-Prowazeki, Robert Koch Institute)
through 2 superficial and 2 deeper cuts in the upper arm.

All experimental subjects used for this test fell ill with genuine
typhus. Incubation period 2 to 6 days.

_20 Jan 42_:

Preliminary report of reactions to vaccinations. Through continuous
blood pictures a strong surplus of neutrophile myelocytes was
discovered.

_20 Feb 42_:

Case history and charts of the preliminary tests to establish a sure
means of infection sent to Berlin.

1 death out of 5 sick.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                   SS Hauptsturmfuehrer

_6 Jan 42_:

_1 Feb 42_:

                  _Typhus Vaccine, Research Series I_

Vaccination for immunization against typhus using the following
vaccines:

1. 31 persons with Weigl vaccine from the intestines of lice from the
Institute for Typhus and Virus Research of the Army High Command,
Krakow.

2. 35 persons with vaccine from vitelline membrane cultures made by the
Cox, Gildemeister, and Haagen process.

3. 35 persons with vaccine “Behring Normal” (1 egg in an emulsion of 450
cc. vaccine. Mixture of 70 percent Rickettsia Mooseri and 30 percent
Rickettsia-Prowazeki).

4. 34 persons with “Behring Normal” “Behring Strong” (1 egg emulsified
in 250 cc. solvent).

5. 10 persons for control.

_3 Mar 42_:

All persons vaccinated for immunization between 6 Jan 42 and 1 Feb 42,
and the 10 control persons were infected with a virus culture of
Rickettsia-Prowazeki in the presence of Professor Gildemeister. SS
Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Ding infected himself in the process (laboratory
accident).

_17 Mar 42_:

Visit of Professor Gildemeister and Professor Rose (Head of the
Department for Tropical Medicine in the Robert Koch Institute) to the
experimental station. All persons experimented on fell sick with typhus
except two who, as was established later, had already had typhus during
an epidemic at the police prison in Berlin. SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr.
Ding fell sick with typhus and is in the hospital in Berlin. SS
Hauptsturmfuehrer Hoven, station medical officer of the Waffen SS in
Weimar, is supervising the stations in the meantime (Blocks 44 and 49).

_19 Apr 42_:

Final report on the 1st typhus vaccine research series: Stone Block 46
will be made available for the purpose of these typhus experiments.

5 deaths (3 control persons, 1 “Behring Normal”, and 1 “Behring
Strong”).

                                                             DR. DING
                                                   SS Hauptsturmfuehrer

_19 Aug 42_:

_4 Sep 42_:

                  _Typhus Vaccine, Research Series II_

Vaccination for immunization against typhus using the following
vaccines:

1. 20 persons with vaccines made by the Durand and Giroud process
(Pasteur Institute, Paris) from rabbit lungs.

2. 20 persons with vaccine made by the process of Combiescu, Zotta, and
collaborators from dog lungs. (Producer: Cantacuzino, Bucharest.) This
vaccine was made available by Professor Rose, who received it from Naval
Doctor Professor Ruge from Bucharest.

_15 Oct 42_:

Artificial infection of all persons vaccinated for immunization between
19 September 1942 and 4 October 1942, and 19 persons for control with
vitelline membrane virus (Rickettsia-Prowazeki).

_25 Oct 42_:

Infection has started with all persons experimented on.

_20 Nov 42_:

Charts and case history sent to Berlin.

4 deaths of control persons.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                   SS Hauptsturmfuehrer

_10 Sep 42_:

_10 Oct 42_:

Unit of SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Ding ordered to the Pasteur Institute
in Paris to Professor Giroud.

_22 Oct 42_:

_5 Nov 42_:

                 _Typhus Vaccine, Research Series III_

Vaccination for immunization against typhus of 20 persons with vaccine
made according to the process of Giroud, Paris. (This vaccine was
brought from Paris by SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Ding immediately after
production.)

_30 Nov 42_:

Artificial infection with vitelline membrane material from the Robert
Koch Institute of the 20 persons vaccinated for immunization and of 6
control persons. This research series was observed for 6 weeks and then
abandoned without results, as no sickness broke out in the control
group.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                   SS Hauptsturmfuehrer

_27 Oct 42_:

_8 Nov 42_:

                  _Typhus Vaccine, Research Series IV_

Vaccination for immunization of 20 persons with a vaccine from
intestines of lice made by the Weigl process (sent by lecturer Dr. Haas
of the typhus institute “Emil v. Behring” in Lvov),

_30 Nov 42_:

To test the effect of the immunization, the infection is to be carried
out with lice suffering from typhus. The lice and their cages must be
burnt immediately, as the latter became leaky during transport, and
therefore represent a danger of epidemic in Buchenwald camp.

_3 Dec 42_:

Newly sent lice applied to 15 persons (5 immunized and 10 persons for
control). The lice must again be destroyed, as the cages are not tight.

Report made that infection with live typhus lice is not possible because
the danger to the camp inmates is too great.

_4 Jan 43_:

Due to infection by lice on 3 December 1942, five persons show short
nontypical illness.

The research series is concluded.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                   SS Hauptsturmfuehrer

_15-18 Dec 42_:

Unit of SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Ding ordered to the opening of the
typhus research institute “Emil v. Behring” in Lvov in the General
Government (lecturer Dr. Haas).

_28-31 Dec 42_:

Vaccination for immunization against diphtheria of the Reserve Battalion
of the Leibstandarte SS “Adolf Hitler” (approx. 2,500 men), because of
the outbreak of an epidemic.

Inspection of quarters and advice to the medical officer on the fighting
of the epidemic.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer
                                 _1943_

_1 Dec 42_:

_20 Dec 42_:

                  _Typhus Vaccine, Research Series V_

To determine the immunization effect, 20 persons are being actively
vaccinated for immunization with “EM” vaccine of the Behring Works—Dr.
Demnitz—(vaccine in which vitelline membrane as well as chicken embryos
were used).

_26 Jan 43_:

Artificial infection with vitelline membrane virus OP No. 223 and 226
(Rickettsia-Prowazeki—strain from Robert Koch Institute).

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_9 Jan 43_:

By order of the Chief of the Medical Service of the Waffen SS, SS
Gruppenfuehrer and Major General of the Waffen SS Dr. Genzken, the
typhus research station at the Buchenwald concentration camp becomes the
“Division for Typhus and Virus Research.” The head of the division will
be SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding. During his absence, the station medical
officer of the Waffen SS, Weimar, SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Hoven, will
supervise the production of vaccines. The Chief of the WVHA, SS
Obergruppenfuehrer and Lt. General of the Waffen SS, Pohl, has ordered
the extension of the block of stone buildings.

SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding is at the same time appointed chief
departmental head for special missions in office XVI (Hygiene), of
office group D (medical affairs of the Waffen SS) of the SS Main
Operational Headquarters.

_10 Jan 43_:

       _Therapeutic Experiments with Acridine and Methylene Blue_

At the suggestion of the I. G. Farbenindustrie A. G. the following were
tested as typhus therapeutica:

_a._ Preparation 3,582 “Acridine” of the chemical pharmaceutical and
sero-bacteriological department in Frankfurt-on-Main, Hoechst, Professor
Lautenschlaeger and Dr. Weber.

                       (Therapeutic experiment A)

_b._ Methylene Blue, tested in an experiment on mice by Professor
Kiekuth, Elberfeld.

                       (Therapeutic experiment M)

_26 Jan 43_:

Artificial infection with vitelline membrane virus OP Nos. 223 and 226:

20 persons for therapeutic experiment A: Acridine.

20 persons for therapeutic experiment M: Methylene Blue.

7 persons for control.

_20 Feb 43_:

The control persons from the typhus infections of the 26 January 1943
show no typical typhus symptoms; in the groups, vaccine “EM” of the
Behring Works, Acridine, Methylene Blue, about ¼ are also not sick, the
remainder have medium typhus.

The research series was designated to the manufacturer as “negative,”
since the persons for control could not be infected properly.

One death in therapeutic experiment Acridine.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_10 Jan 43_:

                      _Yellow Fever Vaccine Tests_

The Behring Works, Marburg-Lahn, the Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, and
the Institute for Typhus and Virus Research of the Army High Command in
Krakow were commissioned by the Army High Command to manufacture the
yellow fever vaccine of Beltier and collaborators. Since a live virus is
being handled, a test is to be performed on 5 persons for safety’s sake
from each vaccine charge.

At the same time 50 persons are to be vaccinated _once_ with OP No. 25
of the Robert Koch Institute, which has already been tested for its
harmlessness, to determine the decrease of working capacity.

The results of the yellow fever vaccine tests are to be sent to office
XVI in the SS Main Operational Headquarters, in duplicate, who will
forward one to the manufacturer, and one to the Army High Command,
attention: Oberstabsarzt Dr. Schmidt, Army Medical Inspectorate.

                      _List of Tested OP Numbers_

                 Manufacturer        │                │
  No. 1. Behring Works, Marburg.     │1, 2, 4.        │13 Jan-26 Jan 43.
      2. Robert Koch Institute,      │28, 30, 37, 38, │11 Jan-26 Jan 43.
           Berlin.                   │  39.           │
      3. Robert Koch Institute,      │46, 47, 48, 49, │30 Jan-8 Feb 43.
           Berlin.                   │  50.           │
      4. Behring Works, Marburg.     │4, 5, 6, 7, 8,  │30 Jan-8 Feb 43.
                                     │  9, 10, 11, 12,│
                                     │  13, 14, 15,   │
                                     │  16, 17, 18,   │
                                     │  19, 20, 21,   │
                                     │  22, 23.       │
      5. Army High Command, Krakow.  │19, 21, 22, 23, │9 Feb-22 Feb 43.
                                     │  25, 26, 27.   │
      6. Behring Works, Marburg.     │24, 25, 26, 27, │11 Feb-22 Feb 43.
                                     │  28, 29, 30,   │
                                     │  31, 32, 33.   │
      7. Behring Works, Marburg.     │34, 35, 36, 37, │25 Feb-7 Mar 43.
                                     │  38, 39, 40,   │
                                     │  41, 42, 43.   │
      8. Army High Command, Krakow.  │28, 29, 30, 32, │25 Feb-7 Mar 43.
                                     │  34.           │
      9. Robert Koch Institute,      │54, 55, 57, 58. │25 Feb-7 Mar 43.
           Berlin.                   │                │
     10. Behring Works, Marburg.     │54, 55, 56, 57, │6 May-17 May 43.
                                     │  58, 59, 60,   │
                                     │  61.           │

Production is being abandoned for the time being because of the military
situation.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_3 Feb 43_:

               _Sterility Experiment with an Egg Vaccine_

A package was sent to us with a small bottle of 20 cc. typhus vaccine
from egg-yolk cultures. Op No. 35 of 15 October 1942. A second injection
on 8 December 1942, a third injection on 13 December 1942, of a typhus
vaccination for immunization was carried out on Sister Lilli Boehm, born
on 3 April 1912, by resident surgeon Dr. von Eysmond. Towards evening a
temperature of 104° F. (40° C.). Forty-eight hours after the last
vaccination, death in coma in the German clinic in Kovno.

_Section protocol_: Typhus (No. 2033, University of Kovno, pathological
institute, Dr. Starkus).

_Investigation_: Material vaccinated on

 1. 2 percent Schraegagar }
 2. Bouillon }
 3. 2 percent Glucose Bouillon}
 4. Tarrozzi }                  No growth after 48 hours
 5. Blood slide }
 6. Klauberg slide }

During animal experiments, guinea pigs and mice were vaccinated
intraperitoneally and under the skin of the back. No pathological
symptoms at all.

_Results_: The vaccine not responsible for the death. Vaccination took
place during the incubation period.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_8 Feb 43_:

Visit of Oberstabsarzt Dr. Eyer from the Institute for Typhus and Virus
Research of the Army High Command in Krakow and Oberstabsarzt Dr.
Schmidt from the Army Medical Inspectorate.

_22 Feb 43_:

           _Examination of Unknown Bacteriological Material_

During August 1942 Soviet parachutists were dropped in the Marienburg
district; they carried in their baggage amphiole material, which was
turned over by the RSHA (Dept. IV A/2 Book No. 2152/439 on 25 Feb 1943).
They were dysentery bacteriophaga which could be clearly diagnosed by
animal and culture experiments; this can be used for therapeutic
purposes in cases of diarrhea.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_28 Feb 43_:
_6 Mar 43_:

Unit of SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding ordered to Paris to procure
laboratory material for the Division for Typhus and Virus Research, and
the Institute of Hygiene.

_23 Mar 43_:

Conference between SS Sturmbannfuehrer Barnewald, SS Sturmbannfuehrer
Dr. Ding and SS Hauptscharfuehrer Schlesinger of department W 5, W V H A
concerning the breeding of rabbits, guinea pigs, and mice as
experimental animals for the experimental department.

_25 Jan 43_:
_28 Feb 43_:

                  _Typhus Vaccine, Research Series VI_

To determine the immunization effect, the following were actively
vaccinated for immunization:

20 persons with vaccine “Zuerich” from the hygiene institute of the
University of Zuerich (lungs of mice), and

20 persons with vaccine “Riga” from the serum institute of the
University of Riga (Professor Darsin, from vitelline membrane cultures).

_31 Mar 43_:

Artificial infection with egg Rickettsia (Rickettsia-Prowazeki) of the
Robert Koch Institute, Berlin.

_11 Apr 43_:

The infection of 31 March 1943 has not resulted in any sickness so far.

_28 Apr 43_:

Experimental series abandoned.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                     S Sturmbannfuehrer

_7 Mar 43_:

Examination of the water and inspection of the concentration camp Vught,
near Hertogenbosch.

_8 Mar 43_:
_10 Mar 43_:

Inspection of billets in Apeldoorn-Arnhem and vicinity. Advising chief
surgeon of the commander of the Netherlands re a diphtheria epidemic in
Apeldoorn.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_24 Mar 43_:
_20 Apr 43_:

Carrying out of a large scale experiment on 45 persons by the process of
the hygiene institute of the Waffen SS by SS Standartenfuehrer Lecturer
Dr. Mrugowsky.

Vaccinations were made on 8 different days within 4 weeks against
smallpox, typhoid, paratyphus A and B, cholera, typhus, and diphtheria.

Compatibility was generally good. Exact records and report were
delivered on 27 April 1943 to department chief of office XVI.

It led partly to a strong decrease in working capacity, loss of
strength, increase of temperature, and swelling of the lymph glands.
Typhoid and smallpox were not vaccinated on the same side of the body,
otherwise great swelling of the lymph glands takes places.

The diphtheria adsorbat vaccine led to about 20 cases of strong
formation of abcesses. Where still in the camp, the persons were again
vaccinated for smallpox within ¼ year.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_31 Mar 43_:

      _Therapeutic Experiments “Acridine Granulate” and “Rutenol”_

For the therapeutic experiments “Acridine Granulate” (A. Gr) and Rutenol
(R), 40 persons were infected with egg Rickettsia.

_11 Apr 43_:

After observation lasting several weeks, no sickness started. Report to
SS Standartenfuehrer Lecturer Dr. Mrugowsky and President Professor
Gildemeister. The strain “Matelska” of the Robert Koch Institute, which
was highly virulent until a year ago, apparently is no longer pathogenic
to humans. A new means of artificial infection must therefore be found,
which will lead to typhus with certainty.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_11 Apr 43_:

Preliminary Experiment C:

To determine a sure means of infection, experiments with fresh blood
from persons stricken with typhus were made. Infection took place as
follows:

3 persons—2 cc. each of fresh blood intravenously.

2 persons—2 cc. each of fresh blood intramuscularly.

2 persons—2 cc. each of fresh blood subcutaneously.

2 persons—after scarification.

2 persons—with a vaccinating scalpel cutaneously.

Those infected intravenously contracted typical, serious typhus and died
from failure of the circulatory system. The other experimental subjects
complained only of minor discomfort, without becoming hospital cases.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_13 Apr 43_:

Preliminary Experiment D:

The following were infected:

6 persons with 2 cc. each of fresh blood intravenously.

6 persons with 2 cc. each of fresh blood intramuscularly.

6 persons with 2 cc. each of fresh blood subcutaneously.

6 persons by scarification.

6 persons by means of vaccinating scalpel cutaneously.

The 6 _intravenously_ infected persons again contracted very serious
typhus; 5 died.

Of the 6 infected intramuscularly, one person contracted medium typhus.
The others had no serious complications, and were not hospital cases.

The surest means of infection to produce typhus in humans is, therefore,
the intravenous injection of 2 cc. fresh typhus-infected blood.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_13 and 14 Apr 43_:

Unit of SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding ordered to I. G. Farbenindustrie A.
G., Hoechst. Conference with Professor Lautenschlaeger, Dr. Weber, and
Dr. Fussgaenger concerning the experimental series “Acridine Granulate
and Rutenol” in the concentration camp Buchenwald.

Visit to Geheimrat Otto and Professor Prigge in the Institute for
Experimental Therapeutics in Frankfurt/Main.

_24 Apr 43_:

 _Therapeutic Experiments Acridine Granulate (A-GR2) and Rutenol (R-2)_

To carry out the therapeutic experiments Acridine Granulate and Rutenol,
30 persons (15 each) and 9 persons for control were infected by
intravenous injection of 2 cc. each of fresh typhus-infected blood. All
experimental persons contracted very bad typhus.

_1 Jun 43_:

Charts and case history completed.

The experimental series was concluded.

21 deaths (8 with Acridine Granulate, 9 with Rutenol, 5 control).

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_27 Apr 43_:
_1 May 43_:

Unit of SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding ordered to Paris to procure
laboratory material for the Division for Typhus and Virus Research and
the Hygiene Institute.

_10 Jun 43_:

              _Typhoid-Therapeutic Experiment “Otrhomin”_

At the suggestion of the Robert Koch Institute, Berlin (Professor Dr.
Lockemann) the effect of a new therapeuticum of the Rhoda
series—Otrhomin is to be tested on humans. For this purpose, 20 persons
of the series “Otrhomin” and 20 persons for control (10 immunized, 10
not immunized) were infected on 10 June 1943 and on 18 June 1943 with 2
cc. each of typhoid bacteria in a physical salt solution, given in
potato salad. Of the 40 persons, 7 became slightly sick, 23 more
seriously. Furthermore, there were 6 ambulatory cases. Four persons did
not show any symptoms.

_28 Jul 43_:

Charts and case history of the series “Otrhomin” completed and sent to
Berlin.

_5 Aug 43_:

Charts and case history of the control series completed and sent to
Berlin.

_10 Aug 43_:

Delivery of the records to Reich Senior Medical Counsellor Christiansen
in the Reich Ministry of the Interior. The experimental series was
concluded.

1 death (control not immunized).

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_28 May 43_:
_18 Jun 43_:

               _Typhus Vaccine, Experimental Series VII_

Carrying out of typhus vaccination for immunization with the following
vaccine:

1. 20 persons with vaccine “Asid”.

2. 20 persons with vaccine “Asid Adsorbat” of the Anhaltinischen
Serumwerke G. m. b. H., Berlin 7.

3. 20 persons with vaccine “Weigl” of the Institute for Typhus and Virus
Research of the Army High Command, Army (OKH) Krakow (Eyer).

_27 Aug 43_:

Infection of—

20 persons in the series “Asid”.

20 persons in the series “Asid Adsorbat”.

20 persons in the series “Weigl”.

10 persons for control by intravenous injection of ¼ cc. each of fresh
typhus-infected blood, strain Bu II, Passage I.

All experimental persons got very serious typhus.

_7 Sep 43_:

Chart and case history completed. The experimental series was
concluded—

53 deaths (18 with “Asid”, 18 with “Asid Adsorbat”, 9 with “Weigl”, 8
control).

_9 Sep 43_:

Charts and case histories delivered to Berlin.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_8 Nov 43_:
_17 Jan 44_:

         _High Immunization Experiment with Fraenkel Vaccines_

According to an immunization plan of the Fraenkel high immunization for
humans, the compatibility of Fraenkel-Formol-Toxoid (Formol-Toxin of
bacterium perfringens) of humans was tested.

At first 15 experimental subjects were vaccinated 3 times at intervals
of 14 days with 1 cc. Fraenkel-A1. F. T. (Fraenkel-Toxoid absorbed in
aluminum hydroxide).

After an interval of 14 days, vaccinations with Fraenkel-Formol-Toxoid
(Formol-Toxin of bacterium perfringens) as follows:

          20 Dec 43  1 cc. subcutaneously left upper arm.
          26 Dec 43  2 cc. subcutaneously right upper arm.
          31 Dec 43  4 cc. subcutaneously left upper arm.
           3 Jan 44  6 cc. subcutaneously right upper arm.
           6 Jan 44  9 cc. subcutaneously right and left chest.
          10 Jan 44 12 cc. subcutaneously both upper arms.
          14 Jan 44 15 cc. subcutaneously right and left chest.

_17 Jan 44_:

Observation of vaccination reactions completed and sent away.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_19 Nov 43_:
_25 Nov 43_:

             _Phosphorus-Rubber Incendiary Bomb Experiment_

To test the preparation “R 17” on fresh phosphorus burns and to test
“Echinacine” ointment and “Echinacine extern” for the later treatment of
wounds from phosphorus burns (all from the Dr. Madaus Works in
Dresden-Radebeul), burning tests were carried out on five experimental
subjects on the above-mentioned dates with phosphorus, matter taken from
an English incendiary bomb found near Leipzig.

_5 Jan 44_:

Records delivered to the Reich medical officer of the SS with the
request to forward it to the Dr. Madaus Works.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_30-31 Dec 43_:

        _Special Experiment on 4 Persons in the Koch-Hoven Case_

By order of SS Gruppenfuehrer Nebe, the experiment was carried out in
the presence of Dr. Morgen and Dr. Wehner.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_21 Dec 43_:
_16 Jan 44_:

                       _Control of Blood Plasma_

By order of the Military Academy of Medicine, Berlin, 18 capsules of
blood plasma were tested on 18 experimental persons for their
compatibility on humans.

_17 Jan 44_:

Test records sent away.

_25 Jan 44_:
_19 Feb 44_:

                       _Control of Blood Plasma_

By order of the Military Academy of Medicine, Berlin, 30 more capsules
of blood plasma were tested on 30 experimental persons for their
compatibility on humans.

_22 Feb 44_:

Test papers sent to Reich medical officer of SS by courier.

                                                             DR. DING
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

_22 Jan 44_:
_31 Jan 44_:

           _Vaccine Preliminary Experimental Series “Weimar”_

To test compatibility and the immunization effect, five persons were
immunized by three vaccinations with typhus vaccine “Weimar” (producer:
Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS, Division for Typhus and Virus
Research). On 22 Jan 44, 0.5 cc., on 27 Jan 44, 1.0 cc., on 31 Jan 44,
1.0 cc. were injected subcutaneously in the left or right upper arm.

For comparison, 5 persons were immunized on the above-mentioned dates
with 0.5 cc., 0.5 cc., and 1 cc. of typhus egg-culture vaccine “Asid”
(Anhaltinische Serumwerke, Berlin) and 5 persons were immunized with
typhus vaccine “Giroud” (produced by the Pasteur Institute, Paris, from
rabbit lungs), 1 cc. each.

_25 Feb 44_:

Twenty persons (15 immunized and 5 for control) were infected by
subcutaneous injection of 1/20 cc. fresh typhus-infected blood.

Donor: G * * * Nr 713, 36 years old (6th day of sickness)

    Strain Bu IV/Passage 13.

All those infected fell sick with slight to serious typhus.

_5 Apr 44_:

Chart and case history completed.

_25 Apr 44_:

The experimental series was concluded—

5 deaths (1 Asid, 1 Weimar, 3 Control).

                                                             DR. DING

_8 Mar 44_:
_18 Mar 44_:

               _Typhus Vaccine, Experimental Series VIII_

Suggested by Colonel M. C. of the Air Corps, Oberstarzt Professor Rose
the vaccine “Kopenhagen” (Ipsen-Murine vaccine), produced from mouse
liver by the National Serum Institute in Copenhagen, was tested for its
compatibility on humans.

20 persons were vaccinated for immunization by intramuscular injection
into the Musculus Glutaeus Max. on the following dates: 8 Mar 44, 0.5
cc.; 13 Mar 44, 0.5 cc.; 18 Mar 44, 1.0 cc.

10 persons were contemplated for control and comparison.

4 of the 30 persons were eliminated _before_ the start of the artificial
injection, because of intermittent sickness.

_16 Apr 44_:

The remaining experimental persons were infected on 16 Apr 44 by
subcutaneous injection of 1/20 cc. typhus sick fresh blood. Donor: W * *
* No. 763, 27 years old (6th day of sickness)

    Strain Bu VII/Passage 1.

The following fell sick:

_a._ 17 persons immunized; 9 medium, 8 seriously.

_b._ 9 control persons; 2 medium, 7 seriously.

_2 Jun 44_:

The experimental series was concluded.

_13 Jun 44_:

Chart and case history completed and sent to Berlin.

6 deaths (3 Kopenhagen, 3 Control).

                                                             DR. DING

_26 May 44_:
_12 Jun 44_:

     _Taking of Blood to Produce Typhus Convalescent Serum (FFRS)_

To produce FFRS, 6,500 cc. blood were taken from 15 typhus convalescents
between the 14th and 21st day after the fever had subsided, and sent by
courier to the SS Main Operational Headquarters, office group D, office
XVI (blood conservation) attn: SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Ellenbeck, in
Berlin-Lichterfelde.

                                                                 DING

_22 May 44_:
_16 Jun 44_:

                       _Control of Blood Plasma_

By order of the Military Academy for Medicine, Berlin, 44 capsules of
blood plasma were tested on 44 experimental persons for their
compatibility on humans.

_19 Jun 44_:

Test protocol sent to the senior hygienist of the Reich Medical Office
of the SS and Police, Berlin.

                                                                 DING

_17 Jul 44_:
_27 Jul 44_:

                _Typhus Vaccine, Experimental Series IX_

The typhus vaccine “Weimar”, produced by the Division for Typhus and
Virus Research of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS,
Weimar-Buchenwald, was tested according to orders for its efficacy on
humans.

This vaccine was produced from rabbit lungs according to the process
Durand-Giroud. It contains virus (Rickettsia-Prowazeki) of
self-isolating types deadened and suspended in 2/00 Formol.

20 persons were immunized on the following dates with 1 cc. each: 17,
22, 27 July 1944.

The vaccinations were made subcutaneously on the right or left upper
arm.

For comparison 20 persons were immunized at the same time with “Weigl”
vaccine, produced from lice by the Army High Command in Krakow according
to regulations.

Furthermore, 20 persons were provided for control purposes.

_6 Sep 44_:

The 60 experimental persons were infected by subcutaneous injection of
1/10 cc. fresh typhus-infected blood each into the right upper arm.

All persons fell sick as follows:

_a._ “Weimar”—9 slightly, 7 slightly to medium, 4 medium.

_b._ “Weigl”—6 slightly to medium, 8 medium, 6 seriously.

_c._ Control—1 medium, 19 seriously.

_17 Oct 44_:

The experimental series was concluded.

_4 Nov 44_:

Chart and case history completed.

24 deaths (5 “Weigl”, 19 Control).

                                                          DR. SCHULER

_13 Oct 44_:
_31 Oct 44_:

     _Taking of Blood to Produce Typhus Convalescent Serum (FFRS)_

To produce FFRS, 20.8 liters of blood were taken from 44 typhus
convalescents between the 14th and 21st day after the fever had
subsided, and sent by courier to the SS Main Operational Headquarters,
office group D, office XVI (blood conservation)—SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr.
Ellenbeck, Berlin-Lichterfelde.

                                                              SCHULER

_26 Oct 44_:

Special experiment on 6 persons according to instructions of SS
Oberfuehrer Lecturer Dr. Mrugowsky and RKPA (report on this orally).

                                                              SCHULER

_13 Nov 44_:

              _Therapeutic Experiment with Typhus Vaccine_

By order of the senior hygienist of the Waffen SS of 12 August 44, it is
to be determined whether the course of typhus can be tempered by the
intravenous or intramuscular injection of typhus vaccine.

For the experimental series 20 persons were considered, of these, 10 for
intravenous injection (Series A), 10 for intramuscular injection (Series
B) and, in addition, 5 persons for control.

On 13 Nov 44, the 25 experimental persons were infected by subcutaneous
injection of 1/10 cc. each fresh typhus-infected blood. All persons fell
sick as follows: Series A—10 serious; Series B—1 medium 9 serious;
Control—5 serious.

_22 Dec 44_:

The experimental series was concluded.

_2 Jan 45_:

Chart and case history completed.

19 deaths (9 Series A, 6 Series B, 4 Control).

                                                          DR. SCHULER

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-257
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 283

     EXTRACT FROM THE AFFIDAVIT OF DR. ERWIN SCHULER, 20 JULY 1945,
                     CONCERNING TYPHUS EXPERIMENTS

                 *        *        *        *        *

                      _Hoven’s Share in Block 46_

In February 1942 the order to conduct typhus experiments came through. I
was chosen to carry out these experiments. Since I had my office in
Berlin, a deputy had to be appointed for my absence in Buchenwald.
Reichsarzt SS Dr. Grawitz, in agreement with the leading doctor of the
concentration camps, Lolling, appointed SS 1st Lt. Dr. Hoven as station
doctor at Buchenwald. My presence in Buchenwald always lasted only a few
days, while the experiments and the typhus epidemic lasted about 10
weeks.

Dr. Hoven had orders to get the prisoners (professional criminals
sentenced to death), who had been released for the experiments from the
Reich Security Office and the chief of the concentration camps, for
vaccination or infection after an examination of their physical fitness.

As deputy, he often ordered Dr. Plaza to take over the guard of Block
46. Dr. Plaza, in addition, continued to work independently under Kapo
Dietzsch.

For experiments that did not result in death, such as the effectiveness
of yellow fever vaccine, 200 to 300 volunteers stood in readiness. This
I know from rosters that Dietzsch showed me once. Such experiments did
not only take place in the block but also, in a certain case, in the
camp itself. For that experiment about 80 Dutchmen were taken; they did
not have to work and they were given extra rations. For that they had to
have their temperature taken three times daily and every two days they
had to give 10 cc. blood for a blood count.

Hoven worked as my deputy until my permanent entrance into Buchenwald in
August 1943. In September he was arrested.

In the year 1942 he had to work a lot by himself, since I contracted
typhus and after that was sent to a rest home. Immediately after that I
was detailed to the Pasteur Institute in Paris. During this time the
sick reports bore the signature of Hoven or Plaza.

                                                 [Signed] DR. SCHULER

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-571
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 285

     1943 WORK REPORT FOR DEPARTMENT FOR TYPHUS AND VIRUS RESEARCH

                                        Weimar-Buchenwald, January 1944.

Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS
Department for Typhus and Virus Research

                    _Work Report for the Year 1943_

I. _Division for Typhus and Virus Research, Clinical Section_

1 December 42 to 20  Experiment with typhus vaccines “EM” of the Behring
  February 43          Works, carried out on 20 experimental subjects.
10 January to 20     Experiment with typhus therapeutics, Acridine and
  February             Methylene Blue, carried out on 47 experimental
                       subjects.
10 January to 17 May Tests with yellow fever vaccines, carried out on 435
                       experimental subjects.
25 January to 28     Experiment with typhus vaccines “Riga” and
  April                “Zuerich,” carried out on 40 experimental
                       subjects.
24 March to 20 April Performance of a large-scale experiment according to
                       the scheme of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen
                       SS, carried out by SS Standartenfuehrer Lecturer
                       Dr. Mrugowsky, with smallpox, typhoid, paratyphus
                       A and B, cholera, typhus, and diphtheria, on 45
                       experimental subjects.
31 March to 11 April Experiment with typhus therapeutics Acridine
                       Granulate and Rutenol, carried out on 40 persons.
11 April to 24 May   Preliminary experiments with fresh blood infected
                       with typhus for the purpose of investigating an
                       infallible method of infection, carried out on 41
                       persons.
11 April—not yet     Infections with typhus so far applied to 47 persons.
  terminated
24 April to 1 June   Experiment with typhus therapeutics Acridine
                       Granulate (2) and Rutenol (2) carried out on 40
                       experimental subjects.
28 May to 9          Experiment with typhus vaccines “Asid,”
  September            “Asid-Adsorbat,” and “Weigl” carried out on 70
                       persons.
10 June to 8 August  Experiment with typhoid therapeutics “Otrhomin,”
                       carried out on 40 experimental subjects.
8 November—not yet   Gangrene—high immunization experiment, carried out
  terminated           on 15 experimental subjects.
19 November—not yet  Experiments with burns by means of phosphorus rubber
  terminated           incendiary bombs carried out on 5 persons.
21 November—not yet  Control of blood conservation.
  terminated
23 December to 31    Special experiment carried out on 4 persons.
  December

II. _Division for Typhus and Virus Research, Production of Vaccines_

10 August            Termination of the exterior alterations on the
                       prisoners’ Block 50 in Buchenwald concentration
                       camp.
16 August            Opening of the Division for Typhus and Virus
                       Research. Transfer of the head of the department,
                       SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding to Buchenwald.
                       Beginning of the preliminary work for production.
20 September         First infection of 3 guinea pigs with
                       typhus-infected blood, strain Bu I. Up to the end
                       of the year 8 successful infections from this
                       strain and positive adaptation of the strain to
                       mice (with only 2 infections due to lack of these
                       experimental animals), as well as to the lungs of
                       rabbits through mice with the brains of guinea
                       pigs as starting material.
24 September         Isolation of the strain Bu II on 3 guinea pigs with
                       typhus-infected blood. After successful adaptation
                       at the end of the year 8th infection. Performance
                       of 4 infections of mice. Great quantities of
                       standard type Rickettsia. Furthermore successful
                       adaptation of the strain Bu II to the lungs of
                       rabbits through mice.
9 October            Due to lack of mice experiment to adapt the mixed
                       strains Bu I and Bu II directly from infected
                       brains of guinea pigs to the lungs of rabbits. At
                       the end of the year this strain is contained fully
                       virulent in the 6th infection of rabbits. Since
                       the 5th infection, particularly, great quantities
                       of Rickettsia on the lungs of rabbits. The results
                       of the direct adaptation experiments are being
                       checked by pathogenic and skin virulence tests.
12 October           Reported to the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS
                       that the experiments for the breeding of
                       Rickettsia strains on the lungs of rabbits were
                       successful and production was only handicapped by
                       the lack of the refrigerator and of the Calabeius
                       meat-triturator model.
22 October           Isolation and transfer to guinea pigs of the strain
                       Bu IV of subjects infected with typhus after
                       strain Bu III had died during the first infection.
                       In this case the lack of mice was once more
                       especially noticeable.
First half of        Outbreak of an epidemic among 375 recently supplied
  November             mice to which 289 animals succumbed within a few
                       days. As the remaining mice were not healthy
                       either, they were killed.
11 November          Vaccination of rabbits with infected lungs of mice.
                       Later on, performance of two more infections of
                       rabbits. Experiments are a complete success; large
                       quantities of Rickettsia with well-developed
                       bacilli-shaped elements on the lungs of the
                       rabbits.
30 November          Successful direct adaptation of the strain Bu IV
                       from the brains of infected guinea pigs to the
                       lungs of rabbits. After performance of another
                       infection of rabbits, mixing of the strain with
                       the strain Bu I and Bu II. All infections continue
                       to be successfully carried out.
4 December           Experiment, by making use of the night frosts and by
                       using the handshake technique without refrigerator
                       and without Calabeius, to produce the first sample
                       of vaccine. For this purpose, lungs of rabbits of
                       the 5th or 6th infection series of the mixed
                       strain Bu I and Bu II, which are rich in
                       Rickettsia, were used.
14 December          Centrifugation of the suspension produced on 4
                       December.
15 December          Starting of the refrigerator which had arrived in
                       the meantime. Result of the examination of the
                       sediment of the vaccine produced on 4 December:
                       after 2 hours of centrifugation great quantities
                       of Rickettsia (bacilli-shaped, point-shaped,
                       dumbell-shaped). The sterility control proved the
                       suspension free from bacteria.
17 December          4 guinea pigs were given intraperitoneal injections
                       of 1 cc. of vaccine each, in order to check
                       whether the vaccines produced on 4 December agreed
                       with them. The guinea pigs did not show any
                       alterations of voracity nor of temperature and
                       were still alive at the end of the year.
24 December          Vaccination of a series of 10 guinea pigs, with our
                       own vaccine and Giroud vaccine, in order to infect
                       them later on with typhus-infected blood.
29 December          The reactions for skin virulence according to Giroud
                       show a virulence of the suspension at a dilution
                       of 1:2.000 to 1:4.000.

For the performance of the breeding experiments 56 mice, 134 guinea
pigs, and 112 rabbits were used up to the present date.

In the serological department 1226 proteus OX 19 agglutinations, 3
Gruber-Widal tests, and 4 Takata-Ara reactions were performed for the SS
infirmary and Buchenwald concentration camp and its branch camps.

For our own requirements up to this date, about 1,500 cubic cm. of
typhoid-paratyphus B deposits have been produced, in order to reduce the
power of resistance of the experimental animals.

III. _Inspections of the Division for Typhus and Virus Research_

8 February           Inspection of the clinical section by Oberstabsarzt
                       Dr. Eyer of the Institute for Typhus and Virus
                       Research of the Army High Command, Krakow and by
                       Oberstabsarzt Dr. Schmidt of the Army Medical
                       Inspectorate.
24 August            Inspection of the department by the Director of the
                       Central Building Section of the Waffen SS and
                       Police, SS Obersturmfuehrer Huehnefeld, and
                       discussion of necessary improvements.
26 August            Inspection by the Higher SS and Police leader in
                       Kassel, SS Obergruppenfuehrer and General of the
                       Waffen SS, the Prince of Waldeck and Pyrmont, and
                       by the commandant of Buchenwald concentration
                       camp.
3 September          Inspection by the head of the Hygiene Institute of
                       the Waffen SS, SS Standartenfuehrer Lecturer Dr.
                       Mrugowsky.
29 September         Inspection by the Chief of Office D III in the SS
                       Economic and Administrative Main Office (WVHA), SS
                       Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Lolling and Professor Dr.
                       Schenk.

IV. _Official Trips by the Head of the Division for Typhus and Virus
Research_

28 February to 6     SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding ordered to Paris
  March                for the purchase of laboratory equipment for the
                       Division for Typhus and Virus Research
                       Weimar-Buchenwald, and for the Hygiene Institute
                       of the Waffen SS.
27 April to 1 May    Once more on detached service to Paris for the same
                       purpose.
25 June to 15 August Ordered sick leave at Sellin on Ruegen.
27 August            Conferences with the Zeiss firm at Jena, with the
                       Landesgewerbearzt and in the University Library.
4 September          Inspection in the village of “X” with the Head of
                       the Hygiene Institute, SS Standartenfuehrer
                       Lecturer Dr. Mrugowsky, with the Standortarzt of
                       the Waffen SS Weimar-Buchenwald, and with the
                       adjutant of the commandant of the Buchenwald
                       concentration camp.
8 September          Another inspection in the village of “X”.
16September          Purchase of laboratory requisites at Jena,
                       conference with the Zeiss firm concerning the
                       alteration of 2 microscopes.
23 September         Purchase of laboratory requisites at Erfurt.
29 September to 4    Conference in Berlin with the Head of the Hygiene
  October              Institute of the Waffen SS, SS Standartenfuehrer
                       Lecturer Dr. Mrugowsky.
13 October           Inspection at “Dora” and “Laura” with the commandant
                       of the Buchenwald concentration camp.
21 October           Inspection of the branch commands Leipzig
                       Wernigerode, Schoenebeck, and “Dora” with the camp
                       commandant.
25 October to 15     On detached service with the German Hygiene
  November             Institute for the Eastern Territories in Riga, and
                       subsequently conference with the Madaus firm in
                       Dresden at the instance of SS Obergruppenfuehrer
                       and General of the Waffen SS von Woyrsch.

                                                 SS Sturmbannfuehrer.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-121
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 293

LETTER FROM HAAGEN TO HIRT, 15 NOVEMBER 1943, CONCERNING PRISONERS TO BE
      USED AS EXPERIMENTAL SUBJECTS FOR TESTS WITH TYPHUS VACCINE

                                                        15 November 1943
                                _Secret_

To: Professor Dr. Hirt
Anatomical Institute of the Reich University
Strasbourg

On 13-11-43, an inspection was made of the prisoners that were furnished
to me in order to determine their suitability for the tests which have
been planned for the typhus vaccines. Of the 100 prisoners that have
been selected in their former camp, 18 died during transport. Only 12
prisoners are in such a condition that they can be used for these
experiments, provided their strength can first be restored. This should
take about 2-3 months. The remaining prisoners are in such a condition
that they cannot be used at all for these purposes.

I might point out that the experiments are for the purpose of testing a
new vaccine. Such experiments only lead to fruitful results when they
are carried out with normally nourished subjects whose physical powers
are comparable to those of the soldiers. Therefore, experiments with the
present group of prisoners cannot yield usable results, particularly
since a large part of them are apparently afflicted with maladies which
make them unsuitable for these experiments. A long period of rest and of
good nourishment would not alter this fact.

I request, therefore, that you send me 100 prisoners, between 20-40
years of age, who are healthy and who are so constituted physically that
they furnish comparable material.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                        STABSARZT PROF. DR. E. HAAGEN

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-122
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 298

    LETTER DICTATED BY ROSE, ADDRESSED TO HAAGEN, 13 DECEMBER 1943,
        CONCERNING EXPERIMENTAL SUBJECTS FOR VACCINE EXPERIMENTS

Professor Rose, Chief Surgeon.

                                                O. U., 13 December 1943.

Stabsarzt Professor Haagen
Institute of Hygiene of the Reich University
Strasbourg, Alsace, Adolf Kussmaulstrasse 3

Dear Herr Haagen,

Many thanks for your letter of 8 December. I regard it as unnecessary to
make a renewed special request to the SS Main Office in addition to the
request you have already made. I request that, in procuring persons for
vaccination in your experiment, you requisition a corresponding number
of persons for vaccination with the Copenhagen vaccine. This has the
advantage, as also appeared in the Buchenwald experiments, that the
testing of various vaccines simultaneously gives a clearer idea of their
value than the testing of one vaccine alone.

   With best wishes,
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours
                (Dictated by Prof. Rose and signed after his departure)
   By order
                                                    [Signed] SCHWARZE
                                        Private, 1st Class (Med. Corps)

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-123
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 303

    LETTER FROM HAAGEN TO HIRT, 9 MARCH 1944, CONCERNING EXPERIMENTS
   CONDUCTED WITH TYPHUS VACCINE AND REQUESTING EXPERIMENTAL SUBJECTS

                                                              9 May 1944

Main Office SS
through Professor Dr. Hirt
Anatomical Institute of the Reich University Strasbourg

I enclose herewith a carbon copy of a paper on our experiments with a
dry typhus vaccine. The paper was sent to the Chief of the Luftwaffe
Medical Service as a manuscript, with the request for permission to
publish it. It constitutes a report concerning further experiments with
a typhus vaccine which has not been made sterile by chemical agents or
by heating. As may be seen from the results, it has been possible to
produce a vaccine which provides not only an antitoxic immunity but also
a definite anti-infection immunity which is of particularly practical
significance. However, it is clearly pointed out that vaccination is
followed by a rather long fever reaction and, therefore, its
introduction cannot yet be recommended. Further tests are now in
progress to alter the vaccine so that, without losing its antigenic
property, it will produce so weak a reaction that no general
indisposition will result. These tests will be made by reducing the dose
or by storing the vaccine for a longer interval.

To carry out this research, experimental subjects will again be needed.
I, therefore, again request that subjects be furnished to me for this
purpose. In order to obtain results which are accurate and which can be
statistically evaluated, I ask that 200 persons be furnished to me for
inoculation. I may point out that they must be in a physical condition
similar to that of members of the armed forces.

It is highly desirable that I again be permitted to carry out these
experiments at camp Natzweiler.

                                              PROFESSOR DR. E. HAAGEN

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-139
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 317

 LETTER FROM DR. GRUNSKE TO HAAGEN, 7 MARCH 1944, CONCERNING REPORTS ON
 YELLOW FEVER VIRUS EXPERIMENTS REQUESTED BY A JAPANESE MEDICAL OFFICER

High Command of the Navy
Flottenarzt Dr. Grunske

                                                    Berlin, 7 March 1944
                                                    Landgrafenstr. 12
                                                    Tel: 24 9591 Ext 241

To: Professor Dr. Haagen
Strasbourg
Hygiene Institute of the University

Dear Professor:

In connection with my letter of 26 February and your long distance
telephone call of 6 March, I must advise you that the Japanese
Oberstabsarzt has in the meantime contacted Oberstarzt Professor Dr.
Rose of the Luftwaffe Medical Service, and that the latter has promised
to secure for him from Strasbourg all the accounts concerning the yellow
fever virus experiments which are important to him. Therefore,
Oberstartz Dr. Rose will give you further details. I therefore ask that
the matter be considered closed between us.

   With fraternal esteem and
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                   Respectfully yours
                                                   [Signed] DR. GRUNSKE
                                                            Flottenarzt

                                         TRANSLATION OF ROSE DOCUMENT 16
                                         ROSE DEFENSE EXHIBIT 12

  EXTRACTS FROM THE AFFIDAVIT OF PROFESSOR OTTO LENZ, DIRECTOR OF THE
                    ROBERT KOCH INSTITUTE IN BERLIN

                 *        *        *        *        *

Professor Rose was not the “typhus expert” of the Robert Koch Institute,
nor did he work on typhus there. But he was the Chief of the Department
of Tropical Medicine, and was in this capacity, with the exception of
one field of research, (that of the transmission of dysentery and
typhoid bacilli by insects) exclusively concerned with tropical diseases
and parasites (insects).

The typhus expert of the institute was rather Professor Haagen, the
Chief of the Virus Division. After his departure, following his
appointment to the Chair of Hygiene at Strasbourg University, Professor
Gildemeister, the then President of the Institute, continued the
research on typhus.

Thus, various physicians, among them Dr. Ding, received instruction on
typhus from Professor Haagen in the Virus Division, but _not_ from
Professor Rose.

Owing to the destruction by air raids of many of the files of the Robert
Koch Institute, I can no longer ascertain whether Professor Rose was
associated with the decisions taken on typhus experiments.

Several of the men who were at that time departmental chiefs, however,
assured me unanimously, that this had _not_ been the case.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Finally, nothing is known of Professor Rose’s having had the opportunity
to become aware of Geheimrat Lockemann’s chemo-therapeutical experiments
(chemo-therapy of abdominal typhoid with otrhomin). The only research on
abdominal typhoid carried on in Rose’s department consisted of the
experiments on the role of the house fly in the transmission of
dysentery caused by bacteria and of abdominal typhoid.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                         TRANSLATION OF ROSE DOCUMENT 46
                                         ROSE DEFENSE EXHIBIT 20

EXTRACT FROM A CERTIFIED STATEMENT, 4 MARCH 1947, OF J. OERSKOV, M. D.,
          DIRECTOR OF THE STATE SERUM INSTITUTE IN COPENHAGEN

                 *        *        *        *        *

In answer to questions asked us about the visit of Professor Rose, I can
say the following:

to 1. Did Professor Rose, when he visited the Institute at the end of
September 1943, request the Copenhagen Institute to take up the
production of the typhus vaccine from R. pr. in order to help overcome
the great shortage of typhus vaccine? Yes.

to 2. Was this request refused by Director Oerskov for valid reasons?
Yes.

to 3. Was R. then taken to visit Dr. Ipsen’s section?

I do not remember this, but it is apparent from Dr. Ipsen’s experimental
records that Professor Rose actually was in Dr. Ipsen’s laboratory on 24
September and probably discussed these problems with him. Unfortunately,
Dr. Ipsen is at present in America on a study trip and will not return
before June or July. It is, however, apparent from our records that if
Profesor Rose ever received samples of our vaccine it could only have
been a small quantity, and neither I nor Dr. Ipsen’s colleagues have
ever heard anything of the possible effects of our vaccine.

Through the Danish Red Cross we sent our vaccine to Danish as well as to
Norwegian prisoners of war camps, so that the vaccine was given only to
Danish or Norwegian colleagues. We heard from Danish colleagues that the
effect of these vaccinations was good.

I can add that I am grateful to Professor Rose because he probably
helped to prevent our Institute’s being compelled to take over the
production of typhus vaccine. It is entirely unpredictable what
calamities might have arisen if we had been forced to take up the
production of this vaccine.

                                                  [Signed] J. OERSKOV
                                  Director of the State Serum Institute
                                                 Not. K. J. No. 1974/47
   EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF PROSECUTION WITNESS EUGEN KOGON[63]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: Now, will you please explain to the Tribunal in your own
words exactly how these typhus experiments were carried out.

WITNESS KOGON: After 40 to 60 people, sometimes up to 120, had been
detailed for a series of experiments, one-third of them were separated,
and the other two-thirds were either vaccinated with a protective
treatment, or it was otherwise administered to them, if it was a
chemical therapeutical treatment. Those people who were protected
against typhus remained in Block 46 for several weeks until their
infection with Rickettsias Prowazeki, the typhus agent. The first
selection, that is to say, the first third, was also infected together
with them. They served as so-called control persons, with the help of
whom it was possible to ascertain whether the infection took and what
course the disease took in their cases, so that this course could be
compared with that of those who had been vaccinated and then infected.
The infection was performed in various ways. Either typhus was
transferred through fresh blood injected intravenously or
intramuscularly. At the beginning, too, by scratching the skin, or by
making a small incision in the arm. In the initial stages, two cubic
centimeters of fresh blood infected with typhus were used for the
infection, unless the infection concerned was one with an infectious
solution. Two cubic centimeters of fresh blood containing typhus were
then usually injected into the veins. Later on that dosage was reduced
to 1/20 of 1 cubic centimeter because the large quantity of 2 cubic
centimeters would penetrate any security achieved by the vaccination.
Even 1/20 of a cubic centimeter of fresh blood containing typhus was
usually enough to produce a very high degree of typhus if injected into
the veins. In the course of years the typhus cultures used at Buchenwald
had been cultivated from man to man and had increased their strength,
their virulence to a considerable degree, so that the very smallest
quantity was sufficient. I suggested to Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding in
1944 that in order to increase the scientific value he should reduce the
quantity of these injections to the extreme minimum so that the
so-called threshold value could be ascertained—in other words, so that
the artificial infection should be as similar to normal infection by
lice as possible. He turned this suggestion down because he believed
that then no convincing proof could be achieved of the real strength of
the protective treatment used. A third category of the experimental
persons was used to maintain the typhus cultures. Those were the
so-called passage persons, amounting to three to five persons per month.
They were merely infected for the purpose of ensuring a constant supply
of fresh blood containing typhus. Very nearly all those persons died. I
do not think I am exaggerating if I say that 95 percent of these cases
were fatal.

Q. Witness, do you mean to say that they deliberately infected three to
five persons a month with typhus just to have the viruses alive and
available in blood?

A. Just for that particular purpose.

Q. Can you tell the Tribunal approximately how many of those persons
died who were infected just to keep the viruses alive?

A. From the so-called passage persons, as I have already said, between
three to five were used per month, that is, when I was working for Dr.
Ding-Schuler—every month until the end of the Buchenwald concentration
camp. That is to say, from April 1943 until March 1945. As far as the
previous period is concerned, I only know that passage persons had been
used, but I do not know the figures.

Q. Now, Witness, were experimental persons also infected with lice?

A. As far as I know, only one single experiment took place in Buchenwald
where an original infection with typhus was performed with lice. The
infected lice were brought from the OKH Institute in Krakow by a courier
and were taken to Block 46. There they were kept in small cages which
were applied to the thighs of the experimental persons, and a number of
persons, I do not know how many, were infected. Some of our comrades let
a few lice escape in a room of Block 46, but they kept them under
control and reported to the Kapo that infected lice had escaped from the
cages. Kapo [inmate trusty] Arthur Dietzsch immediately reported this to
the camp physician, Dr. Hoven, who was deputizing at that time for Dr.
Ding-Schuler. Dr. Hoven, following Dietzsch’s advice, then ordered the
destruction of these infected lice. A second delivery from Krakow was
also burned because it was not desired that experiments should be
performed which entailed such danger for the camp.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Can you tell the Tribunal whether these experimental subjects
suffered to any appreciable extent during the course of these typhus
experiments?

A. There we must draw a strict dividing line between the general mental
condition of such experimental persons and the physical condition caused
by this disease. Every man in the camp knew that Block 46 was a dreadful
place. Only a very few people in the camp had an exact idea of what was
going on in Block 46. A dreadful horror seized anyone who was brought
into any kind of connection with this block. If people were selected and
taken to Block 46 through the sick bay, then they knew that the affair
was a fatal one. The untold horror which was attached to this block made
things even worse. Apart from this, it was generally known in the camp
that Kapo Arthur Dietzsch exercised iron discipline in Block 46. There
the cat-o’-nine-tails really ruled supreme. Everyone, therefore, who
went to Block 46 as an experimental person did not only have to expect
death, and under certain circumstances a very long drawn out and
frightful death, but also torture and the complete removal of the last
remnants of personal freedom. In this mental condition these
experimental persons waited in the sick bays for an unknown period of
time. They waited for the day or for the night when something would be
done to them; they did not know what it would be, but they guessed that
it would be some frightful form of death. If they were vaccinated, then
sometimes the most horrible scenes took place, because the patients were
afraid the injections were lethal. Kapo Arthur Dietzsch had to restore
order with iron discipline. After a certain period, when the actual
illness had set in after the infection, ordinary symptoms of typhus
would appear, which, as is well known, is one of the most serious
illnesses. The infection, as I have already described to you, became so
powerful during the last two and a half years that the typhus almost
always appeared in its most horrible form. There were cases of raving
madness, delirium, people would refuse to eat, and a large percentage of
them would die. Those who experienced the disease in a milder form,
perhaps because their constitutions were stronger or because the vaccine
was effective, were forced continuously to observe the death struggles
of the others. And all this took place in an atmosphere hardly possible
to imagine. Just what happened to those people who survived the typhus
was something which they did not know during the period of
convalescence. Would they remain in Block 46 to be used for other
purposes? Would they be used as assistants? Would they be feared as
surviving witnesses of the experiments on human beings and therefore
killed? All this was something which they did not know and which
aggravated the conditions of these experiments.

           EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT ROSE[64]

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: When did you first learn that Haagen was conducting
experiments on concentration camp inmates?

DEFENDANT ROSE: That Haagen was performing experiments on concentration
camp inmates? I don’t believe that even today, but I knew that he
carried out vaccinations in concentration camps. I cannot remember when
I first learned of it—probably in 1943.

Q. Well, you remember the letter in December 1943?

A. I certainly must have known it by then because there I refer to it.

Q. Well, did you know about this sordid occasion when Haagen had 18 men
who had been assigned to him die on transport?

A. I never learned anything about that at the time. I found it out from
the files. I never knew that prisoners were especially taken to these
concentration camps in order to be vaccinated.

Q. What would you have done if you had known about it? Wouldn’t that
have given you an indication that maybe things were not so nice in the
concentration camp, or maybe proper care wasn’t being taken of the
inmates in these experiments?

A. If I had learned anything about it I probably would have reacted
exactly as Haagen did. The documents he wrote to the SS office prove
that one cannot conduct any experiments of any consequence on such
unfortunate people. The record is in the documents here. If I had
learned about it, I would probably have reacted in exactly the same way,
perhaps more violently.

Q. Well, I should have hoped so.

A. I beg your pardon. I didn’t understand you.

Q. I should have hoped you would have reacted somewhat more violently
than Haagen apparently did.

A. That is possible. Our temperaments are different.

Q. You recall Fraeulein Eyer testified that Haagen sent reports every
three months to the Medical Inspector of the Luftwaffe. Do you agree to
that testimony?

A. I heard the testimony. Yesterday in my direct examination I commented
on it. If Haagen had reported every three months I certainly wouldn’t
have forgotten it. I had many things on my mind during the war, but such
an exemplary condition of reporting would certainly have impressed
itself on my memory. It is quite out of the question that the Medical
Inspectorate received a report from Haagen every 3 months. I said
yesterday that I consider Fraeulein Eyer’s testimony quite credible,
because in view of the number of offices with which Haagen was in
connection, and from which he received reports, there were so many
reports and accounts necessary that it is a marvel that Fraeulein Eyer
didn’t say she had to write a report every month. I explained with the
aid of the documents what obligation to report is apparent from the
documents alone. You probably haven’t had an opportunity to read the
record yet, but as soon as the record is ready you will be able to see
that. I don’t think there is any purpose in holding up the proceedings
with that any further.

Q. And you are quite clear that Haagen never suggested to you that he
was going to carry out infection experiments with typhus after
vaccination?

A. That is not known to me.

Q. Let’s have a look at Document NO-1059. This will be marked as
Prosecution Exhibit 490 for identification. Now, will you please read
this letter in a loud and resonant voice?

A. Perhaps I may see the photostat.

Q. Will you read the letter aloud, please?

A. (Reading)

“29 November 1943—Registered
“To Oberstarzt Professor Dr. Rose
“Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe
“Saalow (Post Office Zossen-Land)
“Dear Herr Rose:

“Enclosed I am sending you the report about our experiments with
dehydrated typhus vaccine which I promised you several days ago. As I
intend to publish the findings, I have already written the report in
manuscript form. After it has been reviewed, I would like it to be
submitted to the competent authorities for their approval of its
publication in the ‘Zentralblatt fur Bakteriologie’ [Central Periodical
for Bacteriology].

“One hundred persons from a local concentration camp were put at my
disposal for immunization and subsequent infection. Unfortunately, these
people were in such a poor physical condition that eighteen of them
already died during transport; the remainder were likewise in such bad
physical shape that they could not be used for inoculation purposes. In
the meantime I have requested 100 additional persons from the SS Main
Office, who should, however, be in a normal physical and nutritional
condition, so that the experiments can be carried out on material which
at least approaches the physical condition of our soldiers.

“For the time being, we will concentrate on an epidemic culture in the
form of a virus, which we have received from Giroud in the meantime.
This seems to be a very good culture.

   “With best regards,
                                                      “Heil Hitler!
                                                              “Yours—

“Enclosure: one report.”
  And no signature.

This is the matter which I discussed yesterday. Haagen’s plan to test
the inoculation reactions to his live and virulent dry vaccine by
prevaccination with dead vaccine to weaken the reaction. That is the
same matter.

Q. I thought you said about two minutes ago that you didn’t know of the
incident where eighteen of the inmates put at Haagen’s disposal had died
during transport.

A. Yes, that’s true. That’s what I said. I had forgotten about it. I
thought that I had learned it for the first time from the records. If I
had remembered it, I would, of course, not have exposed myself by
denying it. But now I see this letter. It is obviously a carbon copy. I
must assume that on 29 November 1943 the mail was still fairly normal,
and that I received the letter, since a report is mentioned which I was
to deal with. It was apparently one of Haagen’s papers on his dry
vaccine, on which my knowledge is based and on account of which I can
give any information here at all as to Haagen’s experiments. This
knowledge of mine goes back to these papers of his which he wanted to
publish.

Q. It would appear that in spite of your fiery temperament your reaction
was even less significant than Haagen’s himself, wouldn’t it?

A. Since I was not concerned in the matter, as it was something between
Haagen and the concentration camp, there was no reaction in this case.
If somebody else tells me that he has had direct contact with abuses,
then there is no occasion for me to interfere, since that is settled
between the persons concerned. I had nothing to do with the
concentration camps. I did not have to carry out any inoculations there.

Q. And you insist that the words, “one hundred persons from a local
concentration camp were put at my disposal for immunization and
subsequent infection” really don’t mean subsequent infection at all, but
a subsequent immunization?

A. With the live and virulent dry vaccine, yes.

Q. Well, that is certainly an inarticulate way of saying that, isn’t it?

A. This is correspondence between experts, and they know what it’s
about.

Q. You state yourself that you are still not sure exactly what Haagen
did, although you were down there in the middle of 1943 and got him back
on the pay roll of the Luftwaffe, and you knew he was staying at the
laboratory and you knew he was going to work on typhus vaccines, but you
now sit here and say you don’t know exactly what he was doing.

A. Yes. That is true. I have given considerable information here about
Haagen’s work, and I have gone to considerable pains to get it all
together; but of course I can’t give you complete information, simply
because all these experiments were not under our direction and
supervision.

Q. Herr Professor, the first time the question of subsequent infection
came up was in a letter dated 1944, and you spent the best part of a day
rationalizing “subsequent infection” as meaning something entirely
different—that it was simply a subsequent vaccination, after the man
had already been vaccinated by the dead vaccine. Now, if you were told
on 29 November 1943 that he was going to carry out immunization and
subsequent infection experiments, you certainly would have known as a
matter of fact what he was doing, and you would not need to speculate on
this stand as you did yesterday. These words are entirely susceptible to
the meaning that they mean exactly what they say.

A. At this stage of his experiments Haagen did not yet have a fully
developed vaccine. He was working exclusively on the problem of
weakening the reaction to this live virulent vaccine. That was the
problem he was dealing with at the end of 1943 and the beginning of
1944. He was looking for various methods of achieving this aim.

Q. What does he mean in the last paragraph when he says, “For the time
being, we will concentrate on an epidemic culture in the form of a
virus, which we have received from Giroud in the meantime”?

A. That means that up to that time he had worked with a murine strain,
and that now for the development of the dry vaccine he wanted in
addition to use a strain of Rickettsia-Prowazeki.

Q. Well, I now want to point out to you again that I am having
considerable difficulty in construing the word “infection” to mean
vaccination.

A. Yes. I admit that many of these documents are written in a confusing
way, but I believe that I can remember the whole matter adequately
enough to know what the problem is. The vaccine was not developed enough
to be used in vaccination without reaction and then to determine the
effect. There were strong fever reactions, and the problem was how to
avoid this fever reaction.

Q. Well, why call that infection?

A. That is a similar condition biologically. An injection of a live, a
virulent vaccine, from the biological point of view, is an infection.
This expression is used often enough, but it is an infection which one
can absolutely control.

Q. And after receipt of this letter, you then wrote him on the 13th of
December—and this is Document NO-122, Exhibit 298—you sent him the
Copenhagen vaccine, didn’t you, and asked him to test it in his
experiments on his concentration camp inmates, didn’t you, just as they
did in Buchenwald, as you put it?

A. I beg your pardon?

Q. You sent him the Copenhagen vaccine after receiving this letter of 29
November, and asked him to test that in his experiments on concentration
camp inmates.

A. When this discussion of the Copenhagen vaccine took place, Haagen was
specially interested in it, because it was a murine vaccine; and since
he could not yet control fever reaction with murine vaccine—he only
succeeded in doing that at the beginning of 1944 by storing the vaccine
for a considerable time—he was no longer interested in this Copenhagen
vaccine. But at the end of 1943, when he still had the same difficulties
as Blanc with the reactions with the live murine vaccine, he was
considerably interested in the Copenhagen vaccine. For it was the only
vaccine from murine virus available in Europe at the time.

Q. You sent it to him, told him to test it just like they did in a
series of experiments in Buchenwald, didn’t you?

A. I don’t remember that.

Q. Well, you remember mentioning Buchenwald to Haagen in your letter of
13 December 1943?

A. Oh, that’s what you mean. Yes, I pointed it out as a parallel,
because several vaccines were tested in Buchenwald for their effect
against infection, and Haagen in Strasbourg wanted to test various
vaccine for their reaction effect.

Q. You sent that Copenhagen vaccine to Buchenwald also to be tested?

A. No.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Herr Professor, did Mrugowsky ever request you to give him vaccines
for use in typhus experiments?

A. No.

Q. Did you ever discuss the question as to whether the louse could be
infected by a vaccinated typhus patient with the defendant Mrugowsky?

A. That could be possible. This question played an important role for a
time in the discussion about the vaccines and their effectiveness. We
had some old Polish observations available to the effect that if
vaccinated persons received typhus in spite of the vaccination, no
further illnesses could be transferred by such persons. It is possible
throughout, since this question was of considerable importance that
something like that could well have been discussed by Mrugowsky and
myself. We talked a lot about that question.

Q. Did you ever negotiate with Mrugowsky concerning vaccines to be
tested in Buchenwald?

A. No.

Q. Let’s look at Document NO-1754.

(Document submitted to the witness.)

MR. MCHANEY: I will ask that document NO-1754 be marked as Prosecution
Exhibit 491 for identification.

Q. (Continuing) Herr Professor, will you read this document aloud?

A. “Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS; Journal No. 795/42

                      “Berlin W 15, Knesebeckstrasse 43/44; 16 May 1942

“To Oberfeldarzt Professor Dr. Rose; Berlin N. W., Foehrerstrasse 2

“Robert Koch Institute
“Dear Professor:

“The Reich Physician SS and Police has consented to the execution of
experiments to test typhus vaccines. May I therefore ask you to let me
have the vaccines?

“The other question which you raised, as to whether the louse can be
infected by a typhus patient vaccinated for protection, will also be
dealt with. In principle, this has also been approved. There are,
however, still some difficulties at the moment about the practical
execution, since we have at present no facilities for breeding lice.

“Your suggestion to use Olzscha has been passed on to the personnel
department of the SS Medical Office. It will be given consideration in
due course.

“With kind regards, and

                                                      “Heil Hitler!
                                                               “Yours
                              “Dr. MRUGOWSKY, SS Obersturmbannfuehrer.”

There is a footnote to this letter, and I quote:

    “According to telephone inquiry, Dr. Mrugowsky asks to be called
    by telephone after Professor Dr. Rose’s return. Dr. Mrugowsky
    will not be in Berlin in June. His deputy, Dr. Ding, is
    informed. 20 May 1942.”

This letter shows that Dr. Mrugowsky once informed me that the Reich
Physician SS and Police had consented to the testing of typhus vaccines.
He then asks me to send him these vaccines. I cannot recall what
vaccines he is speaking of.

Then the question is discussed about lice being infected by typhus
patients vaccinated for protection.

I admitted that a possibility exists, and I said that this question was
at one time discussed with me.

The final paragraph says that one of my assistants had been drafted into
the Waffen SS and that I endeavored to have him used in the hygiene
service.

Q. Herr Professor, let’s go to the footnote first. What are the initials
“B. L.” at the end of that footnote for? Isn’t that Frau Block?

A. Yes, that would be Frau Block, yes.

Q. And Frau Block has been in touch with Dr. Mrugowsky. She notes that
Dr. Ding, who I suppose you will admit is Dr. Ding, has been informed.
In view of this note we can pretty well disregard the testimony of your
witness Frau Block before this Tribunal, can’t we? She testified that
you had not corresponded with Mrugowsky, didn’t she?

A. She said that she could not recollect any correspondence with
Mrugowsky, but you will see from my documents which you have before you,
that this correspondence in effect was so small that it is quite
understandable if she does not remember it in detail. It is a result of
my express order that you have these documents available. I ordered that
in my institute at Pfaffenrode no documents should be destroyed under
any circumstances. There is a written document available to show that I
gave such an order.

Q. Herr Professor, this letter is in response to one which you wrote to
Mrugowsky, isn’t it?

A. That’s possible.

Q. And in the letter that you wrote to Mrugowsky you asked him to have
the Bucharest vaccine tested in Buchenwald, didn’t you?

A. I told you before in great detail that I could not remember this
matter about the Bucharest vaccine. If you have a letter before you
about this matter, it would, of course, give me a possibility to refresh
my memory.

Q. I should think this letter would refresh your memory, Herr Professor,
particularly in view of the Ding diary, which has an entry shortly
following the date on this letter where Ding carries out his experiments
with the Bucharest vaccine among others, and says in the diary that the
vaccine was obtained from you; and Mrugowsky in this letter asked you to
send him the vaccines which you have mentioned in your previous letter.
There’s really no doubt about it, is there, Professor?

A. This possibly becomes apparent.

Q. And was this person Olzscha mentioned in the letter? Was he to assist
in Buchenwald?

A. He was to be used in the hygiene service. Since he particularly dealt
with entomological questions, I asked that he should work on these
questions there.

Q. You got a report from Ding, too, on these experiments testing the
Bucharest vaccine, didn’t you, Professor?

A. I cannot remember that, and I already told you once that had I
received any such report, I would have drawn the conclusions from it;
and since I did not do that, I think it is improbable that I received
such a report.

Q. In view of this letter, Doctor, do you want to go back and change
your testimony about the Copenhagen vaccine? Didn’t you also suggest
those experiments, and didn’t you also supply the Copenhagen vaccine for
the experiments in Buchenwald?

A. No. I have no intention of doing that.

Q. Well, in that event I will ask that Document NO-1186 be passed up to
you, and this will be marked as Prosecution Exhibit 492 for
identification. Will you read this letter aloud please?

A. “Oberstarzt Professor Rose

                                                 “O. U., 2 December 1943

“To Standartenfuehrer Dr. Mrugowsky,
“Head of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS
“Berlin-Zehlendorf 6
“Spanische Allee 10
“Dear Herr Mrugowsky:

“At present I have at my disposal a number of samples of a new murine
virus typhus vaccine which was prepared from mice livers and proved in
animal experiments to be quantitatively a thousand times more effective
than the vaccine prepared from mice lungs. In order to decide whether
this first-rate murine vaccine should be used for protective vaccination
of human beings against lice typhus, it would be desirable to know if
this vaccine showed in yours and Ding’s experimental arrangement at
Buchenwald an effect similar to that of the classic virus vaccines.
Would you be able to have such an experimental series carried out?
Unfortunately, I could not reach you over the phone. Considering the
slowness of postal communications I would be grateful for an answer by
telephone. My numbers, all of which go through the same switchboard,
are: Berlin 278313; Rapid Exchange Berlin 90, Zossen 559; Luftwaffe
Exchange 72, there you ask for RLM, L In 14.

“With best regards

                                                      “Heil Hitler!
                                                               “Yours
                                                                 “Rose”

The signature which you see on this photostatic copy is, in effect, my
signature. This letter shows that I also informed Mrugowsky about the
Copenhagen vaccine, which I did not remember up to this point.

Q. And you asked him to test the vaccine in Buchenwald didn’t you?

A. The question of whether this vaccine can be tested in Buchenwald is
dealt with here.

Q. Do you see the name “Ding” written at the bottom of the letter?

A. Yes, it is at the bottom of the page.

Q. And it appears that the testimony of Kogon was very precise, wasn’t
it, because Ding got a copy of this letter, didn’t he?

A. Yes. Ding’s utterances do not only refer to my memorandum but also to
the correspondence between Mrugowsky and myself. Apparently it was then
transferred to the Reichsarzt SS.

Q. Is the date on this letter 2 December 1943 or 12 February 1943—and I
direct your attention to the receipt stamp on the letter which is 21
February 1944?

A. The difference between the two dates can be explained by the fact
that a considerable time had elapsed between the sending of my letter
and when this letter finally reached Ding. During this time the
competent agency dealt with the matter of the approval and execution of
the experiments on human beings.

Q. So you maintain that 2 December 1943 is the correct date on the
letter?

A. Certainly. That is certainly the correct date.

Q. On the basis of the two letters which I have exhibited to you, you
will concede that the Ding diary was precisely accurate in what it said,
won’t you?

A. No, one can’t conclude that just like that. The order to carry out
experiments in Buchenwald could not be issued by me in any way.

Q. That’s very clear—

A. That vaccines were requested from me seems to be evident from one
letter. I didn’t remember it and I still don’t remember it now, but on
the basis of this letter one has to consider that fact proved. Then it
also becomes evident that in this case I drew the attention of Herr
Mrugowsky to this vaccine, and that I mentioned a discussion dealing
with human experiments regarding these vaccines.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Professor, 6 persons died in this experiment with the Copenhagen
vaccine, didn’t they?

A. Yes. These were 6 persons who were furnished by the Reich Criminal
Police Office through the regular channels after they were chosen by the
competent agencies.

         EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY[65]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. FLEMING: Will you please draw the necessary conclusions from what we
have discovered about Ding’s diary?

DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY: The various erroneous entries in this document and
the facts which the handwriting experts have discovered prove that this
document is not a diary in which entries were made from time to time.
Rather there are long periods of time that are missing, sometimes
periods of more than one year before the entries were made. Pages 1 to
3, I believe, were all written at the same time, and also the subsequent
pages. The document has 27 pages, which were written down on only a few
occasions. That is testified to by the handwriting expert. This explains
the various discrepancies between the entries and the actual facts; for
instance, calling the Robert Koch Institute a Reich Institute, when it
wasn’t, etc. The testimony of a prosecution witness, Balachowsky,
corroborates this affidavit.

Q. This affidavit is Document NO-484, Prosecution Exhibit 291.
Balachowsky said, under number 29: “The file notes which were copied
into the diary shortly before the collapse, give the precise number of
the pages and the number of the experiments.” Now please continue.

A. In these words Balachowsky corroborates the fact that this diary,
namely, this diary of Block 46, was drawn up shortly before the
collapse, apparently on several days, consequently the difference in the
typewriters used. Now, as to why he did this I can only conjecture—I do
not know. That there was some reason for making the entries in this form
would appear to be obvious.

Q. For the explanation of why Ding wrote this diary on Block 46 let me
remind you of Kogon’s testimony, namely, that after 1943 Ding was sure
that the war would be lost.

A. Yes. That is true. During his testimony Kogon often stated that from
the beginning of 1943 on, Ding made efforts to cover himself. He also
said that from that moment on, the oral assignments that he received
were not sufficient, but that he must insist on receiving written
orders. All the more remarkable is it then that the so-called diary,
this NO-265, says only very infrequently who initiated the various lines
of experimentation. And, if I recall correctly, he does not once say who
ordered them.

Q. Then do the contents of this diary meet the normal requirements of a
scientist’s diary?

A. The diary of a scientist has the purpose of setting down the precise
course of the work undertaken. Consequently, all efforts regarding the
initiation and course of experiments should be set down. That is a
perfectly comprehensible custom in all institutes because subsequently
the evaluation of the experiments is based on entries in the scientific
institute’s diary. In this Document NO-265, however, which is allegedly
such a diary of Block 46, there is not one entry regarding the actual
course of the experiments; not even the results of the experiments are
set down there. That is really the least that you could ask of such a
diary. Dr. Kogon thought that the number of fatalities which are set
down with clear precision were a result, to be sure, an unhappy result,
of these experiments. That these events are found lamentable can hardly
be disputed, but it is a false point of view if one orients oneself on
the basis of this result toward something, the purpose of which was
entirely different. The real experimental result can be seen in the
following: as a consequence of the protective vaccination, what happens
during a subsequent case of infection is that firstly, the period of
incubation is prolonged, namely, that period of time which lapses
between the actual infection and the first appearance of the disease.
Secondly, the period of fever is shortened, whereas usually the period
of fever in typhus is 17 days. This protective vaccination reduces it to
12, 10, and even 6 days, depending on the strength of the protective
vaccine. At the same time, the height of the temperature is reduced. In
other words, the symptoms that are associated with fever, which effect
the blood circulation and the heart, as well as those which effect the
central nervous system, are less pronounced or altogether absent after
the protective vaccine. There are various other small clinical
indications which a doctor readily recognizes as a result of the
protective vaccine, and it must be said that as the result of less
serious clinical manifestations, the number of fatalities from typhus is
smaller. That is not a direct but an indirect consequence of
vaccination. Therefore, when Ding asserts in this block diary of Block
46 that the most important result of the experiments was the number of
fatalities, then every doctor will recognize this as such an erroneous
and distorted statement that even if it is made by a doctor so reliable
as Ding, it is completely unworthy of credence.

Q. I now show you Mrugowsky 9 and I put it in as Mrugowsky Exhibit 23.
It is a photostat of a paper by Dr. Ding on the protective action of
various vaccines on human beings and the course of typhus after
immunization. I do not wish to read the document but simply desire to
bring it to the attention of the Tribunal. Would you care to make any
statement about the inadequate way in which this diary was worked on?
Would you like to say that perhaps Ding was not in a position to carry
on such work?

A. This paper is 13 pages long. First, there is the manner of the
patient’s tolerance for the vaccine, then the individual points which I
just mentioned as the consequences of the protective vaccination are
gone into. Tables are presented which give statistics in these matters.
There are eight sketches giving graphs showing the results; and at the
very bottom on the next to the last page, in the next to the last
paragraph, there are three lines which say that the fatalities in the
cases of those vaccinated were fewer in number than among those not
vaccinated. That is all mentioned in the summary—there is a final
summary. This is also an indication that he was perfectly capable of
carrying on scientific work. I should like to point out that at the top
of this paper it is mentioned that this work was done in my institute in
Berlin. I say that as an indication that I laid no stress on keeping
these matters secret in any way or that it was my point of view that
these experimental results which had been achieved on the most expensive
of all material, namely, human beings, should be carried through to
conclusion and that results should be made available to all who are
interested.

Q. The prosecution also charges you with the fact that Ding infected
persons in Buchenwald who had not previously received the protective
vaccination. Would you like to make a statement on that subject?

A. The following cases come into question here on the basis of Ding’s
diary entries. First of all, there are the so-called “preliminary
experiments”. In Document NO-265, four such preparatory experiments are
mentioned on nonvaccinated persons. These were done in order to
ascertain what method was possible in order to artificially infect human
beings with typhus. I always found that the lay person who had never
concerned himself with these matters assumes it to be a matter of course
that it is always possible to infect a human being with a disease. That,
however, is by no means the case. Even in the case of such a toxic
material as the typhus germ, successful infection can only occur if it
is not directed directly into the blood stream. Unless another way is
chosen, it is usually impossible to bring about infection with such a
disease. Consequently, when such experiments are to be carried out on
human beings—and this is a point of view which I express without any
reference to my own person—then such preliminary experiments cannot be
dispensed with. The second case is the so-called “controlled cases”.

Q. Did you know anything of these preliminary experiments?

A. No. I found out about them only through the diary.

Q. Ding says in his diary under the 20th of February 1942: “Case
histories and curves on the preliminary experiments were sent to
Berlin.” Did you receive this report?

A. No. Nor do I believe Ding sent it to me, because he was not
subordinate to me in these experiments and it seems, therefore, more
probable to me that he sent them to Grawitz. I, at any rate, did not see
them.

Q. How can this be reconciled with your letter of 5 May 1942 to Conti
and others which I put into evidence this morning as Mrugowsky 10,
Mrugowsky Exhibit 20?

A. This letter corroborates what I have just testified to, because the
report on this series of experiments was sent to Grawitz, and I received
Ding’s report to Grawitz from Grawitz himself with the order to rewrite
it in a suitable form, since Grawitz did not wish outside persons to be
able to see, without any further trouble to themselves, that these were
really experiments on human beings with artificial infection. He knew
that, to some extent, I could master the style which he used in his
official communications, whereas he did not know whether Ding could or
not. Consequently, he commissioned me to take Ding’s original report and
to cast it in a suitable form for the purpose of making communications
to the manufacturing firm. This I did, and the result is this document
dated 5 May 1942.

Q. Your letterhead here is “Reich Physician SS and Police, Chief
Hygienist”. In other words, this is one of the cases in which Grawitz
made use of you when you still belonged to the medical staff of the
Waffen SS?

A. Yes.

Q. Why didn’t Grawitz rephrase the letter himself?

A. There may have been two reasons for that. Firstly, Grawitz was not a
hygienist but an internist and since the letter was being sent to
specialists, namely, to those people who manufactured the vaccines, he
wanted to be sure that the letter contained everything they needed to
know and, on the other hand, no more than they needed to know; secondly,
this is quite in line with his customary manner of working, namely, to
let his collaborators write letters which dealt with their particular
sphere of work, and for this reason, he commissioned me to indite this
letter.

Q. On this occasion did you not once again express objections to Grawitz
regarding experiments on human beings?

A. That I did not do because this series of experiments had been
concluded and because I knew that they had been carried out on Himmler’s
specific orders. This was the first series of experiments which had ever
been carried out and it was the reason for my very violent show-down
with Grawitz at that time. I assumed that this job was now completed and
I had no reason to raise further objections.

Q. Were the vaccines of the Behring Works in an experimental stage when
Dr. Ding used them in his experiments?

A. No; these vaccines had already been tested in the plant as to a
person’s tolerance for them. All such preparations of the Behring Works
were worked on in their own laboratories before they were sent out into
the world.

Q. I submit to the Tribunal Mrugowsky 44, and I put it in as Mrugowsky
Exhibit 24. This is an affidavit by Dr. Demnitz, the manager of the
Behring Works, regarding the way in which the vaccines of the Behring
Works were developed and how they were tested in the institute itself.
On the fourth page, it reads:

    “Naturally, the Behring Works also carried out tests to
    establish whether the vaccines agreed with human beings for
    (_a_) it was necessary to vaccinate those people working in the
    typhus laboratories in order to protect them against typhus;
    (_b_) it was necessary to protect those people who attended the
    experimental animals; and (_c_) the undersigned himself was
    vaccinated against typhus on several occasions with vaccines of
    the Behring Works. These vaccinations had to be repeated from
    time to time. This concerned both German and Russian assistants.
    About 20 to 25 persons were employed in our typhus department.”

And Number 6: “The animal experiments according to Otto proved: (_a_)
the harmlessness and (_b_) the effectiveness or insufficient
effectiveness.”

It stated previously, “the question of whether the animals showed a
positive reaction is incomprehensible.” It stated also that animal
experiments were carried out in the Behring Works. I submit this
document to prove these were not vaccines which had not been previously
tested, but were vaccines which had gone through the necessary
preliminary and effective testing. Do you remember Kogon’s testimony
that volunteers were used in the first two series of experiments? This
testimony is on page 1,162 of the English transcript and on page 1,197
of the German transcript. If we base our assumptions on Ding’s diary,
what two series of experiments must these have been for which volunteers
were used?

A. If we base our statements on Ding’s diary we can only consider that
these two series were, first of all, the preliminary series A which
began on 5 January, and the first series of vaccine experiments with 145
persons regarding which the letter of 5 May 1942 that was previously
read concerns itself. (_Mrugowsky 10, Mrugowsky Ex. 20._) This series
began on the next day, namely, on 6 January 1942. Any other experiments
took place at a later date. Thus, when Kogon says that two series of
experiments were carried out with volunteers, it can only be these two
series of experiments.

Q. The experiments with which the letter of 5 May concerned itself were
carried out on volunteers?

A. Apparently they were.

Q. Can you remember the communication of 11 April 1943 to the effect
that the Mateska serum could no longer be used for experiments?

A. No, I don’t remember that and I consider it out of the question that
I ever received any such communication. In all bacteriology,
particularly in virology, there have been efforts for centuries to breed
live germs which are no longer pathogenic (which do not infect human
beings), in order to use these live germs for the manufacture of
vaccine, namely vaccines with live attenuated strains, because these are
a complete protection against the disease.

Q. In other words, you want to say that if you had received this
communication, you would have seen to it that further experiments were
carried out with this serum which was no longer so virulent?

A. I should not like to put it quite that way, but I should certainly
have contacted the person whose institute had developed this strain,
that was the Robert Koch Institute, Professor Gildemeister. However, I
never spoke to him about this matter, and I should like to believe that
he found nothing out about this matter because Gildemeister was one of
our best virus researchers and was very familiar with the value such a
really unique occurrence would have had.

Q. Did you see reports on the C and D series of experiments concerning
the discovery of a safe method of infection, which were said to have
taken place on the 11th and 13th of April?

A. No, I only found out about them here while looking through this
document and I also saw that Ding does not assert that he sent a report
on this to Berlin.

Q. On what further typhus experiment series did you then see reports?

A. In the diary of Block 46, Document NO-265, Ding says that only in the
case of a few experimental series did he send reports to Berlin, namely
the new experimental series, series I, II, VII, and VIII. I saw the
report on series I, having received it from Grawitz, and as I said
before, I rephrased it in another form, and it constitutes the document
here submitted. Series II was carried out with the vaccine of
Durand-Giroud of the Parisian Institute. That was the vaccine we
intended to produce in our own institute. I really cannot recall ever
having seen this report, but it is possible that I was informed of it by
Grawitz, because I remember that Grawitz one day told me that he was
convinced of the effectiveness of this vaccine and had no further
objection to my suggestion that we manufacture the vaccine according to
that process. The immunization in the course of this series was carried
on by Ding between 19 August and 4 September 1942. From 10 September to
9 October he was in Paris with Professor Giroud to learn his method, and
when he returned, he infected persons and sent the charts to Berlin on
20 November. It was probably then, toward the end of 1942, that Grawitz
spoke to me about this matter.

Q. Ding was ordered to report to Giroud in Paris in the autumn of 1942,
although, as you have stated, it was already decided at the end of 1941
to manufacture your own vaccines according to Giroud’s process. Now how
do you explain this delay?

A. In the infections carried out in series I on 3 March 1942, Ding
infected himself and fell seriously ill of typhus, despite his
protective vaccination. Subsequently, he went on leave to recover, and
when his health was somewhat restored, the business of going to Paris
was discussed, which was only possible in the autumn.

Q. There were 4 specific fatalities in the control cases. Now you say
that Grawitz probably discussed this matter with you. Did you do nothing
about the fact that there had been fatalities?

A. When Grawitz spoke to me about this matter, [I] could do nothing
because the series of experiments had already been concluded. But I do
remember pretty clearly the situation in his office there. I remember
that I brought up the matter of these 4 fatalities and told him that
that would probably be the last series that he instigated. He answered
that Himmler had ordered these experiments and that I had specifically
objected to being included in the matter, and consequently no longer had
any right to interfere in his business.

Q. The report on the typhus experimental series VII was concluded on 7
September 1943, and when finished a report was sent to Berlin on 9
September, according to Ding’s diary. Did you see this report?

A. No.

Q. But according to Ding’s work report, on the third of September, at a
time when this series was completed but the report not yet written, you
were in Buchenwald, according to this diary, visiting Ding. Did you talk
about this matter then?

A. This entry is apparently correct. This was the period in which Block
50 was being prepared for the production of the vaccines. Ding writes in
one of his documents that on the 10th of August this block was occupied
and that work in producing the vaccine was begun. Kogon corroborated
that in his testimony. Then 3 weeks after the beginning of this work, I
went to Buchenwald to look over the laboratory and to see how his work
was getting along. Kogon also described at some length how I inspected
the institute, how I went into every room. It was a rather extensive
inspection. I asked many questions, had many conversations with the
inmates there; he further testified that I was with Ding in his room for
only a very brief period of time, and that is also correct. In other
words, at that time he did not submit any material to me.

Q. Did you know anything else about this experimental series VII?

A. This series was carried out with a vaccine similar to the Behring
vaccine, manufactured by a different firm. I knew nothing of this
experimental series.

Q. I submit to the Tribunal as the next document, Mrugowsky 12, and I
put it in evidence as Mrugowsky Exhibit 25. This is an affidavit by Dr.
Karl Ludwig Wolters of Hamburg, from the Asid Works. After the customary
introduction the statement reads:

    “The above person requested the notary to draw up an affidavit
    and declared and deposed the following under oath and after
    having been duly informed of the meaning of an affidavit:

    “1. The production of typhus vaccines based on the egg culture
    process began as early as 1941. Later on, the prescribed process
    according to Gildemeister and Haagen was introduced.

    “2. Experiments on animals for the purpose of testing the
    manufactured vaccines were taken up simultaneously with the
    beginning of the production and were carried out continuously.
    The results of the animal experiments were not always clear. The
    vaccine tolerance was tested by protective vaccinations of
    employees; all employees connected with the typhus department or
    who came in contact with employees working therein, were
    vaccinated. In addition, all other employees had the privilege
    of receiving protective vaccination against typhus on demand and
    without charge. In the course of time, about one thousand
    employees were vaccinated against typhus.”

To figures 3 and 4 I simply draw the attention of the Tribunal. Figure 5
reads:

    “5. As far as I know, there was no correspondence between the
    firm of Asid, Serum Institute G.m.b.H., Dessau, on the one hand,
    and the former Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS, or the
    Institute for Typhus and Virus Research at Buchenwald, or its
    chief, Dr. Ding, or the Grawitz Agency, on the other hand.

    “6. I made the acquaintance of Dr. Ding during a trip from
    Berlin to Krakow.

    “7. I could not say how the test of the typhus vaccines in
    question materialized. In any case, as far as I know, I never
    discussed that question with Professor Mrugowsky, nor did I
    forward the vaccines to him for testing. It is quite possible
    that the vaccines reached Dr. Ding through Professor
    Gildemeister of the Robert Koch Institute in Berlin, who
    received them in his capacity as expert consultant of the
    Ministry of the Interior for the fight against epidemics.

    “8. During a discussion with Professor Mrugowsky in the Hygiene
    Institute of the Waffen SS in Berlin, I only talked about
    general questions of hygiene concerning the occupied eastern
    territories, and I asked for assistance in the work of
    developing the serum institute at Kiev. At the same time, the
    organization of delousing by the Asid Serum Institute
    Koenigsberg was discussed. There also may have been discussion
    of general questions in connection with active immunization,
    especially against scarlet fever, diphtheria, and tetanus.”

Then there is the usual conclusion and signature.

It can be seen from this that the vaccines for this series did not go
via you from Ding; is that true?

A. Yes.

Q. According to Dr. Ding’s work report, which is Document NO-571,
Prosecution Exhibit 285, you were present with him on the 3d of
September in Buchenwald. Did you visit Block 46?

A. Yes. Ding invited me to take a look at Block 46. I went over there
with him; and I remember quite well that I was led to the lower floor of
a stone building, where there were a number of room-like partitions.

In the first room there were a few men playing cards; Ding told me that
these were typhus convalescents who had survived typhus and who were to
be released. I talked to them and found that their state of health was
good and that the usual after-effects of typhus were no longer in
existence. There were about five or six persons.

In the second room I saw about three patients lying in bed. I examined
them and spoke to them. They had been transferred to Buchenwald a short
time before from other camps. I think one of them was ill even when he
arrived and the others had fallen ill shortly after their arrival in
Buchenwald, and then were transferred to the typhus station. We are here
concerned with people who fell ill spontaneously. According to Ding’s
entry, there was no series of experiments carried on at that time.

Q. When visiting Buchenwald, didn’t you talk to Dr. Ding about his
various series of typhus experiments?

A. No. At that time he had concluded the experimental series number VII
with Asid vaccines as I can see from this document. This was a series
which had a number of fatalities as its result. It is in line with
Ding’s character that he did not speak to me about such a series of
experiments, since he knew what my basic attitude towards this question
was.

Q. Didn’t you discuss the typhus experiments with Ding on the occasion
of your visit?

A. No. We didn’t discuss that matter. Our conversation merely dealt with
the work carried on in Block 50 for the production of vaccine, which was
really the purpose of my visit. I think we discussed a number of other
hygienic questions concerning the vicinity of Buchenwald. I knew that
there was a lack of water there from my previous activity; and I am sure
that this was a subject which was discussed. I spent the evening with
Ding in his flat where I met Dr. Hoven, the camp physician of
Buchenwald, and his wife. Mrs. Ding was there, too. It is a matter of
course that we didn’t discuss any technical questions in that circle. We
certainly did not speak about any experiments on human beings.

In this connection I may perhaps say that this was the only time that I
saw Hoven, who was allegedly Ding’s representative. This was ten days
before Hoven had to end his activity as a camp physician in Buchenwald.

Q. Were you of the opinion that the typhus experimental series had been
concluded?

A. Yes. I held that opinion, since it becomes evident from the documents
here that the experimental series of that time had not led to any
disease. The reason was that the strain coming from the Robert Koch
Institute was not pathogenic. Ding did not say that he sent any reports
to Berlin about it; and I, therefore, did not know anything about the
way he worked in Buchenwald as far as it did not concern Block 50. I was
of the opinion that after the second series of experiments, which was
concluded at the end of 1942, no further experiments were planned.

Q. Well, if you believed that the typhus experiments had been concluded,
the main activity of Dr. Ding would also have had to come to a
conclusion?

A. No. That is not the case. Seen from my point of view, he was a
bacteriologist; and I was anxiously awaiting the end of this special
mission by Grawitz when Ding would again be fully at my disposal. At
that time, in 1943, he had to carry out the preparations for vaccine
production at Buchenwald. Therefore, the building work had to be
supervised. Block 50 was a bacteriological institute furnished in a very
modern style with a number of special pieces of equipment. Animals had
to be obtained and accommodation made ready for them. There was not only
one kind of animal but four different kinds. It was necessary to obtain
fodder for them. Then a number of other organizational activities were
necessary, which made Ding’s stay in Buchenwald absolutely necessary.

Q. Ding maintains that he sent a report about the series number VIII of
the typhus experiments. Did you see that in Berlin? It was to have been
sent on the 13th of June 1944.

A. Well, I heard about this series of experiments only by looking at the
document here. I hadn’t seen or heard of it before.

Q. In the last entry of his diary, Ding says: “By order of the Chief
Hygienist of the Waffen SS, dated the 12th of August 1944, it was to be
established whether the course of a typhus illness can be mitigated by a
typhus vaccine through intravenous or intramuscular injections.” Did you
ever issue such an order?

A. No. I repeatedly pointed out that on the basis of the entire
organizational set-up of the Medical Institute of the Waffen SS, neither
as the Chief of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS, nor as the
consulting hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police, could I order
any experiments to be carried out on inmates because I had just as
little influence on the medical service of the concentration camp as any
other member of the Waffen SS. The matter with which we dealt was
completely different. In the Crimea, in one of the hospitals in the
East, I saw that the internist there was treating typhoid illnesses with
injections of dead typhoid vaccines; and this procedure resulted in
fever in many of the cases. At that time I remembered that literature
dating back to the last World War, when a number of papers were written
on the very same subject, showed that there were similar methods in the
treatment of typhus and typhoid entailing the injection of vaccines.

During the course of these years when I had to deal closely with,
typhus, I had developed a very definite opinion about the origin and
development of typhus. I was, therefore, of the opinion that in the case
of this illness, which clinically is very close to para-typhus, it would
be quite feasible to make an experiment with that kind of treatment. The
clinical symptoms of typhus and typhoid and stomach typhus are very
similar. If a cure can be achieved with one method, it is to be assumed
that all other types of illnesses of that nature could also be treated
with success using that method. After my return, therefore, I
established contact with a number of internes belonging to the hospitals
which I knew, and wrote them that I had gathered, like experiences. I
quoted passages from literature on that subject, and I said that our new
experiences were the same as our old. I made the suggestion that the
same method be used in the case of typhus by injecting with a protective
typhus vaccine. One might consider that at that time we had just as
little means of combating the severe disease as we have today. We,
therefore, were medically justified in searching for new methods of
treatment.

Q. Were these to be a series of experiments in the sense in which Ding
carried them out?

A. That is completely out of the question. There was no reason to do
that at all. In order to perform such an experiment, one could make
tests on a typhus inflicted person using this method, and the worst that
could happen would be that it would not help; but it certainly would not
be necessary to make a certain series of experiments, and I certainly
never gave any such order.

Q. Did you write to Ding in that sense?

A. At that time I informed my assistants about this therapy in the case
of contagious diseases, and I am sure that it was a matter of course
that, as epidemic specialists, we had to be informed about such a
possibility, and in this manner we also received knowledge of it.

Q. You were saying that there would not have been justification for the
experimental theory?

A. No.

Q. Well, did you or did you not order such a series of experiments from
Dr. Ding?

A. Never, at no time.

Q. Are you of the opinion that Ding started these experiments on his own
initiative?

A. That is possible. At any rate he did not receive orders from me, and
I don’t know where else he could have received an order.

                 *        *        *        *        *

  EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENSE WITNESS DR. EUGEN HAAGEN[66]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. TIPP: Now, Professor, we are coming to the last and perhaps the most
decisive count of the indictment—namely, the typhus experiments, as the
prosecution calls them. Professor Schroeder and Professor
Becker-Freyseng are charged with responsibility for such typhus
experiments. There are two groups of them, according to the prosecution.
On the one hand, those performed in Buchenwald concentration camp by Dr.
Ding-Schuler and to a lesser extent by the defendant Dr. Hoven. The
second group is alleged typhus experiments that you carried out in the
Natzweiler concentration camp. Before we turn to the individual
experiments, Professor, please tell the Tribunal what the hazards of
typhus were during the war, especially in the years 1943, 1944, and 1945
when this problem became acute? Describe it only to the extent necessary
in order to make your work understandable.

WITNESS HAAGEN: I shall try to be brief, but in order to understand this
whole problem, one must be given some general information. Typhus is a
very serious infectious disease which, in international medical circles,
is included among the diseases which are of general danger, and it is
consequently subject to international control. In cases of such
hazardous and dangerous diseases, every state felt the moral obligation
to do everything to prevent the outbreak of an epidemic because it is
very difficult to combat and to eliminate the epidemic once it has
broken out. This point of view was embraced, of course, not only by the
government officials, but also by the responsible and interested
scientists and physicians; because we all, of course, knew how
prodigious the danger of typhus is, not only for the waging of the war
but also for the civilian population of the entire world. Typhus is not
only a war epidemic, but it has taken root in the country. It is also a
peacetime epidemic which is enormously difficult to combat.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Counsel, the Tribunal is quite aware that typhus
is a very dangerous disease, that it is a great menace to humans, and
that it was a menace to Germany during the last war, a great danger. I
don’t think it is necessary to elaborate that again. We have heard it
from several witnesses. It’s not denied.

DR. TIPP: Witness, you heard the Tribunal’s wish. In the opinion of the
Tribunal, the typhus danger for Germany has already been sufficiently
proved. Please go on to the subject itself now. Perhaps you could speak
of the usual preventive measures which are used against typhus,
particularly vaccines.

WITNESS HAAGEN: There are, in general, two procedures to prevent typhus.
One is what I might call the mechanical procedure, and the other the
biological procedure. In the mechanical procedure we are concerned with
combating the lice—I shall not go into that—but in the biological
procedure we are interested in a protective vaccine. There are various
vaccines available. Now, to get down to the crux of the matter, I must
say that the typhus vaccines which are made from dead typhus virus do
not provide absolute protection against the disease. They may lead to a
milder form of the disease, but the infection itself is not prevented.
Dead typhus vaccine, in other words, has no absolute anti-infectious
effect, which, however, is the main point of any vaccine.

We developed a live vaccine, not on the basis of our own experiences and
research, but we made use of the experiences of others. I should like to
mention primarily the work of the French typhus research scientists,
Blanc, Baltasar, and assistants Legrer and Lecolle. When vaccinating, a
vaccine must be used which gives anti-infectious protection, and in
general, in the case of virus diseases, successful vaccination is also
achieved only with live virus. Let me mention the examples of smallpox,
influenza, and yellow fever. In all these cases the vaccines are made
from a live virus, but it is true that this virus is mutated, that is,
it is no longer pathogenic to human beings. Its pathogenic
characteristics have been suppressed and have disappeared, but the virus
retains its anti-infectious efficacy. This change is accomplished in two
ways, either by passing the virus through an animal—this is frequently
done—and sometimes effects mutation in the virus and sometimes weakens
the virus. I need not go into that; it would take up too much time.

Q. If I understand you correctly, Witness, your aim as a scientist was
to develop a vaccine from live virus; in other words from a
nonpathogenic virus which could not cause the disease, but which,
nevertheless, had the antigenic effect, namely the effect of protecting
the vaccinated person against contracting the disease later by
infection. Is that so?

A. Yes. That is correct.

Q. Now, Witness, nobody is reproaching you for having produced vaccines,
but it is said that you tested the effectiveness of your vaccines in a
concentration camp. The prosecution called these virulent and you say
they were nonpathogenic. At any rate, that is the way I understood the
reproach of the prosecution; but first before you go into this, Witness,
will you please tell the Court how it happened that you came into
contact with the concentration camp Natzweiler in this matter?

A. The development of typhus throughout the war was such that typhus no
longer became purely a war epidemic, but because of the many refugee
camps, PW transports, and military transports, typhus was brought into
Germany itself. In the overcrowded camps, especially with lack of
sanitary installations, there was considerable danger from typhus,
particularly where people assembled who came from the East. I have only
to say that in the Auschwitz camp, for example (but also in many other
prisoner camps in the east), there had already been extensive epidemics.
Typhus pressed further and further into Germany. Every closed community
such as a camp is, in itself, a great source of danger of typhus, not
only the danger of an epidemic within the camp, but also an epidemic
that spreads to the surrounding civilian population. Most of the
concentration camp inmates worked outside the camp in factories and they
came into contact with the civilian population, so you can easily see
the danger of contagion. Now, in brief, the camp commandant and the camp
doctor in the course of the spring of 1943 asked me whether they could
have my assistance in combating this danger.

Q. Witness, a preparatory question first. Did you have any connection
with the SS, with the concentration camp, as such?

A. I had no connection with the SS or with the concentration camps, or
with any office in charge of them.

Q. Why did the camp commandant and the camp physician of the Natzweiler
concentration camp turn specifically to you?

A. As director of the Hygiene Institute I had a rather large sphere of
activity in Alsace, and, of course, it was known in the concentration
camps, too, that my offices were in Strasbourg. For this reason the camp
turned to me for help in many matters, including the obtaining of
vaccines and help in the disinfection of the camp, and so forth, matters
which perhaps we shall deal with later.

Q. You say then that the camp turned to you because you were the
hygienist in the Alsatian district around Strasbourg?

A. That is correct.

Q. You said also that the camp commandant or doctor asked for your
assistance?

A. Yes, that was an obvious thing for him to do, because I was right
there in Strasbourg.

Q. You said further that it was roughly in the spring of 1943 that these
requests for assistance were made to you; was there an epidemic in the
camp already at that time, or why did they think they needed your help?

A. At that time there was no epidemic in the camp, but the general
epidemiological situation was such that an outbreak of typhus was
expected at any moment, especially since transports were continually
coming from the East. These transports were infected with lice and
contained people who were already infected with typhus, and other camps
in the neighborhood had already had their first cases of typhus.

Q. Professor, what means did you have available to help these camp
physicians? Please limit yourself, first of all your vaccines?

A. I have already said that there are various vaccines available made
from dead virus, and also those made from live and attenuated virus. It
was very difficult to procure virus at that time. The superior officers
simply could not make the effective vaccines available, and in order to
carry out any plans, all sorts of decrees and orders existed in Germany
for the planning of systematic vaccination should the danger of typhus
arise.

Q. Now, Witness, you have described your work in the field of vaccine
production, namely, that of producing a live pathogenic virus; did you
begin this developing and working on your own initiative, or did some
other agency refer the problem to you?

A. Live typhus virus was being manufactured in foreign countries at that
time in great quantities, particularly in France where they had had a
great deal of experience with such live virus. I have already mentioned
Blanc, Baltasar, Lecolle, and Legrer. During the war, protective
vaccines were also made with such live virus in North Africa. There had
already been millions of such vaccinations and, of course, this
permitted experience to be gathered. The fact is that the French, who
saw this great danger, also saw the necessity of such large-scale
vaccines, and they had also had a few fatalities. As I said, we had to
use a virus strain for these vaccinations which, it is true, was alive
and still pathogenic to animals. In other words, a virulent virus, the
pathogenic effect of which on human beings was suppressed to a large
extent; and that is the essence of all live vaccine manufacture, and it
must occupy the central position in our considerations here. You bring
about such mutation only by passing the virus through animals. Every
specialist knows that when the virus is passed through animals it is
attenuated there more than by being cultured or bred, for instance, in
chicken yolks or by being preserved in a vacuum, or at very low
temperatures and only somewhat attenuated in strain.

Q. Witness, you still haven’t answered my question fully, that is,
whether you carried out this work on your own initiative or on the basis
of an order, directive, or assignment which came to you from elsewhere?

A. In developing this live typhus vaccine—

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Witness, you can answer that question in a very
few words. Just answer the question propounded to you by your counsel.

A. This was a research assignment, as I just said, there was no military
or other directive.

DR. TIPP: Witness, you have already described this morning how research
assignments were distributed, and you told us that, in general, the
assignment was made on the application of a scientist for such an
assignment; now what was the case here, did you work on this problem
first and then receive an assignment or was there already an assignment
in existence and did you then begin to work?

A. All this work was done entirely on my own initiative. I also saw to
it that I got the necessary research assignment so that I could have the
necessary funds for the work from the Reich Research Council, and then
from the Medical Chief of the Luftwaffe. That is where I obtained my
assignment.

MR. HARDY: Your Honor, before we adjourn may I inquire from counsel how
long the examination will continue, and how long other defense counsels
will take in their examination of the witness Haagen?

DR. TIPP: I have already said I will need roughly a day and a half. We
have already eliminated some of the questions; I don’t know if I can
finish this afternoon, but I shall not need so much time tomorrow
morning. I cannot tell you how much time my other colleagues will need.

MR. HARDY: Do I understand Dr. Tipp is going to take the rest of the
day, in spite of the fact that we sit until 5 o’clock?

DR. TIPP: I shall use all of today. Yes.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Does any other defense counsel desire to examine
this witness while he is on the stand?

DR. TIPP: Dr. Nelte just tells me that he will need a quarter of an
hour, and my colleague Krauss for Rostock, fifteen minutes.

DR. FRITZ: Mr. President, I cannot say definitely now how long I shall
need because I do not know how many of the questions I intend to put to
the witness will be made unnecessary by Dr. Tipp’s examination.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: The Tribunal is only asking for an estimate.

DR. FRITZ: One hour.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Counsel, during the noon recess will you instruct
your witness to answer your questions directly and simply without
expostulating on matters about which, while scientific and important,
the Tribunal has already been advised. Kindly instruct him and explain
to him how to answer these questions.

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. TIPP: Professor, before the recess you said that you began your work
in the field of typhus on your own initiative, and that in the course of
this work you obtained research assignments from the Medical Inspector
of the Luftwaffe as well as the Reich Research Counsel; now I ask you,
in your applications made before the various assignments were issued,
were any details given about the work which you planned to carry out or
the work which you had already carried out?

WITNESS HAAGEN: No details were given, of course, merely the problem as
such was dealt with.

Q. You have already described to the Tribunal your work on this problem;
it was to find a vaccine produced from live virus, a virus no longer
pathogenic to human beings which, however, contained the qualities of
the virus.

A. Yes. That is true. Our work was limited to the development of a live
vaccine, and this work was based on the great experiences of foreign
scientists, especially the French scientist Blanc; the technical side
was always carried out in animal experiments.

Q. Now, Witness, did you succeed in finding a vaccine of the type
described?

A. Yes. We did succeed in developing such a vaccine from a so-called
murine typhus virus strain, that is, from rat typhus. The weakening was
brought about through animal experiments, through cultivation in chicken
eggs, and thirdly through a conservation process.

Q. Was this vaccine then tested for its effectiveness and if so, how?

A. Yes. The vaccine was tested for its effectiveness. First, of course,
by animal experiments for its immunizing qualities. After this quality
had been proved, the first vaccinations were undertaken in order to test
the effectiveness and the tolerance on human beings. This was done on
volunteers.

Q. Where did you get these volunteers, Professor?

A. First of all I served myself, then the members of my institute and a
number of students from the university.

Q. Now, will you please tell us the purpose of these experiments?

A. When one has produced a new vaccine one must test not only its
effectiveness, but also its tolerability. This can only be done on human
beings; animal experiments are not sufficient. At a certain stage it
always becomes necessary to test it on human beings.

Q. In these vaccinations on members of the institute and students, you
tested the tolerability of the vaccine; the immunizing effect of the
vaccine, if I understood you correctly, could not be proved by these
experiments?

A. Yes. The immunizing effect can also be determined. One merely needs
to make the Weil-Felix reaction, which has been mentioned in this trial.
That is, to ascertain whether the blood serum already contains
protective bodies against the typhus germ. This test (I mention this
because mistakes have been made here) is used not only to diagnose the
disease, but also, since it is a definite immunity reaction, to find the
protective bodies after vaccination.

Q. We will come back to that later, Witness. Now when did you achieve
your aim, when did you have a vaccine of the type described, and when
did you develop it far enough to be used?

A. In the spring of 1943.

Q. And when was this vaccine first actually used on a large scale, or
when was it first used at all?

A. The first vaccinations were carried out in May 1943 in the Schirmeck
internment camp, which belonged to the Natzweiler concentration camp.
The vaccinations were performed on persons in special danger.

Q. This morning, Witness, you mentioned the request of a camp doctor of
the Natzweiler concentration camp, and Schirmeck was no doubt under him;
may I ask whether these Schirmeck vaccinations go back to the request of
the camp physician?

A. I do not quite understand your question.

Q. Please tell me whether the vaccinations performed in Schirmeck
originated with the request of the camp physician?

A. Yes. Schirmeck and Natzweiler belong together. My vaccinations there
were in connection with all the work of the camp.

Q. Then you used this vaccine for the first time in May 1943 in
Schirmeck. How many persons did you vaccinate?

A. Twenty-eight persons were vaccinated altogether.

Q. Did you have any influence on the selection of these persons; that
is, did you select these persons, or who selected them?

A. I did not have any direct influence on the selection of these
persons, only to the extent that I told the camp administrator and the
camp doctor that we could only vaccinate people who were in a more or
less good state of health, since if this were not the case it would not
correspond to our German vaccination laws. To that extent I did have
some influence.

The selection was made according to the point of view that persons were
selected who were in special danger of typhus, persons who were in the
so-called “east block” of the camp. New transports were always coming
from the East, lice infected, for the most part, so that one could count
on a considerable typhus danger. In this part of the camp the danger was
greater than in those parts of the camp, housing Germans and Alsatians
who did not come from the East.

Q. You said, Witness, the persons were selected from the group of
prisoners in special danger of contracting typhus. You just mentioned
the east block. Can you tell us what nationality these persons were?

A. As far as I can remember they were of various nationalities. There
were quite a number of them who spoke German and one could converse with
them easily.

Q. Now, Witness, I should like to ask you to describe how these
vaccinations were carried out. Perhaps a preliminary question first. Why
did you vaccinate only 28 persons? Why did you not vaccinate all the
inmates of the camp there?

A. At first I could only produce the vaccine in very small quantities.
My laboratory facilities were very limited. If I had wanted to vaccinate
a whole camp I would have had to have a production workshop. That is why
we only vaccinated a small number of people.

Q. Now, Professor, please describe how the vaccinations were performed.

A. Vaccinations were performed on 28 persons altogether, in several
groups. The first vaccination was of eight persons. They were given one
injection of 0.5 cc. of the vaccine into the breast muscle in the
customary manner. The second group consisted of 20 persons, divided into
two subgroups of ten each. The first group—let’s call this group A—was
also given 0.5 cc. of the vaccine intramuscularly. Subgroup B, the last
ten persons, were first given a vaccination of 0.5 cc. of a dead typhus
vaccine produced in the Robert Koch Institute. Then, eight days later,
there was a second vaccination with a live vaccine, again 0.5 cc.
intramuscularly. I should like to say that the first vaccination with
the dead vaccine, which I have just mentioned, was performed for two
reasons: First of all, in order to be able to see whether this
preliminary examination produced more protective bodies; and, in the
second place, to see whether this preliminary examination with dead
vaccine might reduce the reactions of the living vaccine.

At the same time, I carried out protective vaccinations on persons
outside the camp, on volunteers. They were again performed in such a way
that there were three injections this time: the first, 0.25 cc., the
second, 0.25 cc., and the third injection 0.5 cc. of the live vaccine.

Q. The Court will be especially interested, Witness, in the reactions of
the persons after this vaccination. Can you tell us that?

A. In the first group of eight persons who were given 0.5 cc. of the
living vaccine only once, three had a reaction consisting of a short
fever of over 39 degrees. The rest of the persons, however, had no
reaction.

In the second group, among the ten persons in group A, there were no
noticeable reactions. In the other group there were very negligible
symptoms, in some cases only a headache and depression. Typical symptoms
of typhus, brain symptoms or vessel symptoms, and other symptoms, did
not appear in any case.

The same was true of the third group. Here again there was no reaction.
I must say in this connection that I used a vaccine produced from dead
typhus virus. I must point that out because later, in Natzweiler, I used
the classic epidemic or louse typhus virus vaccine.

Q. Professor, after the vaccination did you watch the well-being of the
persons vaccinated?

A. Yes, of course. After the vaccination I was frequently in the camp. I
looked at the persons who had been vaccinated and was shown their
temperature charts. After four weeks a final blood sample was taken to
perform the Weil-Felix reaction in order to see what degree of immunity
they had developed.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. * * * Were there any deaths in the course of these vaccinations at
Schirmeck?

A. No. There were no deaths from the vaccinations at Schirmeck.

Q. Witness, your testimony is in contradiction to the testimony of a
prosecution witness whom we heard here. This was George Hirtz, who
testified here on the 8th of January. His testimony is on page 1310 of
the German and page 1293 of the English record. Hirtz said that at
Schirmeck you injected 20 to 25 persons and during the following days
these people developed a high temperature. The temperature is said to
have started after 36 to 48 hours, and two of these people died. The
witness also said you had vaccinated him, the head of the camp, and the
Kapo in the sick bay. Will you explain the differences between your
testimony and the testimony of Hirtz?

A. It is true that these three people, the camp head, the Kapo [inmate
trusty], and the nurse, that was Hirtz, were vaccinated with the
customary vaccine on the basis of an order to the effect that if there
was any danger of typhus, the camp personnel had to be vaccinated
regularly against this disease. Now, the personnel was in much less
danger than the inmates themselves; so in order to help the camp doctor,
I supplied the vaccine and vaccinated these three persons, but I
reserved the live vaccine for the persons who were in real danger. Those
were the reasons why these seeming distinctions were made.

Q. The witness Hirtz also testified that he did not medically examine
these 20 people before they were vaccinated. Is that correct?

A. When the prisoners came to the camp they were carefully examined by
the camp doctor. This was necessary in the interest of preventing
disease in the camp. Therefore, here I merely had to observe whether
they were free from external symptoms of disease and to determine how
strong they were.

Q. Then if I understand you correctly, you say that the medical
examination was performed by the camp doctor, who made them available to
you for vaccination?

A. Yes, the camp doctor and the head of the camp, together.

Q. Now, Professor, is the statement of the witness Hirtz correct to the
effect that after 36 to 48 hours these persons had a temperature of up
to 40° Centigrade, 104° Fahrenheit?

A. I have already said that aside from the first group there was no
special reaction. Hirtz himself did not know the first group, he says so
himself. In the second group, I have just testified that there were no
temperature reactions or any other reaction.

Q. But you said, Witness—oh, that was the first group.

A. Yes. And even here the reactions were quite the usual ones which
occur in other vaccinations, too.

Q. But Hirtz also says that after the temperature—seven to eight days,
the persons developed some kind of disturbance and they had some
impediment in their speech and in three or four cases they stuttered. Do
you know anything about that?

A. When I visited these persons I did not observe any such symptoms.
None of them complained, and I am sure that if any one found that he had
developed such symptoms he would immediately have gone to the doctor.
Everyone was interested in getting rid of these symptoms. I did not
observe any disturbances or stuttering. If Hirtz had seen them at the
time, I am convinced he would have reported them to me. He was the nurse
for these persons and was responsible for them; I cannot imagine that he
would have served the interests of these prisoners by keeping these
things secret.

Q. You say that you did not observe such symptoms nor did Hirtz report
them to you. Now, Witness, Hirtz also said that after two days two of
these experimental subjects, as he calls them, or vaccinated persons, as
you call them, died. Did you observe this, Witness?

A. I have already said that in the smaller experimental group no one
died, because I am sure I would have noticed it when I visited these
persons who had been vaccinated. I would certainly have ordered an
autopsy in the case of such deaths to determine when the person died.
Not only would I have ordered or carried out this autopsy, but the camp
administration would have ordered it. People might think that these
persons perhaps died of typhus. I must say that after a two-day
incubation period—that was the period between inoculation and death—no
one ever died of typhus. The shortest time for typhus deaths, that is
the incubation period plus length of disease, is ten days to fourteen
days. And these early deaths are supposed to be cases with a high
pathogenic virus originating directly from human beings. For this reason
alone it is quite impossible.

Q. Witness, you said that in such cases you would doubtless have had an
autopsy performed. You said you heard nothing about the deaths, and
that, therefore, there was no autopsy; is that right?

A. Yes. That is correct.

Q. I should like to remind the Tribunal of the testimony of Hirtz. (_Tr.
p. 1298._) He said that he immediately wrapped the bodies in paper and
had them burned in the crematorium at Natzweiler. Not even the
prosecution witness was able to say, or perhaps did not want to say, how
Professor Haagen reacted to these deaths. Now one more question about
this witness Hirtz. Here on the witness stand Hirtz was asked, “Now
Witness, you realized that these experiments performed on the 20 to 25
persons were experiments for the determination of typhus in connection
with typhus disease?” A. “Yes, I had not the slightest doubt about it. I
have fifteen years of practice behind me.” I do not know, Witness, what
this testimony means. Perhaps I am not enough of a specialist to judge,
but I may assume that you can explain what the content of these
statements is.

A. I can only say that I cannot understand Mr. Hirtz’ statement at all.
I have no idea what experiments to determine typhus in connection with
this disease are supposed to be. First of all, there were no experiments
to determine typhus since there was no typhus. And I don’t know any
method for performing experiments on human beings to determine typhus.
If by experiments, one means the removal of blood in the Weil-Felix
reaction, that is something else, but that is not what he is talking
about here. As reason for his expert knowledge the witness states that
he has been a pharmacist for 15 years. That he has such a long practice
behind him and so considers himself an expert in the field of contagious
diseases. I can’t quite understand that either. But I think one can
expect that from a pharmacist—after all, pharmacists do sell vaccines
for public diseases in pharmacies—one would really expect him to know
what vaccine reactions are and what a real disease is. And then in the
first group where a reaction did appear, he didn’t know that group at
all.

Q. You have already said, Witness, something about Mr. Hirtz’ testimony
that the prisoner Atloff told him about what Mr. Hirtz described was the
second experiment. It seems to me that supports your statement that Mr.
Hirtz knew nothing about the first group, that is the eight persons. Can
you tell us anything else, Professor, to explain the contradiction
between your testimony and that of Mr. Hirtz?

A. Hirtz speaks only of one injection, not of two. The vaccinated
persons whom he took care of all had two injections at intervals of
several days. If he had really been interested in the vaccination, he
must have known that two injections were performed. That is one point.
Then he says that the needles were not changed. He seems to have
overlooked something there again; that for every injection a new
injection needle was used which was brought from Strasbourg already
sterilized, and that the technical assistant changed them. Anybody who
knows anything about scientific work knows that in such important work,
one does not use the same needle for several persons, quite aside from
the fact that this would not be in accordance with one of the most
elementary demands of asepsis. Here again he probably didn’t observe
very carefully.

Q. Now, Professor, we are interested in the question of whether in the
camp of Schirmeck, you wanted to produce typhus through artificial
injection of pathogenic virus. Did you perform such experiments at
Schirmeck?

A. No. No such experiments were performed. I don’t know what the purpose
would have been.

Q. Then if I may sum up, Professor, you were introducing a vaccine into
practice after it had already been tested in animal experiments, in
self-experiments, and in experiments on volunteers. But experiments such
as I have just described were not performed at Schirmeck, is that
correct?

A. Yes. That is correct. We were merely introducing a vaccine which was
already being used on a large scale in other countries. Perhaps I may
add that at first I intended to perform further vaccinations in the
Schirmeck camp in order to protect this camp as far as possible, but
that in the course of the next month, I realized that the Natzweiler
camp was entirely different in its whole structure and that there was
much greater danger of typhus in this camp. Therefore, I shifted my
interest from Schirmeck to Natzweiler.

Q. Now before we go on to the work at Natzweiler, Witness, I should like
to clarify the following point with you. Mr. Hirtz testified here that
the prisoners used for vaccination were not volunteers; but you say,
Professor, that your point of view is that experimental subjects should
be volunteers. Can you please clearly answer this question and explain
the points of view which are important in your opinion in vaccinations
particularly?

A. The prisoners whom we vaccinated were not volunteers. I would like to
say the following on that point: As I have already said, I share with
most scientists the point of view that the prerequisite for any
experiment is the self-experiment. This was not merely a theory in my
case. Everyone who knows my work or saw my work knows that I performed a
number of self-experiments and contracted a number of infections. I need
not go into that now, but of course I tested all vaccines on myself. If
we dispensed with the element of voluntariness in this present case, I
must state that according to our rules and laws in Germany, vaccinations
are ordered wherever there is danger of an epidemic. This situation
existed in Schirmeck and Natzweiler. There was a decree for this camp
from the SS-WVHA, and decrees were sent out by the chief doctor of
concentration camps. Our vaccinations were performed within these legal
regulations. In the records of trial, I find again and again the point
of view that I had taken poor, helpless prisoners and treated them with
murderous germs. But if one knows my work well, one can see that, on the
contrary, I was combating these diseases. There can be no question of
any criminal experiments here. I want to object very definitely to being
called a criminal when I was merely fighting diseases.

Q. Well, Professor, you say that in this case you dispensed with
volunteers because it was not an experiment, but rather a vaccination,
and because it is your point of view that for vaccinations it is legally
permissible to make them compulsory—that you were merely carrying out a
legal measure under international law?

A. Yes. This was a vaccination with a vaccine which was already being
used elsewhere in the world within the framework of general vaccinations
carried out on the basis of the existing regulations.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. When did you begin your work in Natzweiler proper?

A. It was my intention to begin vaccination in the Natzweiler camp in
the summer of 1943, but then unexpected difficulties arose which I must
go into—I think they are of significance for this trial. Professor
Hirt, whose name I believe has been mentioned here repeatedly, the
director of the Anatomical Institute in Strasbourg, was a member of the
SS and a research worker of the Ahnenerbe. As an SS officer he had
discovered through the camp that I wanted to perform vaccinations there.
He then intervened because he thought that if persons outside the SS or
the WVHA wanted to work in the camp in some form or other we had to have
approval for this, quite aside from the fact that I had been asked to
perform these vaccinations, etc. Professor Hirt told the camp doctor and
myself that he was ready to get this approval and asked me to make a
request to this effect to the Institute for Military Scientific
Research. I had no connection with the SS or any suborganization of the
SS, nor did I know the inner organization of the SS. The application was
made in the summer of 1943. I cannot remember the wording of the
application exactly, but Hirt sent it on to the agency in question. I
only know that the application said that I had asked for permission to
vaccinate a certain number of camp inmates. One had to make a limitation
because I could only produce the vaccine in small quantities since the
technical conditions did not yet exist at the institute for large-scale
production. In this letter to Hirt, I pointed out that there was no
danger in vaccination with the new vaccine, but that we had to expect a
more or less strong reaction, especially a temperature reaction in
accordance with the variances in the individuals. I also pointed out
that the people to be vaccinated had to be in good physical condition,
so that they should be in more or less the same physical condition as
our soldiers. I said this in order to conform with the general
vaccination regulations. After some time I received an announcement from
the Institute for Military Scientific Research to the effect that my
request would be granted.

Q. Professor, will you please look at Document NO-120, which is
Prosecution Exhibit 297. It is a letter from the Reich Leader SS,
Personal Staff, Institute for Military Scientific Research, dated 30
September 1943. It is signed by Sievers, and it is addressed to the
Director of the Institute for Hygiene of the Reich University,
Strasbourg. Herr Sievers writes:

    “I confirm receipt of your request of 16 August 1943. I shall be
    glad to help you and have accordingly contacted the proper
    source to have the desired personnel placed at your disposal.”

Is this the letter you meant, Witness, when you said that you were given
approval in principle to carry out these vaccinations?

A. Yes, this letter created the basic prerequisities for performing the
vaccinations. If we disregard the fact that for epidemiological reasons
the vaccinations were justified and even necessary, this letter, I
believe, gives us a justification to perform them.

Q. Now, were you able to carry out the vaccinations?

A. No. It wasn’t as simple as that unfortunately—I say “unfortunately”
because precious time was lost and I was interested in protecting the
camp as soon as possible, at least insofar as there was no longer any
danger of typhus. I informed the camp doctor of the contents of this
letter and asked to be allowed to commence the vaccinations. A
considerable time passed, however, and not until November did I receive
notice that we could begin with the vaccinations. The whole affair had
not been helped by Hirt’s intervention, therefore, but had even been
delayed. Then when I received the first hundred prisoners, I looked at
them and found that they were in no condition at all to be vaccinated.
They were in very poor shape. I must say that they were prisoners who
came from Auschwitz on the transport; I think eighteen of the people had
already died. One really had no right to perform a vaccination on such a
group. I did not do so and refused for medical reasons.

Q. And what did you do then, Witness?

A. I informed Hirt of this. I wrote to him frankly that these people
were out of the question for vaccination and I asked for men in good
physical condition.

Q. Professor, will you please look at Document NO-121, Prosecution
Exhibit 293? It is a letter from you to Professor Hirt, dated 15 [13]
November 1943. Did you mean this letter when you say that you wrote to
Hirt? I shall read briefly:

    “On the 13th of November 1943, an inspection was made of the
    prisoners who were furnished to me by the SS-WVHA, in order to
    determine their suitability for the tests which have been
    planned for typhus vaccines.”

Is this the letter?

A. Yes. This is the letter of 13 November 1943. I may point out in this
letter that I asked for a hundred prisoners in good physical condition.
Only in this way could I expect results which could be used for purposes
of comparison.

Q. Professor, I have something to put to you from this document which is
perhaps a contradiction—or which may be interpreted as a
contradiction—of your testimony. You say that you wanted to vaccinate
these people and the first sentence of the document seems to indicate
that. You write, “their suitability for the typhus vaccinations.”
Further down, however, in the document you speak of testing a new
vaccine. Again, further down, “material which can be compared.” One
might conclude that these are not vaccinations but experiments. Is this
not in contradiction of your testimony?

A. No. That is not in contradiction of my statements. It is apparently
necessary for me to supplement my statements by saying the following: as
I said, in the Natzweiler camp I wanted to vaccinate a fairly large
number of prisoners. The vaccine was ready as far as the laboratory was
concerned; it had been tested in animal experiments; it had been tested
in self-experiments, and on a small group of volunteers. I, therefore,
knew that it no longer involved any danger for the persons vaccinated
and that the use of this living vaccine did not bring about any manifest
disease. But when a new vaccine is used for the first time in practice
it is to a certain degree an experiment, since the tolerance still has
to be determined and that can only be determined on a large number of
people. The dose still has to be determined and the result of the
vaccination still has to be checked on a large number of people. So I
admit it is no doubt true that the use of a new vaccine for the first
time in practice on a large number of people could still be considered
an experiment. I should like to add that in the first large-scale
application the titer values and blood were examined. Of course,
temperature was taken and all other observations were carefully made in
order to get a definite final impression of the effectiveness and
tolerance of the vaccine. We had to do this; it was our duty. It was a
big responsibility to introduce a new vaccine like this, even if one had
already gained experience in a small experiment on oneself and
volunteers. But in this trial the word, “experiment,” has been grossly
misused. In this sense our vaccinations were not “experiments”, they
were tests and not experiments with any uncertain goal or purpose. One
can hardly speak of criminal experiments here. And in every medical
journal in the world, on almost every page, we find experiments at the
sick bed, and I don’t think anyone has any objection to this word. And
as far as human experiments are concerned, I should like to refer to
advertisements which show the public attitude of an American firm—in
picture magazines which I have seen myself. Antiseptics such as
Listerine, where they speak of human beings on whom tests have been
made, who were used as guinea pigs. For this reason alone I think the
word; “experiment”, is used in different senses.

Q. One term has not yet been cleared in this document, the last words,
“comparable material.” Can you please explain what that means? What did
you mean by “comparable material”?

A. That means that the investigations indicated had already been made
and that the results were to be compared with one another, so that one
could have really useful results. The individual values of every
immunologist vary considerably according to the constitution and general
physical condition. That was one of the reasons why I was very careful
to obtain only those persons in good physical condition for vaccination,
since persons in a poor condition react quite differently. Besides, I
must point out that according to the general vaccination regulations,
vaccinations of any type can only be performed on healthy people, and I
wanted to observe this rule strictly.

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. TIPP: Now, Witness, I turn to the next document, NO-122, Prosecution
Exhibit 298. It is a letter from Rose to you dated 13 December 1943. In
this letter the frequently mentioned Copenhagen vaccine is again
mentioned. Herr Rose writes here that the testing of many vaccines
simultaneously gives a clearer picture of better or worse results of a
method than the testing of one vaccine alone. Furthermore, there is
mention of the experiments in Buchenwald. Let me ask you first of all,
Professor, when you received this letter in December 1943, what did you
know about these Buchenwald experiments?

WITNESS HAAGEN: I only heard the details about these Buchenwald
experiments from the documents in this trial. Moreover, Dr. Ding’s
report at the consulting conference in 1943 must be mentioned. I heard
of Professor Rose’s protest against these human experiments at that
time.

Q. You had no connection then with these Ding experiments?

A. I never worked with Ding and knew of his work only from the report at
this consulting conference.

Q. The prosecution has deduced regarding these Buchenwald experiments
that the efficacy of the vaccine was tested by subsequent infection with
pathogenic virus. Will you please say what you have to about that?

A. This attitude on the part of the prosecution ignores the fact, as I
said several times, that I never had a strain of virus which is
pathogenic to human beings, consequently, I could not carry out an
infection such as the prosecution seems to assume. I never thought of
carrying out such subsequent infection with a virus pathogenic to human
beings, because I was working as a scientist with my own material, and
wasn’t testing mixture for other vaccines at all.

As I have already said, on the occasion of Aherinesliev, I vaccinated
some of the inmates there, with an attenuated virus in order to minimize
the reactions to the vaccine. I thought that in the next vaccination I
would carry out these primary vaccinations with dead vaccine and I
wanted to use such a vaccine that used a dead virus. In the meantime,
between Schirmeck vaccines and the new vaccinations in Natzweiler, I had
carried my work to the point where I no longer needed a dead vaccine.
But the previous history was this: Professor Rose, by sending me this
Copenhagen vaccine, thought he was supporting and helping me. And he
suggested that I include this dead vaccine in my series of vaccines. Let
me say regarding this Copenhagen vaccine that it was a liver vaccine
which is said to be much more effective than the other dead vaccines,
particularly more so than the lung vaccine; and from it, in dead form, a
better protection could be expected. Now, it was my point of view that
if we distributed it over 100 persons again and did not get other
persons, there would not be enough vaccinations to be of value for
comparisons. So, I didn’t see any reason for introducing the Copenhagen
vaccine. I told this to Professor Rose and Professor Rose answered in
the form we have seen in the letter which constitutes this document.
This would have given some basis for comparison between the two
vaccines. However, I didn’t use it because I was no longer interested in
it since, in the meantime, we had succeeded somewhat in attenuating our
own virus so that we could do without it. I heard no more from Professor
Rose about this vaccine and never received the Copenhagen vaccine.

Q. Then you say, Professor, that this was a dead vaccine, namely the
Copenhagen vaccine, and there was also your own dead vaccine which was
to be used for a preliminary vaccination to reduce the reaction to the
live vaccine. However, this plan although originally intended, was never
carried out?

A. Yes. That is so.

Q. Now, Professor, we were talking about your letter to Professor Hirt
of 15 [13] November 1943, in which you ask him to make other prisoners
available. Was this request met later and were you able to carry out
vaccinations in Natzweiler later with your new vaccine?

A. Yes. I received the persons I had requested, and in December of 1943
and January of 1944 we were able to carry out these vaccinations. I
performed them in two groups of 40 persons each with my live attenuated
virus which is no longer pathogenic to human beings, and this I want to
state explicitly.

Q. Professor, please describe these vaccinations briefly to the
Tribunal.

A. First, a group of 40 persons was vaccinated. The first vaccination
was done with one cc. intramuscularly. One was a vaccine made of murine
typhus virus vaccine. In no case did local reactions of temperature or
other symptoms occur. The second vaccination took place a week later.
This was again one cc. of vaccine introduced intramuscularly. This was
no longer pathogenic to human beings. To complete the story I have to
say that between the Schirmeck vaccinations in May and these
vaccinations, I had turned to the production of a louse typhus vaccine;
this vaccine contained live virus. Before it was used in Natzweiler as a
vaccine, we tested it on ourselves, that is, with some collaborators, to
ascertain the tolerability and effects. We were roughly ten persons,
members of the institute and also students. Only then did we use the
vaccine on the prisoners in Natzweiler. Four weeks after the last
vaccination there were the usual serological examinations. The
Weil-Felix reaction was used. The average titer value, let me say, was
better than in the vaccinations with the rat virus. It was, namely
2,000. I need not go into these details. The general reactions were
normal reactions to inoculation, temperature, and headaches; but there
were no manifestations of actual typhus as a result of inoculations.

Q. You are speaking of a first group, so I assume there must have been a
second group. How did you carry out the vaccination of the second group?

A. It occurred to me that instead of injecting the vaccine, the
vaccination could be performed by scarifying the skin in the same way as
you scrape the skin to make a smallpox vaccination. Therefore, as with
the first group, with the same living virus vaccine, I vaccinated 40
additional persons with scarification of the skin. Let me point out that
the experiments on myself and on my assistants were carried out in the
same way, with scarification of the skin. The reactions were
comparatively mild, corresponding roughly to the reactions to vascular
typhus vaccine, so that we had no misgivings about undertaking this kind
of vaccination.

Q. You described the reactions of yourself and the volunteers as very
slight. Now, the reactions of the prisoners were stronger, were they
not?

A. Yes. They were stronger again. And this we can only explain by
believing that the general state of health among the prisoners was lower
than among my associates; but there was no such thing as a natural
manifestation of typhus or any fatalities.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. But, Professor, to this statement I shall have to put to you
something which was said before this Tribunal and which is quite
different from what you have just said. I am referring to the testimony
of the witness, Edith Schmidt. On 9 January 1947 (_Tr. p. 1371_), she
said that you had carried out vaccination experiments on 100 to 150
persons in Natzweiler, and out of these experiments roughly 50 are said
to have died from the control group. Fraeulein Schmidt stated that she
knew this from notes which your technical assistant, Miss Crodel, had
made about the typhus experiments at Natzweiler. Can you please tell the
Tribunal to which notes Fraeulein Schmidt was referring—in other words,
how do you explain her testimony?

A. It is utterly impossible for Fraeulein Schmidt to have seen records
of notes of my vaccinations in Natzweiler in which fatalities occurred
because as I have already said no one died following the vaccinations.
These notes of Fraeulein Crodel’s which Fraeulein Schmidt saw do not
refer to the vaccinations. That can be seen from the numbers mentioned,
by Fraeulein Schmidt, because I only vaccinated 80 persons at
Natzweiler, not 150 to 200 as the witness stated. The witness apparently
took this number and the concept of a control group from later writings,
which are to be discussed hereafter; but I can imagine to which note she
could have been referring.

Q. Please continue, Witness.

A. The witness states correctly when these notes were made, because she
says the sun was shining on the pages. That must have been in the spring
or summer of 1944. This corresponds with the time when the typhus
epidemic was raging in the camp. Thus I assume that Fraeulein Schmidt
really did see genuine notes of some sort.

Q. Then, Witness, you are saying that these were notes which were made
in the course of an epidemic that took place in Natzweiler, can you tell
us when this epidemic broke out?

A. So far as I can state from memory, the epidemic broke out in February
or March of 1944. Gradually the number of cases became very large, and
in the summer the very considerable figure of roughly 1,200 was reached.

Q. Let me point out in this connection that this epidemic is confirmed
by two prosecution witnesses: Grandjean on 6 January (_Tr. p. 1099_) and
the witness Holl on 3 January 1947 (_Tr. p. 1058_). Both witnesses
stated that in the spring of 1944 and also in the summer following,
there was a severe typhus epidemic in Natzweiler. The witness Grandjean
gave the number as 1,200 to 1,400 cases, as I remember, thus this would
agree with what you have just said, Witness. Now, the most important
question in this connection is, did the outbreak of this epidemic have
any connection with your vaccinations—what I mean is, were your
vaccinations the cause of this epidemic?

A. No. There was no connection between the epidemic and our
vaccinations. Our vaccinations had already been concluded in January
1944, and the first typhus cases occurred in February or March, and they
were brought into the camp from outside, either by transports or from
other camps. Let me repeat that the sick people were taken from outside
camps to Schirmeck where they were treated in a special department,
because there was no way of isolating them in the outside camps.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

MR. MCHANEY: Let’s pass on to the notebook. Now, what does the notebook
show? What is this notebook?

WITNESS HAAGEN: That is a control book in which the experiments with the
typhus vaccine on the animals were recorded.

Q. Does that notebook concern your typhus experiments?

A. As far as I can see now, it looks as if that was the current
laboratory work which we were carrying out. That is what it looks like,
but I’d have to see all of it first.

Q. Now, Professor, you must be able to tell the Tribunal who wrote this
book.

A. The technical assistant kept it, and from the handwriting, it looks
as if she made these entries; but I can’t interpret every record after
such a long time. I have to study it first. We did not only have
vaccinations, but also scientific work.

Q. But to the best of your memory, you can state that this notebook was
written by Fraeulein Crodel, and it concerns the experiments carried out
by you?

A. The laboratory work, as far as I can see at the moment. I would like
to make that restriction.

MR. MCHANEY: The prosecution asks that Document NO-3852 be marked as
Prosecution Exhibit 521 for identification.

Now, Professor, we have covered the chart of the test on the two mice.
Let’s go to the notebook itself. And in order to follow my questions, I
will ask you to observe the pencil numbers which I have written on this
photostatic copy down at the bottom right-hand corner of each page. Do
you find that?

A. Yes.

Q. Will you turn to page 3?

If the Tribunal, please, it will be necessary to renumber the pages
appearing on your translations. This applies equally to the defense
counsel. When the translation was made, they took some pages off the
reverse side of the photostatic copy, and because of the two pages
appearing for one photostatic copy, they had to be renumbered. Page 5 on
the translations should be marked page 3.

Do you find the entry for 30 April 1943, Professor?

A. 30 April ’43, yes.

Q. And that says, “S, plus, plus, 9, Sch.” That is Schirmeck, isn’t it,
Professor? “Sch.”?

A. No. That means ninth passage. It is supposed to be “pas.”, ninth
passage.

Q. It says “Sch.”, what does “Sch.” mean?

A. It doesn’t look like “Sch.” to me.

Q. What does it look like to you?

A. In German, I think it looks like a “p”, a German “p”.

Q. And you think it should read what?

A. First, I said it is probably “passage—ninth passage”.

Q. All right. Let’s go down to the entry, the next one for 14 May. In
parenthesis “two weeks,” does that mean the vaccine had been stored for
two weeks?

A. Where is that? I can’t find it.

Q. 14 May, immediately—

A. It probably means that it was stored for two weeks, yes.

Q. And then you go on, and it reads, “1 plus two point two for six mice,
point five, I. P. All injected again, six point six immune, only two out
of four of the controlled died,” right?

A. Yes. That is right.

Q. Then, the next is 26 May, “four weeks, three dash six,” what does
“three dash six” mean, Professor?

A. “Four weeks, three to six,” only I can’t tell you at the moment. I’d
have to reconstruct what the assistant wrote.

Q. Well, passing that for the moment. It continues to read, “point 5 per
person and six mice point five I. P., five dead after ten, fourteen
days. The rest after four weeks.” What does “the rest” refer to, the one
mouse? Does that refer to those unidentified persons?

A. No. That refers to the mice. It was simply a mouse experiment. It
says “five dead.” We should have all the information on the mice. This
is only an extract.

Q. But this is May 1943, when you were vaccinating people in Schirmeck,
and this entry says “three dash six, point five per persons”. Now you
are not suggesting to the Tribunal that the “persons” are referring to
the mice? It continues to say—

A. But when it says “six mice” with “point five”, that was the serum, I
suppose, because we were also testing the immunizing effect on mice. I
can’t interpret it differently at the moment. “Four weeks”, that means
the vaccine had been stored for four weeks. “Point five per persons”
were vaccinated. That might mean that it was a comparison experiment,
that the effectiveness was to be tested on mice. At the moment I can’t
give any exact interpretation. I’d have to study the document very
carefully.

Q. What does this “per person” refer to? Talking about human beings,
aren’t they?

A. Yes. It is very possible that that was the vaccine which we had
injected into the persons in Schirmeck in May of ’43; and then in
parallel experiments, we tested it on mice. It was still pathogenic to
mice. It was the murine typhus virus.

Q. But not pathogenic to human beings. It killed the mice, but you were
sure it wouldn’t kill any human beings, is that right?

A. Yes. The vaccination showed that.

Q. Let’s see what it showed. Let’s look at the entry for 6 July, and you
will recall that this is right about the time that our witness, Hirtz,
was testifying. On 6 July, “drawings of blood, Schirmeck, 10 persons, 3
had fever, Weil-Felix,” and then under number 1 to 8, indicating persons
1 to 8, you give the serum titer count, and then comes a little phrase,
“the other two were not here anymore.” Professor, what about these other
two persons out of the ten? You remember that the witness Hirtz
testified that he personally sewed two bodies up in a paper bag, which
were delivered to the crematorium after you had injected your vaccine.
Doesn’t this, “the other two are not here anymore”, rather substantiate
what the witness Hirtz testified to?

A. No. I wouldn’t say that. In my direct examination, I said that on
checking these vaccinated persons, no one was missing. Whether later
perhaps—these serological examinations were in May, two months
before—whether some of the prisoners went in the meantime, I don’t
know. If anyone had died there would have been an entry somewhere in the
record, I should think.

Q. Doesn’t that entry say, “the two weren’t here anymore”? Where were
these serological examinations in May? I don’t see that in your records.
Does it show any serological examinations in May?

A. In the institute. And this is a later check on the immunity through
the Weil-Felix experiments.

Q. We will proceed, Professor. Now you testified you did not conduct any
vaccinations after May 1943 in Schirmeck, and I must have given you an
opportunity at least five times to make that perfectly clear. And even
on the last document I put to you, you still insist you did not make
any. The next entry reads, “4 October 1943, six months, inoculated 20
persons in Schirmeck, tube plus 2 cc. distilled water, 0.5 per person”.

Do you want to change your testimony now, Professor?

A. First I have to read it carefully. There is a figure here, “six
months”. I have to interpret that “20 persons inoculated in Schirmeck”.
Those are probably the 20 people we vaccinated in May, whom the witness
here mentioned. “Two cc. distilled water, then 0.5 cc. per person.” I do
not know even today that we carried out vaccinations in Schirmeck in the
fall of 1943. Then there is an entry on the 27th of January, 1944, “nine
months”.

Q. That is right. That gives you the length of time you had this vaccine
stored, does it not, Professor? On 4 October 1943 you had it stored six
months? You inoculated 20 persons in Schirmeck on 4 October, did you
not, as you stated in your letter to Rose on the same date: “the
inoculations are now progressing,” or words to that effect? You remember
you said to Rose in a letter of 4 October 1943, which I put to you, that
was just a plan that you would do that. This entry indicates you did do
it, does it not, Professor?

A. I must stress what I said before. Afterwards it suddenly says
“January 1943”. That is a time much farther back.

Q. Yes, it is further back. It is obviously a mistake, Professor, as you
well know. Sometimes people running from December over into January make
a mistake and put the last year, you know, and that is obviously what
happened in this case because he could not write a contemporaneous entry
for January 1943 and then have it appear up above that entry, entries
for October, July, and May and April 1943, could he, Professor? You will
agree with me that the date should read 27 January 1944, when the
vaccine had been stored nine months dating from 30 April 1943, is that
not right, Professor?

A. I cannot remember that we vaccinated anybody in Schirmeck later; I am
very sorry.

Q. You remember that you did not vaccinate anybody after May, Professor?

A. Yes. That is right.

Q. On 27 January 1944, which is the next entry, “nine months, mixed with
the same amount as 21 May distilled water plus tube, 20 persons 10 cc.
each”. Those were in Schirmeck, too, were they not, Professor?

A. It says 1 cc., 1 point 0 cc. It does not say anything about
Schirmeck. I cannot say. I must assure you once more that I actually
know nothing about these vaccinations. I am very sorry.

Q. Let us proceed to page 4, Professor. It is apparently another series
on Schirmeck. Do you find the entry on page 4? Your Honors should change
page 6 to page 4.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Our pages are numbered 1 and 2. You are referring
to the numbers on the original document?

MR. MCHANEY: Yes, your Honor, page 6 on our translation. Page 6 of the
original, should be changed to read page 4 of the original.

Now, Professor, do you find an entry on page 4 before you, of 10
October, “five months, inoculated ten persons in Schirmeck”? Do you find
that, Professor?

WITNESS HAAGEN: Yes.

Q. That indicates you inoculated some after 4 October 1943, vaccinations
which you mentioned in your letter to Rose, and which are confirmed by
this notebook.

And then, under the entry for 10 October, you find 27 January 1944. Does
it appear 1944 on the original?

A. 27 January 1944, yes.

Q. Eight months?

A. Eight months, yes.

Q. You speak of inoculating 20 persons there, do you not, Professor? Can
you tell the Tribunal that those were done in Schirmeck?

A. I do not know that vaccinations were performed in Schirmeck at this
time. We were only vaccinating in Natzweiler at this time, and I did not
hear that such vaccinations were carried out. I am sorry.

Q. All right.

A. I am trying to interpret the document.

Q. Professor, let us go on to page 5. Do you find page 5, Professor?

A. Yes.

Q. This mentions another series of inoculations in Schirmeck, “13 July
1943, approximately seven weeks, Schirmeck, 0.5 cc. per person and six
mice before the inoculation”.

Let us drop down lower on the page. Do you find the entry for 14
October?

Professor, do you find that?

A. Yes.

Q. “Ten persons inoculated for the third time with 1 cc.” Professor, I
thought you told us that you did not carry out multiple vaccinations
with your murine vaccine in Schirmeck.

A. I have already testified that the only vaccinations in Schirmeck were
in May 1943. I do not know from where this record came. In the fall of
1943 we were only working in Natzweiler. I am sorry, I cannot give any
explanation.

Q. This entry, though, Professor, indicates an inoculation for the third
time on a series of ten persons. That was your “Infektions-Versuche,”
was it not, Professor?

A. No. I know nothing about it; I am sorry.

Q. But your series of three vaccinations was what you referred to as the
“Infektions-Versuche,” was it not, Professor?

A. But these were vaccinations which were carried out in Natzweiler, Mr.
Prosecutor.

Q. The book says they were carried out in Schirmeck, and about four days
before, on the 4th of October 1943, you wrote to Rose and said, “We have
to carry out infection experiments.” Professor, is it possible that you
really meant by “infection experiments” something other than your
three-times vaccination which you had concluded on 14 October 1943?

A. Let me see exactly what it says here, page 5, “10 October-14 October,
ten persons, three times point five,” it says again. It only says it is
a vaccination, if this document is right.

Q. Does the document say, “Vaccinated ten persons, inoculated for the
third time”? Is that what it said?

A. Yes. It says so. In May at Schirmeck in the control group we
vaccinated three times. That is not impossible; but what I notice on
this document, if you want to connect it with the Ipsen vaccine, is that
it does not say anything about the Ipsen vaccine; I have not found that
yet, but it does say Gildemeister.

Q. I have not mentioned anything about Ipsen vaccine. Let us proceed,
Professor, so that we get through before the noon recess. Remember, you
testified you had not carried out any vaccinations in Natzweiler after
January 1944. Professor, will you turn to page 7 of this little notebook
on your experiments, and while this is not the only entry which shows
that you carried out vaccination experiments in Natzweiler after January
1944, I think it will be sufficient for our purposes. Do you have page
7? Will you find the entry?

A. Yes. I have page 7.

Q. Will you find the entry for 25 May 1944?

A. Yes.

Q. Does that read, “Together with S inoculated, used up five tubes of MI
in Natzweiler; two ampules distilled water, three to four cubic
centimeters per ampule vaccine, 0.5 cc. The inoculation took place
during the incubation period, a transport also containing sick people,
13 became sick in the period from 29 May to 9 June; of those, two died.”

Then it continues to give the titer value of some of the others.
Professor, don’t you have to change your testimony about vaccination in
Natzweiler?

A. No. I cannot change it. I know nothing about this.

Q. Professor, let us look at words “together with S”. What do you
understand “together with S” to mean? It is 25 May 1944?

A. I have no idea what “S” means.

Q. You testified that the defendant Schroeder visited you and you fixed
the date, 25 May 1944. Is there any possibility that that “S” could mean
Schroeder?

A. No. That is quite impossible. Impossible. Professor Schroeder never
carried out any experiments with me nor did any work in my laboratory.
He was not with me in Schirmeck or Natzweiler.

Q. He was not with you in Natzweiler?

A. No.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[57] United States _vs._ Oswald Pohl, et al. See Vol. V.

[58] Not introduced in evidence.

[59] Final plea is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 17 July 1947,
pp. 11049-11074.

[60] United States _vs._ Friedrich Flick, et al. See Vol. VI.

[61] United States _vs._ Oswald Pohl, et al. See Vol. V.

[62] Passage is the passing of a disease carrier through a human being
or through an animal.

[63] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 6, 7, 8,
9 Jan. 1947, pp. 1151-1883.

[64] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 18, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25 April 1947, pp. 6081-6484.

[65] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 26, 27,
28, 31 March 1947, pp. 5000-5244.

[66] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 17, 18,
19, 20 June 1947, pp. 9409-9713.

                      10. EXPERIMENTS WITH POISON

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Genzken, Gebhardt, Mrugowsky, and Poppendick were charged
with special responsibility for and participation in criminal conduct
involving experiments with poison (par. 6 (K) of the indictment). Only
the defendant Mrugowsky was convicted on this charge.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the experiments with
poison is contained in its closing brief against the defendant
Mrugowsky. An extract from this brief is set forth below on pages 631 to
632. A corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on these
experiments has been selected from the final plea for the defendant
Mrugowsky. It appears below on pages 633 to 634. This argumentation is
followed by selections from the evidence on pages 634 to 639.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                          DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                          _Poison Experiments_

Poison experiments were carried out in the Buchenwald and Sachsenhausen
concentration camps by order of the defendant Mrugowsky (_Tr. pp.
1183-6_). The first series of the experiments was carried out in
December 1943 in order to determine the fatal dosage of poisons of the
alkaloid group. These experiments were requested by the SS judge,
Morgen, who investigated the criminal case against Koch, camp commander
of Buchenwald, and the defendant Hoven. Hoven was suspected of having
killed a witness against Koch and himself by means of poison. Four
Russian prisoners of war were experimented upon by Ding. The poison was
administered to the experimental subjects in their food without their
knowledge. All four survived, but were strangled in a crematorium of the
concentration camp in order that autopsies could be performed. (_Tr. pp.
1183-6_; _NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287_.) Since Ding was subordinated to
Mrugowsky, this experiment could not have been performed by Ding without
Mrugowsky’s approval.

On 11 September 1944 Mrugowsky and Ding carried out an experiment with
aconitine nitrate projectiles in the Sachsenhausen concentration camp.
The projectiles were filled with crystallized poison and five
experimental subjects were shot in the upper part of the left thigh with
these projectiles. In two cases, no effect of the poison could be
observed. In the other three cases, the suffering of the experimental
subjects was terrible. All three died after approximately two hours of
agony. The poison bullets used in the experiments were allegedly of
Russian origin. (_NO-201, Pros. Ex. 290._)

The experimental subjects were Russian prisoners of war. (_Tr. p. 1186_;
_see also Kogon’s testimony in Case 4_.[67]) Mrugowsky admitted his
participation in these experiments. He defended himself on the ground
that he was the legally appointed executioner in this case. Assuming the
truth of this absurd statement, it cannot be held legal to torture to
death prisoners of war even if they had been validly sentenced to death.

On 26 October 1944 still another poison experiment was carried out by
Ding in Buchenwald. The entry in the Ding diary for that date states:
“Special experiment on 6 persons according to instructions of SS
Oberfuehrer Lecturer Dr. Mrugowsky and RKPA. (Report on this orally.)”
Kogon testified that Ding told him the Russian prisoners of war used in
the experiments died in a short time. They were later dissected and
burned. Ding reported to Mrugowsky orally. These experiments were
connected with the poison bullet experiments in the Sachsenhausen
concentration camp. (_Tr. pp. 1185-1186._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

               _EXTRACT FROM THE FINAL PLEA FOR DEFENDANT
                             MRUGOWSKY_[68]

                 *        *        *        *        *

In respect to the poison experiments, I proved in my written statement
that Ding’s assertion that Mrugowsky had ordered him to be present at a
euthanasia killing by phenol is not correct. Professor Killian, who
according to Ding’s statement, was present when the order was given,
said that this statement of Ding’s was incorrect. It showed that the
examination of the question of whether the noxious effect of serums
containing phenol can be proved by the comparative use of serums with
and without phenol, and also a series of experiments with serums
containing phenol was never carried out.

The experiments with pervitin were carried out on the initiative of Dr.
Morgen and Dr. Wehner, according to the Ding diary. I proved that no
harm was caused to the health of the experimental subjects by these
experiments. The experiments were performed with pervitin which can be
obtained in any chemist’s shop without a prescription and consequently
is not a poison. In the experiments it was used together with a narcotic
because the authority wanted to determine whether, as a result of this
treatment, the effect was increased one way or the other. The only
effect was that the experimental subjects fell into a disturbed sleep
for up to 20 hours. This pervitin experiment was not ordered by
Mrugowsky; he did not participate therein in any way, and the
prosecution did not even contend that he knew of it. No responsibility
under criminal law may be deduced against him from this experiment.

With regard to the special experiment on 6 persons mentioned in Ding’s
diary, it is again solely the witness Kogon who gave details. In my
closing brief I pointed out that, in this case too, Kogon gave
contradictory testimony in the Pohl trial[69] and the doctors’ trial
about the origin of this experiment. Thus his evidence has no probative
value. Moreover, Kogon’s description of this experiment, except for the
sealing and the burning of the prescription, is only based on Ding’s
statements. In respect to this special experiment, there is no evidence
whatsoever to show the type of poison used, the manner in which the
special experiment was performed, and the aim of the experiment. After
the collapse, Ding told the defendant Sievers that towards the end of
1944 in Buchenwald he had filled 80 phials with prussic acid in order to
commit suicide, but he unfortunately took none of them with him.

No one can prove whether Ding carried out his “special experiment” with
these prussic acid capsules because Ding left no report about the course
of the special experiment.

The Ding diary states that the experiment was performed by order of
Mrugowsky and the Reich Criminal Police Office. Because the diary has
such little probative value, the truth of this contention cannot be
proved by this document alone. No other evidence has been submitted to
show that Ding poisoned 6 prisoners by order of Mrugowsky. Therefore
there is no conclusive evidence to prove that Mrugowsky ordered this
experiment or that he even knew about it.

The prosecution further indicted Mrugowsky because of an execution
performed at Sachsenhausen in which ten bandits sentenced to death were
executed with bullets poisoned with aconitine. I have proved that
Mrugowsky attended this execution only as the usual doctor present at an
execution. I further demonstrated that the execution took place because,
in an attempt on the life of a high-ranking civil servant in the General
Government, Russian revolver ammunition had been used in which hollow
bullets had been filled with aconitine poison. This use of poisoned
Russian bullets, and Henderson’s book which described the preparation
for the use of poisoned bullets in the First World War, had increased
the concern that poisoned bullets would shortly be used at the front. I
proved that poisoned ammunition was used at the execution to determine
whether pure aconitine or a poison mixture had been used in the bullets,
and how much time would be available in case of need to administer
antidotes.

I proved that all executions in the concentration camps were ordered by
the Reich Criminal Police Office, and that the presence of a doctor at
such executions was prescribed. The execution at Sachsenhausen was
ordered by the Reich Criminal Police Office. No charge under criminal
law can be deduced against Mrugowsky from his attendance as a doctor at
the execution. I have explained this in detail in my closing brief.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
           Pros. Ex.
 Doc. No.     No.                Description of Document            Page
NO-201        290     Report from Mrugowsky to the Criminological     635
                        Institute, 12 September 1944, concerning
                        experiments with aconitine nitrate
                        projectiles.

                               _Testimony_

Extract from the testimony of prosecution witness Dr. Eugen Kogon     637

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-201
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 290

  REPORT FROM MRUGOWSKY TO THE CRIMINOLOGICAL INSTITUTE, 12 SEPTEMBER
    1944, CONCERNING EXPERIMENTS WITH ACONITINE NITRATE PROJECTILES

Reich Physician SS and Police                    Berlin-Zehlendorf 6,
The Chief Hygienist                              12 September 1944
Journal No.: Secret 364/44 Dr. Mru./Eb.          Spanische Allee 10-12

                                Top Secret

Subject: Experiments with aconitine nitrate projectiles
To the Criminological Institute                                    [Stamp]
attn: Dr. Widmann

Berlin                                           Criminological Institute
                                                 Department: Chemistry
                                                 received: 13 Sep 1944
                                                 Journal No. g 53/44
                                                 in charge:

In the presence of SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Ding, Dr. Widmann, and the
undersigned, experiments with aconitine nitrate projectiles were
conducted on 11 September 1944 on 5 persons who had been condemned to
death. The projectiles in question were of a 7.65 mm. caliber, filled
with crystallized poison. The experimental subjects, in a lying
position, were each shot in the upper part of the left thigh. The thighs
of two of them were cleanly shot through. Even afterwards, no effect of
the poison was to be observed. These two experimental subjects were
therefore exempted.

The entrance of the projectile did not show any peculiarities. Evidently
the arteria femoralis of one of the subjects were injured. A slight
stream of blood issued from the wound. But the bleeding stopped after a
short time. The loss of blood was estimated as having been at the most ¾
of a liter, and consequently was on no account fatal.

The symptoms of the condemned three showed a surprising similarity. At
first no peculiarities appeared. After 20 to 25 minutes a motor
agitation and a slight ptyalism set in, but stopped again. After 40 to
45 minutes a stronger salivation set in. The poisoned persons swallowed
repeatedly, but later the flow of saliva became so strong that it could
not even be overcome by swallowing. Foamy saliva flowed from their
mouths. Then choking and vomiting set in.

After 58 minutes the pulse of two of them could no longer be felt. The
third had a pulse rate of 76. After 65 minutes his blood pressure was
90/60. The sounds were extremely low. A reduction of blood pressure was
evident.

During the first hour of the experiment the pupils did not show any
changes. After 78 minutes the pupils of all three showed a medium
dilation together with a retarded light reaction. Simultaneously,
maximum respiration with heavy breathing inhalations set in. This
subsided after a few minutes. The pupils contracted again and their
reaction improved. After 65 minutes the patellar and achilles tendon
reflexes of the poisoned subjects were negative. The abdominal reflexes
of two of them were also negative. The upper abdominal reflexes of the
third were still positive, while the lower were negative. After
approximately 90 minutes, one of the subjects again started breathing
heavily. This was accompanied by an increasing motor unrest. Then the
heavy breathing changed into a flat, accelerated respiration,
accompanied by extreme nausea. One of the poisoned persons tried in vain
to vomit. To do so he introduced four fingers of his hand up to the
knuckles into his throat, but nevertheless could not vomit. His face was
flushed.

The other two experimental subjects had already early shown a pale face.
The other symptoms were the same. The motor unrest increased so much
that the persons flung themselves up, and down, rolled their eyes and
made meaningless motions with their hands and arms. Finally the
agitation subsided, the pupils dilated to the maximum, and the condemned
lay motionless. Masseter spasms and urination were observed in one case.
Death occurred 121, 123, and 129 minutes after entry of the projectile.

_Summary._ The projectiles filled with approximately 38 mg. of aconitine
nitrate in solid form had, in spite of only insignificant injuries, a
deadly effect after two hours. Poisoning showed 20 to 25 minutes after
injury. The main reactions were salivation, alteration of the pupils,
negative tendon reflexes, motor unrest, and extreme nausea.

                                              [Signature] MRUGOWSKY
                              SS Lecturer Oberfuehrer and Office Chief.

                 *        *        *        *        *

     _Poison Projectile of a Russian 7.65 Caliber Pistol Cartridge_

                     (Perspective view, scale 10:1)
                             [Illustration]

The projectile is cut open and ¼ of the lead core (1 segment) is
removed. The lead seal at the bottom of the projectile is not shown in
this illustration. The section is clearly visible on the right half of
the jacket of the projectile.

                        Criminological Institute of the Security Police
                                                  Department: Chemistry
                                                    Journal No. g 15/44

   _Russian 7.65 mm. Caliber Pistol Cartridge with Poison Projectile_

               (Stamp on bottom of cartridge case: Geco)
                             [Illustration]

                        Criminological Institute of the Security Police
                                                  Department: Chemistry

         EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF PROSECUTION WITNESS DR.
                             EUGEN KOGON[70]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: Do you know anything about experiments with poisons in the
Buchenwald concentration camp?

WITNESS KOGON: I know of two such cases. The one case was about the turn
of the year 1943-44 or in the late fall of 1943, and the second case was
probably in the summer of 1944. In each case Russian prisoners of war
were used for these experiments. In the first case various preparations
of the so-called alkaloid series were put into noodle soup and
administered to 40 of these prisoners of war who were in Block 46. They,
of course, had no idea what was going on. Two of these prisoners became
so sick that they vomited, one was unconscious, the fourth showed no
symptoms at all. Thereupon, all four were strangled in the crematorium.
They were dissected and the contents of their stomachs and other effects
were determined. The experiment was ordered by the SS court, by the SS
investigating judge, Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Morgen. It was carried out in
the presence of Dr. Ding, Dr. Morgen, Dr. Wehner, SS Hauptsturmfuehrer
and SS judges, and one of the three camp leaders, I do not know whether
it was SS Sturmbannfuehrer Schubert or SS leader Florstedt. The second
experiments—

Q. Witness, before continuing with the second experiment, I wonder if
you could tell the Tribunal the reason why this poison experiment which
you have just mentioned was carried out?

A. In the summer of 1943 the SS court in Berlin was trying the former
commander of Buchenwald and later commander of the Lublin concentration
camp in Poland, SS Standartenfuehrer Koch. The trial was reaching its
climax. The investigation had led to very serious charges against Koch.
Here I must mention that SS Obergruppenfuehrer Prince Waldeck, then head
of the SS main district [Oberabschnitt] Fulda-Werra, was personally
opposing Koch, and it was merely this personal antagonism of the two men
which had brought about the trial. A man by the name of Koehler, a
Hauptscharfuehrer in Buchenwald, was arrested by Dr. Morgen and kept in
custody in the Buchenwald concentration camp. This Hauptscharfuehrer
seemed to have testified against Koch. Two or three days later this
Hauptscharfuehrer Koehler was found dead in his cell. A few hours before
he had been quite healthy. He seemed to have taken strong poison. Dr.
Morgen contended that Dr. Hoven, together with the guard,
Hauptscharfuehrer Sommer, had killed Koehler. Koehler was dissected in
the dissecting room in the presence of a scientist from Jena and two of
my comrades. The head of the pathology section was also present. Drugs
of the alkaloid series were found in the stomach of the dead man. The
amount and the specific type was not known. In order to determine the
fatal dosage of poisons of this type, the SS court ordered an experiment
on four Russian prisoners of war. This is the experiment which I have
just described in Block 46. On 20 September 1943, Dr. Hoven was arrested
on Dr. Morgen’s orders and remained in the custody of the SS court until
the end of March 1945. I know the date exactly because on that Saturday
afternoon Dr. Hoven came to Block 50 on his motorcycle, asked me about
Dr. Ding-Schuler, who was not there, and went away again quite
depressed. Half an hour later I learned from the hospital, the
prisoners’ hospital, that Dr. Hoven expected to be arrested himself.

Q. In other words, Hoven was suspected by Morgen of having done away
with the witness against Koch, is that right?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, will you explain to the Tribunal about his second poison
experiment?

A. In the summer of 1944—I am not quite sure of the exact date—Dr.
Ding, who was already called Schuler, came from Berlin at the time and
told me that he had a very unpleasant task to perform. He said it was
extremely secret and a few hours later, without my having asked, he told
me details about it in his room.

I must point out that at this time there was really nothing at all
private or official, that Dr. Schuler would not have told me in order to
get my advice. He realized quite clearly that the cause of National
Socialism was lost. He was only looking for safety.

He said, “Kogon, can you see any way of getting me out of this affair? I
am supposed to test a poison here on Russian prisoners of war. I have to
report on it immediately. It is a direct order from Mrugowsky. I don’t
know how I can get out of it.”

He gave me the prescription, the chemical formula of this poison, and I
was to put this prescription in an envelope and seal it in his presence.
In my haste I was not able to read it. It had some code name. I put the
prescription in the envelope and only said to him, because we were
interrupted, “You know my point of view.” I must add here that in long
conversations at night I had tried to explain to him that his only way
out was to do as much as possible for the political prisoners, but that
in serious cases he must, as a human being, refuse to carry out orders
which violated the moral laws.

He laughed when I said that and replied, “I know your religious and
moral ideas. You know I don’t believe in anything. This way is out of
the question for me; all I can do is comply with the first suggestion
and collaborate with the political prisoners.”

In this poison case, he went in great haste and excitement to the camp
leader, Sturmbannfuehrer Schubert, whom he had informed beforehand by
telephone, and the commander, Oberfuehrer Pister, who also knew about it
and they all went—I don’t know whether the camp physician was also
present—at any rate, they went to the crematorium, not to Block 46. The
Russian prisoners of war, again, four of them, had been taken there into
the cellar with the 46 hooks on the walls on which the people were
strangled. These four Russians were given this poison. I do not know how
it was administered. As Ding-Schuler told me later, they died in a very
short time. Then they were dissected and cremated. Dr. Ding did not send
a written report on this matter to Berlin. He told me he had to report
on it to Mrugowsky orally. Ding was not only excited about this matter,
but afterwards he was also very secretive about it. He did not want me
to talk about it any more. From indications in his conversation I
learned that there was some connection with experiments in the
Sachsenhausen concentration camp near Oranienburg which Mrugowsky had
performed in Ding’s presence. Prisoners must have been shot there with
poisoned bullets, because Ding said that a Russian prisoner of war had
succeeded in getting hold of a knife and attacking Mrugowsky, but that
the prisoner had been immediately overpowered.

In any case, Ding did not want to have anything more to do with the
matter, even in my presence. A short time later the prescription and the
sealed envelope were burned by Ding in my presence. He held it over a
candle in my presence and burned it. I could not find out what the
contents were.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[67] United States _vs._ Oswald Pohl, et al. See Vol. V.

[68] Final plea is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 17 July 1947,
pp. 11049-11074.

[69] United States _vs._ Oswald Pohl, et al. See Vol. V.

[70] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 6, 7, 8
Jan 1947, pp. 1150-1300. See also testimony of defendant Mrugowsky, sec.
VIII G, vol. II.

                    11. INCENDIARY BOMB EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Genzken, Gebhardt, Mrugowsky, and Poppendick were charged
with special responsibility for and participation in criminal conduct
involving incendiary bomb experiments (par. 6 (L) of the indictment).
The defendants were acquitted on this charge.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the incendiary bomb
experiments is contained in its closing brief against the defendant
Poppendick. An extract from this brief is set forth below on page 640. A
corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on these
experiments has been selected from the closing brief for the defendant
Poppendick. It appears below on pages 641 to 643. This argumentation is
followed by selections from the evidence on pages 643 to 653.

         b. Selection From the Argumentation of the Prosecution

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                          DEFENDANT POPPENDICK_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                     _Incendiary Bomb Experiments_

Sturmbannfuehrer Ding-Schuler (hereinafter referred to as Ding) carried
out incendiary bomb experiments in the Buchenwald concentration camp
between 19 and 25 November 1943. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287._) In order to
ascertain the effectiveness of the drug R 17 and echinacine ointment and
liquid for the treatment of phosphorus burns, five experimental persons
were deliberately burned with ignited phosphorus which was taken from an
incendiary bomb. The resulting burns were very severe, the victims
suffered excruciating pain and permanent injury. The drugs to be tested
were manufactured at the Dr. Madaus Works in Dresden-Radebeul. (_Tr. pp.
1187-90._)

The report on these experiments (_NO-579, Pros. Ex. 288_) was forwarded
by Ding to the defendants Poppendick and Mrugowsky. (_Tr. pp. 1158,
1188._) The Research Department “V” (for Vonkennel) in Leipzig was also
interested in these experiments. Correspondence by Ding with this
department went through Poppendick. (_Tr. pp. 1158, 1175, 1247, 1267._)
Research Department “V” was a laboratory run by Sturmbannfuehrer
Vonkennel, with funds and material furnished by Grawitz. (_Poppendick 9,
Poppendick Ex. 8_; _Tr. pp. 5589-5592_.) Poppendick was the expert in
Grawitz’ office responsible for the work of that laboratory. (_Tr. p.
1267._) This testimony of Kogon is corroborated by letters from
Vonkennel to Poppendick and Ding to Poppendick concerning typhus
experiments. (_NO-1182, Pros. Ex. 477_; _NO-1184, Pros. Ex. 476_;
_NO-1185, Pros. Ex. 478_.) The latter was actually typed by Kogon for
Ding, as can be seen from the file notation.

                 *        *        *        *        *

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

                  _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR
                          DEFENDANT POPPENDICK_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Experiments with Incendiaries_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                        _Evaluation of Evidence_

The prosecution questioned the witness Kogon about the dispatch of
reports on experiments with incendiaries. He stated:

    “The photos were placed opposite each other, mounted in an
    album, described in detail; the result sent in two copies to
    Berlin, one to Professor Mrugowsky, the other—here I am not
    quite sure—to Oberfuehrer Poppendick. I believe that
    Oberfuehrer Poppendick certainly received one report concerning
    this matter because Dr. Ding intended to publish a dissertation
    on this in a medical journal.”

The prosecution then referred in this connection, to the entry in the
so-called Ding diary under 5 January 1944 (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287_):

    “Records dispatched to the Reich Physician SS with the request
    that they be forwarded to the Dr. Madaus Works.”

The prosecution now thought they would be able to connect these two
pieces of evidence with one another and wants to prove from this that
Poppendick received a regular report, with photos, on experiments with
incendiaries, and thus learned about criminal experiments with
incendiaries in Buchenwald.

The defense first questioned the persons concerned in Leipzig, in the
form of affidavits, about the previous history of the experiments with
incendiaries—the affidavit of Dr. Koch from the Madaus Works
(_Mrugowsky 103, Mrugowsky Ex. 97_), the affidavit of Kirchert
(_Poppendick 7, Poppendick Ex. 9_), and the affidavit of von Woyrsch
(_Mrugowsky 115, Mrugowsky Ex. 108_), all of these make similar reports
on these events. Each one of these three witnesses, viewing this matter
from different angles, was able to testify under oath that the
correspondence between Dr. Ding and the firm of Madaus did not pass
through Poppendick personally, and that the research section of
Professor Vonkennel also had nothing to do with the whole matter as far
as it took place in Leipzig, but that the connections were somewhat
different in many respects from what might be concluded from the
statement of Kogon.

For a person like Kogon, it was, of course, difficult to take in the
connections as a whole, as he only occasionally received letters which
had anything to do with the questions dealt with here. On the basis of
letters still available, he can only draw certain retrospective
conclusions today. Therefore, in the formulation of his statements, he
exercises a certain caution, qualifying in advance things as they
happened by remarks such as “I believe,” “certainly,” and so on. (_See
also testimony, Pohl trial, 22 April 1947_;[71] _Poppendick 21,
Poppendick Ex. 20_.) For these reasons the phrase “in this case I am not
quite sure,” relating to Poppendick’s knowledge of illustrated reports
on incendiaries, can only be taken as an indication of the fact that
Kogon did not want Poppendick to be charged, through his sworn
testimony, with the knowledge of these reports, with photographs
concerning incendiaries. Poppendick has definitely declared that he
would certainly have remembered such a report with photographs if he had
received it. In this way then, the uncertain statement of Kogon is
confronted by the definite statement of the defendant, who could not be
accused of any unreliability in the course of his examination. The
contention of the defendant is supported by the three above-mentioned
affidavits which fully confirm this. Kogon then said, however: “A
report, I think * * *”—then again with a certain limitation—“which
Oberfuehrer Poppendick certainly received because Dr. Ding intended to
publish a dissertation on this in a medical journal.”

Although this last statement was made with somewhat more emphasis, but
still not with complete certainty, the following comment can be made on
it:

It is certain that Kogon had access to the entire documentary evidence
as introduced in this trial before making his statement. Without doubt
he saw the manuscript of the Ding publication on typhus (_NO-582, Pros.
Ex. 286_) with the stamp of approval “by order of Poppendick,” even if
he did not see it while still in Buchenwald during his stay in the camp.
From this he thought he could deduce that Poppendick must be the person
responsible—in spite of the words “by order”—for the approval of
scientific publications. Kogon knew from his work in Buchenwald that
Ding meant to publish a pamphlet on the treatment of burns. He therefore
took it for granted that the only way of getting official permission was
via Poppendick, whereas actually Poppendick authorized these requests
and signed them “by order of” in every case only when given special
permission by Grawitz. Neither Kogon nor we know whether such a
manuscript was ever actually sent in for publication. Even if it was
actually sent in, it is not certain that Poppendick had to grant
permission for its publication. If Poppendick actually authorized the
publication of such a pamphlet “by order of”—a fact which cannot be
proved—there is a 100 percent probability, taking the typhus manuscript
(_NO-582, Pros. Ex. 286_) as an example, that in such a publication the
question of artificially inflicting wounds on human bodies would not
have been openly mentioned but would have been just as carefully veiled
as was done in the manuscript concerning typhus treatment.

It is quite obvious, though, and even the prosecution will not dispute
this, that Poppendick otherwise played no part whatever in the
incendiary bomb experiments, and had no contact with the authorities
responsible for them, such as the Madaus Works, Dr. Ding, etc., whereby
he might have been informed of what was going on in Buchenwald also in
regard to those incendiary bomb experiments.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
Doc. No.   Pros. Ex. No.           Description of Document           Page
NO-579     288             Extracts from a report on the findings     644
                             of 2 January 1944, on a skin
                             ointment—R 17—for phosphorus burns.
NO-1080 A, 219 A, E, F     Exposures of the witness Maria             901
E, F                         Kusmierczuk who underwent
                             sulfanilamide and bone experiments
                             while an inmate of the Ravensbrueck
                             concentration camp. (_See Selections
                             from the Photographic Evidence of the
                             Prosecution._)
NO-1082 A, 214 A, C        Exposures of the witness Jadwiga Dzido     903
C                            who underwent sulfanilamide and bone
                             experiments while an inmate of the
                             Ravensbrueck concentration camp. (_See
                             Selections from the Photographic
                             Evidence of the Prosecution._)

                           _Defense Documents_

Doc. No.   Def. Ex. No.            Description of Document
Mrugowsky  Mrugowsky Ex.   Extracts from the affidavit of Udo von     647
115        108               Woyrsch, 3 May 1947, concerning
                             experiments on combating injuries due
                             to phosphorus incendiary bombs.

                               _Testimony_

Extract from the testimony of prosecution witness Eugen Kogon         648
Extract from the testimony of defendant Mrugowsky                     651

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-579
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 288

  EXTRACTS FROM A REPORT ON THE FINDINGS OF 2 JANUARY 1944, ON A SKIN
                   OINTMENT—R 17—FOR PHOSPHORUS BURNS

_EXPERIMENTS ON ANIMALS_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_EXPERIMENTS ON HUMAN BEINGS_

I. Application of the phosphorus-caoutchouc mixture and immediate
removal—

1. With R 17.

_19 November._ The mixture was dropped on a smooth spot of skin on the
forearm and immediately thereafter wiped off with a tampon dipped in R
17. R 17 quickly dissolved the phosphorus and the caoutchouc. Subsequent
checks showed a complete cessation of phosphorescence. The spot of skin
showed an increased temperature until 14 December, as the testers
ascertained by placing the backs of their hands against it.

2. With CuSO_{4}.

_19 November._ The mixture, which had been applied to a smooth spot of
skin on the forearm, was removed with a 2 percent solution of
copper-sulphate. There appeared a blackish-brownish, strongly viscous
mass with a metallic sheen which, when rubbed off, spread over the
entire experimentation area. After an initial formation of black smoke
(phosphorus fumes) and a strong glow, the phosphorescence, because of
the formation of a copper-phosphate coating, ceased almost immediately.
It seems to be possible that phosphorus, if it comes in contact with
small skin wounds, is assimilated into the body by resorption. This spot
of skin likewise showed an increase in temperature until 14 December.

3. With water.

_19 November._ It was always possible to remove the mixture from the
skin by water. However, in this case pronounced phosphorescence lasting
several minutes and phosphorus fumes were to be observed.

II. Lighting of the phosphorus-caoutchouc mixture and treatment:

1. With R 17.

_a. Immediate ignition._

_25 November._ The mixture was applied to a skin area of 6 × 3 cm. and
immediately ignited. After burning for 20 seconds, it was extinguished
with water and then wiped off with R 17. A burn appeared, with a
yellowish induration of the skin. Later a thin scab formed. After 3
days, the wound was treated with _liquid echinacine_. On 11 December the
scab fell off; the surface of the wound was dry and rosy red. Epithelium
formed very rapidly; on 21 December only 1/5 of the surface remained
without epithelium. On 29 December this spot too was almost healed.

_25 November._ The mixture was applied to a skin area of the same size
(6 × 3 cm.) and immediately ignited. It burned for 55 seconds until it
went out by itself. The burned spot was wiped off with R 17. There
appeared a yellowish-brown burn which exhibited a cavity at the proximal
end and a blister at the distal end. An elastic scab formed. On the
fourth day the wound was treated with _echinacine ointment_. Thereupon,
on 3 December, the scab began to slough off; on 10 December the wound
was dry and closed; on 13 December only the edge of the wound still
showed a scab and the main part of the wound was covered with fine
granulation. The wound continued to become smaller until 29 December
without healing over.

_b. Ignition after 30 seconds._

_19 November._ The mixture was applied to 2 sq. cm. of skin. After 30
seconds it was ignited and after burning for 40 seconds it was wiped off
with R 17. A dry burn appeared. During the following days a small
oedematous swelling developed. The wound was treated with _liquid
echinacine_. Thereafter, the swelling subsided rapidly, so that on 1
December there remained a clear, dry wound without necrosis.
Subsequently to this a broad zone of epithelization formed and by 29
December the wound had healed with the exception of 0.5 sq. cm. still
lacking epithelium.

_19 November._ The mixture was again applied to 2 sq. cm. of skin,
ignited after 30 seconds, but treated with R 17 only after burning 60
seconds. Here too a dry burn appeared, however with severe reddening and
pain in the surrounding area. The wound formed a necrotic coating. On
the third day it was treated with a 10 percent solution of cod-liver-oil
ointment. On 19 December it was circumscribed and dry. A slow
epithelization began. Later the wounded skin area became similar to the
smooth surrounding area. On 29 December the wound had not yet healed
over.

_c. Application to a piece of cloth covering the skin._

_25 November._ The phosphorus-caoutchouc mixture, applied to a piece of
cloth covering the skin was ignited. Sixty-seven seconds elapsed before
it had burned itself out. The piece of cloth, except for a small
remainder, was carbonized. After it was wiped off with R 17 there
appeared on skin a burn with a central blister which later developed to
a thin, elastic scab. After 3 days the wound was treated with echinacine
ointment. Until 3 December cleaning of the wound took place; at this
date it was dry, rosy red, and closed; a fine granulation covered it.
Thereupon rapid epithelization began. On 29 December it was not yet
healed over.

2. With CuSO_{4}.

_a. Immediate ignition._

_25 November._ The mixture was applied to a skin area of 6 × 3 cm., and
immediately ignited. After burning 20 seconds it was extinguished with
water, and then wiped off with copper-sulphate solution. During this
operation the entire epidermis separated from the area of the wound. An
oedematous swelling of the surrounding area, 12 × 13 cm. in extent and a
thick scab formed. Treatment took place with _liquid echinacine_. On 7
December the necrosis began to slough off, and gradual epithelization
took place. On 21 December one-third of the area of the wound was still
without epithelium (cf. II/1/a/aa). On 29 December the wound was healed
over.

_25 November._ The mixture was again applied to a skin area of 6 × 3 cm.
and immediately ignited. After it had burned itself out in 60 seconds,
the burned area was wiped off with copper-sulphate solution. A
brownish-grey burn with thickening of the skin appeared. The thickening
developed to a strong scab. It was treated with a 10-percent solution of
cod-liver oil ointment. The surrounding area remained very red and
painful. On 10 December a subcutaneous suppuration appeared at the edge
of the wound. Consequently the treatment with cod-liver oil was replaced
by _liquid echinacine_. On 13 December the scab separated from the
greater part of the wound, but the surrounding area remained more
inflamed than in the corresponding experiment with R 17 (cf. II/1/a/bb).
The granulation was coarse and uneven. On 29 December the wound was not
yet healed over; epithelization advanced only slowly.

_b. Ignition after 30 seconds._

_19 November._ The phosphorus-caoutchouc mixture was applied to 2 sq.
cm. of skin and left there for 30 seconds; then it was ignited and after
burning for 60 seconds wiped off with copper-sulphate solution. A
brownish-black viscous mass formed; the dry wound discolored to a
blackish-grey. Thereupon a thick crust formed and a considerable
oedematous swelling of the area surrounding the wound developed.
Treatment took place with echinacine ointment. The swelling subsided
more slowly than in the treatment with R 17 (cf. II/1/b/aa). On 5
December the wound was without necrosis, with a wide zone of
epithelization. On 29 December it had healed over except for 1 sq. cm.
lacking in epithelium (cf. II/1/bb/aa).

_c. Application to a piece of cloth covering the skin._

_25 November._ The skin was covered with a piece of cloth 6 × 3 cm. to
which the mixture was applied and then ignited. After it had burned
itself out in 57 seconds there remained of the piece of cloth only small
carbonized remnants. After being wiped off with copper-sulphate solution
a yellowish, rather strong thickening of the skin appeared. The wound
was treated with a 10-percent solution of cod-liver oil. A few days
later little blisters appeared, which then dried up on 5 December. On 9
December, thickened, shred-like necroses began to peel off, and a dark
red surface with rough, uneven granulations developed. The
epithelization progressed only slowly. On 29 December the wound was not
yet healed over.

3. With water.

_19 November._ The mixture was applied to a 2 sq. cm. of skin and
ignited 30 seconds later. After 45 seconds the fire was extinguished
with a damp cloth and the burned spot washed off with water. A burn of
parchment-like, dry, greenish-brownish appearance appeared. The wound
was treated with _echinacine_ ointment. On 3 December it was clean, dry,
and without necrosis. On 5 December the epithelization began, which then
made rapid strides, so that on 23 December the wound, in contrast to the
treatment with a 10-percent solution of cod-liver oil, was considerably
smaller. On 29 December it was not yet healed over, but was only half as
large as the wound treated with a 10-percent solution of cod-liver oil.

                                        PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF MRUGOWSKY
                                        DOCUMENT 115
                                        MRUGOWSKY DEFENSE EXHIBIT 108

 EXTRACTS FROM THE AFFIDAVIT OF UDO VON WOYRSCH, 3 MAY 1947, CONCERNING
  EXPERIMENTS ON COMBATING INJURIES DUE TO PHOSPHORUS INCENDIARY BOMBS

                 *        *        *        *        *

From 20 April 1940 to 12 February 1947 I was Higher SS and Police Leader
in Military District IV and main district leader [Oberabschnittsfuehrer]
in Dresden. In this capacity I was responsible for measures
counteracting the damage caused by the air war. I knew Dr. Hans Madaus,
co-partner of the firm Dr. Madaus & Co., in Dresden. He told me that
experiments on the combating of injuries caused by phosphorus incendiary
bombs were being carried on in his laboratory with rabbits. On the
occasion of an inspection of the whole pharmaceutical lay-out of the
firm, I inspected, at his suggestion, in particular numerous hothouses
and also the above-mentioned experiments. As far as I remember I
inspected the experiments once again at a later date—at that time I
called in Dr. Kirchert as medical expert, who was the physician of the
Higher SS and Police Leader.

The experiments seemed to me to be so successful that I reported about
them to Reich Physician SS and Police Dr. Grawitz; that is, I called his
attention to these experiments on the combating of injuries caused by
phosphorus incendiary bombs, which in my opinion were particularly
successful.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I do not remember Dr. Ding, who, as I have learned only now, is supposed
to have carried on experiments in Buchenwald with the preparation of the
Madaus firm. It is possible that when visiting Dresden he paid a brief
visit to me with Kirchert. But I do not recall such a visit.

I want to emphasize that the experiments at the Madaus firm made a big
impression upon me, because I saw that the rabbits used in those
experiments were treated very well. The content of the phosphorus
incendiary bombs which was rubbed onto their skins and then wiped off
with preparation R 17 did not seem to cause any kind of pain to the
animals, because after they were returned to their cage, immediately
after the experiments, they immediately ate again and did not show any
signs of discomfort.

Professor Dr. Joachim Mrugowsky is personally known to me. He was not
mentioned in any way nor did he participate in the matter of incendiary
bombs. Since I know him, I would certainly remember if he had
participated in any way at all or if his name had been mentioned.

Dr. Helmut Poppendick has also never been mentioned in any way in
connection with this matter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

   EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF PROSECUTION WITNESS EUGEN KOGON[72]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: Witness, I had just asked you whether or not you know
anything about experiments conducted at Buchenwald with the phosphorous
content of incendiary bombs.

WITNESS KOGON: * * * As far as I can recall, I was told by Dr. Ding in
the spring of 1944 that he had been given orders by Professor Dr.
Mrugowsky in collaboration with the firm of Madaus & Co. at
Dresden-Radebeul to carry out experiments on human beings with regard to
the effect of a drug against the contents of phosphorous-caoutchouc
incendiary bombs. I had the impression that the idea for this experiment
had come from Dr. Ding and had been given to Dr. Mrugowsky by him, and
then he had obtained permission to carry out this experiment. On the
part of the firm Madaus, negotiations were led by a certain Dr. Koch. He
had a drug which he called R 17 and which was used by the German
population after attacks in which incendiary bombs were dropped.

By way of Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Koch and the higher police leader of
the Dresden sector, the contents of phosphorus incendiary bombs were
sent to Buchenwald, and four experimental subjects from Block 46, who
had survived other experiments, had this phosphorus liquid applied to
their forearms. The whole mass was then ignited and was then treated in
various manners. In the case of one experimental subject, water was used
in order to wipe off the liquid, and in other cases a damp rag was
applied, and in the last case R 17 was applied. Several experiments were
carried out on these four subjects.

In one instance the drug R 17 was applied immediately after the mass had
been ignited; in another instance, after approximately five minutes, and
in yet another case, after thirty minutes. After the mass had burned the
arm, serious burns developed which were observed for two weeks
afterwards. The experiment was conducted by the Special Section 5 at
Leipzig, and photographs were taken of the wounds. Previously
experiments on animals had been carried out in Block 40 on rabbits.
These experiments were conducted in the same manner, and the various
results were also photographed, and the photographs were compared with
each other. Then they were put into an album with exact descriptions and
the results were sent to Berlin—two copies. One was sent to Professor
Mrugowsky, and the other was sent to Oberfuehrer Poppendick, but I am
not quite sure about that. I believe that Oberfuehrer Poppendick must
surely have received a report on this matter because Dr. Ding intended
to write an article about this in a German medical journal.

Q. Now, you have mentioned an album report. Did you see this report?

A. I personally made the report after having it dictated to me by Dr.
Ding.

Q. I will ask you if the document which I will now have handed to you,
and which is Document NO-579, is the report on these incendiary bomb
experiments which you have described.

MR. MCHANEY: I will ask that the original of this document be passed up
to the Tribunal.

I didn’t hear any answer to the question.

A. Yes. It is a carbon copy of the report with the original photographs.

MR. MCHANEY: I offer Document NO-579 as Prosecution Exhibit 288, and I
will ask that the original be passed up to the Tribunal for inspection.
I will ask that the Tribunal turn particularly to page 15 and following
of the exhibit itself. Your Honor, I think you would find the pictures
more easy to discern in the original document. Page 15 and following are
pictures of burns on the arms of human beings. Witness, did you see any
of the experimental subjects who were burned with this phosphorus?

WITNESS KOGON: I personally saw all the experimental subjects because
this experiment was carried out in the private room of Dr. Ding in Block
50 and in the library of the Hygiene Institute in Block 50. The reason
for this was that the experiment in Block 46 among the experimental
subjects that were located there, and who were destined for other
purposes, would have caused far too much excitement.

Q. Were these burns very severe?

A. As far as I can recall they were very severe in three out of the four
cases.

Q. Did the experimental subjects suffer any pain?

A. Kapo Arthur Dietzsch had suggested that the subjects should be given
an anesthetic as soon as they came into Block 50, so that violent scenes
could be avoided, and in Block 50, which was completely different from
Block 46, having persons handcuffed, as was the common practice in Block
46, was to be avoided. It was like that at least in the first
experiment, but I only saw the subjects. I did not personally witness
the experiments, and I saw the subjects before as well as afterwards.
During the first experiment at least, the subjects were given an
anesthetic, and after about half an hour they regained consciousness and
complained of very severe pains. You could see that they were really
suffering very badly. I must confess that I personally, after having
looked at the photographs, almost became sick.

Q. Do you know whether the injuries which they received are permanent?

A. In the case of some of the wounds, it is completely impossible that
they will ever become completely healed; very deep scars must have
remained because the wounds were big and were as deep as two or two and
a half centimeters.

Q. Do you know whether any of the experimental subjects died?

A. Four persons were returned to Block 46, and I do not know anything
about the future fate which awaited them there. I especially do not know
if they were used for further experiments.

Q. Do you know the nationality of the experimental persons used?

A. No. However, all four wore the green triangle to signify that they
were habitual criminals, and they were Germans.

Q. And you state that the purpose of these experiments was to test
certain chemical preparations of the Madaus Company in treating the
burns.

A. Yes.

                 *        *        *        *        *

         EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY[73]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. FLEMMING: Now, I come to the incendiary bomb experiments. Dr. Kogon
during his testimony frequently spoke of an experiment by Dr. Ding with
a phosphorus-caoutchouc incendiary bomb, and he said that you ordered
this experiment.

DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY: I did not know who ordered this experiment. I found
out about it only from the report which was drawn up after the
experiment had been terminated. This report has been put in evidence
here as a document. From this it can be seen that animal experiments
were also carried out. I assume that these were not performed in Block
46, but in Block 50, which was under my supervision. I went with the
report to Grawitz and asked him if he knew any more about this matter. I
asked him if I was correct in my assumption that some of the experiments
took place in Block 50 and if so, to tell Dr. Ding in future to confine
himself to his Block 46 in such matters, which was directly under
Grawitz. Grawitz answered thereupon that it did not make any difference
one way or the other, and I should not be so fussy. I also know that
after a few weeks Ding was looking for this report and called me up and
asked me if I had it. I no longer had it at that time as I had given it
to Grawitz, and it was in his files where it belonged.

Q. Kogon also testified that the experimental subjects had suffered
serious pain and had incurred wounds from 2 to 2.5 centimeters deep,
which led to the formation of extensive scars. I show you now Document
NO-579, Prosecution Exhibit 288 and ask you to comment on this document
and Dr. Kogon’s testimony?

(The document is handed to the witness.)

A. The first part of this document deals with the rabbit experiments. In
the second part, however, there are pictures of experiments on human
beings. These pictures show the place on the arm where the experiment
was made. Kogon said that this burning was done in such a way that the
mass of phosphorus was burning for quite awhile. The document, however,
proves exactly the contrary. The length of time during which the matter
was burning was not long, but the period between the time when the
mixture was applied and the time it was ignited was long; that is
possibly the reason for this misunderstanding. Moreover in the
description of the individual cases, it can be seen that already on 29
December, in other words four days after the experiment, the burn was
almost healed, or had greatly reduced in size. In one case there was
still an open wound of 0.5 centimeter but there is no mention anywhere
of any deeper wounds, but only of purely superficial epidermal wounds.
There is constant mention of the fact that the wounds healed over nicely
and in some cases the wound was completely healed four days after the
experiments. Wounds 2½ centimeters deep, or large scars could not have
occurred and that testimony of Kogon is false. In this case let me point
out that he was not speaking from his own knowledge. During the first
discussion of these incendiary bomb experiments, he said he had seen the
experimental subjects, and then in the same interrogation he later says
this was not the case. In other words, he is reporting what he has heard
and not what he knows at first hand.

Q. I am submitting to the Tribunal Mrugowsky 56, and it will be
Mrugowsky Exhibit 50. I should like to read from page two:

    “Treatment of phosphorus burns with ‘R 17.’

    “The dropping of phosphorus incendiary bombs made it necessary
    to find an adequate method of treatment. As the copper-sulphate
    solution hitherto in use did not give satisfactory results, the
    firm of Dr. Madaus in Dresden looked for a different solvent and
    produced a liquid carbon tetrachloride which was called ‘R 17.’
    The efficacy of R 17 had been proved by means of experiments on
    rabbits carried out by the firm of Dr. Madaus.

    “After the completion of these rabbit tests, Dr. Madaus asked
    the Higher SS and Police Leader von Woyrsch, Dresden, to come
    and see the tests. As my emergency office was in the building of
    Gruppenfuehrer von Woyrsch, he asked me to accompany him to the
    firm of Madaus in my capacity as a doctor and to watch these
    tests. That was in the autumn of 1943. At the request of
    Gruppenfuehrer von Woyrsch and the firm of Madaus, I reported to
    the Reich Physician SS and Police the results achieved by the
    firm of Madaus in the treatment of phosphorus burns and
    suggested that the drug R 17 be made known to the air-raid
    precaution dispensaries. Grawitz promised to have another test
    made.

    “Some time afterward he sent Dr. Ding to Dresden for this
    purpose in his capacity as health expert, and instructed me to
    make arrangements for Ding to see the results achieved there, by
    the firm of Madaus, with R 17. I arranged this. Ding came to
    Dresden and saw the above-mentioned tests in my presence, on the
    premises of the Madaus firm. Afterward he declared that, on the
    orders of the Reich Physician SS in Buchenwald, he would also
    test the efficacy of the drug on rabbits. He requested the firm
    of Madaus to put the drug R 17 at his disposal. Immediately
    after inspecting the firm of Madaus he left Dresden.

    “I also know that Dr. Ding asked the office of the Higher SS and
    Police Leader to procure for him the filling of an English
    incendiary bomb, which as far as I know was done through the
    Commissioner of the Police of Leipzig. Dr. Ding had the drug R
    17 and the incendiary bomb collected.

    “I also know that Ding made a report on his experiments. I know
    this because Dr. Ding asked my office in Dresden several times,
    in writing and by telephone, if they had this report, as he
    could not find it. It was supposed to be a report with
    photographs. I do not know if the report went through my office,
    as I was in Dresden only one day a week. At the time when Ding
    was looking for the report it was not in my office. I assume,
    therefore, that he sent it direct to the firm of Madaus, as they
    were interested in the results of his test.

    “When, after a considerable time, I still had not heard from the
    Reich Physician whether the drug R 17 was to be made known to
    the air-raid precaution dispensaries, I asked the Reich
    Physician about it at a meeting. He then declared that the drug
    would not be introduced, as it only possessed
    phosphorus-dissolving properties, but did not directly
    contribute to the healing of the burns. However, a drug was in
    preparation elsewhere that combined both qualities and this
    would be introduced.”

I submit further the last paragraph of Dr. Morgen’s affidavit.
(_Mrugowsky 23, Mrugowsky Ex. 26._) Dr. Morgen says here:

    “While I was making observations in Block 46 I paid repeated
    surprise visits in order to inspect the running of the Block.
    Once, when I paid a surprise visit to Block 46, examinations on
    the treatment of wounds caused by phosphorus incendiaries were
    being carried out.

    “As I arrived a big strong prisoner came into the room laughing.
    On each of his two upper arms there were applied on a space
    about 1 centimeter wide and 5 centimeters long, some parts of
    the contents of a phosphorus incendiary bomb. These spots on
    both upper arms were treated with various ointments. During the
    discussion with Dr. Ding I was informed that the experimental
    persons volunteered for the experiment. They received the diet
    for sick persons, a packet of cigarettes, and for one month they
    did not have to work. In the case of the inmate whose treatment
    I witnessed by chance, I had the definite impression that he was
    a volunteer.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[71] United States _vs._ Oswald Pohl, et al. See Vol. V.

[72] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 6, 7, 8
Jan 1947, pp. 1150-1290.

[73] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 27, 28,
31 March and 2, 3 April 1947, pp. 5000-5244, 5334-5464.

                        12. PHLEGMON EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The prosecution introduced evidence calculated to show that inhumane
acts and atrocities, as generally alleged in paragraph 6 of the
indictment, were committed in the course of phlegmon experiments. These
experiments were not specifically described in the subparagraphs of
paragraph 6 of the indictment which particularized 12 specific types of
experimentation. On this charge the defendants Poppendick, Oberheuser,
and Fischer were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the phlegmon experiments
is contained in its closing brief against the defendant Gebhardt. An
extract from this brief is set forth below on pages 654 to 655. A
corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on these
experiments has been selected from the final plea for defendant
Gebhardt. It appears below on pages 655 to 657. This argumentation is
followed by selections from the evidence on pages 657 to 669.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

           _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT
                                GEBHARDT_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                    _Sepsis (Phlegmon) Experiments_

Sepsis experiments were performed in the Dachau concentration camp
beginning in the autumn of 1942. These experiments were carried out in
order to test the effectiveness of biochemical treatment of sepsis and
related diseases.

The witness Stoehr testified concerning these experiments. He stated
that sepsis was artificially provoked by infecting with pus the
concentration camp inmates who were used as subjects. (_Tr. pp. 578,
579._) He knew of at least two series of experiments. In each of these
series approximately half of the experimental inmates were treated by
biochemical means and the other half with sulfanilamide. The first
series consisted of 20 German concentration camp inmates of whom seven
died as a result. For the second series, 40 clergymen of various
nationalities were selected and 12 died as a result of the experiments.
(_Tr. pp. 581, 582._) The experimental subjects did not volunteer. (_Tr.
p. 590._) See also the Review of Proceedings of the General Military
Court in the case of the _United States_ vs. _Weiss, et al._ (_NO-856,
Pros. Ex. 125._)

It is quite clear that the biochemical experiments performed in Dachau
were complementary to the sulfanilamide experiments by Gebhardt in
Ravensbrueck. This is shown by the fact that in September 1942, while
the sulfanilamide experiments were still in progress, Gebhardt received
a copy of a report on the biochemical experiments in Dachau from
Grawitz. (_NO-409, Pros. Ex. 249._) This report shows on its face that
approximately eight cases of sepsis were artificially provoked. The
report dealt with the results obtained from experiments carried out on
40 concentration camp inmates in treating sepsis, phlegmon, furuncles,
abcesses, and nephrosis, among others.

Ten of the experimental subjects died. The report also covered three
sepsis cases in Auschwitz, all of whom died. It concluded with the
statement that the experiments were being continued.

The case history of one of the experimental subjects artificially
infected with pus in November 1942 shows the horrible pain which these
victims suffered. (_NO-994, Pros. Ex. 251._)

That the defendants Gebhardt and Fischer had more than a casual
connection with the sepsis experiments in Dachau is proved by a
handwritten notation by Gebhardt on a letter written by Grawitz to
Himmler on 7 September 1942, attaching copies of the preliminary report
by Gebhardt on his sulfanilamide experiments, together with the report
on the sepsis experiments in Dachau. (_NO-2734, Pros. Ex. 473._) This
note reads as follows:

    “16 September 1942. Settled, after conversation with Reich
    Leader SS. Obersturmfuehrer F. Fischer has been given new
    instructions for Ravensbrueck _and Dachau_. Gebhardt.” [Emphasis
    supplied.]

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

               _EXTRACT FROM THE FINAL PLEA FOR DEFENDANT
                              GEBHARDT_[74]

                 *        *        *        *        *

                         _Phlegmon Experiments_

In the course of the hearing of the evidence, the prosecution submitted
documents and interrogated witnesses with the intention of proving that
apart from other medical experiments, experiments were also carried out
on the treatment of phlegmon. In the indictment itself these
experiments, which were carried out at Dachau, are not mentioned. In
view of Article IV of the Ordinance of Military Government for Germany,
which expressly states that the indictment should list the counts in
sufficient detail, it must be assumed that in this case a properly made
charge does not exist.

As far as the participation of the defendant Gebhardt is concerned, the
documents submitted by the prosecution show by themselves that he had
nothing to do with the execution of these experiments. It was only later
that he learned of the experiments carried out at Dachau, as
unequivocally proved by the letter of Reich Physician SS Dr. Grawitz to
Reich Leader SS Himmler of 29 August 1942, referring to the biochemical
treatment of sepsis, which was submitted by the prosecution as NO-409,
Prosecution Exhibit 249. The defendant Gebhardt learned of these
experiments on 3 September 1942, on the occasion of the visit of Reich
Physician SS Dr. Grawitz to Ravensbrueck in connection with the
sulfanilamide experiments in this camp. The defendant Gebhardt wrote on
the margin of this document the remark “seen and read”. This remark
alone shows that he could only have learned subsequently of these
experiments, and especially that he did not approve of them. If it had
been the contrary, he certainly would have made some other notation on
the document, as for instance, “agreed”, or else he would have shown his
approval in a similar way. On the witness stand the defendant Gebhardt
explained in detail to the Tribunal what his opinion of these
experiments was. These experiments demonstrate unequivocally that they
were deliberately initiated in ignorance of, and in contradiction to,
the recognized rules of orthodox medicine. As also demonstrated by the
evidence the Reich Leader SS Himmler did not conform to orthodox
medicine but wanted to promote independently one patent solution out of
a variety of suggestions and opinions. Nearest to his conception, beside
his inclination towards theories of biological selection, were
biochemistry, homeopathy, and mesmerism, i. e., those schools of
medicine which, contrary to the theories of orthodox medicine do not
combat certain symptoms of a disease but by means of the so-called
stimulation theory want to bring about a change of the general physical
disposition. The defendant Gebhardt, when on the witness stand, clearly
explained this attitude of Himmler, which among other things resulted in
rejection of any criticism by orthodox medicine, relying exclusively on
his biochemical experts.

The evidence, however, has further shown that after having learned of
the letter of Reich Physician SS Grawitz of 29 August 1942 (_NO-409,
Pros. Ex. 249_) and with the object of convincing Himmler of the
futility of these experiments, the defendant Gebhardt himself performed
experiments on patients with these biochemical remedies in his clinic at
Hohenlychen, and that he succeeded in convincing Himmler of the
inefficacy of these remedies. In this connection I refer to the
statements of the defendant Gebhardt himself and to the affidavits of
Dr. Jaedicke and Dr. Brunner, which I submitted to the Tribunal.

When examining the legal conclusions which can be drawn from the facts
presented above, we may arrive at the following results:

The defendant Gebhardt did not commit any act which had any causative
connection with these experiments. He learned about these experiments
only after the event, and then he did everything in his power to prevent
further experiments of this kind. The prosecution was not able to
produce evidence that such experiments had been carried out at all after
3 September 1942. All this proves that in view of the missing causal
connection and absence of premeditation there cannot be any question of
criminal action on the part of the defendant Gebhardt. It is
acknowledged in the criminal law of all civilized nations that knowledge
acquired after events is not sufficient to prove the existence of a
criminal action.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
 Doc. No.  Pros. Ex.             Description of Document              Page
              No.
NO-409        249     Report from Grawitz to Himmler, 29 August        657
                        1942, concerning experiments with
                        biochemical remedies conducted at the Dachau
                        and Auschwitz concentration camps.
NO-2734       473     Extracts of letter from Grawitz to Himmler, 7    660
                        September 1942, and report on gas gangrene
                        experiments.

                               _Testimony_

Extract from the testimony of prosecution witness Heinrich W. Stoehr   664
Extract from the testimony of defendant Gebhardt                       667

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-409
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 249

 REPORT FROM GRAWITZ TO HIMMLER, 29 AUGUST 1942, CONCERNING EXPERIMENTS
    WITH BIOCHEMICAL REMEDIES CONDUCTED AT THE DACHAU AND AUSCHWITZ
                          CONCENTRATION CAMPS

The Reich Leader SS                            Berlin W 15, 29 August 1942
Reich Physician SS and Police                          Knesebeckstr. 50/51
Telephone: 924249.924351.924373.                   [Stamp]
924406                                         Personal Staff
Az.: 738/IV/42                                 Reich Leader SS
                                               G 213

Subject:    Biochemical treatment of sepsis, etc., with biochemical
              remedies.
To the Reich Leader SS H. Himmler
Berlin SW 11 Prinz Albrechtstrasse 8

Reich Leader,

With regard to previous results of biochemical treatment of sepsis and
other cases of illness, I beg to submit the following provisional
report.

1. The following _40 cases_ were treated with biochemical remedies in
the SS hospital _Dachau_ in the time mentioned in the report. Besides
septic processes, such diseases were treated where a decisive change for
the better should be achieved by means of biochemistry.

   Phlegmonous-purulent processes                                       17
   Sepsis                                                                8
   Furuncles and abscesses                                               2
   Infected operational incisions                                        1
   Malaria                                                               5
   Pleural empyema                                                       3
   Septic endocarditis                                                   1
   Nephrosis                                                             1
   Chronic sciatica                                                      1
   Gall stones                                                           1

According to the indications of the biochemistry applied to the
different cases, we used the following remedies:

   Potassium phosphoricum                                               D6
   Ferrum phosphoricum                                          D6 and D12
   Silicea                                                              D6
   Sodium muraticum                                                     D6
   Calcium phosphoricum                                                 D6
   Sodium sulfuricum                                                    D6
   Magnesium phosphoricum                                               D6
   Sodium phosphoricum                                                  D6
   Calcium fluoratum                                                    D6

The cases of sepsis were mostly artificially provoked.

Up to now we found that the unfavorable course of the severe cases could
scarcely be stopped by means of biochemical remedies. All sepsis cases
died. The malaria cases were not influenced by it.

The cases of extended purulent processes, with development of abscesses,
the pleuralempyeata, the septic endocarditis, the nephrosis, the chronic
sciatica and the gall stones showed no definite influence from
biochemical treatment. Insofar as they were conducted with positive
results, they did not show a different result from the ones where,
according to medical experience, patients were restricted to staying in
bed without receiving any special treatment.

The impression of a favorable effect on morbid cases of sickness by
biochemical means proved to be satisfactory in five cases only, four of
which were comparatively slight. The fifth case involved a 17-day-old
child with severe furunculosis. In this case an improvement set in only
a few days after treatment had been applied. However, an error occurred
in the experimental procedure, for at the beginning of the treatment a
sulfanilamide preparation was used.

The strong formation of pus, clearly noticeable in a few cases, is
perhaps due to the biochemical remedies applied. The doses of sugar,
which were frequently given and mainly consisted of pure milk sugar in
the form of biochemical tablets, probably promoted the effect.

Experiments for orientation are to be made. In a case of a joint mould
the antiseptic potassium phosphoricum D 6 was given as a prophylactic
because the incision of the operation was greatly endangered by
infection. In spite of that, the temperature rose to 39° on the
following day. Consequently, the biochemical treatment could not prevent
appearance or breaking-out of an infection, although potassium
phosphoricum D 6 was given immediately and intensively.

It is also to be noted that very soon all the seriously ill cases flatly
refused to take biochemical tablets, because it meant torture to them to
take the tablets every 5 minutes, even at night.

Finally it must be said that from a total number of 40 cases there are 1
positive case and 4 positive cases with certain reservations, against 35
failures, of which 10 ended fatally.

The experiments in Dachau are being continued.

Besides the hitherto existing program, special attention is directed to
research of twin cases in similar conditions, of which one will receive
an allopathical, the second a biochemical treatment.

    [Marginal note.] Seen at Ravensbrueck 3-9-1942, [Signature] K.
    GEBHARDT

2. In the concentration camp of Auschwitz, three typical cases of
sepsis, which developed from phlegmons, were treated—according to
prescription—with potassium phosphoricum D 4. In none of these cases a
therapeutical influence on the progress of the disease could be
observed. All 3 cases ended fatally.

The experiments are being continued.

                                                  [Signature] GRAWITZ

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-2734
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 473

EXTRACTS OF LETTER FROM GRAWITZ TO HIMMLER, 7 SEPTEMBER 1942, AND REPORT
                      ON GAS GANGRENE EXPERIMENTS

The Reich Leader SS                        Berlin, W 15, 7 September 1942
Reichsarzt SS and Police                   Knesebeckstrasse 50/51
Telephone: 924249. 924351.                         [Rubber stamp]
924373. 924406                             (Personal Staff Reich Leader SS
File No. 748/IV/42                                    Archives)
                                           (File No. AR/31/13)
                                           [Signature] GEBHARDT

Subject:   1. _Experiments by SS Brigadefuehrer Gebhardt on the Combating
             of Gas Gangrene._
           2. Experiments on the Treatment of Sepsis by Biochemistry.

Enclosures: -2-X
To the Reich Leader SS H. Himmler
Berlin

Reich Leader:

Attached please find a provisional report by SS Brigadefuehrer Professor
Dr. Gebhardt on his clinical-surgical experiments at Ravensbrueck
concentration camp, furthermore a concluding provisional report on
experiments on the biochemical treatment of sepsis as performed at
Dachau concentration camp.

                                                  [Signature] GRAWITZ

         [Rubber stamp]          }              [Handwritten]
                                 }                       16 September 1942
Personal Staff RF-SS Enclosures  }  Settled, after conversation with
In: 9 September 1942             }    RF-SS. Obersturmfuehrer F.
Journal No. AR/40/7/42 2         }    Fischer has been given new
? RF                             }    instructions for Ravensbrueck
                                 }    and Dachau.
                                                      [Signature] GEBHARDT
Copy!
                                    [Rubber stamp]
                                 (Personal Staff Reich Leader SS Archives)
                                    (File No. AR/31/13)

Professor Dr. K. Gebhardt
SS Brigadefuehrer and Brigadier General of the Waffen SS
To the Reichsarzt SS Gruppenfuehrer Grawitz

Provisional Report on Clinical Experiments at Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp for Women

By order of the Reich Leader SS, I started on 20 July 1942 at
Ravensbrueck concentration camp for women on a series of clinical
experiments with the aim of analyzing the sickness known as gas
gangrene, which does not take a uniform course, and of testing the
efficacy of the known therapeutic medicaments.

In addition, the simple infections of injuries which occur as symptoms
of war surgery had also to be tested, and a new chemo-therapeutic
treatment apart from the known surgical measures had to be tried out.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I appointed SS Obersturmfuehrer Dr. Fischer as co-worker. SS Oberfuehrer
Dr. Blumenrent put the complete surgical instruments and medicaments at
my disposal. SS Standartenfuehrer Mrugowsky put his laboratory and
co-workers at my disposal.

SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Lolling, Chief of Office IIID at
Oranienburg, assigned as co-workers: SS Obersturmfuehrer Dr.
Schiedlausky, garrison-physician at Ravensbrueck concentration camp for
women, and Fraeulein Dr. Oberheuser, camp physician at Ravensbrueck
concentration camp for women.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The question was to define firstly, by way of a preliminary experiment,
the mode of infection, making use of the known results from experiments
upon animals. In these questions I was advised by SS leaders of the
Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS who had taken over the culture and
dosage of the inoculation material.

The point was to implant the lymph cultures on the damaged muscle
tissue, to isolate the latter from atmospheric and humoral oxygen
supply, and to subject it to internal tissue pressure. The inoculation
procedure was as follows: a longitudinal cut of 10 centimeters over the
musculus peroneus longus; after incision into the fascia the muscle was
tied up with the forceps in an area the size of a five mark piece; an
anaemic peripheral zone was created by injection of 3 cc. adrenalin and
in the area of the damaged muscle the inoculation material (a gauze
strip saturated with bacterii) was imbedded under the fascia,
subcutaneous adipose tissue, and skin sutured in layers.

In the first series of experiments (preliminary experiments), three
selected prisoners of as much the same constitution as possible were
used. They were inoculated as follows:

The first: Aerobic mixculture (staphylococci, streptococci, bact. comm.
try. a 5 Mil).

The second: Para Oedema Malignum, sarc, flav. 4.5 mg.

The third: Bact. Fraenkel and earth. Stimulus 4.5 mg.

The experiment was concluded after 10 days. After an initial local
swelling in the inoculation area and an increase in temperature up to 39
degrees, the inflammation died down, the wound having broken open on the
fourth day. There was no danger to the life of any of the prisoners. We
succeeded in producing locally the symptoms of gas gangrene in the third
prisoner. After 20 days the prisoners were released again to their
working blocks.

The course of the preliminary series of experiments had proved that we
were not successful in producing the same symptoms as of clinical gas
gangrene. In a conference with the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS
the nature of the infection and the conditions for the germs were not
considered to be equivalent to the natural conditions in war surgery and
consequently the experimental arrangements were varied.

Bacterium coli were added to the acrobe culture and the germ number was
increased to 20 millions. Bacterium coli and dextrose were added to the
mixture of para oedema malignum.

Bacterium coli were added to the gas gangrene culture by Fraenkel, and
while doubling the number of germs, earth was administered to produce a
similar environment. Six selected youthful prisoners were inoculated two
by two with the above mixture of bacteria in the subsequent first
experimental series. One of them remained untreated for control
purposes, the other one was powdered with cataxyn wound powder
immediately after the inoculation. The first change of dressing took
place 3 days afterwards, the following each second day. Those who
remained without treatment were covered with sterile layers, those
treated with cataxyn (indicated in the graphs as TK-cases) were
continuously powdered with cataxyn. The aerobe cultures in both cases
showed local abscesses which could be easily treated surgically.

The para oedema malignum inoculation produced a local inflammation with
central suppuration, small formation of necrosis in the depth and
moderate emphysem of the skin. The regional lymphatic glands were not
affected.

Those prisoners who were infected with Fraenkel’s gas gangrene, and who
immediately received tetanus-antitoxin for the administered earth,
produced by far the strongest inflammatory reaction: abscesses with deep
necrosis in the area of the inoculation, emphysem of the skin with
formation of blisters, and beginning necrosis collateral oedema
extending from above the joint of the knee to the lower third of the
thigh as far as the back of the foot. The inflammatory appearances
receded considerably after the opening of the injury on the first
dressing day. The effect of the opening of the wound was particularly
significant in the TK-cases which started inflammations in spite of
simultaneous therapy. Greater pressure of the tissue due to oxygen,
liberated by the medicament, was considered to be the reason for the
accentuated local inflammation.

Comparing nontreated cases with the TK-cases, the final critical
observation shows:

1. Immediate therapy does not prevent the occurrence either of an
ordinary suppuration or of a “gangrene”.

2. The cleaning of the wound is faster in TK-cases than in control
cases.

3. The formation of fresh wound granulations occurs earlier with
cataxyn.

4. The part played by the paranchymatic organs (liver, kidneys) is less
important under the influence of cataxyn.

Since in this experiment too definite gangrene could be produced
clinically speaking, yet its picture did not in any way correspond to
the one known in war surgery; after further consultation with the
collaborators in the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS, the vaccine was
changed by adding wood shavings. It is known in bacteriological
literature that the virulence of the bacteria in the experimental animal
can thereby be considerably increased.

The triple distribution was reserved for the second series of
experiments now in progress. Three prisoners in each group were
inoculated. One person was left without treatment as control, the second
was treated with cataxyn as before, and with the third the
Marfanilprontalbin powder manufactured by I. G. Farben was employed,
since this was strongly recommended by the Army Medical Inspectorate.
The powder was applied according to the Schmick procedure. This
experiment is still in progress.

Even if as yet nothing definite can be said about this series of
experiments it can already be stated that—

1. there is no decisive difference between cases which are treated and
those which are not treated,

2. that opening the wound, in addition to immobilization, has proved the
most effective means of controlling the inflammation,

3. the effect of the MP powder seems at least doubtful, since in the III
TM case the most definite gangrene observed up to now has developed.

We are now investigating the problem as to why the gangrene in the
present case did not fully develop. Therefore, the injuring of the
tissue and the exclusion of a muscle from the circulation of the blood
were undertaken during a separate operating session, and the large-scale
necrosis resulting therefrom was to be inoculated with bacteria strain
which had already had one human passage. For it is only when the really
definite clinical picture of the gangrene has appeared that conclusions
may be drawn on therapy with chemo-therapeutics in connection with
surgical operations.

                                                 [Signature] GEBHARDT
                                                      SS Brigadefuehrer

Copy certified correct
Berlin, 7 September 1942
[Signature] POPPENDICK
SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

                 *        *        *        *        *

           EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF PROSECUTION WITNESS
                         HEINRICH W. STOEHR[75]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. HARDY: Witness, did you ever hear of the sepsis or phlegmon
experiments at the Dachau concentration camp?

WITNESS STOEHR: Yes, these experiments were conducted at my station.

Q. How did you gain your knowledge of these phlegmon experiments? Were
you an observer? Were you an assisting nurse, or by what way did you
gain the knowledge you have of these phlegmon experiments?

A. I was the nurse at that station. One day, I think it was in the late
summer and fall of 1943, a certain Sturmbannfuehrer Schuetz came to me,
with a Standartenfuehrer by the name of Laue or Lauer—I am not quite
sure which—and inspected the surgical department. He was shown a number
of patients. We had to take their bandages off, and he examined their
wounds—or rather, he just looked at them very superficially. After
that, the chief physician of the concentration camp Dachau, Dr. Walda,
was called in, and he received the order to see to it that the patients
received biochemical treatment for some time.

Q. Witness, will you kindly explain to the Tribunal in what manner these
phlegmon experiments were conducted; that is, the details of the
experiments? What did they do to the victim?

A. Mainly, phlegmon was treated. It was very general in the camp. That
is to say, phlegmon was the typical camp disease. The biochemical
treatment was carried out in the following manner:

Three similar cases were observed. One of these cases was given
allopathic treatment; another biochemical, and the third one received
only ordinary surgical treatment. That is, the third one received no
drugs whatsoever, and the wound was treated in an ordinary way with
bandages and so on. These were the directives of the physicians who were
there. We saw on many occasions that the patient was cured much faster
who received no drugs or injections.

Experiments of that kind were conducted for many weeks, and if I may as
a layman make a judgment, I must say that the physicians, according to
my observations, were not satisfied with these experiments.

In addition, I have to emphasize that not only wounds were treated
according to these methods, but internal diseases, too. They tried to
find out whether biochemical treatment was suitable for treating the
thirst for water, which was so frequent in the camp. We saw that the
biochemical drugs had no influence whatsoever as to the cause of this
illness.

I emphasize that I am speaking as a layman and that all these are my
observations.

During the fall, this Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Schuetz told the camp doctor,
who was named Babo, to infect a number of people with pus. We nurses
were told nothing about that, and we did not know the purpose. These
experiments were conducted on a group of men, and they extended over a
period of approximately six to seven weeks.

First a group of Germans were infected with pus. We nurses had no idea
of the cause of the illness, and we gave the patients the drugs that
were ordered by the physicians. I emphasize again that half of these
people received allopathic and the other half biochemical treatment. As
nurses, we could observe the following facts:

The patients who received allopathic treatment were cured much quicker,
that is, if they had any power of resistance to their illness, but the
patients who had to take those pathological tablets, if I remember
correctly, died with the exception of one person. There were
approximately 20 persons who, at that time, were infected. The second
group consisted of 40 clergymen of all nationalities and brothers of
religious fraternities. These patients were selected from the block
where the clergymen were housed. They were selected by the Chief
Physician Dr. Walda and were sent to the operational room of the
concentration camp Dachau. They were operated on by Dr. Schuetz and Dr.
Kieselwetter [Kieselwecker (?)] I think that was his name—and these
experiments were conducted on them. A number of nurses, and also the
personnel of the operating room, and I myself, saw how the injections
were made. We were standing in the anteroom of the operating room.

Q. Witness, will you explain to the Tribunal what the word “phlegmon”
means?

A. Phlegmon, as far as a layman can answer that question—means an
inflammation of the tissues, and in the camp of Dachau phlegmons were
very numerous because the people there were mostly sent to the hospital
too late. Typical camp phlegmons, as far as I know, are caused by germs.
Persons got phlegmons who suffered from lack of water.

Q. Witness, did you say that inmates were used for experiments in which
they were injected with pus?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you see these injections of pus being administered?

A. Yes.

Q. How were the inmates to be used for these experiments selected?

A. I didn’t understand your question.

Q. In what manner did they select the inmates to be used for these
experiments which dealt with the injection of pus? In other words, how
were they selected? What type of prisoners? What were their
nationalities, etc.?

A. They were 40 persons coming from the so-called clergymen block.

Q. Were these inmates used for these experiments with injection of pus
healthy inmates?

A. Completely healthy and strong men.

Q. You have told us that they had one group, the first group, of ten
Germans. How many died in that group?

A. I believe that the first group consisted of ten people of whom, as
far as I remember, seven died.

Q. Now, you have told us of a second group of 40 clergymen. How many
died in that group?

A. I have seen a list of the survivors, and according to that list, 12
clergymen, or rather brothers, must have died.

Q. Were any prisoners of war used in these experiments?

A. I don’t know whether they were prisoners of war or not. We could not
tell the difference in the camp of Dachau, whether they were prisoners
of war or not; at least I could not.

Q. Were the victims used in these experiments treated by medical doctors
after they had been injected with pus?

A. The operation was done by physicians.

Q. Well, after they had been infected with pus what kind of treatment
was given to them?

A. After the injection, Sturmbannfuehrer Schuetz gave instructions to
the nurses that one-half of them should receive allopathic and the other
half biological treatment. I emphasize that the group which received
allopathic treatment had special drugs, the so-called sulfanilamide
drugs. We had the impression that the physicians wanted to prove that
the biological drugs were not suitable to cure such a severe disease.

Q. Then you say, Witness, that 50 percent were treated with
sulfanilamide and the other 50 percent with biological medicants?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, after these injections with pus, did abscesses develop on the
inmate?

A. The greater part of those who were treated biologically, or rather,
all of them, developed abscesses and very deep abscesses. Some of the
persons who received allopathic and prophylactic treatment with
sulfanilamide had no abscesses.

Q. Did the inmates who endured this treatment suffer pain?

A. Yes.

Q. Severe pain?

A. As far as I know, the pain was very severe.

                 *        *        *        *        *

          EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT GEBHARDT[76]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. SEIDL: The next document which I intend to submit to the witness is
NO-409 which has been submitted by the prosecution as Exhibit 249. It is
a letter from Reich Physician SS Dr. Grawitz to the Reich Leader SS
Himmler dated 29 August 1942. It refers to the biochemical treatment of
sepsis. This document came to your knowledge, didn’t it? And this is
shown by a comment you wrote: “Seen at Ravensbrueck on 3 September 1942.
(Signed) KARL GEBHARDT.” Did you know beforehand about the performance
of these experiments and did you agree with them?

DEFENDANT GEBHARDT: I did not have any previous knowledge of these
experiments, and with regard to this document may I state somewhat more
in detail what it shows? This is a letter to Himmler, dated the end of
August, and signed by Grawitz. It was never mentioned that I was to
receive this letter or that this letter was to be routed through me. It
does not have any note from me to the effect that I countersigned it, or
was in agreement with it, in this form. It was also not discussed in
Berlin or Hohenlychen or in the headquarters, but in Ravensbrueck, and,
in particular, on 3 September when this discussion took place between
Grawitz and me, because of the second group of our sulfanilamide
experiments. Grawitz, who at that time came in order to show us that he
was not in agreement, as far as I can recall, brought this letter and
this description along from Dachau. We then discussed it in detail,
because on my part there were many reasons for raising the sharpest
protest against it. And, may I point out how much can be seen from this
document about how Grawitz planned to publish experiments or to describe
them, in contrast to my procedure at the time. Under point (1) it
states, “SS Hospital, Dachau” and it actually looks in general as though
this were a hospital report. And most of the case histories also speak
in favor of that, too. For example, the reference on page 3 to a joint
plastic, certainly is a big operation which can only be performed in a
hospital. On the following page there is “artificially induced sepsis.”
On the second page, “the cases of sepsis were mainly artificially
induced.” Then on the other side it is stated that in the fatalities
there is no mention of the 8 cases of sepsis that were artificially
induced, but of 10. I proved to Grawitz, especially on this page, that
the description he wanted to make of a camouflaged mixture of
experiments and clinical results might later on be read by somebody
superficially, and he would come to the word “artificially induced” and
would not be able to decide. Then there was a fundamental point with
regard to all persons concerned. This was the impracticability of
performing an experiment in this establishment. Then on page 3 it states
that the drugs were to be taken every five minutes, even at night. At
the time I didn’t even think of giving the report to Grawitz, after I
had found out about it by chance. I wrote “read” in the margin and drew
a logical conclusion with regard to Himmler and Grawitz. In this
connection I not only concluded Grawitz’ influence on our experiments,
but I also asked Himmler how these biochemical experiments were brought
about. I request permission of the Tribunal to permit me here to
describe what Himmler thought with regard to such experiments, and to
show, therefore, how impossible it was in certain cases, in spite of
obtaining knowledge, to effect any change. For a person who has studied
school medicine it is impossible to believe that through the homeopathic
administration of sulphur and phosphorus, surgical case histories, as
well as internal case histories, and metabolistic diseases can be
influenced. However, in medicine one can, of course, take a completely
different point of view, and that is the basic conception of
biochemistry up to homeopathy, to which Himmler completely adhered. And
here in two sentences we have described how all the elements which
appear in nature also have traces in the human body. Now, if one small
trace of an element is lacking, then the human being is susceptible to
and suffering from some disease or other. The therapy and method of
treatment by the biochemist is the exact contrast of medicine as
practiced by a person who has studied it at school. They make test
experiments on human beings and discover what element is lacking in that
human being, and no matter from what disease he is suffering, the
patient is treated with minimum doses of the element which he lacks.
Never in the world has it been possible for a typical school
practitioner and a biochemist to agree, because they want to treat the
human being completely in contrast to each other. From this example you
can see now that when I went to Himmler and said that it was madness for
not only an experiment to be performed on out-patients, but that also
simultaneously ten or twelve different cases should be treated with the
same medicine, when I told Himmler this, he said that he had one of the
most experienced biochemists, and a layman, Herr Laue with him, and that
he was absolutely convinced that this method of treatment was correct.
Himmler always attempted to discover old-fashioned popular remedies. In
spite of my objection and in spite of my proof that my own surgical
patients would suffer from it, these experiments were performed until I
succeeded in bringing this Dr. Laue and Dr. Kieselwecker from Marburg
(who enjoyed Himmler’s complete confidence on this question) to
Hohenlychen. There we performed a similar experiment together on my
patients in order to show that this method of treatment was impossible.
But even in this way I was not able to achieve my purpose with Himmler,
because afterwards it was said we had not applied the drugs properly,
and so on. Therefore, one can conclude from this that it was not the
case that Himmler adhered to one certain medical concept, and if one
accidentally heard of an experiment, one could convince him. Himmler
maintained a hostile attitude toward school medicine, and from nature
cures to biochemistry he was accessible to every thought, and when Laue
convinced him of the fact that this drug was of decisive importance,
then the experiment was performed. May I state in this connection, that
the knowledge of this document had the following three results with me:
that Grawitz, who was ready to make compromises as is shown here, did
not allow anyone to tell him anything at all about the sulfanilamide
question; that I gave Himmler clear knowledge of the false idea without
being able to convince him because of his favorable attitude toward
biochemistry; and that the experiment would perhaps be discontinued,
mainly on account of subsequent examinations at Hohenlychen. I shall
give evidence of this as soon as I receive the appropriate testimony of
witnesses.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[74] Final plea is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 15 July 1947,
pp. 10874-10910.

[75] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 17
December 1946, pp. 574-594.

[76] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 4, 5, 6,
7, 10 March 1947, pp. 3981-4256.

                        13. POLYGAL EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The prosecution introduced evidence calculated to show that inhumane
acts and atrocities, as generally alleged in paragraph 6 of the
indictment, were committed in the course of polygal experiments. These
experiments were not specifically described in the subparagraphs of
paragraph 6 of the indictment which particularized 12 specific types of
experimentation. On this charge the defendants Handloser, Blome, and
Poppendick were acquitted and only the defendant Sievers was convicted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the polygal experiments
is contained in its closing brief against the defendant Blome. An
extract from this brief is set forth below on pages 670 to 672. A
corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on these
experiments has been selected from the closing brief for the defendant
Blome. It appears below on pages 672 to 675. This argumentation is
followed by selections from the evidence on pages 675 to 683.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                            DEFENDANT BLOME_

                 *        *        *        *        *

In order to test the effectiveness of a blood coagulant “polygal,”
Rascher carried out experiments in which inmates of the Dachau
concentration camp were shot. Rascher’s uncle, in his affidavit,
describes the murderous experiments which were carried out by his
nephew. In August 1943, he visited Rascher in Dachau and, while Rascher
was away from his office, he saw a report which he describes as follows:

    “It refers to a report about the shooting (execution) of four
    people for the purpose of experimenting with the hemostatic
    preparation ‘Polygal 10.’ As far as I remember they were a
    Russian Commissar and a cretin, I do not remember who the other
    two were. The Russian was shot in the right shoulder from above
    by an SS man who stood on a chair. The bullet emerged near the
    spleen. It was described how the Russian twitched convulsively,
    then sat down on a chair and died after about 20 minutes. In the
    dissection protocol the rupture of the pulmonary vessels and the
    aorta was described. It was further described that the ruptures
    were tamponed by hard blood clots. That could have been the only
    explanation for the comparatively long span of life after the
    shot.” (_NO-1424, Pros. Ex. 462._)

This evidence is corroborated by the testimony of the witness Stoehr
(_Tr. p. 587_) and the affidavit of Pohl (_NO-065, Pros. Ex. 221_). Even
the defendant Gebhardt admitted, during his testimony, that he knew that
Rascher had carried out blood coagulation experiments on concentration
camp inmates who had been shot for the purpose. (_Tr. pp. 4240-1._)

The evidence proves that Blome collaborated with Rascher in the polygal
research. This collaboration began at least as early as the middle of
1943 in connection with cancer research. (_NO-473, Pros. Ex. 237_; _see
also NO-538, Pros. Ex. 122, entries for 18 February, 7 April, 14 April,
and 26 June 1943_.) The defendant Sievers stated in his affidavit that:
“Blome also had full knowledge of the blood coagulation experiments at
Dachau. He received reports from Rascher and should have a complete
knowledge of these matters.” (_NO-473, Pros. Ex. 237._) Blome admitted
that Rascher had been commissioned by Himmler to work with him in the
field of blood coagulation. (_Tr. p. 4642._) One of the collaborators of
Rascher in the polygal research was an inmate of the Dachau
concentration camp by the name of Robert Feix. By letter of 15 September
1943, Rascher requested Sievers to approach Blome, so that the latter
might arrange for the release of Feix and for his reinstatement in his
former category as half-Aryan. Rascher stated in his letter that “Blome
has given me great hopes in this respect.” (_NO-611, Pros. Ex. 239._)
This proves that Blome was already collaborating with Rascher on polygal
research in the summer of 1943. Obviously, Blome would not have put
himself out to assist in this work without knowing precisely what had
been done to test polygal.

In the latter part of 1943, Rascher and Dr. Haferkamp wrote a paper on
polygal. This paper draws a clear distinction between _experiments_ on
human beings to test the effect of polygal and _clinical tests_. It
states that: “Before we tried the clinical use of the drug and had it
probed, it was tested on _human beings_ by thorough experiments as to
its influence on the period of clotting and bleeding.” Curves were
included to show the reaction of polygal on clotting and bleeding. Later
on, the paper discusses clinical observations during operations.
(_NO-438, Pros. Ex. 240._) The experiments mentioned in this paper
obviously are the ones during which inmates were shot. They were not so
described in the paper because it was written for publication. Blome
testified that the only experiments he knew about were ones where one
cubic centimeter of blood was withdrawn to see how fast it would
coagulate in a test tube. (_Tr. p. 4643._) Such tests cannot be
described as experiments. It is impossible to conceive of Rascher’s
testing a blood coagulant to be used on soldiers wounded on the
battlefield in such a manner. And this was better known to Blome at the
time than it is now to the Tribunal. He knew that Rascher had conducted
the freezing experiments with resultant loss of life. He had been
informed about the Buchenwald typhus experiments. (_Tr. p. 4640._)
Moreover, this devious explanation of Blome does not cover experiments
to test the effect of polygal on bleeding; to test blood in a test tube
covers only coagulation reaction, not bleeding reaction. So he had to
add to the implausible by saying that Rascher once told him that he or
another doctor had rubbed the upper thigh of a person under anesthetic
until it became bloody and then tested the efficacy of polygal. But
Blome said, “I didn’t take this statement of his seriously.” (_Tr. p.
4635._) The thing which cannot be taken seriously is Blome’s display of
ignorance about experiments in which the documents prove he had a direct
personal interest.

Blome approved the publication of the paper mentioned above in the
Munich Medical Weekly [Muenchener Medizinische Wochenschrift]. (_Tr. p.
4639; NO-616, Pros. Ex. 244._) Both Grawitz and Pohl raised objections
to the publication of the article because they had not been consulted
and because Dachau 3 K and human experimental subjects were mentioned.
(_NO-614, Pros. Ex. 245_; _NO-615, Pros. Ex. 246_.) Both these men knew
of the murderous experiments carried out by Rascher to test polygal.
Gebhardt knew. Yet Blome asks the Tribunal to assume that he was too
naive to have known; that he didn’t even believe Rascher when he was
told that he had deliberately rubbed the hide off of an inmate’s leg to
test polygal.

On 23 February 1944 Rascher received a research assignment on polygal
from the Reich Research Council. (_NO-656, Pros. Ex. 247._) _Blome
admitted that he issued this assignment._ (_Tr. p. 4634._) Siever’s
diary reveals that on 1 February 1944, polygal production by Rascher was
listed as a war economy industry by the Reich Research Council. On 22
February Sievers had a conference with Rascher in which supply questions
for the production of this drug, _experiments of Blome_, and the polygal
report for the defendant Gebhardt were discussed. On 24 February Sievers
had a telephone conversation with Blome in which Blome informed him that
Himmler had issued an order concerning Blome’s work in Dachau in
collaboration with Rascher, (_3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123._) Blome admitted
that Himmler requested him to cooperate with Rascher on polygal
research. (_Tr. p. 4510._) When Ploetner took over Rascher’s work on 31
March (_Tr. p. 973_), Blome continued his interest in polygal as shown
by a telephone conversation with Sievers on this matter on 24 July.
(_Tr. p. 976._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

             _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT
                                 BLOME_

                 *        *        *        *        *

The question of _polygal_ was from the beginning one of the weakest
counts of the indictment against Dr. Blome. It is a remedy to make the
blood clot and to prevent people from bleeding to death as a result of
wounds inflicted in battle or by operation, or from injury due to
excessive loss of blood. This equally innocuous and beneficial remedy
was apparently made the object of a charge only because Dr. Rascher once
maintained that he had killed four concentration camp inmates with
pistol shots in order to try out polygal on them. (_NO-1424, Pros. Ex.
462_; _NO-065, Pros. Ex. 221_.) But I believe that every intelligent
person must have approached this contention of Rascher’s with the
strongest distrust, because one cannot try out a styptic on a dead
person, and Dr. Blome, like other physicians, has repeatedly assured me
that they did not understand what Dr. Rascher had in mind with such
actions, which of course had nothing to do with “experiments”. But even
on the assumption that these stories of Dr. Rascher were true—that he
had actually killed some concentration camp prisoners in order to
“experiment” on them with “polygal”—by what right can Dr. Blome be held
responsible for this, a man who knew nothing at all about these crimes
of Dr. Rascher? Dr. Blome has been waiting in vain for evidence to be
submitted by the prosecution to prove that he (Dr. Blome) had had
anything to do with those actions of Dr. Rascher, that he had at least
approved or at any rate had some knowledge of them. The document
presented by the prosecution proves that Dr. Blome can certainly not be
held responsible for the alleged shooting of four concentration camp
inmates by Dr. Rascher. (_NO-1424 Pros. Ex. 462._) This murder committed
by Dr. Rascher, if it was committed at all, happened before August 1943,
according to Document NO-1424. It was during this month that the witness
Friedrich Karl Rascher found in the writing table of his nephew, Dr.
Rascher, the report on the shooting of the four concentration camp
inmates. Dr. Blome, however, heard about polygal for the first time only
during his second visit to Himmler in August or September 1943; before
that time the matter was unknown to him. This statement by Dr. Blome
concerning the date is in agreement with the testimony of Sievers of 10
April 1947, according to which the joint visit of Dr. Blome, Sievers,
and Rascher to Himmler took place in the autumn of 1943. From this it is
evident that the murder of the four concentration camp inmates by Dr.
Rascher, if it has really any connection with polygal, happened without
doubt at a time when Dr. Blome still had no knowledge of this styptic.
Dr. Blome has rightly pointed out that it would have been a completely
incomprehensible insanity to kill people only for the purpose of testing
a styptic at a time when every day offered an abundance of material for
the observation and study of the effect of polygal in the thousands of
wounded soldiers and of patients operated on at the front as well as
among the civilian population.

In this connection it is, incidentally, quite interesting to learn from
the interrogation of the witness Neff that he never saw or observed any
such “experiments” by Dr. Rascher. Neither did Dr. Rascher tell Neff
anything about them, although Neff held a particularly confidential
position with Rascher and otherwise learned much about Rascher and his
“experiments”. Even in the camp nothing was said at the time about these
alleged “experiments” of Dr. Rascher with polygal, although it could
certainly not have been and also did not have to be kept secret in the
camp if Rascher had actually shot four concentration camp inmates in
order to carry out “experiments” on them with polygal.

These facts justify serious doubts as to whether those “experiments”
ever took place at all and especially whether they have anything to do
with the hemostatic polygal.

In reality, polygal is an absolutely harmless drug, whether it is
injected or taken in tablet form, and the use of such a drug in this
form can in no case be considered a criminal experiment against humanity
as specified by the indictment before this Tribunal. Even when
administered by injection with the subsequent drawing of a few drops of
blood from the experimental subject, it is completely harmless. It does
not cause any more “pain” than any other injection, and the whole test
of this drug consists solely of taking one cc. of blood from the vein of
the so-called experimental subject. Thus we are not dealing with any
experiment of the kind that could be considered criminal because it
causes severe pains or because it is dangerous or for any other reasons.

Besides, the concept of “criminal experiments on human beings” has
already been explained at the trial of Field Marshal Milch[77] by the
verdict of 16 April 1947; this verdict expressly limits the range of
such experiments to experiments “which could cause torture or death to
the experimental subjects.” Thus one cannot, in the present proceedings,
object to those experiments which cannot ordinarily be assumed to cause
death to the experimental subject or be accompanied by severe pain.
Neither took place when polygal was administered. For either it serves
as a hemostatic which can only be of advantage to the patient or, in the
reverse case, it simply has no effect. Polygal can never have any
harmful consequences, least of all cause any damage to health; nor could
this be claimed by the prosecution, for polygal is generally used in
surgery nowadays.

And finally, all the persons who submitted to polygal tests were
volunteers. Dr. Blome, however, could not prove this here by
interrogating the inventor of the drug, Feix, because the prosecution
prevented defense counsel from examining Feix by transferring the latter
to Dachau, whence he later escaped. The transcript of the interrogation
of Feix by the prosecution was not submitted here, even though Feix had
told me personally that he could not understand how any blame in
connection with polygal could be put on Dr. Blome. But another witness,
namely Walter Neff, testified here on the witness stand that the
experimental subjects on whom the experiments had been carried out had
volunteered, just as he himself had done. Since Neff was produced as
witness by the prosecution,[78] the latter will hardly want to declare
the testimony, sworn to by Neff, to be untrue.

The verdict of 16 April 1947 against Field Marshal Milch quoted above,
states explicitly that medical experiments are punishable only when
carried out without the consent of the subjects. Furthermore,
punishability presumes that the experiments were a “torture” for the
experimental subject or jeopardized his life. Both conditions obviously
do not apply to polygal. Thus one comes to the conclusion that it would
have been better not to mention within the limits of this trial subjects
where even the closest observer has to look very carefully to see
whether he could not possibly find anything to object to.

This applies especially to the report of the Institute for Military
Scientific Research (Department Rascher), on coagulation of blood.
(_NO-438, Pros. Ex. 240._) In this report, the author, Dr. Rascher,
emphasizes the importance of “Polygal 10” for combat troops and in
operations and describes five operations where polygal was used with
good results. There can be no doubt that those were five bona fide
operations which were performed on patients in an entirely legitimate
way and which tested polygal’s effectiveness in stopping bleedings in an
absolutely proper manner, as it is usually done, with similar drugs. It
is inconceivable how a conclusion of illegal “experiments” could have
been drawn from that report.

One of these five legitimate operations, by the way, is described in a
report by the camp physician Dr. Kahr, dated 12 October 1943 [10
December 1943] (_NO-656, Pros. Ex. 247_); it does not offer any basis
for assuming an “experiment”. In this connection it is worthwhile to
note that Dr. Blome himself, in his affidavit of 25 October 1946
(_NO-471, Pros. Ex. 238_), under section 8 describes the use of polygal
in cases of “battle wounds and operations”, but deals with “experiments
on human beings” only in the next section, 9. Therefore, Dr. Blome knew
from the beginning that polygal had nothing to do with “experiments on
human beings”.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
           Pros. Ex.
Doc. No.      No.                Description of Document             Page
NO-1424       462     Affidavit of Fritz Friedrich Karl Rascher, M.   676
                        D., 31 December 1946, concerning the life
                        and activities of Dr. Sigmund Rascher.
NO-438        240     Report from the Institute for Military          676
                        Scientific Research, (Department Dr.
                        Rascher) on “Polygal 10.”
NO-656        247     Memorandum by SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Wolff,    680
                        8 May 1944; letters from Dr. Kahr to
                        Rascher, 10 and 16 December 1943.

                               _Testimony_
                                                                     Page
Extracts from the testimony of defendant Sievers                      682

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-1424
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 462

  AFFIDAVIT OF FRITZ FRIEDRICH KARL RASCHER, M. D., 31 DECEMBER 1946,
       CONCERNING THE LIFE AND ACTIVITIES OF DR. SIGMUND RASCHER

                               AFFIDAVIT

I, Fritz Friedrich Karl Rascher, being duly sworn, depose and state:

1. I was born on 13 August 1888 at Kellmuenz/Schwaben-Neuburg. I am a
German citizen. My present civilian address is: Hamburg, Parkallee 78. I
attended the following schools: 4 years public school at Augsburg, 4
years St. Anna Gymnasium at Augsburg, 2 years Real-Gymnasium at
Augsburg, and 4 years of senior high school at Ravensburg. I graduated
from junior college at Ravensburg in 1909. I studied medicine for 5
years at Munich. I passed my state board examination in 1914 at Munich.
From 1914 to 1917 I worked as general practitioner. In the autumn of
1917 I was drafted into the armed forces, remained however at first in
Hamburg in the home guard reserve and worked at the same time as general
practitioner until May 1918. From May 1918 until November 1918 I was a
medical officer. Since the end of 1918 until now I have been a general
practitioner in Hamburg.

2. I am the uncle of Dr. Sigmund Rascher and have always maintained a
pleasant family relationship with my nephew. I also was well acquainted
with the wife of Dr. Sigmund Rascher, Nini Rascher nee Diehl. I also
maintained contact with Dr. Sigmund Rascher and his wife during the war
until the arrest at the end of 1943 or beginning of 1944. For the
reasons stated above, I am in the position to make the following
statement:

3. While attending the wedding of my nephew in Munich he told me that he
had been asked to take over a laboratory in the concentration camp
Dachau by order of the Luftwaffe and in connection with the Ahnenerbe.
This offer was made to him through the medium of his wife and Himmler.
He told me that this would be a big chance to work free and undisturbed.
At the same time he saw in it a chance of continuing his experiments on
blood crystallization. In these experiments he was supported by a
relative of his wife by the name of Fraeulein Lulu, who later committed
suicide. At that time I advised my nephew against accepting such a job.

4. In August 1942 I heard from my nephew in Munich that he had taken
over the laboratory at Dachau and that he would work there extensively.
Knowing the great diligence and the ambition of my nephew I was not
surprised that he accepted this job.

At that time I drove with my nephew by car up to the entrance of the
concentration camp, but did not enter. The only thing I heard from my
nephew at that time was that he had carried out high-altitude tests on
himself.

5. In August 1943 I was with my nephew twice in the Dachau concentration
camp. The first time I went only to his private quarters and did not see
the laboratory. The second time he showed me his laboratory and
introduced me to his colleagues. I still remember the following names:
Dr. Punzengruber and Dr. Feix. I inspected the chemical exploitation of
blood coagulation. At that time he also told me of freezing experiments.
He said that he had carried these out on himself at first and then he
introduced to me one of his colleagues who had volunteered three times
for these experiments. If I remember rightly, Himmler is supposed to
have been present at one of these experiments and to have pardoned the
man who was condemned to death. During the absence of my nephew, I
accidentally found the following document in his desk:

It refers to a report about the shooting (execution) of four people for
the purpose of experimenting with the hemostatic preparation “Polygal
10”. As far as I remember they were a Russian Commissar and a cretin, I
do not remember who the other two were. The Russian was shot in the
right shoulder from above by an SS man who stood on a chair. The bullet
emerged near the spleen. It was described how the Russian twitched
convulsively, then sat down on a chair and died after about 20 minutes.
In the dissection protocol the rupture of the pulmonary vessels and the
aorta was described. It was further described that the ruptures were
tamponed by hard blood clots. That could have been the only explanation
for the comparatively long span of life after the shot. After reading
this first protocol I was so shocked that I did not read the others. At
the time I took a sample of the hemostatic preparation from the desk
which I submit herewith to the files.

6. On the way to Munich after this visit to Dachau, which was my last, I
called my nephew to account. He raved when he learned that I knew of
this matter. After appealing to his conscience, from the scientific as
well as from the humane point of view, he broke down and cried: “I dare
not think, I dare not think.” In Munich my nephew and I continued this
conversation during the whole night. Dr. Sigmund Rascher admitted at the
time that he was on the wrong path but that he didn’t see any
possibility of resigning from it.

7. At the end of 1943 or beginning of 1944 I received a letter from my
nephew, in which he informed me that he and his wife had been arrested
because of illegal adoption (and registration) of a child. This letter
was accompanied by a note by Kriminalrat Schmidt from Munich in which he
informed me that I should contact him if I knew anything about this
matter. I wrote at the time to Munich that I considered this to be
impossible because I myself had once seen Frau Rascher in a pregnant
state. I am a doctor and examined her myself. That was before the birth
of the second child; she was then in the 6th or 7th month of pregnancy.
I wish to add that the first son looked very much like his father and
also had similar habits.

8. Since this occurrence in 1943 or 1944 I have not heard from either
Dr. Sigmund Rascher or his wife. Only in 1946 I learned from various
people that my nephew had been shot in Dachau before the arrival of the
Americans and that his wife had been hanged at Ravensbrueck or Berlin on
orders of Himmler. I also submit to the files three pictures taken
during the youth of Dr. Sigmund Rascher. All my nephew’s documents which
I had in my possession I burned in 1944 because I was afraid of the
Gestapo.

I have read the above affidavit in the German language consisting of 2
pages and declare that it is true and correct to the best of my
knowledge and belief. I was given the opportunity of making alterations
and corrections in the above affidavit. This affidavit was made by me
voluntarily, without any promise or reward and I was subjected to no
compulsion or duress of any kind.

                                                  [Signature] RASCHER

Hamburg, 31 December 1946.

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-438
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 240

REPORT FROM THE INSTITUTE FOR MILITARY SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH, (DEPARTMENT
                      DR. RASCHER) ON “POLYGAL 10”

                                                           [Handwritten]
                                                    Mue. med. Wo. Schri.
                                                 delivered 20 Dec. 1943.

  From the Institute for Military Scientific Research (Department Dr.
      Rascher) “Polygal 10”, a hemostat to be administered orally
                                   by
        Dr. med. S. Rascher, Munich, and Dr. med. H. Haferkamp,
                       Waltershausen (Thuringia).

A good hemostat has to have the following qualifications:

1. It must be harmless.

2. It must be administered easily (orally).

3. It must not have an unpleasant taste.

4. It must have a deep and long-lasting effect on bleeding and clotting
time.

5. After the effect wears off it must be possible to administer another
dose without any danger.

Hemostats now on sale commercially meet these demands only partially. No
unobjectionable hemostat is known so far which is in tablet form,
durable, unimpaired by cold temperatures and therefore easily
transportable. But it would be worthwhile to produce such a preparation
whose application would have the following important advantages:

1. It could be given prophylactically to the combat troops before an
attack and to air crews before action. Too great a loss of blood could
be avoided that way when tending to wounds is delayed; similarly it
would prevent the wounded from becoming incapacitated by delaying the
loss of blood.

2. Before operations in which greater areal bleeding is to be expected,
it could be used to keep the operational region clear of interfering
bleeding.

3. Persons having a long blood clotting time could benefit inestimably
from such a remedy in cases of teeth extractions, etc.

4. In severe cases of lung or stomach hemorrhage which cannot be treated
surgically at once, such a remedy could be life saving.

We believe we have such a remedy in “Polygal 10,” a preparation composed
and tested in our institute, which does fulfill the above requirements.
“Polygal 10” is a drug composed on a “pectin” base; its new method,
differentiating it from other hemostats on a pectin base is to be found
in the activation of pectin before composing it into the hemostat.

Before we tried the clinical use of the drug and had it probed, it was
tested on _human beings_ by thorough experiments as to its influence on
the period of clotting and bleeding. The period of clotting was
occasionally established in short intervals by 10 parallel definitions
of free flowing venous blood according to the method of _Buercker_. The
period of bleeding was measured by a stop watch after a wound at the ear
had been inflicted by a “Frankeschen Schnepper.”

On the enclosed graphic chart (not reproduced) the curves of two
experimental subjects are displayed (experimental subjects Nos. 200 and
207). The depth of decline and the duration of effect correspond to the
average. It is to be mentioned with reference to the curves that
_various persons_ were always used for the _experiments_ in order to
avoid a possible accumulation of effect by the drug.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-656
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 247

 MEMORANDUM BY SS OBERSTURMBANNFUEHRER WOLFF, 8 MAY 1944; LETTERS FROM
              DR. KAHR TO RASCHER, 10 AND 16 DECEMBER 1943

                       [Handwritten]     The Preparation of Polygal

                                     Waischenfeld/Oberfranken 8 May 1944
                                                 No. 135 Telephone No. 2
                                                 Journal No.      Wo/He.

The Reich Leader SS
Personal Staff
Office Ahnenerbe

                                SUMMARY

SS Hauptsturmfuehrer S. Rascher MD. was assigned the following research
tasks by the Reich Research Council:

                 *        *        *        *        *

2. On 23 February 1944 Journal No. Rf 3717/44g Code word: “Polygal.”
Research task for the development of production methods for the
preparation of the hemostat polygal. Priority SS/44 Wehrmacht order
number: SS 4118-0391/44 Rf 2829.

Point 11 as an addition to the task.

Procurement of supplies, etc., has a priority rating SS 4950 (Group I).

                                                    [Signature] WOLFF
                                                    SS Obersturmfuehrer

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                 _Copy_

Concentration Camp Dachau
The Camp Physician

                                               Dachau, 10 December 1943

Subject: Administering “polygal” after amputation of the thigh of
        a 40-year-old male patient.
To: Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher
Dachau

On 10 December 1943 the effectiveness of “polygal” in the case of the
amputation of the thigh was tested. The drug was administered per os 45
minutes before the operation and was placed in the patient’s mouth to be
dissolved. A blood transfusion of 500 cc. had been made the previous day
in preparation for the operation. Blood pressure on the day of the
operation was 180/80.

As regards the effectiveness of “polygal” one can say that it was
absolutely evident how little the tissues bled. After the first rush of
blood from the vessels which had been cut, when completely emptied of
blood no more bleeding occurred after this first flow of accumulated
blood, so that it was not necessary to apply any ligatures to the
surface of the muscles and the fatty tissues, or the subcutaneous
tissues, as had always been the case with other amputations. The
effectiveness of “polygal” must in this case be described as complete.

   By order:
                                                  [Signed] DR. KAHR
                                                  SS Obersturmfuehrer
                    The First Camp Physician, Concentration Camp Dachau

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                 _Copy_

Concentration Camp Dachau
The Camp Physician
                                                 Dachau 16 December 1943
To: SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Rascher
Dachau

“Polygal 10” was used for 2 herniotomies. The patients were men of 35
and 42 years of age, respectively. In both cases the tablets were
administered to the patients 40 minutes before the operation. Blood
pressure before the operation was 135/80 in the case of the 35-year-old
patient and 145/80 in the case of the 42-year-old patient. Both patients
tolerated “polygal 10” without complaint, nor were there any unpleasant
accompanying symptoms in the stomach.

It is to be said of the operation itself that the loss of blood was
conspicuously slight in both cases. As in the case of all preceding
operations where “polygal 10” had been administered, it was only
necessary in this case, to cut off the bleeding from the vessels. In the
first case, that of the 35-year-old patient, stronger bleeding from the
subcutaneous tissues occurred after the skin had been cut, which,
however, was stopped by mere wiping, so that in this case the
application of clips to the subcutaneous tissues was unnecessary. Only
after cutting the cremaster was it necessary to apply some ligatures,
because then some smaller vessels were pierced. During the further
course of the operation, i. e., the separation of the hernial sac from
the funiculus spermaticus (it was an indirect inguinal hernia), several
spots bled in the beginning, but bleeding came to a standstill at once
and the use of ligatures was superfluous.

The same observations were made in the second case, the case of the
42-year-old patient. Hemostasis by application of ligatures was
necessary in only a few spots, and this was always in those places where
vessels had been injured during the operation. The favorable effect of
“polygal 10” in surgical operations consists not only in its causing
slight bleeding and preventing great loss of blood, but also in that it
makes possible considerably faster operations, because the applications
of clips and later ligatures always takes up a certain time, which can
be saved by the use of “polygal 10.”

                                                    [Signed] DR. KAHR
                                                    SS Obersturmfuehrer
          EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT SIEVERS[79]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. WEISGERBER: The prosecution has submitted a single Document,
NO-1424, Prosecution Exhibit 462. This is an affidavit of Dr. Fritz
Friedrich Karl Rascher, who is an uncle of Dr. Rascher. It becomes
evident from this document that Rascher was carrying out fatal
experiments on human beings in connection with the development of
polygal. Did you know about that at any time?

DEFENDANT SIEVERS: No, I heard nothing about it. After Rascher’s arrest,
however, in 1944, the Police President of Munich, von Eberstein, gave me
a rather excited description of this criminal Rascher. He said that
Rascher had even shot at a human being in order to test his coagulating
drug. A confirmation of this statement could not be obtained at that
time. I didn’t believe it at first because so many rumors were flying
around about him and his wife after his arrest—one of them was that he
removed his collaborator Muschler by murdering her. Rascher,
incidentally, succeeded in clearing himself of this suspicion of murder.
After everything has become known through this trial—everything that
Rascher has on his conscience—I am rather inclined to believe it. Uncle
Rascher’s statements also reveal how secret Rascher kept his misdeeds.
Only by interfering with his nephew’s desk did Uncle Rascher gain
knowledge of whatever he is testifying here. At the same time, he
confirms in his statement that his nephew was furious when he found out
about his interference.

Q. Concluding these questions, I put to you Pohl’s affidavit which is
Document NO-065, Prosecution Exhibit 221. I quote (this is on top of
page 3): “Sievers told me the following: Ahnenerbe, of which Sievers was
manager, was developing a drug in Dachau, by order of Himmler, which had
as its result the quick coagulation of blood. He said that it was very
important for fighting units because it prevented their bleeding to
death. The experiments in Dachau, during which one inmate was shot at,
have proved these results.” Did you tell Pohl anything to that effect?

                 *        *        *        *        *

A. I told Pohl exactly what I had found out from Eberstein. As I already
said, the development stage of polygal was already concluded when he
received Himmler’s order to take care of the production. If Rascher shot
at an inmate in connection with polygal research then this, at any rate,
occurred at a time when he had nothing to do with that matter. I only
heard of this alleged shooting after Rascher’s arrest, as I have already
testified.

Q. Mr. President, in this connection I offer Document Sievers 10 as
Sievers Exhibit 8. I beg your pardon, Sievers Exhibit 9. This is an
affidavit of Oswald Pohl. The essential points to be found on page one
of this document are, and I quote:

    “1. My affidavit of 23 July 1946 concerning medical experiments
    was submitted to me with reference to my statements in paragraph
    4, Sievers (Ahnenerbe).

    “2. Sievers’ diary of 1944 (_3546-PS_) was submitted to me with
    reference to the entry of 15 June 1944, 9 o’clock (page 167):

    “SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl.

    “1. Production of polygal and settlement Felix.”

Paragraphs two to six are not interesting here and I shall skip them. I
quote again:

    “After having read this entry in the diary, I can remember
    Sievers’ visit very well and I can state according to the best
    of my knowledge and conscience:

    “When all the relevant points concerning the possibility of
    producing (installation for manufacture) the blood-stanching
    remedy ‘polygal’, as well as the other items had been discussed,
    Sievers told me a few things about the Rascher case before I
    called in SS Standartenfuehrer Maurer to discuss the employment
    of scientist prisoners in mathematical calculating problems. He
    informed me that Rascher and his wife had been arrested for
    jointly committing child substitution and abduction. Through
    Rascher’s arrest, several unbelievable things had apparently
    come to light which were now being investigated. It was also
    maintained that Rascher was supposed to have fired at a prisoner
    in order to test the ‘polygal’. Sievers therefore expresses an
    assumption which he himself had only heard, and not a fact based
    on his own knowledge.”

And then follows the certification.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[77] United States _vs._ Erhard Milch. See Vol. II.

[78] Neff was called as witness by the Tribunal.

[79] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 9, 10,
11, 14 Apr 1947, pp. 5656-5869.

                  14. GAS OEDEMA (PHENOL) EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The prosecution introduced evidence calculated to show that inhuman acts
and atrocities (as generally alleged in paragraph 6 of the indictment)
were committed in the course of gas oedema experiments. These
experiments were not specifically described in the subparagraphs of
paragraph 6 of the indictment, which particularized 12 specific types of
experimentation. On this charge the defendants Mrugowsky and Hoven were
convicted and the defendant Handloser was acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the gas oedema
experiments is contained in its closing brief against the defendant
Mrugowsky. An extract from this brief is set forth below on pages 684 to
685. This argumentation is followed by selections from the evidence on
pages 685 to 694.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

           _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT
                               MRUGOWSKY_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                     _Gas Oedema Serum Experiments_

The affidavit of Dr. Erwin Schuler, alias Ding, states that at a
conference in the Military Medical Academy in Berlin, at the end of
1942, in which he took part, one of the topics of discussion was the
fatality of gas oedema serum on wounded soldiers. The affidavit goes on
to state that among the participants in the discussion were Killian,
General Schreiber, Mrugowsky, and a medical officer who was unknown to
him. Killian and Mrugowsky gave reports on soldiers who had received the
serum in high quantities and hours later, after apparently having
recovered, died suddenly without visible reason. It was suspected that
the phenol content of the serum brought about the fatal result. In the
presence of Killian and Schreiber, Mrugowsky ordered Ding to take part
in the performance of euthanasia with phenol on a concentration camp
inmate and to describe the results in detail. Ding later witnessed the
execution of four or five persons with phenol injections by the
defendant Hoven in the Buchenwald concentration camp. According to
orders, Ding reported his findings to Berlin. (_NO-257, Pros. Ex. 283._)

Mrugowsky denied having given any such order to Ding. It is quite
apparent, however, that Ding-Schuler, who was under arrest at the time
he executed this affidavit, would not have implicated himself in a crime
which did not occur. Mrugowsky’s continued interest in the effect of the
phenol contained in serum is evidenced by a letter of 24 August 1944
from Grawitz to him. Grawitz stated that the Reich Leader SS had
approved experiments proposed by Mrugowsky on the tolerance of serum
containing phenol. (_NO-1198, Pros. Ex. 466._)

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
           Pros. Ex.
Doc. No.      No.                Description of Document              Page
NO-429        281     Extracts from the affidavit of Waldemar Hoven,   685
                        24 October 1946, concerning the killing of
                        inmates by phenol and other means.
NO-257        283     Extract from a sworn statement by Dr. Erwin      686
                        Schuler (Ding), 20 July 1945, concerning
                        euthanasia with phenol injection.

                               _Testimony_

Extracts from testimony of the defendant Mrugowsky                     688

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-429
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 281

    EXTRACTS FROM THE AFFIDAVIT OF WALDEMAR HOVEN, 24 OCTOBER 1946,
      CONCERNING THE KILLING OF INMATES BY PHENOL AND OTHER MEANS

I, Waldemar Hoven, being duly sworn, depose and state:

1. I was born in Freiburg, Breisgau, on the 10th of February 1903. I
attended high school but did not complete my education until many years
later. Between the years 1919 and 1933 I visited Denmark, Sweden, United
States, and France. In 1933 I returned to Freiburg and completed my high
school course and then attended the Universities of Freiburg and Munich.
In 1939 I concluded my medical studies and joined the Waffen SS as a
physician. The last rank I held in the Waffen SS was Hauptsturmfuehrer
(captain). In 1934 I had joined the Allgemeine SS.

2. In October 1939 I was assigned as an assistant medical officer in the
SS hospital in the Buchenwald concentration camp and held that position
until 1941 when I was appointed the medical officer in charge of the SS
troops stationed in the camp. At the end of 1941 I was transferred to
the camp hospital and became the assistant medical officer therein. This
hospital was for the inmates of the Buchenwald concentration camp. In
July 1942 I was elevated to the position of chief physician and thereby
had the full responsibility for the inmate patients in the hospital. I
held this position until September 1943 when I was arrested by the SS
police court of Kassel and remained under arrest until 15th of March
1945.

3. Due to my various positions in the Buchenwald concentration camp
during this period of nearly four years I became acquainted with all
phases of the medical activities therein and am hereby able to make the
following statement:

                 *        *        *        *        *

10. In the camp we had a great many prisoners who were jealous of the
positions held by a certain few of the inmates, that is, some of the
political prisoners held key positions and were able to get better
living conditions than the average. Hence, many of the prisoners envied
these positions and made every effort to discredit the men who held the
key positions. Such traitorous actions became known through the
“grapevine” to the men in the key positions and then such traitors were
immediately killed. In each case I was later notified in order to make
out the death statements of the prisoners killed. These statements did
not indicate the actual cause of death but were made out to indicate
that the prisoner died of natural causes.

11. In some instances I supervised the killing of these unworthy inmates
by injections of phenol at the request of the inmates. These killings
took place in the camp hospital and I was assisted by several inmates.
On one occasion Dr. Ding came to the hospital to witness such killings
with phenol and said that I was not doing it correctly, therefore he
performed some of the injections himself. At that time three inmates
were killed with phenol injections and they died within a minute.

12. The total number of traitors killed was about 150, of whom 60 were
killed by phenol injections, either by myself or under my supervision in
the camp hospital, and the rest were killed by various means, such as
beatings, by the inmates.

The above affidavit written in the English language, consisting of five
(5) pages, is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.
This affidavit was given by me freely and voluntarily, without promise
of reward and I was subjected to no duress or threat of any

                                          [Signed] DR. WALDEMAR HOVEN

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-257
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 283

  EXTRACT FROM A SWORN STATEMENT BY DR. ERWIN SCHULER (DING), 20 JULY
           1945, CONCERNING EUTHANASIA WITH PHENOL INJECTION

                                                 Freising, 20 July 1945

Erwin Schuler, M. D.

Case 508

As ordered I am briefly answering two questions:

1. _Witness of Euthanasia with Phenol at Buchenwald._

At the end of 1942 I took part at a conference in the Military Academy
of Medicine in Berlin. The topic of discussion was the fatal effect of
gas gangrene serum on wounded men.

Present: Generalarzt Professor Schreiber, hygienist of the Military
Academy of Medicine; SS Oberfuehrer Professor Mrugowsky, hygienist;
Oberstabsarzt Professor Killian, professor in the University of Breslau,
surgeon; a medical officer (surgeon) whose name I did not know; and
myself, as department chief of the Central Institute for the Combating
of Epidemics, Berlin.

Killian and Mrugowsky gave reports on soldiers who had been given gas
gangrene serum in high quantities (up to 1,500 cc.) and hours
afterwards, while feeling perfectly well, had died suddenly without any
visible reason. Mrugowsky suspected that the cumulative effect of the
phenol content of the injections was responsible for the deaths.

In the presence of the other gentlemen, Mrugowsky ordered me to take
part in euthanasia with phenol in a concentration camp and to describe
the result in detail, since neither I nor Mrugowsky had ever seen a case
of death by phenol. Mrugowsky himself could not take part in the
euthanasia because of an urgent trip to the East, on the other hand the
affair was urgent for the fighting troops, and the publication of a new
circular for the troop doctors.

A few days later I asked Dr. Hoven in Buchenwald to notify me when he
performed euthanasia with phenol. The next evening he asked me to come
to the operating theater in the inmates’ hospital. Besides himself and
another doctor—probably Dr. Plaza—only two other prison male nurses,
whom I cannot remember, were present.

I talked to the doctor about the composition of the phenol injection
and, as far as I can remember, it consisted of undiluted raw phenol,
which was to be administered in doses of 20 cc.

One by one, four or five prisoners were led in. The upper part of the
body was naked so that their nationality patch [on their clothing] could
not be distinguished. The condition of their bodies was bad and their
age was advanced. I do not remember a diagnosis as to why euthanasia was
to take place, but probably I did not ask about it either.

They sat down quietly on a chair, that is without any sign of
excitement, near a light. A male nurse blocked the vein in the arm and
Dr. Hoven quickly injected the phenol. They died in an immediate total
convulsion during the actual injection without any sign of other pain.
The time between the beginning of the injection and death I estimate at
about ½ second. The rest of the dose was injected as a precautionary
measure, although part of the injection would have been enough for the
fatal result (I estimate 5 cc.).

The dead were carried into an adjoining room by the nurses—I estimate
the time of my presence at 10 minutes.

I reported in Berlin according to orders. I know nothing further to say.

                 *        *        *        *        *

         EXTRACTS FROM TESTIMONY OF THE DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY[80]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. FLEMMING: I now turn to the gas gangrene experiments. When examining
the defendants Handloser, Rostock, Schroeder, Genzken, and the witness
Bernhard Schmidt, we heard to what extent gas gangrene became prevalent
at the front. I refer you to the Document NO-578, Prosecution Exhibit
284. I shall have it submitted to you. Would you please tell the
Tribunal whether, in connection with gas gangrene, there was an extreme
necessity in concentration camps and in the army to discover protective
means to combat this disease?

DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY: It was pointed out frequently that no infection can
be taken so seriously in the surgical field as the infection by gas
gangrene, since the mortality cases of these injuries were very high. In
concentration camps, as Noeling told me, we often had cases of gas
gangrene. Therefore, the Asid Works suggested that vaccine should be
used in the same manner as in the case of diphtheria. This was done in
these works sometimes in cases of tetanus. Such vaccine against gas
gangrene was produced by the Behring Works and was tested on students at
Marburg University at first, about which a publication is available. I
received a small part of this gas gangrene toxin in order to protect
people in danger. This gas gangrene toxin I gave to Noeling and he used
it at Buchenwald. The chart is available concerning persons on whom this
vaccine was used. It becomes evident from that that there is even an
increase in temperature following that vaccination, and that we are here
concerned with a completely harmless project which has nothing at all to
do with an infection.

Q. Dr. Ding in an affidavit (_NO-257, Pros. Ex. 283_) stated that at the
Military Medical Academy a conference took place on the question of gas
gangrene serum. What do you know about that?

A. It is correct that such a conference actually took place. Whenever
gas gangrene occurred a large amount of gas gangrene serum had to be
used for treatment in order to insure success. It was not a mere ten or
fifteen cubic centimeters, but 400 to 800 cubic centimeters which was
given to the patient in the course of a few days. In Germany all serums
which are obtained from animals, mostly horses, are mixed with 0.5
percent of phenol and carbolic acid—in order to preserve them—i. e.,
to 400 cubic centimeters I added a concentration of two cubic
centimeters of phenol acid. This amount is, of course, far above the
tolerance of human beings. Carbolic acid is one of the strongest acids
we possess. When treating people with gas gangrene serums a number of
deaths occurred. We discussed whether we were dealing with cases of
serum death, resulting from the serum, or whether death was caused by
the phenol added. Ding and I participated in that conference with
others.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Did you give Dr. Ding an assignment on the basis of this discussion
to test this phenol question?

A. Yes, I told him to study the literature and to make use of the
libraries of the pharmacological and forensic medicine institute in
Jena. He was in touch with those institutes.

Q. Did you give him the assignment to participate in euthanasia with
phenol?

A. No. I never heard anything about his having carried out such
euthanasia, or of such killings having been carried out. I could not,
therefore, have given him any such order.

Q. You are aware that in an affidavit of your codefendant Hoven it is
stated that Ding himself carried out killings in Buchenwald with phenol.
Had you given him instructions to that effect?

A. No. I did not give him any such instructions, and there was no
occasion to do so because death by phenol is well known in literature;
simply reading works on the subject would have sufficed.

DR. FLEMMING: Mr. President, I submit Document Mrugowsky 28. I should
like to submit it as Mrugowsky Exhibit 46. It is an affidavit of
Professor Killian, who is a university professor at Halle/Saale. He
says:

    “In 1941-1943 I was consulting surgeon with the 16th Army in the
    East. We had experienced numerous cases of death and injury to
    the circulatory system due to the effects of gas gangrene serum.
    In my opinion, these bad effects cannot only be attributed to
    the inoculation of great quantities of unrelated serums, but
    also to the addition of one-half percent phenol, as is
    prescribed by law. Since up to 150 cc. of gas gangrene
    serum—sometimes even more than that—was given intravenously to
    wounded in the field, in my opinion the total quantity of phenol
    added then approached becoming a danger. This became obvious
    after four of my collaborators had had themselves injected
    intravenously with a phenol common salt solution of 0.5 percent
    density. All of them showed typical signs of phenol poisoning to
    a different degree. In a letter to the medical inspectorate I
    called their attention to the disappointing effects of the gas
    gangrene serum and to the detrimental effect of phenol, and made
    proposals for a change. Consequently, I was officially ordered
    to report during my stay in Berlin to Oberstarzt Professor
    Schreiber, who was a specialist on this matter. Present at this
    conference were Professor Mrugowsky and a junior physician whose
    name I no longer remember. I did not know any of the three
    gentlemen; I saw and spoke to them then for the first time.
    Apart from a few general questions concerning bacteriology, we
    discussed mainly the gas gangrene serum problem. I had to give
    an exact report on what took place at the front and on the
    symptoms of poisoning. The discussion then took two directions.
    First, the question whether it was possible for industry to
    substitute a harmless disinfectant for the dangerous phenol, and
    which one of the many substances would be suitable for this
    purpose.”

Number two is not important. And I can skip the next paragraph too. I
come to the last paragraph:

    “I well remember the substance of the discussions and declare
    that no mention was made of any experiments in a concentration
    camp, or of effecting euthanasia by injecting phenol. Such
    considerations never even came up for discussion, let alone an
    order in my presence by one of the medical officers. This would
    certainly have remained in my memory. I may add that a reason
    for such experiments did not exist since the symptoms of phenol
    poisoning are well known and may be found in any book on
    pharmacology. Apart from this, the question had been
    sufficiently settled by the above-mentioned experiments which
    the physicians had carried out on themselves. I am convinced
    that Dr. Ding’s statements are not true.” [Signed by Professor
    Killian, and certified.]

On the basis of instructions that he was to inform himself from
literature about phenol poisoning—instructions which you gave to
him—what did Ding report? Was the question of gangrene serum, and the
deaths resulting from it, settled?

DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY: Ding made a report. I waited for it for some time
and when it did not come I myself read up on this question. Then I was
no longer interested in his report.

Q. On page 20 of the Ding diary (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287_) it says that a
special experiment on four persons was carried out on behalf of
Gruppenfuehrer Nebe. What do you know about that?

A. I have already mentioned the case of Hauptscharfuehrer Koehler, who
was at the hospital at Weimar, who died from poisoning. Inaccurate
statements were given about his death and autopsy. It was said that they
occurred in the Buchenwald concentration camp—which is not true. At the
discussion of the autopsy findings in the Reich Criminal Police Office,
the opinion had been expressed that this death might have resulted from
pervitin together with a narcotic drug. I participated in this
discussion.

DR. FLEMMING: Mr. President, I have already submitted the affidavit by
Dr. Konrad Morgen. (_Mrugowsky 29, Mrugowsky Ex. 36._) When I submitted
it I read the first one and one-half pages. I should now like to read
the following portion:

    “Professor Dr. Timm”—that is, the forensic medical expert from
    Vienna who performed the autopsy on Koehler—“came to the
    opinion that there were two possibilities: first, that a South
    American poison had been used which was totally unknown to us
    and which dissolves completely in the human body; second, that a
    combination of drugs had been used. One drug had excited the
    circulation to the point of exhaustion, the other drug had acted
    as an antidote. Professor Dr. Timm spoke of the possibility that
    pervitin had been used together with a soporific. The idea that
    a South American poison had been used was rejected from a
    criminological point of view. From a technical point of view the
    second possibility would have been quite possible.

    “I had to report the case to the Reich Security Main Office.
    Subsequently, a conference took place in the Reich Security Main
    Office at which quite a number of persons were present. The
    chief of the Reich Security Main Office [sic], Gruppenfuehrer
    Mueller, presided. Gruppenfuehrer Nebe of the Reich Criminal
    Police was also present, as well as Professor Dr. Mrugowsky. At
    the conference various persons, among others also Dr. Mrugowsky,
    pointed out that pervitin was not a poison, that it could be
    obtained without a prescription. One of the gentlemen present
    pointed out that in America experiments were carried out where
    up to 100 tablets of pervitin were administered and the effects
    were not fatal. But no one present could answer the question of
    whether a combination of pervitin and a soporific would be
    harmless, or whether it would lead to an increased reaction to
    any one direction. The latter appeared improbable to the
    experts. In order to settle this question Gruppenfuehrer Mueller
    ordered that an experiment be conducted. He ordered that Dr.
    Ding, whom he knew, should conduct this experiment in
    Buchenwald.

    “It was ruled that in this experiment, which was to settle the
    purely criminal side of the question, only minute quantities of
    pervitin and soporific should be used, since it would be
    impossible to give large quantities of pervitin and a soporific
    unobtrusively to the prospective victim. Moreover, larger
    quantities of these drugs would have been found in any case by
    means of a chemical analysis. The scientific theoretical problem
    concerning the harmfulness or even deadliness of maximum doses
    did not interest anyone.

    “I was present at the experiments at Buchenwald.

    “Five persons were presented to us for testing, because
    Gruppenfuehrer Mueller had ordered experiments to be conducted
    on five persons. I checked the papers of the persons to be
    experimented on prior to the experiment. They were Russians who
    had deserted, or workers, who had formed a gang, stolen, and
    plundered, and had even been charged with murder. They had all
    been sentenced to death before a special court in Pomerania.
    Gruppenfuehrer Mueller had already previously been given the
    order for their execution.

    “I had agreed with Dr. Ding that a preliminary experiment should
    be made on three persons to see the kind of reaction this
    combination had in the organism. Some of the condemned could
    speak German. They were told that the experiments were neither
    dangerous nor painful, and that by taking part they would at
    least put off their execution. Thereupon they all volunteered.
    Dr. Ding chose three of them. They were transferred to Block 46.
    There they were given a dose of pervitin and a subcutaneous
    injection of a soporific. Then they had to go to bed. They fell
    asleep. Their sleep was very restless. One of them slept for 20
    hours. The others awoke a little earlier * * *.”

Then he says that none of them showed the symptoms which Koehler had
shown, and that the experiment was considered completed. In the last
sentence of the next paragraph he says, “Therefore, I told Dr. Ding that
he should not make any more experiments, and I reported this to
Gruppenfuehrer Mueller.” I shall read the last paragraph in another
connection.

According to the affidavit of Dr. Morgen, Mueller ordered Ding to carry
out the experiment at Buchenwald. Did you receive a report on this
experiment?

A. No, I did not receive a report on it.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

MR. HARDY: Prior to the afternoon recess, Doctor, we were discussing the
phenol problem. Now, in this connection, did you at any time propose
experiments to be conducted at Buchenwald concerning the tolerance of
serum or sera containing phenol? That is, did you propose that in 1942
or 1943 at any time?

DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY: No. No such suggestions were made and they were not
necessary, because in Germany every serum contains phenol. In the German
serum industry there is no serum produced without phenol. I am speaking
of the sera for therapeutic purposes, not vaccines.

Q. Then at no time did you even propose that experiments be conducted to
determine the tolerance of sera containing phenol; is that what you say?

A. No. I never suggested that.

Q. Are you sure, Doctor?

A. Yes.

MR. HARDY: At this time, your Honor, I offer Document NO-1198 as
Prosecution Exhibit 466, for identification. This is a letter dated
Berlin, 24 August 1944. Subject: Service of experiments. It has
reference-file indexes, addressed to the chief hygienist on the staff of
the Reich Physician SS and Police, Berlin-Zehlendorf:

    “Dear Mrugowsky,

    “I am able to inform you that the Reich Leader SS has approved
    today the series of experiments proposed by you.

    “1. Specific therapy with typhus.

    “2. Tolerance of sera containing phenol.

    “I agree that both series of experiments in the department for
    typhus and virus research of the Hygienic Institute of the
    Waffen SS in Weimar-Buchenwald should be carried out, and
    request that I be informed of the course of the findings,
    perhaps through intermediary reports.”

       “By order of Grawitz.”

The signature is “NICOLAI”.

Q. Now this states that the Reich Leader SS has approved a series of
experiments proposed by you and the experiments may be carried out in
Buchenwald. You stated that you never proposed experiments to determine
the tolerance of sera containing phenol. Now do you maintain, Doctor,
that you never initiated any experimentation to determine the tolerance
of sera containing phenol?

A. Yes. The connection here is something quite different. I shall
discuss point two first.

I have already said that in Germany there were no sera without phenol.
In connection with this phenol question in German serum, I informed
Grawitz about the question which is being discussed here—Killian and
Schreiber were present—and I told him that industry should try to
produce sera without phenol, as the French serum industry had been doing
for some time. I knew that suggestions to that effect had been sent to
the industry, but that the German serum industry had refused, during the
war, to effect any such basic change in its production because it was
not in a position to obtain the necessary special apparatus, filters,
etc. I therefore told Grawitz that in serum therapy for ordinary
diseases—I was thinking primarily of diphtheria, where large quantities
of serum were used at the time in the therapy against diphtheria once it
had broken out, because the highly concentrated serum was no longer
available in necessary quantities—I told him that in the case of such
diseases one should watch to see whether injury from phenol might
result. I told him also that it would be desirable to know whether serum
without phenol would definitely prevent such shock. I also remember that
this point too had connection with the fact that we had negotiated with
the Behring Works for the production of serum frequently in small
quantities in order to use it, and to compare it with other serum. If I
remember correctly this involved diphtheria serum, that is the serum
which is used most in Germany. The comparison was to be made of symptoms
following the administration of the usual antidiphtheria serum
containing phenol on children, and it was to be noted whether the
symptoms would appear; and the symptoms following the administration of
serum free of phenol were also to be noted. This was what Grawitz meant
here, and he called that a series of experiments. I might point out that
this expressed series of experiments in this case cannot refer to
artificial infection, because it is not possible to have a human being
artificially infected with diphtheria serum.

Q. Doctor, after receiving this confirmation of your proposals to
perform experiments as outlined in this letter, you must have issued
orders in that regard. Now to whom did you issue those orders?

A. No. I did not issue any orders. In my opinion this concerns
activities of some civilian hospitals; for among the troops, and in
concentration camps, we did not have any diphtheria patients.

Q. Just a moment, Doctor. But it is said in this letter that Grawitz
agrees that these experiments can be carried out in the Department for
Typhus and Virus Research of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS in
Weimar-Buchenwald. Did you or did you not carry out these experiments in
Weimar-Buchenwald?

A. No.

Q. Never issued any orders to carry out such experiments to Ding, for
instance?

A. I have already explained what this series of experiments means. It is
possible that I suggested, for example, that he was to vaccinate one
child with one kind of serum and another child with another serum. That
is possible; I don’t remember about that. But to try out serum
containing phenol on human beings, that I did not order. * * *

-----

[80] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 27, 28,
31 Mar and 2, 3 Apr 1947, pp. 5000-5244, 5334-5464.

                 15. EXPERIMENTS FOR MASS STERILIZATION

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Gebhardt, Rudolf Brandt, Mrugowsky,
Poppendick, Brack, Pokorny, and Oberheuser were charged with special
responsibility for and participation in criminal conduct involving
sterilization experiments (par. 6 (I) of the indictment). In the course
of the trial the prosecution withdrew this charge in the case of the
defendants Mrugowsky and Oberheuser. On this charge the defendants
Gebhardt, Rudolf Brandt, and Brack were convicted, and the defendants
Karl Brandt, Poppendick, and Pokorny were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the experiments for mass
sterilization is contained in its closing brief against the defendant
Rudolf Brandt. An extract from this brief is set forth below on pages
695 to 702. A corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on
these experiments has been selected from the final plea for the
defendant Gebhardt and closing brief for the defendant Pokorny. It
appears below on pages 702 to 708. This argumentation is followed by
selections from the evidence on pages 710 to 738.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

           _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT
                             RUDOLF BRANDT_

                      _Sterilization Experiments_

By 1941 it was the accepted policy of the Third Reich to exterminate the
Jewish population of Germany and the occupied countries.[81] Because of
the pressing need for laborers, sterilization of Jews able to work was
considered as an alternative to outright extermination. (_NO-205, Pros.
Ex. 163._)

In order to ascertain cheap and fast working methods for sterilization,
experimentation on concentration camp inmates by means of drugs
(_NO-036, Pros. Ex. 143_), injection of an irritating solution (_NO-212,
Pros. Ex. 173_) and X-rays and surgical operation (_Tr. pp. 556-9_) were
carried out on a large scale. Brandt not only had full knowledge of
these experiments, but collaborated actively in all of them.

The purpose of the sterilization experiments is well described by Brandt
in his own affidavit:

    “Himmler was extremely interested in the development of a cheap
    and rapid sterilization method which could be used against
    enemies of Germany, such as the Russians, Poles, and Jews. One
    hoped thereby not only to defeat the enemy but to exterminate
    him. The capacity for work of the sterilized persons could be
    exploited by Germany, while the danger of propagation would be
    eliminated. As this mass sterilization was part of Himmler’s
    racial theory, particular time and care were devoted to these
    sterilization experiments. Surgical sterilization was of course
    known in Germany and applied; this included castration. For mass
    application, however, this procedure was considered as too slow
    and too expensive. It was further desired that a procedure be
    found which would result in sterilization that was not
    immediately noticeable.” (_NO-440, Pros. Ex. 141._)

Sterilization experiments in order to ascertain the efficacy of a drug
known as caladium seguinum (Schweigrohr) were suggested to Himmler by
the defendant Pokorny in October 1941. Pokorny reported that Dr. Madaus
had found, as a result of his research on medical sterilization of
animals, that caladium seguinum produced sterility in animals when
administered orally or by injection. Pokorny further stated in his
letter that:

    “* * * the immense importance of this drug in the present fight
    of our people occurred to me. _If, on the basis, of this
    research, it were possible to produce a drug which after a
    relatively short time effects an imperceptible sterilization on
    human beings, then we would have a new powerful weapon at our
    disposal._ The thought alone that the 3 million Bolsheviks, at
    present German prisoners, could be sterilized so that they could
    be used as laborers but be prevented from reproduction, opens
    the most far reaching perspectives.”

He therefore advocated immediate research on human beings in order to
determine the dose and length of treatment, the cultivation of the plant
caladium seguinum in hothouses, and chemical research in order to
produce the drug synthetically on a large scale. (_NO-035, Pros. Ex.
142._)

Himmler agreed to Pokorny’s suggestions and requested Pohl, on 10 March
1942, to contact Dr. Madaus and to “offer him possibilities for doing
research in cooperation with the Reich Physician SS (Grawitz) on
criminals who would have to be sterilized in any case.” He further
ordered that the intended plan of research should be submitted to him.
It was the defendant Rudolf Brandt who forwarded a copy of this letter
to Grawitz (_NO-036, Pros. Ex. 143_) and furnished him, on 20 April,
with a copy of Pokorny’s report and information on the publications of
Madaus concerning medicinal sterilization of animals. (_NO-037, Pros.
Ex. 146._)

Brandt’s office submitted Madaus’ report on the studies of experiments
on animals to SS Obergruppenfuehrer Heydrich, Chief of the Security
Police and SD. The letter of transmittal, dated 23 April 1942, bears the
same file number as Himmler’s letter to Pohl (752/5) and refers
expressly to “the question of sterilization by medicine.” (_NO-047,
Pros. Ex. 145._)

In June 1942 Brandt requested a report from Pohl, Chief of the WVHA, as
to the progress of the preparation for experiments. (_NO-038, Pros. Ex.
147._) Pohl reported on 3 June 1942 that since “Schweigrohr,” from which
caladium seguinum was derived, grew only in North America and could not
be exported in adequate quantities, attempts to grow the plant from seed
cultivated in hothouses had been made by Dr. Koch of the Biological
Institute of the Madaus Works. These attempts had been successful, but
the process of growing the plant and developing the drug was not speedy
enough and the yield not sufficient to permit experimentation on a
_large scale_. In order to remove these difficulties, he said that it
would be necessary to build a larger hothouse. (_NO-046a, Pros. Ex.
148._) On 11 June, Brandt advised Pohl that he had informed Himmler of
his letter and that Himmler wanted Pohl to see to it that a large
hothouse was placed at Dr. Koch’s disposal as soon as possible as
Himmler considered the experiments extremely important. Brandt also
asked Pohl for further reports in the matter. (_NO-046b, Pros. Ex.
149._) Only eight days later Brandt himself had a conference with Pohl
in which, among other things, he informed Pohl of Himmler’s request to
have the ingredients of caladium seguinum thoroughly investigated to
determine whether equally effective ingredients could be found in plants
more easily accessible. Brandt requested that the work of Dr. Koch
should be carried out to the fullest extent. He informed Pohl that
experiments should be conducted in concentration camps with the amount
of the drug then available. Pohl agreed to take the necessary steps at
once. (_NO-044, Pros, Ex. 150._) Department IV-B-4 of the Reich Security
Main Office, the agency which was in charge of the solution of the
Jewish question[82] was informed by a subordinate of Brandt about
Madaus’ research work and requested to collaborate closely with Pohl in
this matter. (_NO-050, Pros. Ex. 151._) A copy of this letter was
forwarded to the defendant Rudolf Brandt. (_NO-051, Pros. Ex. 152._)

The Deputy Gauleiter of Gau Lower Danube (Lower Austria), SS
Obergruppenfuehrer Gerland, informed Himmler on 24 August 1942 that the
Director of the Office for Racial Policy in that province, Dr.
Fehringer, had examined the question of mass sterilization and, in this
connection, had come across Dr. Madaus’ studies on medicinal
sterilization with caladium seguinum. For reasons similar to those
suggested by the defendant Pokorny (_NO-035, Pros. Ex. 142_), Gerland
advocated experimentation on inmates of the gypsy camp of Lackenbach in
Gau Lower Danube. Gerland pointed out that if these experiments were
successful, as was expected, it would be possible to sterilize
practically unlimited numbers of people in the shortest time and in the
simplest way conceivable. (_NO-039, Pros. Ex. 153._)

It was the defendant Rudolf Brandt who took the matter up and informed
Gerland on 29 August of the steps which had already been taken in
respect to experiments with caladium seguinum. From Brandt’s letter, it
is apparent that Himmler was not present at that time. Brandt took care
of this matter on his own initiative and informed Gerland that Pohl and
Grawitz were in charge of the experiments. He requested information from
Gerland whether Dr. Fehringer had caladium seguinum available and what
means for the procurement of this plant the latter would suggest.
(_NO-040, Pros. Ex. 154._) Copies of Gerland’s letter were forwarded by
Brandt to Pohl and Grawitz. On 7 September 1942, Pohl gave Gerland
further details and informed him that he and Dr. Lolling were personally
supervising the experiments. Pohl, in turn, sent copies of this letter
to Rudolf Brandt and Grawitz. In the covering letter to Brandt, Pohl
informed him that he had been to the Madaus Works to convince himself of
the progress of the experiments and that Dr. Lolling would cooperate in
them. An agreement had been reached with Madaus “to transfer the
experiments to our concentration camps as soon as possible.” (_NO-041,
Pros. Ex. 156._)

On 14 October 1942, Gerland wrote to Rudolf Brandt and informed him of
the letter he had received from Pohl. He stated that he considered Dr.
Fehringer’s suggestion to use inmates of the gypsy camp of Lackenbach as
obsolete, as Pohl had informed him that Lolling was already
collaborating with the Biological Institute of Madaus. He further
advised Brandt that Fehringer was of the opinion that it was quite
possible to produce caladium seguinum chemically or have the plant
cultivated in hothouses to an extent which would be sufficient for
experimental purposes. He also suggested collaboration between Lolling
and Fehringer. (_NO-043, Pros. Ex. 157._) Brandt’s reply of 25 October
reveals that he, on his own initiative in Himmler’s absence, agreed to
the collaboration between Fehringer and Lolling. (_NO-049, Pros. Ex.
159._) Brandt sent copies of Gerland’s letter of 14 October (_NO-043,
Pros. Ex. 157_) and his reply (_NO-049, Pros. Ex. 159_) to Pohl. In his
covering letter to Pohl he expressed the conviction that in spite of the
fact that he could not consult Himmler, he was convinced that the latter
would certainly welcome experiments to produce caladium seguinum
synthetically. He asked Pohl to arrange for a contact between Lolling
and Fehringer. (_NO-048, Pros. Ex. 158._)

There is no reasonable doubt that the sterilization experiments with
caladium seguinum were, in fact, carried out on concentration camp
inmates. Himmler, who was the highest authority to decide such
questions, not only gave his consent to these experiments (_NO-036,
Pros. Ex. 143_) but considered them “extremely important” (_NO-046b,
Pros. Ex. 149_) and requested that they should be carried out in the
concentration camps _in any case_. (_NO-044, Pros. Ex. 150._) Pohl, who
was in charge of the administration of the concentration camps, agreed
upon the request of Brandt to take the necessary steps immediately.
(_NO-044, Pros. Ex. 150._) There can be no doubt that Department IV-B-4
of the Reich Security Main Office, which was charged with the solution
of the Jewish question, was informed about Madaus’ research work for the
purpose of furnishing the necessary Jewish victims for the experiments.
The collaboration of Dr. Lolling, who was the doctor in charge of all
concentration camps, can only be explained in connection with
experimentation in these camps. This is also clear from Gerland’s letter
to Brandt:

    “SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl has informed me that _the doctor of
    his Main Office_ is already collaborating with the Madaus
    Biological Institute for research on the effects of caladium
    seguinum, so that the suggestion of my District Main Office
    Leader, Dr. Fehringer, _becomes obsolete_.” [Emphasis added.]
    (_NO-043, Pros. Ex. 157._)

It can only be concluded that Pohl and Lolling carried out the
experiments in concentration camps as was agreed upon between them,
Himmler, Brandt, and Madaus. (_NO-043, Pros. Ex. 157._) Moreover, Brandt
himself admitted in his affidavit that experiments with caladium
seguinum on human beings were performed in concentration camps:

    “As result of Pokorny’s suggestion experiments were conducted
    upon concentration camp prisoners in order to test the effect of
    the drug. Simultaneously all efforts were made to cultivate the
    plant in large quantities. Oswald Pohl, Chief of the Economic
    and Administrative Main Office, took a personal interest in this
    matter. Hothouses were used, with a certain amount of success,
    to cultivate this plant, and the experiments were continued.”
    (_NO-440, Pros. Ex. 141._)

On 30 May 1942, Dr. Clauberg wrote to Himmler asking his support on
sterilization experiments on female concentration camp inmates.
(_NO-211, Pros. Ex. 169._) On 4 June the defendant Poppendick forwarded
to Rudolf Brandt a list of doctors who were authorized to carry out
sterilization. Clauberg is listed among these doctors. (_NO-214, Pros.
Ex. 168._) On 7 and 8 July, a conference took place between Himmler,
Gebhardt, Gluecks, and Clauberg. The topic of discussion was the
sterilization of Jewesses. Clauberg was promised by Himmler that the
Auschwitz concentration camp would be placed at his disposal for
experiments on human beings. He was assigned the task of performing
experiments to test a method of sterilizing persons without their
knowledge. He was ordered to report on this matter as soon as possible
so that measures could be taken “for the practical realization of the
sterilizations on a larger scale”. It was suggested that Hohlfelder be
consulted on the sterilization of men by X-rays. The participants in the
conference were admonished that these experiments were a matter of
utmost secrecy. Rudolf Brandt denied having been present at this
conference. Be that as it may, one of the two file memoranda which
reveal complete knowledge of all details discussed in this conference
was dictated by Brandt (_NO-215, Pros. Ex. 172_), and the other was
signed by him. (_NO-216, Pros. Ex. 170._)

On 10 July 1942, Rudolf Brandt wrote a letter to Clauberg in which he
informed him of the details of his assignment and the plans for the
execution of the experiments. Clauberg was ordered to report to Himmler
on how long it would take to sterilize, a thousand Jewesses by his
method. It was suggested that Clauberg should contact Pohl and a camp
physician of the Ravensbrueck concentration camp in order to perform
there his sterilization experiments. Brandt stated further:

    “Thorough experiments should be conducted to investigate the
    effect of the sterilization, largely in a way that you could
    find out after a certain time, which would have to be _fixed,
    perhaps by X-rays_, what kind of changes have taken place. In
    some cases a practical experiment might be arranged by locking
    up a Jewess and a Jew together for a certain period and then
    seeing what results are achieved.

    “I ask you _to let me know your opinion about my letter for the
    information of the Reich Leader SS_.” [Emphasis added.]
    (_NO-213, Pros. Ex. 171._)

Copies of this letter were sent by Brandt to Pohl, Grawitz, SS
Sturmbannfuehrer Koegel of the Economic and Administrative Main Office,
and to Gruppenfuehrer Mueller of the Reich Security Main Office. On 7
June 1943, Clauberg was able to report, on the basis of his experiments,
that it would be possible to sterilize several hundred, if not a
thousand, per day by his methods. He stated that sterilization could be
“performed by a single injection made from the entrance of the uterus in
the course of the usual customary gynecological examination”. (_NO-212,
Pros. Ex. 173._)

The sterilization experiments of Clauberg were, in fact, carried out in
the Auschwitz concentration camp. Brandt communicated with Clauberg on
this matter again on 19 June and 22 July 1943. While these two letters
are not available, it is clear from Clauberg’s reply to Brandt, dated 6
August, that these communications were reminders to Clauberg to expedite
his experimentation. In his reply, Clauberg stated:

    “I really do need the _second X-ray installation—I can give you
    the explanation only by word of mouth—at any rate the
    probability exists that even more of the installations will be
    needed later on_ (_it depends on, the application of my results
    the moment these are determined_). For I can get the
    installation without further difficulties, that is, it is
    ‘_waiting_’ for me—_really I have got it already_!

    “I had an opportunity _to acquire one myself_ and I quickly laid
    hands on it, and the installation has been set up for some
    weeks. But what I care for is the following:

    “_I urgently need this installation here in Koenigshuette for my
    contrary (positive) research. But I cannot spare it in Auschwitz
    until I get a second installation from the Waffen SS._ If I may
    tell you something between ourselves—the fact is that I will
    _be able to replace my own existing installation provided the
    Reich Leader SS will give me his approval_. I would not bother
    either him or you with this _unless it were really necessary_.”
    (_NO-210, Pros. Ex. 174._)

Brandt himself admitted in his affidavit that Clauberg did carry out
sterilization experiments in the Auschwitz concentration camp on a large
scale. He stated:

    “Dr. Clauberg developed further a method for the sterilization
    of women. This method was based upon the injection of an
    irritating solution into the uterus. Clauberg conducted
    widespread experiments on Jewish women and gypsies in the
    Auschwitz concentration camp. Several thousand women were
    sterilized by Clauberg in Auschwitz.” (_NO-440, Pros. Ex. 141._)

Sterilization of Jews by means of X-rays was suggested to Himmler by the
defendant Brack in the spring of 1941. (_NO-426, Pros. Ex. 160._)
Himmler requested Brack to investigate with some of the physicians who
were active in the euthanasia program, the possibility of sterilization
which would keep the victims unaware of their terrible fate. (_Tr. p.
7484._) On 28 March 1941, Brack forwarded to Himmler a report of the
results of experiments concerning X-ray castrations in which he stated
that mass sterilization by means of X-rays could be carried out without
difficulty. Brack estimated that with twenty X-ray installations,
sterilization of 3,000 to 4,000 victims could be carried out daily.
(_NO-203, Pros. Ex. 161._) On 12 May 1941 a subordinate of Brandt, SS
Sturmbannfuehrer Tiefenbacher, acknowledged receipt of Brack’s report
and sent a copy to the Chief of the Security Police and SD, Heydrich.
(_NO-204, Pros. Ex. 162._)

The invasion of Russia began in the summer of 1941 and Brack’s proposal
was not acted on immediately, but on 23 June 1942, when Germany appeared
to be on the verge of victory, Brack again wrote to Himmler suggesting
the sterilization of Jews who were able to work. Jews unable to work
were being exterminated. (_NO-205, Pros. Ex. 163._) Himmler wrote to
Brack on 11 August 1942 that further experiments to ascertain the
effectiveness of X-ray sterilization should be carried out on
concentration camp inmates by expert physicians who were to be furnished
by Brack’s chief, Bouhler. Rudolf Brandt sent copies of this letter to
Pohl and Grawitz in order to put Himmler’s decision into effect.
(_NO-206, Pros. Ex. 164._) Brack ordered his deputy, Blankenburg, to
contact the chiefs of the concentration camps for this purpose.
Blankenburg’s letter, which communicated this fact to Himmler, was
received by Brandt’s office on 15 August 1942. (_NO-207, Pros. Ex.
165._) As a result, experiments on inmates in the Auschwitz
concentration camp were carried out by Dr. Schumann. (_NO-208, Pros. Ex.
166._) One of the victims of these atrocious experiments who, after
having been subjected to severe doses of X-ray in the genital area, was
castrated by operation in order to determine the effects of the X-ray.
(_Tr. p. 541._) At least 100 involuntary experimental subjects—Poles,
Russians, French, and prisoners of war—were used for these experiments.
Only young, well-built inmates, in the best of health, were selected for
them. (_Tr. pp. 556-7._) Nearly all the victims of these experiments
were exterminated as the severe X-ray burns made them incapable of
working. (_Tr. p. 557; Tr. p. 543._) Brandt admitted in his pretrial
affidavit that “sterilization experiments were likewise conducted with
X-rays. Dr. Schumann applied this procedure in Auschwitz and sterilized
a number of men.” (_NO-440, Pros. Ex. 141._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

               _EXTRACT FROM THE FINAL PLEA FOR DEFENDANT
                              GEBHARDT_[83]

                 *        *        *        *        *

                    _The Sterilization Experiments_

The defendant Gebhardt is also accused of special responsibility for
these experiments and of participation in them. The evidence, however,
proved that this contention of the indictment is not true. First of all
it should be pointed out that the life work of the defendant Gebhardt as
a physician was based on the principle of helping the physically and
mentally affected and to find cures for restoring them as fully
qualified members of human society. That was the reason for the
establishment of the training camp Hohenaschau in the lower Alps of
Bavaria, which was repeatedly mentioned in the evidence. He also made
this principle the finding principle of his work as chief physician of
the hospital at Hohenlychen. The defendant Gebhardt did not hold the
opinion that a sound population policy could be realized by negative
measures only; on the contrary, he was convinced that the faculties of
physically and mentally handicapped patients ought to be improved by new
methods of treatment and their efficiency thus increased. He applied
these principles not only in his rehabilitation surgery dealing with
injuries but also in the cure of hereditary physical defects. I am here
referring to the affidavits of Professor Dr. Iseling, Professor Dr.
Buerkle de la Camp, and of the Generalarzt, Dr. von Heuss. (_Gebhardt 7,
Gebhardt Ex. 1_; _Gebhardt 8, Gebhardt Ex. 2_; _Gebhardt 9, Gebhardt Ex.
3_.) I further refer to the affidavits presented in court as exhibits in
volume II of my document books. All these witnesses’ affidavits in
connection with the defendant’s own statements make it obvious that his
medical attitude was not based on the principle of negative selection
and the destruction of unworthy lives or the prevention of propagation
of such human beings but, on the contrary, that he was led by the
conviction that these human beings must be helped insofar as medical
science was able to help them at all. In their presentation of evidence,
the prosecution presented documents concerned with the sterilization
experiments. It is obvious from these documents that three different
methods of quick and simple sterilization had been considered.

The first experiments were supposed to be carried out with caladium
seguinum. The documents presented in this connection proved clearly that
the defendant Gebhardt had nothing to do with this matter and that he
apparently had no knowledge of it. May I, as a matter of precaution,
point out the following: to start with, I wish to refer to the letter of
Reich Leader SS Himmler to SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl of 10 March 1942,
which proves that the experiments with caladium seguinum were supposed
to be carried out on criminals whose sterilization had been ordered
before that anyway. (_NO-036, Pros. Ex. 143._) In this connection I
should like to point out that the German Penal Code expressly provides
in certain cases for compulsory sterilization and castration of certain
types of criminals. The experiments in themselves, therefore, need not
be contrary to the law. From the other documents presented by the
prosecution it is, however, to be seen that the plans to carry out
sterilizations with caladium seguinum were dropped. It turned out that a
cultivation of this plant, or at least of a quantity adequate for
experimental purposes was impossible. From the evidence presented by the
prosecution it is obvious that it only came to preparatory measures
which, according to generally acknowledged principles, cannot be
considered punishable.

The second part of the documents deals with sterilization by X-rays. The
prosecution presented no evidence from which it can be concluded that
the defendant Gebhardt had knowledge of this matter.

Finally, the third part of the documents deals with sterilization
experiments conforming with the methods of Professor Dr. Clauberg. From
Professor Dr. Clauberg’s letter to the Reich Leader SS Himmler dated 30
May 1942 presented by the prosecution as evidence, it is obvious that
the initiative for these experiments and the methods used originated
exclusively with Professor Clauberg himself. In this connection, it must
be pointed out that it was quite obvious that Professor Clauberg’s
intention was not only to develop the simplest possible method of
sterilization, but that he aimed at the establishment of an
all-inclusive “Research Institute for Propagation Biology” with due
consideration for the demands of a positive population policy. This is
demonstrated among other things by the content of Document NO-211,
Prosecution Exhibit 169, and the plan for this research institute
attached to that document.

In the course of evidence and referring to the sterilization
experiments, the prosecution has submitted two file notes of the
defendant Rudolf Brandt (_NO-216, Pros. Ex. 170_; _NO-215, Pros. Ex.
172_) which refer to a discussion with the Reich Leader SS on 7 July
1942 and 8 July 1942, in which the defendant Gebhardt had participated.
The evidence has shown that these are two file notes which refer to the
same discussion. The evidence, however, has further demonstrated that
this was the very discussion during which the conditions were
established under which the sulfanilamide experiments were to be carried
out. This was the reason why the defendant Gebhardt took part in this
discussion at all. The defendant Rudolf Brandt who had written these
file notes did not participate in the discussion, and obviously the file
notes were made due to some remarks made by Reich Leader SS Himmler to
the defendant Brandt following the discussion.

The fact that the defendant Gebhardt had nothing whatsoever to do with
these sterilization experiments is also demonstrated by another document
which was also introduced as evidence by the prosecution. I refer in
this connection to the letter which the defendant Brandt by order of the
Reich Leader SS sent to Professor Clauberg on 10 July 1942, that is, a
few days after the discussion mentioned. This letter has been submitted
to the Tribunal by the prosecution. (_NO-213, Pros. Ex. 171._) Copies of
this letter were sent to SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl, to SS
Gruppenfuehrer Grawitz in his capacity as Reich Physician SS and to two
other offices, but not to the defendant Gebhardt. There can be no doubt
that a copy of this letter would have been sent to this defendant, too,
if his participation in Clauberg’s experiments would have been decided
upon or even considered in any form. This seems to be the more
impossible, apart from the reasons already given, since the defendant
Gebhardt at no time concerned himself with sterilization problems. In
this connection it is necessary to refer briefly to the affidavit of the
defendant Rudolf Brandt, of 19 October 1946, which has been introduced
by the prosecution and in which it is asserted among other things that
“Dr. Karl Gebhardt apparently performed surgical sterilization at the
Ravensbrueck camp.” (_NO-440, Pros. Ex. 141._) By the wording of this
affidavit it is already demonstrated that here only an assumption is
stated. The defendant Rudolf Brandt could not state any facts on which
he could base this assumption. In view of the other result of the
evidence, and above all because of Rudolf Brandt’s own statements, no
substantial value can be attached to this affidavit. In these
circumstances it will be useless to discuss this question any further,
especially also in view of the fact that surgical sterilization offers
no problems and that it is difficult to understand what reasons the
defendant Gebhardt could have had to work on this field which was quite
foreign to him.

                 *        *        *        *        *

             _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT
                                POKORNY_

                 *        *        *        *        *

Sterilization with caladium seguinum is impossible as is shown by the
following opinions:

1. Opinion of Dr. August Wilhelm Forst of the University of Munich.
(_Pokorny 20, Pokorny Ex. 28._) This opinion states:

    “Apart from all these restrictions it appears to me that the
    whole idea cannot claim to have any actual significance, since
    it would hardly have been possible to import tropical plants in
    large numbers to Europe during the war and to work out a
    rational method for production of the effective substance as
    well as the initiation of animal experiments on a broad basis.
    This would have required disproportionally more time than was
    available up to the time when the war was lost.”

2. Opinion of Professor Dr. Helmuth Weese, Director of the
Pharmacological Institute of the Medical Academy in Duesseldorf.
(_Pokorny 19, Pokorny Ex. 27._) This opinion states:

    “Asked whether it can be assumed that after studying the work of
    G. Madaus and Dr. E. Koch, ‘Studies in Animal Experiments
    concerning Medical Sterilization by Caladium Seguinum’ in the
    Journal of Experimental Medicine, page 68, 1941, a doctor can
    come to the conclusion that he can sterilize human beings with
    caladium seguinum, I have the following comment:

    “In the research mentioned it was proved that the authors
    managed to sterilize rats by feeding them with the juice of
    caladium seguinum. The proof is not only given by pairing
    experiments but by anatomical examinations. In order to achieve
    this sterilization of female as well as of male rats weighing
    150-180 grams, daily doses of ½ cubic centimeter for each rat
    had to be administered 30-50 times and 40-90 times,
    respectively, without assuring a certain result. Applied to a
    human being weighing 70 kilograms this would mean that 200 grams
    of juice would have to be administered daily.

    “It is also proved in these examinations that a large number of
    the animals treated died from the poisonous effects of the
    caladium juice. The juice has therefore no specific action on
    the reproductive system. It is still completely unknown if these
    injurious complications are caused by the main substance of the
    juice or any other ingredients.

    “Such nonspecific damage to the reproductive system in similar
    ways but with different substances is also observed in human
    beings, for example as result of serious abuse of nicotine,
    morphine, etc., where it also occurs only together with most
    severe harm to other functions.

    “The question arises for every doctor if these experiments on
    rats can be applied to human beings at all. Madaus and Koch
    reject them on principle because they merely want to determine
    if the layman’s belief about sterilizing men with large amounts
    of the caladium extract can be proved in animal experiments.

    “A prerequisite for the use of the caladium extract on human
    beings in our countries would be the cultivation in central
    Europe of the South American caladium. This appears extremely
    improbable to any student of natural science with the least
    experience. Even if it could be cultivated, this would not prove
    that it would produce the same effective substances in
    sufficient quantities in our moderate climate.

    “Because of the uncertain effect of the caladium extract, its
    high toxicity, the doubts as to its successful cultivation and
    use in our moderate climate, I consider it extremely improbable
    that even a doctor with only average intelligence could in
    seriousness embark on an experiment to sterilize human beings
    with caladium extract. No other convincing foundation on which
    the problem under discussion might be based besides the work of
    Madaus and Koch is known to me.”

3. Opinion of Dr. Friedrich Jung, lecturer at the Pharmacological
Institute of Wuerzburg University. (_Pokorny 30, Pokorny Ex. 30._) This
opinion states:

    “Summary: The findings of Madaus and Koch in their work ‘Studies
    in Animal Experiments concerning Medical Sterilization by
    Caladium Seguinum’ are certainly valid, but they do not prove
    anything with regard to a specific sterilizing effect of
    caladium seguinum; they are rather to be accepted as part of the
    general poisonous effect of the caladium extract. One can
    therefore sterilize with caladium or achieve the effect of
    castration, but not more and not less than one can sterilize by
    hunger, vitamin deficiency, infections, psychic insults, etc.
    The experiments of Madaus and Koch are in no way conclusive with
    regard to human beings. The symptoms on the sexual glands of the
    experimental animals are only a reversible partial symptom of a
    long lasting, almost fatal, serious injury to the entire
    organism, and have no connection with an actual sterilization or
    castration. Dr. Pokorny’s proposals based upon certain
    completely unfounded conclusions drawn from Madaus’ work can be
    recognized even by slightly educated men as quite apparently
    utopian.”

4. The expert witness of the prosecution, Dr. Friedrich Scheiffart,
writes (_NO-3347, Pros. Ex. 546_):

    “The experimental sterilization by caladium seguinum is a
    scientifically interesting but, in practice, an unimportant
    addition to the group of pharmacological methods of
    sterilization, which without exception in their totality have
    not gone beyond a certain theoretical interest.”

The prosecution itself states (_Tr. p. 525_):

    “The prosecution admits openly that it cannot prove that
    sterilization was actually brought about through this drug. We
    have not been able to find anybody who has been actually
    sterilized by it. But we maintain that it is nevertheless a
    crime. We strongly hope that no permanent sterilization has been
    caused in any case with this drug. However it is fortunate that
    the plants from which this substance was received could not be
    cultivated to a greater extent.”

_Final Summary of the Defense_:

Nothing could or did occur with the caladium plant as the prosecution
admits and as has completely been proved by the expert opinions.

In an affidavit by Karl Tauboeck (_NO-3963, Pros. Ex. 528_) the
prosecution referred to the idea that sterilization with caladium
seguinum is not an ideal one, but a matter which lies well within the
bounds of possibility.

The defense on the other hand contends that this affidavit is lacking in
credibility because of the expert opinions. The expert witness of the
defense, university lecturer Dr. Friedrich Jung, in his enclosure to the
expert opinion (_Pokorny 30, Pokorny Ex. 30_) comments as follows on
Karl Tauboeck’s affidavit:

    “Concerning the person—

    “Dr. Tauboeck is, according to his education, a natural
    scientist with additional specialized studies in plant
    chemistry. His medical education is confined to histology,
    physiology, physiological chemistry, immunology, and
    pharmacology. By virtue of his education, he calls himself ‘a
    specialist in this field’, i. e., in the field of medicamental
    sterilization. I should like to stress the fact that the title
    ‘specialist’ in the field of sterilization presupposes
    considerable medical and in particular gynecological knowledge,
    which generally may be acquired only in a complete study of
    medicine or a penetrating study over several years in the
    _materia medica_.

    “The affidavit of Dr. Tauboeck in several places lacks that
    critical attitude which is so necessary in scientific questions,
    especially if they are discussed under oath. Dr. Tauboeck
    states, for example, under point 5, that caladium seguinum was
    used as a means of sterilization by the natives of Brazil. He
    calls this assertion of the Indians, which has been reported in
    literature, a fact. Under point 6 he calls the reports from
    Brazil vague, only to assert literally several lines further on
    that ‘the Brazilian natives have already reached castration
    effects with an arrow wound, i. e., with an intramuscular
    injection’. This assertion is not proved, and is therefore, in
    my opinion, out of place in an affidavit. Furthermore Dr.
    Tauboeck makes a large number of apodictic assertions, for which
    he brings no direct proof whatever and which he tries to
    strengthen with the help of absolutely impermissible
    generalizations of the examples listed under points 7 a-d. Such
    analogical conclusions are not permissible in a serious
    scientific explanation, the more so since also the examples
    brought by him are by no means unobjectionable. Moreover, Dr.
    Tauboeck, under point 8, draws a conclusion from the experiments
    by Madaus and Koch, which can only be based on an insufficient
    knowledge of these experiments. He writes literally: ‘This
    bitter substance was lacking in the plants of the firm Madaus,
    the use of the pressed juice for feeding was accomplished there
    without any irritation of the pharyngeal mucous membranes or the
    tongue.’ According to the evidence on hand, Madaus and Koch
    administered the pressed juice through probing, no doubt in
    order to avoid this very irritation.

    “These findings may be further enlarged upon by attentive
    reading of Dr. Tauboeck’s statement. I, therefore, do not
    consider Dr. Tauboeck to be qualified as a scientific expert in
    this question.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Conclusion of the Defense_:

The affidavit of Karl Tauboeck produced at the end of the case-in-chief
cannot alter the fact that it is impossible to sterilize or castrate
human beings with caladium seguinum.

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
           Pros. Ex.
Doc. No.      No.                Description of Document              Page
NO-3963       528     Extracts from affidavit of Karl Wilhelm          710
                        Friedrich Tauboeck, 18 June 1947, concerning
                        the development of, and experiments with
                        sterilization drugs.
NO-035        142     Letter from Pokorny to Himmler, October 1941,    713
                        concerning a sterilization drug to be used
                        against Germany’s enemies.
NO-036        143     Letter from Himmler, 10 March 1942, to Pohl      714
                        (initiated by Rudolf Brandt) concerning a
                        sterilization drug and suggesting further
                        research on criminals.
NO-038        147     Letter from Rudolf Brandt to Pohl, June 1942,    715
                        transmitting an inquiry by Himmler as to the
                        progress made with experiments for medical
                        sterilization.
NO-046a       148     Letter from Pohl to Himmler, 3 June 1942,        716
                        concerning the development of a
                        sterilization drug by the firm of Dr. Madaus
                        and Co.
NO-046b       149     Letter from Rudolf Brandt to Pohl, 11 June       717
                        1942, asking him on behalf of Himmler to set
                        up a large hothouse for the development of a
                        sterilization drug.
NO-039        153     Letter from Gund to Himmler, 24 August 1942,     717
                        concerning research in medical sterilization
                        and development of sterilization drugs.
NO-203        161     Covering letter from Brack to Himmler, 28        719
                        March 1941, with report on experiments
                        concerning sterilization and castration by
                        X-rays.
NO-205        163     Letter from Brack to Himmler, 23 June 1942,      721
                        proposing sterilization of two to three
                        million Jews.
NO-206        164     Letter from Himmler (countersigned by Rudolf     722
                        Brandt), 11 August 1942, addressed to Brack,
                        concerning Himmler’s interest in
                        sterilization experiments.
NO-208        166     Letter from Blankenburg to Himmler, 29 April     723
                        1944, regarding employment of Dr. Horst
                        Schumann on experiments concerning the
                        influence of X-rays on human genital glands
                        in connection with similar experiments
                        conducted at concentration camp Auschwitz.
NO-211        169     Letter from Professor Clauberg to Himmler, 30    724
                        May 1942 (referring to a letter from Rudolf
                        Brandt), concerning the urgency of research
                        into biological propagation and
                        sterilization without operation, and draft
                        of a “Research Institute for Biological
                        Propagation.”
NO-216        170     Memorandum of Rudolf Brandt, July 1942, on a     728
                        discussion between Himmler, Gebhardt,
                        Gluecks, and Clauberg concerning
                        sterilization experiments conducted on
                        Jewesses.
NO-213        171     Letter from Rudolf Brandt to Clauberg, 10 July   729
                        1942, transmitting instructions of Himmler
                        to perform sterilizations on Jewesses at
                        concentration camp Ravensbrueck.
NO-212        173     Letter from Professor Clauberg to Himmler, 7     730
                        June 1943, reporting on research in
                        connection with the sterilization of women.

                               _Testimony_

Extract from the testimony of the defendant Viktor Brack               732

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-3963
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 528

  EXTRACTS FROM AFFIDAVIT OF KARL WILHELM FRIEDRICH TAUBOECK, 18 JUNE
1947, CONCERNING THE DEVELOPMENT OF, AND EXPERIMENTS WITH STERILIZATION
                                 DRUGS

I, Karl Wilhelm Friedrich Tauboeck, swear, depose, and state:

1. I was born on 21 September 1904 in Josefstadt, Czechoslovakia. I have
been an Austrian citizen all my life. From 1910 to 1915 I attended the
elementary school in Leitmeritz and Pilsen, Czechoslovakia. From 1915 to
1923 I attended the gymnasium (high school) in Pilsen (Czechoslovakia),
Ljubljana (Yugoslavia) and Klosterneuburg (Austria). In June 1923 I
graduated from the Klosterneuburg high school. From 1923 to 1925 I
studied natural science at the University of Vienna, Austria,
specializing in plant physiology and chemistry. In 1925 I studied at
Kiel (Germany), where I devoted myself mainly to problems of marine
biology and bacteriology. From 1926 to 1927 I again studied the
above-mentioned natural science subjects in Vienna (Austria). In
December 1927 I was made Doctor of Philosophy with special distinction.
My thesis dealt with a problem concerning vegetable chemistry—urea in
the plant world.

2. From 1928 to 1929 I was assistant in the Institute of Plant
Physiology of the University of Vienna, Austria. In this capacity I had
to direct the practical studies of the students and was able to carry
out my own research in the field of vegetable chemistry. I also
continued my studies there in the medical faculty of that University, in
several medical subjects, especially in histology, physiology,
physiological chemistry, immunology, and pharmacology. These
above-mentioned studies made it possible for me to be able to carry out
independently tests on the efficacy of drugs in animal experiments.

3. From 1930 to 1945 I was employed as a biochemist and botanist in the
biological laboratory of the I. G. Farbenindustrie A. G. at
Ludwigshafen/Rhine. I specialized there in drugs with particular effects
on the animal and human organisms, respectively. Through this work I
invented various new remedies based on biology. In particular I studied
the question of animal poisons for many years and thus produced a new
remedy for rheumatism. I also worked on the question of the stimulant
from the sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) and similar substances
effective in minimum quantities. During the war years I worked on
biochemical problems concerning agriculture and as a result of my work
produced an improved fertilizer.

The I. G. Farbenindustrie A. G. at Ludwigshafen at Rhine employed
several hundred natural scientists and technicians. Since 1937 I was the
senior specialist in vegetable chemistry there.

4. In the fall of 1942, I was instructed by the director of my
laboratory, Dr. Mueller-Cunradi, to devote my time to research on the
effective substance from the plant caladium seguinum (Schweigrohr). At
the beginning of November 1942, I was sent to Dr. Schamberger of the
Research Institute Grunewald-Berlin for the purpose of obtaining further
information. The Research Institute Grunewald was a cover name for a
camouflaged SS office. The address was Grunewald-Berlin,
Delbrueckstrasse 6. There I was told that this plant was to be used for
sterilizing mental patients. In order to obtain further information
about the progress of experiments with caladium seguinum which had
already taken place, I had to visit the firm Madaus in Dresden-Radebeul,
together with Dr. Schamberger and another SS man. This firm had already
made animal experiments with this plant and published the results in a
medical journal in 1941. I was introduced to the firm Madaus as Dr.
Weiss, so that nobody should know that I was an employee of I. G.
Farben. The senior pharmacologist of the firm Madaus asked us: You must
be a commission from SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl, to which the SS men
replied “yes”. The pharmacologist went on to tell us that a few days
previously Pohl himself had visited the firm Madaus together with
several other people and had mentioned the especial urgency of this
work. Furthermore, while visiting the firm Madaus, I checked all the
equipment and experiments in the course of one day. By careful
examination of sections of mice and rats and of the histological
preparations, I was convinced that the publications of the firm Madaus
were perfectly true. By this examination I, as a specialist in this
field, gained the conviction that sterilization with caladium seguinum
is no Utopia, but something which is quite within the bounds of
possibility. On the return journey from Dresden to Berlin, the SS men
revealed to me that this research was being carried out on the express
order of Reich Leader SS Himmler in order to suppress births among the
eastern nations. After this fact had been revealed to me I was sworn to
secrecy. I was furthermore informed at the Research Institute
Grunewald-Berlin that the first preparations were to be supplied as soon
as possible, as the Reich Leader SS had ordered the testing of the new
method on inmates of concentration camps to take place at once.

5. In order to point out the effectiveness and practical possibility of
using caladium seguinum as a sterilization drug, I would like first of
all to go into the subject of the history of this plant. Before doing
so, however, I would like to add that caladium seguinum is not
considered a sterilization drug in the ordinary sense of the word, but a
castration drug. This is evident from the fact that the experiments
carried out by the firm Madaus have clearly shown that a destruction of
the sexual glands of the experimental animals occurred which is
equivalent to the surgical removal of such glands. Caladium seguinum is
a plant which comes from Brazil. As I know from the literature and the
publications made by the firm Madaus, this plant has already been used
by the Brazilian natives as a means of sterilization of their enemies.
It was administered to the enemies either in food or in arrow wounds. By
this method of injection by arrows, only relatively small portions of
poison gained from caladium seguinum could have been administered, as
the wound produced by arrows may be compared with a large intramuscular
injection. From this fact, as learned from literature, results the
conclusion that this poison, if obtained by the correct process, is
effective even in very small doses. This drug is described in literature
as secret, which shows that the enemy did not know that he was being
sterilized.

6. Inspired by this experience of the Brazilian natives, the firm Madaus
carried out their experiments on animals. The results obtained by the
firm Madaus which I have seen with my own eyes confirm the effectiveness
of caladium seguinum as a means of sterilization for human beings. It
was possible to doubt whether the caladium seguinum was actually
effective according to the first rather vague reports coming from Brazil
before the experiments of the firm Madaus had been carried out. The
experiments of Madaus, however, have eliminated all doubts in this
direction.

                 *        *        *        *        *

11. As a result of all examples and explanations mentioned, I am of the
opinion that mass production of a castrating preparation from caladium
seguinum in Germany or in the German occupied countries is no dream, but
could easily have been put into practice. Another proof of the
harmfulness of the caladium poison is the fact that the Madaus
examinations confirmed beyond doubt the castrative effect of caladium
despite all the shortcomings already described. All this made me realize
at once the criminal character of such research and for this reason did
not carry it out as far as my specific order was concerned. The SS,
however, took a great interest in this matter. I received my orders as
an employee of the I. G. Farbenindustrie from the Chief of the Security
Police, first through the camouflaged office of the Research Institute
Grunewald-Berlin and later direct. I know, however, that the firm Madaus
placed their orders through SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl separately and I
am not acquainted with the development of this matter.

I have read the above statement consisting of seven pages, in German,
and declare it to be the whole truth to my best knowledge and belief. I
was given an opportunity of making alterations and amendments in the
above statement. I have made this statement of my own free will, under
no duress, without promise of reward.

Nuernberg, 18 June 1947.             [Signature] DR. KARL TAUBOECK

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-035
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 142

LETTER FROM POKORNY TO HIMMLER, OCTOBER 1941, CONCERNING A STERILIZATION
               DRUG TO BE USED AGAINST GERMANY’S ENEMIES

To the Reich Commissioner for the Consolidation of German
    Folkdom,
SS H. Himmler, Chief of Police,
Berlin.

I beg you to turn your attention to the following arguments. I have
requested Professor Hoehn to forward this letter to you. I have chosen
this direct way to you in order to avoid the slower process through
channels and the possibility of an indiscretion in regard to the
eventually enormous importance of the ideas presented.

Led by the idea that the enemy must not only be conquered but destroyed,
I feel obliged to present to you, as the Reich Commissioner for the
Consolidation of German Folkdom, the following:

Dr. Madaus published the result of his research on a _medicinal
sterilization_ (both articles are enclosed). Reading these articles, the
immense importance of this drug in the present fight of our people
occurred to me. _If, on the basis of this research, it were possible to
produce a drug which, after a relatively short time, effects an
imperceptible sterilization on human beings, then we would have a new
powerful weapon at our disposal._ The thought alone that the 3 million
Bolsheviks, at present German prisoners, could be sterilized so that
they could be used as laborers but be prevented from reproduction, opens
the most far-reaching perspectives.

Madaus found that the sap of the Schweigrohr (caladium seguinum) when
taken by mouth or given as injection to male and also to female animals,
after a certain time, produces permanent sterility. The illustrations
accompanying the scientific article are convincing.

If my ideas meet your approval, the following course should be taken:

1. Dr. Madaus must not publish any more such articles. (The enemy
listens!)

2. Multiplying the plant. (Easily cultivated in greenhouses!)

[Written notation] Dachau

3. Immediate research on human beings (criminals!) in order to determine
the dose and length of the treatment.

4. Quick research of the constitutional formula of the effective
chemical substance in order to

5. Produce it synthetically if possible.

As German physician and chief physician of the reserves of the German
Wehrmacht, retired [d. R. a. D.], I undertake to keep secret the purpose
as suggested by me in this letter.

       [stamp]                            Heil Hitler!
                                      [Signed] DR. POKORNY
                       Specialist for skin and venereal diseases, M. U.
                         Dr.
Ad. Pokorny
Komotau
Graben 33
Komotau, October 1941

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-036
                                                 PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 143

LETTER FROM HIMMLER, 10 MARCH 1942, TO POHL (INITIALED BY RUDOLF BRANDT)
   CONCERNING A STERILIZATION DRUG AND SUGGESTING FURTHER RESEARCH ON
                               CRIMINALS

The Reich Leader SS
Journal No. 752/5, RF/H.

                                     Fuehrer Headquarters, 10 March 1942
                                                                2 W 1.5.

Dear Pohl,

I read Dr. Pokorny’s very interesting memorandum and Dr. Madaus’
publications on medicinal sterilization. I would ask you to get in touch
with Dr. Madaus and to inform him, on my behalf, that he should not
publish anything else on these questions of medicinal sterilization, and
offer him possibilities of doing research, in cooperation with the Reich
Physician SS, on criminals who would have to be sterilized in any case.

The intended plan of research is, however, to be submitted to me by the
office engaged on the subject.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                               Yours,
                                                    [Signed] H. HIMMLER

A copy is forwarded to the Reich Physician SS, SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr.
Grawitz with request to take cognizance.

   By Order:
                                               [Initial] BR. [BRANDT]
                                                    SS Sturmbannfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-038
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 147

LETTER FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO POHL, JUNE 1942, TRANSMITTING AN INQUIRY BY
      HIMMLER AS TO THE PROGRESS MADE WITH EXPERIMENTS FOR MEDICAL
                             STERILIZATION

The Reich Leader SS
Personal Staff
Journal No. AR/752/5, Bra/Bn.

                                         Fuehrer Headquarters, June 1942
                               Top Secret

SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl
Berlin

Dear Obergruppenfuehrer,

On 10 March 1942, the Reich Leader SS sent you a memorandum written by
Dr. Pokorny and the publication of Dr. Madaus on medicinal
sterilization. In cooperation with the Reich Physician SS, experiments
were to be made accordingly.

The Reich Leader SS inquired today as to how things were progressing. I
would appreciate it if I might have some information soon.

                                                       Heil Hitler
                                                       Yours,
                                                 [Signed] R. BRANDT
                                                 SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-046a
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 148

LETTER FROM POHL TO HIMMLER, 3 JUNE 1942, CONCERNING THE DEVELOPMENT OF
         A STERILIZATION DRUG BY THE FIRM OF DR. MADAUS AND CO.

Chief of SS, Economics and Administrative Main Office
Ch. Po/Ha

                                                     Berlin, 3 June 1942

Subject: Sterilization by means of drugs.
Re: Your letter of 3 October 1942. Journal No. AR. 752/52, RF/H

To the Reich Leader SS
Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Strasse 8

Dear Reich Leader:

In reference to the above matter, I had a conversation today with E.
Koch, Ph. D. and M. D., director of the Biological Institute of Dr.
Madaus and Co., at Dresden-Radebeul.

I advised him of your desire to have publications on this subject
discontinued for the time being. Dr. Koch will comply with your request.

Furthermore, experiments have reached a dead point because the caladium
seguinum grows only in North America and during the war cannot be
imported in adequate quantities. Dr. Koch’s attempts to grow this plant
from seed cultivated in hothouses have been successful, it is true; but
the process is very slow and the yield is not sufficient to permit
carrying on experiments on a large scale.

Dr. Koch is hopeful that this will be remedied if it is possible for us
to obtain permission for him to build a larger hothouse. I promised him
this.

For the time being this is the first and only practical step to promote
the project.

I shall continue reports periodically.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                        [Signed] POHL
                     SS Obergruppenfuehrer and General of the Waffen SS

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-046b
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 149

LETTER FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO POHL, 11 JUNE 1942, ASKING HIM ON BEHALF OF
      HIMMLER TO SET UP A LARGE HOTHOUSE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A
                           STERILIZATION DRUG

The Reich Leader SS
Personal Staff, Diary No. 1230/42, Bra/Bu
                                    Fuehrer’s Headquarters, 11 June 1942
Re: Medical sterilization.
To SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl
Berlin

Dear Obergruppenfuehrer,

I have informed the Reich Leader SS of your letter of 3 June 1942. He
asks you to see to it without fail that a large hothouse is set up as
soon as possible for Dr. Koch. He considers the experiments extremely
important.

The Reich Leader SS asks you to continue to send in further reports.

                                                        Heil Hitler
                                                          [Signed] B.
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-039
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 153

  LETTER FROM GUND TO HIMMLER, 24 AUGUST 1942, CONCERNING RESEARCH IN
      MEDICAL STERILIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF STERILIZATION DRUGS

                                 Secret
The Deputy Gauleiter of Lower Danube [Lower Austria]

                                 Vienna, 9, Wasagasse 10, 24 August 1942
                                                        Ge/Schd—310/42 g

To: The Reich Leader SS Pg. Heinrich Himmler
Berlin SW 1, Prinz Albrecht Strasse 8
Sir,

At the orders of Gauleiter Dr. Jury, his staff have hitherto busied
themselves especially with the problems of population, racial policy,
and antisocial elements. Since the prevention of reproduction by the
congenitally unfit and racially inferior belongs to the duties of our
National Socialist racial and demographic policy, the present Director
of the District Office for Racial Policy, Gauhauptstellenleiter Dr.
Fehringer, has examined the question of sterilization and found that the
methods so far available, castration and sterilization, are not
sufficient in themselves to meet expectations. Consequently, the obvious
question occurred to him whether impotence and sterility could not be
produced in both men and women by the administration of medicine or
injections. So he came to the studies of the Biological Institute of Dr.
Madaus, in Dresden-Radebeul, on animal experiments for medical
sterilization, which became accessible to him through the Madaus Annual
Report, IVth year, 1940, and are of the greatest interest for our
demographic policy. Madaus and Koch found that caladium sequinum used in
homeopathic doses, that is, administered in infinitesimal quantities,
favorably affects impotence, sterility, and frigidity (sexual
indifference), so that clinical and medical research should not proceed
without regard to this fact. It was established by an extensive series
of experiments on rats, rabbits, and dogs that, as the result of the
administration or injection of caladium extract, male animals became
impotent and females barren, and the differences in effect of the
various methods of applying the drug could be seen. From the animal
experiments, it seems that a permanent sterility is liable to result in
male animals and a more temporary one in females.

It is clear that these observations could be of tremendous importance if
alterations of potency or fecundity could also be successfully brought
about in human beings by the administration of a caladium extract.
Research on human beings themselves would, of course, be necessary for
this. The director of my race policy office points out that the
necessary research and human experiments could be undertaken by an
appropriately selected medical staff, basing their work on the Madaus
animal experiments in cooperation with the pharmacological institute of
the Faculty of Medicine of Vienna, on the persons of the inmates of the
gypsy camp of Lackenbach in Lower Danube.

It is quite clear that such research must be handled as a nationally
important secret matter of the most dangerous character, because enemy
propaganda could work tremendous harm all over the world by the
knowledge of such research, should it come by such knowledge.

Since these considerations are only a theory, the fundamental accuracy
of which has already been established by animal experiments and the
possibility of the application of which to human beings is highly
probable, a mere indication only can be given of the prospects of the
possibility of the sterilization of practically unlimited numbers of
people in the shortest time and in the simplest way conceivable.

In this connection, I may perhaps point out that it would surely be
worth while to study the old cults and the knowledge of their priests
concerning the promotion and prevention of human potency and fecundity.
Primitive, primeval populations which are close to nature had, and still
have, a very extensive knowledge of this subject without these things
being known to science. It is known, for instance, that the natives of
South America attempted to destroy the potency of their enemies by
administering caladium seguinum to them.

I should be particularly grateful to you if you would give me your
opinion in this respect when the occasion arises, or even order a
concrete working plan to be submitted to you. Gauleiter Dr. Jury would
personally have approached you with this plan were he not at present
away on a vacation.

                                                     Heil Hitler!
                                                  Yours faithfully,
                                                     [Signed] K. GUND
                                                         SS Oberfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-203
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 161

  COVERING LETTER FROM BRACK TO HIMMLER, 28 MARCH 1941, WITH REPORT ON
     EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING STERILIZATION AND CASTRATION BY X-RAYS

Viktor Brack
Oberdienstleiter

                                                   Berlin, 28 March 1941

To the Reich Leader SS and Chief of the German Police
Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Str. 8
H. H. [Handwritten initials]

                               Top Secret

  [Handwritten]: 1 read
                 2+
                 5 May 41

Dear Reich Leader:

Enclosed herewith for your information is the result of the
investigations into the possibility of sterilization or castration,
respectively, by means of X-rays. I request your instructions as to what
further theoretical or practical steps, if any, are to be taken in this
matter.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                       [SIGNED] BRACK
Enclosure

The experiments in this field are concluded. The following result can be
considered as established and adequately based on scientific research:

If any persons are to be sterilized permanently, this result can only be
attained by applying X-rays in a dosage high enough to produce
castration with all its consequences, since high X-ray dosages destroy
the internal secretion of the ovary, or of the testicles, respectively.
Lower dosages would only temporarily paralyze the procreative capacity.
The consequences in question are for example the disappearance of
menstruation, climacteric phenomena, changes in capillary growth,
modification of metabolism, etc. In any case, attention must be drawn to
these disadvantages.

The actual dosage can be given in various ways, and the irradiation can
take place quite imperceptibly. The necessary local dosage for men is
500-600 r, for women 300-350 r. In general, an irradiation period of 2
minutes for men, 3 minutes for women, with the highest voltage, a thin
filter and at a short distance, ought to be sufficient. There is,
however, a disadvantage that has to be put up with: as it is impossible
unnoticeably to cover the rest of the body with lead, the other tissues
of the body will be injured, and radiologic malaise, the so-called
“Roentgenkater”, will ensue. If the X-ray intensity is too high, those
parts of the skin which the rays have reached will exhibit symptoms of
burns—varying in severity in individual cases—in the course of the
following days or weeks.

One practical way of proceeding would be, for instance, to let the
persons to be treated approach a counter, where they could be asked to
answer some questions or to fill in forms, which would take them 2 or 3
minutes. The official sitting behind the counter could operate the
installation in such a way as to turn a switch which would activate the
two valves simultaneously (since the irradiation has to operate from
both sides). With a two-valve installation about 150-200 persons could
then be sterilized per day, and therefore, with 20 such installations as
many as 3,000-4,000 persons per day. In my estimation a larger daily
number could not in any case be sent away for this purpose. As to the
expenses for such a two-valve system, I can only give a rough estimate
of approximately 20,000-30,000 RM. Additionally, however, there would be
the cost of the construction of a new building, because adequately
extensive protective installations would have to be provided for the
officials on duty.

In summary, it may be said that, having regard to the present state of
radiological technique and research, mass sterilization by means of
X-rays can be carried out without difficulty. However, it seems to be
impossible to do this in such a way that the persons concerned do not
sooner or later realize with certainty that they have been sterilized or
castrated by X-rays.

                                                       [Signed] BRACK

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-205
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 163

 LETTER FROM BRACK TO HIMMLER, 23 JUNE 1942, PROPOSING STERILIZATION OF
                       TWO TO THREE MILLION JEWS

Viktor Brack
SS Oberfuehrer

                               Berlin, W 8, Voss-Strasse 4, 23 June 1942
                                                            [Initial] HH

                               Top Secret

To the Reich Leader SS and Chief of the German Police
Heinrich Himmler,
Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Str. 8

Dear Reich Leader,

On the instructions of Reich Leader [Reichsleiter] Bouhler I placed some
of my men—already some time ago—at the disposal of Brigadefuehrer
Globocnik to execute his special mission. On his renewed request I have
now transferred additional personnel. On this occasion Brigadefuehrer
Globocnik stated his opinion that the whole Jewish action should be
completed as quickly as possible so that one would not get caught in the
middle of it one day if some difficulties should make a stoppage of the
action necessary. You, yourself, Reich Leader, have already expressed
your view, that work should progress quickly for reasons of camouflage
alone. Both points which in principle arrive at the same result are more
than justified as far as my own experience goes; nevertheless would you
kindly allow me to submit the following argument:

Among 10 millions of Jews in Europe there are, I figure, at least 2-3
millions of men and women who are fit enough to work. Considering the
extraordinary difficulties the labor problem presents us with, I hold
the view that those 2-3 millions should be specially selected and
preserved. This can, however, only be done if at the same time they are
rendered incapable to propagate. About a year ago I reported to you that
agents of mine had completed the experiments necessary for this purpose.
I would like to recall these facts once more. Sterilization, as normally
performed on persons with hereditary diseases, is here out of the
question, because it takes too long and is too expensive. Castration by
X-ray however is not only relatively cheap, but can also be performed on
many thousands in the shortest time. I think, that at this time it is
already irrelevant whether the people in question become aware of having
been castrated after some weeks or months once they feel the effects.

Should you, Reich Fuehrer, decide to choose this way in the interest of
the preservation of labor, then Reichsleiter Bouhler would be prepared
to place all physicians and other personnel needed for this work at your
disposal. Likewise he requested me to inform you that then I would have
to order the apparatus so urgently needed with the greatest speed.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                               Yours,
                                                  [Signed] VIKTOR BRACK

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-206
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 164

 LETTER FROM HIMMLER (COUNTERSIGNED BY RUDOLF BRANDT), 11 AUGUST 1942,
   ADDRESSED TO BRACK, CONCERNING HIMMLER’S INTEREST IN STERILIZATION
                              EXPERIMENTS

The Reich Leader SS
1314/42 [Handwritten]

                                                XIa/126 [Handwritten]
                                                          11 August 1942
                                               Figure 11—[Handwritten]
SS Senior Col. (SS Oberfuehrer) Brack      Field Headquarters
Berlin W 8 Voss-Strasse 4
                               Top Secret
                                                             4 copies
                                                             4th copy
Dear Brack:

It is only today that I have the opportunity of acknowledging the
receipt of your letter of 23 June. I am positively interested in seeing
that sterilization by X-rays is tried out at least once in one camp in a
series of experiments.

I will be very much obliged to Reichsleiter Bouhler if, to begin with,
he would place the expert physicians for the series of experiments at
our disposal.

I will mail a copy of this letter to the Reich Physician SS and to the
competent Chief of the Main Office for concentration camps.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                               Yours,
                                                    [Signed] H. HIMMLER

SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl
SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr. Grawitz
  For information.
              By order                         [Handwritten] BR.
                                                   SS Obersturmbannfuehrer
[Stamp] 11 August 1942

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-208
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 166

LETTER FROM BLANKENBURG TO HIMMLER, 29 APRIL 1944, REGARDING EMPLOYMENT
OF DR. HORST SCHUMANN ON EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING THE INFLUENCE OF X-RAYS
ON HUMAN GENITAL GLANDS IN CONNECTION WITH SIMILAR EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED
                    AT CONCENTRATION CAMP AUSCHWITZ

Chancellery of the Fuehrer of the NSDAP
File No: IIa/Kt.

                                 Berlin W 8, Vosstrasse 4, 29 April 1944
                                             Telephone No.: local 120054
                                                    Long distance 126621

                               Top Secret

To the Reich Leader SS and Chief of the German Police, Heinrich Himmler

Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Strasse 9
Dear Reich Leader!

By order of Reich Leader (Reichsleiter) Bouhler I submit to you as an
enclosure a work of Dr. Horst Schumann on the influence of X-rays on
human genital glands.

Previously you have asked Senior Colonel [Oberfuehrer] Brack to perform
this work, and you supported it by providing the adequate material in
the concentration camp Auschwitz. I point especially to the 2d part of
this work, which shows that by those means a castration of males is
almost impossible or requires an effort which does not pay. As I have
convinced myself, operative castration requires not more than 6 to 7
minutes, and therefore can be performed more reliably and quicker than
castration by X-rays.

Soon I shall be able to submit a continuation of this work to you.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                          [Handwritten] Your devoted,
                                                   [Signed] BLANKENBURG

Enclosure

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-211
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 169

 LETTER FROM PROFESSOR CLAUBERG TO HIMMLER, 30 MAY 1942 (REFERRING TO A
  LETTER FROM RUDOLF BRANDT), CONCERNING THE URGENCY OF RESEARCH INTO
BIOLOGICAL PROPAGATION AND STERILIZATION WITHOUT OPERATION, AND DRAFT OF
           A “RESEARCH INSTITUTE FOR BIOLOGICAL PROPAGATION”

Professor C. Clauberg, M. D. Chief Physician of the Gynecological
Clinics of the Miners’ (Knappschaft) Hospital and of the St. Hedwig
Hospital.

                               Koenigshuette, Upper Silesia, 30 May 1942
                                                        Telephone 409-31
                                                           [Handwritten]
                                                        Wednesday 8 July

To the Reich Leader SS Heinrich Himmler Through SS Obergruppenfuehrer
and General of the Police Schmauser

                                                           [Handwritten]
                                      discussed H. H. [Heinrich Himmler]

Dear Reich Leader!

In answer to my letter of 5 June 1941 “concerning the Research Institute
for Biological Propagation” I received at that time by return mail the
answer of your personal adjutant, SS Sturmbannfuehrer Brandt, dated 19
June 1941 saying that you, Reich Leader, would come back to my expose as
soon as possible. Without any doubt the far more important events of the
war which happened shortly afterwards prevented this.

If I may remind you briefly, the continuation of my work had been
rendered impossible because of the problem of carrying out the
procurement of female concentration camp inmates. On the occasion of a
scientific discussion with the Stabsfuehrer of your office here, SS
Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Arlt, I also happened to speak about my
research activities in the field of biological propagation. Dr. Arlt
told me then that the one person in Germany today who would be
particularly interested in these matters and who would be able to help
me would be you, most honorable Reich Leader. In his capacity as a
member of the SS and Stabsfuehrer of your office here, I then told him
briefly that I had already submitted this matter to you.

After this discussion, I most obediently take the liberty of asking you
to make it possible for me to carry out these tasks here in Upper
Silesia.

In order to explain what would be necessary at the moment—that is, at
least for the time being—the two most urgent questions and fundamental
problems should be stated briefly once more.

A. In the question of the positive population policy, the eventual or
most probable importance of agriculture for the female capacity for
propagation demands clarification. This is to be thoroughly probed and
tested by experiments on animals, namely, on the experimental animal
which is proverbially most fertile and at the same time variable in its
fertility—the rabbit. The question is whether good general nutrition
with food obtained through intensive farming can reduce fertility, and
if this should be the case, what factor (positive or negative) is
responsible.

B. In the question of the negative population policy the situation now
is such that from animal experiments (in which I have demonstrated the
possibility of sterilization without operation) we must proceed to the
first experiments on human beings.

For that purpose the following is necessary:

With ref. to A. _Problem of fertility and agriculture._

1. Land—that is, as much “untouched”, “wild” or hitherto “badly” farmed
land as possible. For the first animal experiments to be conducted at
least 10 Morgen [Morgen = 2/3 of an acre] would be needed.

2. Personnel to till the land.

3. Animal material—that is, a few hundred female rabbits and the
corresponding number of males necessary.

4. Animal hutches and shelters.

5. Persons to attend and guard the animals.

With ref. to B. _Sterilization without operation._

1. Occasional special billeting for 5 to 10 women (single rooms or rooms
for two persons) corresponding to the conditions of sick rooms.

2. Special X-ray apparatus with installation and accessories.

3. Smaller outfit of instruments and material.

Reich Leader! Without wishing to anticipate your decision, I am taking
the liberty of proposing that the experiments necessary for A and B be
carried out at the Auschwitz concentration camp and that the facilities
there be used. As I already told you in the course of our conversation,
I would be very much pleased to work under you as head of an
experimental institute, directed exclusively by you.

I believe that in view of the procurement of the land, the necessary
animals, the attending personnel, and the human material to be provided,
an annex to your camp in Upper Silesia would offer the best facilities.
Cash would be needed only for the procurement of—

With ref. to A.

1. _Animal material._

2. _Material for the animals’ stables and shelters._

3. _A conscientious working person to attend them._

With ref. to B.

4. _Special accommodations for 5 to 10 female camp inmates undergoing
experiments._

5. _Eventually a special X-ray installation._

6. _Smaller outfit of instruments and material._

Reich Leader! The explanations and dispositions made here are related to
the fact that the most necessary and most urgent means for solution of
this problem should at once be created and set in motion. My suggestions
are absolutely adapted to the present times and attempt to meet the
circumstances. As one problem arises from the other or—I should rather
say—as many further problems will arise, the ideal pattern of such a
“Research Institution of the Reich Leader SS for Biological Propagation”
the establishment of which is to be considered, would present itself as
an entity, on the one hand far greater in scope, and on the other hand
more concentrated and closely knit in shape. A short sketch is enclosed
as a suggestion for that purpose. This suggestion is to demonstrate the
possibility of realization of all the thoughts discussed and submitted
to you.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                               Yours most obediently,
                                               [Signed] PROF. CLAUBERG.

                 *        *        *        *        *

       Draft of a “Research Institute for Biological Propagation”

The center from which all ideas start, all problems are raised and their
execution directed, and finally turned over into practical use, is and
remains the clinic. It must be an obstetric clinic at the same time. For
the problems (which are mostly of a hormonal nature) do not merely
extend into practical gynecology and obstetrics but also reach deeply
into them and remain most closely connected with pregnancy and
obstetrics as well. These problems are just as unlimited and therefore
must necessarily be solved step by step, as they are proving to be
successful for obstetrics also in the future.

In this clinic the possibility must be provided—

_a._ for most intensive treatment of women hitherto sterile but desirous
of bearing children and for applying and testing of newly gained
experiences in cases hitherto seemingly hopeless.

_b._ to evaluate the method of sterilization without operation
(bloodless sterilization) on women unworthy of propagation and to use
this method continually after it is finally proved efficient.

Attached to this clinic there is to be—

_c._ a laboratory for extensive animal experiments, which will always
serve as a basis for further research.

There should also be incorporated in this research station—

_d._ an experimental farm as a basis for the solution of the questions
of “agriculture and fertility,” that is—

1. far reaching nutrition experiments on animals, and

2. far reaching nutrition experiments on human beings (female camp
inmates).

Sketch enclosed.

[Handwritten] 30 May 1942.

                                                             CLAUBERG
           “_Research Institute for Biological Propagation_”

_Experimental Farm_—

    _a._ For far reaching nutrition experiments on the animal.

    Laboratory for further experimental research on animals.

    _b._ For far reaching nutrition experiments on human beings.
    (Special production of food for female camp inmates.)

                 _Clinic for gynecology and obstetrics_

_Clinical and Polyclinical Department_—

    _a._ Treatment of sterile women desired to propagate.

    _b._ Further clinical research on cases of sterility hitherto
    seemingly hopeless.

_Clinical department_—

    For sterilization without operation (bloodless sterilization) on
    women (women unworthy of propagation or women whose propagation
    is not desirable—at first to test method without operation,
    later for current use).

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-216
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 170

MEMORANDUM OF RUDOLF BRANDT, JULY 1942, ON A DISCUSSION BETWEEN HIMMLER,
  GEBHARDT, GLUECKS, AND CLAUBERG CONCERNING STERILIZATION EXPERIMENTS
                         CONDUCTED ON JEWESSES

                                        Fuehrer Headquarters, July 1942
                               Top Secret
                                                               1 copy

On 7 July 1942 a discussion took place between the Reich Leader SS, SS
Brigadefuehrer Professor Dr. Gebhardt, SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks, and SS
Brigadefuehrer Clauberg, Koenigshuette. The topic of the discussion was
the sterilization of Jewesses. The Reich Leader SS has promised SS
Brigadefuehrer Professor Clauberg that Auschwitz concentration camp will
be at his disposal for his experiments on human beings and animals. By
means of some fundamental experiments, a method should be found which
would lead to sterilization of persons without their knowledge. The
Reich Leader SS wanted to get another report as soon as the result of
these experiments was known, so that the sterilization of Jewesses could
then be carried out in actuality.

It should also be examined, preferably in cooperation with Professor Dr.
Hohlfelder, an X-ray specialist in Germany, what way sterilization of
men could be achieved by X-ray treatment.

The Reich Leader SS called the special attention of all gentlemen
present to the fact that the matter involved was most secret and should
be discussed only with the officers in charge and that the persons
present at the experiments or discussions had to pledge secrecy.

                                                      [Signed] BRANDT
                                               SS Obersturmbannfuehrer.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-213
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 171

   LETTER FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO CLAUBERG, 10 JULY 1942, TRANSMITTING
    INSTRUCTIONS OF HIMMLER TO PERFORM STERILIZATIONS ON JEWESSES AT
                    CONCENTRATION CAMP RAVENSBRUECK

Reich Leader SS Personal Staff
Journal Number 1266/42, Bra/Dr.

                                                           [Handwritten]
                     Returned 31 October 1942 by Pol. Administration K.
                                     Fuehrer Headquarters, 10 July 1942
                               Top Secret
                                                           [Handwritten]
                                                  Original handed to G.
                                                      6 copies—6th copy

1. Professor Clauberg
Koenigshuette.

                                                           [Handwritten]
                                                             W 1-10
                                                              1-5-43

Dear Professor!

Today the Reich Leader SS charged me with transmitting to you his wish
that you go to Ravensbrueck after you have had another talk with SS
Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl and the camp physician of the women’s
concentration camp Ravensbrueck, in order to perform the sterilization
of Jewesses according to your method.

Before you start your job, the Reich Leader SS would be interested to
learn from you how long it would take to sterilize a thousand Jewesses.
The Jewesses themselves should not know anything about it. As the Reich
Leader SS understands it, you could give the appropriate injections
during a general examination.

Thorough experiments should be conducted to investigate the effect of
the sterilization largely in a way that you find out after a certain
time, which you would have to fix, perhaps by X-rays, what kind of
changes have taken place. In some cases a practical experiment might be
arranged by locking up a Jewess and a Jew together for a certain period
and then seeing what results are achieved.

I ask you to let me know your opinion about my letter for the
information of the Reich Leader SS.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                      [Signed] BRANDT
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

2. To SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl, Berlin.
[Handwritten] delivered to Boemer

Please acknowledge. SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Koegel also received a copy
for the information of the camp physician. Moreover the Reich Physician
SS and the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA) received a copy.

                                                      [Signed] BRANDT
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

3. To SS Gruppenfuehrer Grawitz, Reich Physician SS.

Please acknowledge.

                                                      [Signed] BRANDT
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

4. To SS. Obersturmbannfuehrer Koegel, WVHA.

Please acknowledge and inform the camp physician.

                                                      [Signed] BRANDT
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

5. To the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), Berlin.

SS Sturmbannfuehrer Guenther, IV B 4 (Department for Jews).

                                       [Handwritten] SS GRUF. MUELLER

Please acknowledge.

                                                      [Initialed] BR.
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-212
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 173

  LETTER FROM PROFESSOR CLAUBERG TO HIMMLER, 7 JUNE 1943, REPORTING ON
         RESEARCH IN CONNECTION WITH THE STERILIZATION OF WOMEN

Professor Dr. C. Clauberg,

Chief Physician of the Clinics for Women of the Miners’ (Knappschaft)
Hospital and the St. Hedwig Hospital

                                        Koenigshuette O. S., 7 June 1943
                                                       Telephone: 409-31

                                 Secret

To the Reich Leader SS
Heinrich Himmler
Berlin
Dear Reich Leader,

Today I am fulfilling my obligation to report to you from time to time
about the state of my research work. In doing this I am, as before,
adhering to the procedure to report only if the matter is essential. The
fact that, after my most recent interview in July 1942, I could not do
so before today is due to temporary difficulties against which I myself
was powerless and with which I could not bother you, Reich Leader. I
mention as an example that only since February 1943 am I in possession
of an X-ray installation, which is of great value to my special
research. In spite of the short period of actually only 4 months, it is
already today possible to report to you the following:

_The method I contrived to achieve the sterilization of the female
organism without operation is as good as perfected. It can be performed
by a single injection made through the entrance of the uterus in the
course of the customary gynecological examination known to every
physician._—If I say that the method is “as good as perfected,” this
means:

1. Still to be worked out are only minor improvements of the method.

2. Already today it could be put to practical use in the course of our
_regular_ eugenic sterilization and could thus replace the operation.

As to the question which you, Reich Leader, asked me almost one year
ago, i. e., how much time would probably be required to sterilize 1,000
women by using this method. Today I can answer you with regard to the
future as follows:

If my researches continue to have the same results as up to now—and
there is no reason to doubt that—then the moment is not far off when I
can say:

    “_One_ adequately trained physician in _one_ adequately equipped
    place, with perhaps 10 assistants (the number of assistants in
    conformity with the speed desired) _will most likely be able to
    deal with several hundred, if not even 1,000 per day_.”

Please permit me to postpone my report about the other part of my
researches (positive population policy) because it will take some time
until something decisive can be said in this field.

Reich Leader! The main reason for my reporting to you today, shortly
before the possibility of even more final results, is the following:

I know that the settlement of the last part of this particular complex
of problems—in contrast to the external forces which determined the
progress so far—depends _now_ almost entirely on me. In this
connection, several minor but nevertheless fundamental changes would be
necessary which only you, my dear Reich Leader, can personally direct
and order. I had hoped that I would be able to give you personally a
short description of these requirements in the event of a visit to Upper
Silesia. Since I have not had this opportunity, I am asking you for your
decision today.

In addition I should like to make a further request. It was SS
Brigadefuehrer _Dr. Blumenreuter_ who finally managed to get me the one
suitable X-ray installation. I am in urgent need of another installation
of the same kind, and he informed me in February that he had another one
stored in Berlin. He was ready to deliver it to me if I would secure
your approval.

May I ask you, Reich Leader, for this approval?

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                    [Signed] CLAUBERG
      EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF THE DEFENDANT VIKTOR BRACK[84]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. FROESCHMANN: What plans are you talking about?

DEFENDANT BRACK: The plans to exterminate the Jews which I told you
about before. Having known them and having been in the Party Chancellery
in the course of this conversation when I told Himmler that Grafeneck
was to be abandoned, Himmler also told me of communications he had
received from Poland, according to which the Jews there were using the
temporary impotence of the Polish government to strengthen their own
position and Himmler said something had to be done about this. He said
something had to be undertaken to stop this because through the mixing
of blood in the Polish Jews with that of the Jews from Western Europe a
much greater danger for Germany was arising than even before the war,
and he said it was his intention to sterilize the Jews according to
reliable methods, according to a procedure which would permit mass
sterilization. Operative sterilization was out of the question for one
thing because you couldn’t do that without leaving some scar. Then he
brought up the question, could not this be done with X-ray treatment?
However, I didn’t know about this for sure, and in fact nobody knew
about it, and especially didn’t know whether the person in question
could be treated without noticing something. Himmler then said that
Bouhler had gathered together so many scientists and doctors in the
Euthanasia Program, consequently I should try to find out from him what
he could tell me about sterilization, and tell him to report to me
again.

Q. Well, what was the effect of this communication from Himmler on you?

A. This made a great impression on me. I believed that Heydrich could
really have been the instigator of all of this.

In my interrogation I told the interrogator that I regarded such a plan
to exterminate the Jews as unworthy of Germany and its leaders. From
what I knew of Himmler it would never have occurred to me that such a
destructive idea could have originated in his mind. Be that, however, as
it may, whether the idea originated with Heydrich or Bormann, my
attitude was opposed to this; and I felt that I was under the obligation
to do anything I could to prevent this. If I had raised the least
objection to it openly, I would have aroused great suspicion of myself
and would have aroused a false reaction in Himmler. Therefore, I had to
make the best of a bad job and had to pretend that I agreed with
Himmler. I pretended to be willing to clarify the question of mass
sterilization through X-ray methods. Many years ago I had been subjected
to X-ray treatment for quite a period of time and had discussed with the
doctor the effect of X-rays on the human body. Now I remembered from
those discussions that the effect of X-rays on the sexual organs is only
of slight importance and not lasting. Moreover, I knew that one of my
associates was personally acquainted with an X-ray specialist and he
told me that this specialist was conducting experiments on the effects
of X-rays on the fertility of animals. However, there seemed to be no
result.

Q. Mr. President, I present an affidavit of 25 February 1947, by Dr.
Martin Zeller, a specialist, born 3 December 1880, living in Munich,
signed by him on this same date and certified by myself. (_Brack 26,
Brack Ex. 31._) This affidavit contributes to the understanding of this
matter now under discussion and I quote:

    “I remember distinctly that 10 to 15 years ago I spoke to Viktor
    Brack about X-ray injuries. Brack was worried that he might
    develop an X-ray injury; at that time his knee had been X-rayed.
    When some time afterwards he had rough hands he thought that
    might be an X-ray burn. I explained to him that no injuries
    could result from our X-ray examinations since the quantities of
    radiation used for diagnosis were small and besides, the more
    distant parts of the body (that is, in the case of a picture of
    the knee being taken, the hands and genitals) were not in the
    danger zone under modern technical conditions.

    “I also made the remark that even an intentional sterilization
    by X-ray treatment would, especially in the case of young
    persons, be difficult to achieve and even then only with a
    strong dose of prolonged radiation.”

And then in paragraph 2 the witness continues:

    “It is quite possible that Brack in this way developed the views
    he brought forward, i. e., that the effect of X-rays upon the
    sexual organs is negligible, and that the danger of
    sterilization does not exist at all. The layman will not
    differentiate between X-ray diagnostics and X-ray therapy.”

A. I took this associate into my confidence and told him of my intention
to deceive Himmler, if only to gain time. We agreed to deceive Himmler
by giving him a certificate that seemed to say that sterilization by
X-ray methods was possible and we would thus get him to pursue a false
path. Just what was said in this certificate I do not know any longer.
At any rate there were no positive results in it so that we couldn’t put
it to Himmler in this form.

DR. FROESCHMANN: Mr. President, let me remark in this connection, that
after great efforts I have succeeded in finding the man who drew up this
certificate of which the witness has just been speaking. I have found
out his name and address. He lives in the Russian zone and for that
reason it was not possible for me to get a copy of that certificate that
he drew up at that time. However, I have contacted this doctor and he
has declared his readiness to come to Nuernberg and to give me an
affidavit, because as he said it, it would be a matter of course that he
should help an innocent man if his testimony could do so. He does
remember having given this certificate to Brack or to his associates and
I ask permission to reserve the right to put this affidavit in evidence
as soon as I have it, and when perhaps the doctor has had a chance to
speak to the defendant.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Counsel for defendant Brack may offer the
affidavit as soon as it is received so long as it complies with the
evidence in the case.

DR. FROESCHMANN: Thank you, your Honor. Witness, please continue.

DEFENDANT BRACK: Naturally, this factor of uncertainty had to be taken
into consideration.

Q. What exactly are you speaking of?

A. I am talking about the report we received.

Q. You mean the man who drew up the certificate, the expert?

A. Yes.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Now, counsel, I don’t want you to misunderstand
me. I said counsel may offer the affidavit; that means it is offered
subject to any objection raised by the prosecution as to the form of the
affidavit or its relevancy. Yesterday, the affidavits from Brazil were
possibly offered by you because the Tribunal had said that they might be
offered. The right to offer simply means offered, subject to objection,
and that is not equivalent to saying that the affidavit will be received
in evidence but it may be offered. That is the sense in which I have
used the word “offer” towards this affidavit.

DR. FROESCHMANN: Yes, your Honor, I understood the President and I shall
only submit an affidavit which is in compliance with the regulation of
this Tribunal. Would you please continue, Witness?

DEFENDANT BRACK: My collaborator changed the contents of this
certificate in such a manner that sterilization becomes apparent as
something possible from a medical point of view. That is exactly what is
contained in my affidavit. Thus, this letter dated 28 March 1941,
originated with Document NO-203, Prosecution Exhibit 161.

Q. Mr. President, let us reconstruct this letter quite shortly. I shall
quote. It is addressed by Brack to Himmler, marked “Top Secret.”

    “Dear Reich Leader:

    “Enclosed I send to you for your information the report of the
    examination regarding the possibility of an X-ray sterilization
    or castration. I ask you to tell me whether anything can be done
    in the matter either theoretically or practically.”

That is the covering letter. This covering letter, Witness, in
connection with the report which is attached was considered by the
prosecution as being a serious suggestion for sterilization and the
prosecution in that connection has stated that this needed no comment.
What is your attitude toward it?

A. Neither the former nor the latter is correct. I admit that if one
reads this letter or report without knowing the connections that
impression can be created. I therefore have to attempt to analyze this
report in order to explain to the Tribunal what we tried to achieve with
this letter. I have to emphasize once more that the entire thing was a
maneuver of deceit.

Q. With reference to the report which you attached to this letter
(_NO-203, Pros. Ex. 161_) I should like to quote from it a very brief
passage:

    “Report on experiments concerning X-ray castration.

    “The experiments in this field are concluded. The following
    result can be considered as established and adequately based on
    scientific research.

    “If any persons are to be sterilized permanently, this result
    can only be attained by applying X-rays in a dosage high enough
    to produce castration with all its consequences, since high
    X-ray dosages destroy the internal secretion of the ovary or of
    the testicles, respectively. Lower dosages would only
    temporarily paralyze the procreative capacity. The consequences
    in question are, for example, the disappearance of menstruation,
    climacteric phenomena, changes in capillary growth, modification
    of metabolism, etc. In any case, attention must be drawn to
    these disadvantages.

    “The actual dosage can be given in various ways, and irradiation
    can take place quite imperceptibly. The necessary local dosage
    for men is 500-600 r, for women 300-350 r. In general, an
    irradiation period of 2 minutes for men, 3 minutes for women,
    with the highest voltage, a thin filter, and at a short distance
    ought to be sufficient. There is, however, a disadvantage that
    has to be put up with. It is impossible unnoticeably to cover
    the rest of the body with lead, the other tissues of the body
    will be injured, and radiologic malaise, the so-called
    ‘Roentgenkater,’ will ensue.”

Witness, would you define your attitude toward this letter which I
partly read?

A. I was speaking in connection with the talk I had with Himmler in the
year of 1941. This becomes apparent from the paragraph “I herewith
submit the result of an X-ray examination.” It looks now as though in
effect experiments had been carried out by scientists, which was not the
case. Himmler had to be reassured and that is why we had to emphasize
that the experiments had been concluded and the result could be based on
scientific work. Of course, we couldn’t state the result as being
absolutely positive. We had to leave it to Himmler himself to judge it.
In the first instance it was our intention to get Himmler off the idea.
That is why we chose the formulation which can be seen in that
letter—“If any persons are to be sterilized permanently.” It meant in
effect that this was theoretically possible. At the same time, however,
we pointed out that this success cannot be concealed and that phenomena
will arise. That obviously was shown by the contents of the certificate
itself, and it is emphasized that permanent sterilization makes a high
dosage of X-rays necessary. These high dosages would then bring about
the effects of castration with all of the accompanying symptoms which
would be noticed immediately. If, however, lower dosages were used, you
would only have stopped procreative capacity for a short time. We
actually said that at the end of the report, namely, that the result of
sterilization could be ascertained after a comparatively short time but
that it was impossible to achieve the results of bringing about
sterilization without being noticed, and in this way we thought we could
get Himmler to give up that idea.

Q. Now, this was the first part of the letter. Now, let us discuss the
second part. I am again referring to the method which you suggested to
Himmler. You thought at that time “One practical way of proceeding would
be, for instance, to let the persons to be treated approach a counter,
where they could be asked to answer some questions or to fill in forms,
which take them 2 or 3 minutes. The official sitting behind the counter
could operate the installation in such a way as to turn a switch which
would activate the two valves simultaneously (since the irradiation is
to operate from both sides). With a two-valve installation about 150-200
persons could then be sterilized per day and, therefore, with 20 such
installations as many as 3,000-4,000 persons per day. In my estimation a
larger daily number could not in any case be sent away for this
purpose.”

Herr Brack, how could you arrive at this idea of turning switches? This
is completely nonunderstandable for a layman.

A. Himmler wanted this procedure to be carried out as simply as
possible. Therefore, we had to suggest as simple a method as we could
think of. On the other hand, this method increased the uncertainty of
directing the rays to the corresponding parts of the body. That is what
was discussed by my collaborator with his acquaintance. We suggested
this switch method to Himmler with the idea of making this matter as
simple as possible and at the same time preventing any active X-ray
reaching the body. Furthermore, only 2-3 minutes were suggested as the
length of time for these people to be subjected to these X-rays. How we
arrived at these 500-600 figures—or 350 r.—I don’t know whether they
were just invented or whether they were based upon something. I don’t
know. But looking at it as a whole it contained a number of points that
were to demonstrate to Himmler that the whole thing could not be carried
out. There is a scientific basis for these suggestions.

DR. FROESCHMANN: Mr. President, in connection with this point I have
tried to get an unobjectionable irreproachable certificate for the
correctness of what the defendant just stated. I shall get a certificate
from a specialist. The man concerned says that this suggestion is
absolutely senseless. I had, however, to wait for this certificate
because I had to wait for an affidavit from another expert physician.
With the permission of the Tribunal, I shall obtain a corresponding
certificate from a radiologist who can show that it is credible that
this entire suggestion was really scientific nonsense.

A. We had to take into account the possibility that Himmler might accept
this proposal in spite of all these difficulties. We knew, however, that
the preparation of any such installation would take a long time, for the
building, etc. We thought that the war would end very quickly, and as I
said before I didn’t know there was any threat from the West. And, in
case of peace, the Madagascar plan, which had already been rejected,
could once more be placed in the foreground. If on the other hand this
suggestion was to be accepted and if at that time the war had not yet
ended, the carrying out of this experiment on the 100-200 Jews was much
less of an evil than Himmler taking the Jews and sterilizing them en
masse or doing something worse to them.

Q. Mr. Brack, if I understand you correctly, you’re saying that, at that
time, you had to make a decision between either killing millions of Jews
or choosing the smaller evil by only suggesting this small number which
you have mentioned upon whom experiments might be carried out. Is my
opinion correct?

A. During my interrogations I designated this dilemma in a way by saying
that this was our last way out. But, naturally, when judging these two
possibilities one must take into consideration that one decides upon one
possibility and, at the same time, feels an inner justification for
doing so. The same way as a troop commander sacrifices a few thousand
people somewhere if he can save a hundred thousand somewhere else.

Q. Now, Mr. Brack, in order to finish with this letter I want to say
that you have stated the following at the end of that letter, and I
quote:

    “In summary it may be said that, having regard to the present
    state of radiological technique and research, mass sterilization
    by means of X-rays can be carried out without difficulty.
    However, it seems to be impossible to do this in such a way that
    the persons concerned do not, sooner or later, realize with
    certainty that they have been sterilized or castrated by
    X-rays.”

In your covering letter you apparently mentioned your second letter, and
I quote:

    “I request your instructions as to further theoretical or
    practical steps if any are to be taken in this matter.”

What is the significance of this latter statement?

A. By using this formulation I endeavored to keep control of the
development of that matter. I never really counted on the realization of
these experiments and I never had any intention of submitting a serious
proposal to Himmler which would cause the sterilization of millions of
Jews, but if Himmler was to accept this nonsensical proposal I wanted to
have his idea delayed as long as possible. If this suggestion had been
serious on my part I would have had to be a fanatical Jew hater, and I
think I have already proved that I was not such a person.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[81] Trial of the Major War Criminals, International Military Tribunal,
Nuremberg, 1947, vol. I, pp. 247-253.

[82] Judgment of the IMT. Ibid.

[83] Final plea is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 15 July 1947,
pp. 10874-10910.

[84] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 7, 8, 9,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19 May 1947, pp. 7413-7772.


                     B. Jewish Skeleton Collection

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Rudolf Brandt and Sievers were charged with criminal
responsibility and participation in plans and enterprises, involving the
murder of civilians and members of the armed forces of nations at war
with the German Reich, and specifically with the murder of 112 Jews for
the purpose of completing a skeleton collection for the Reich University
at Strasbourg (par. 7 of the indictment). On this charge both defendants
were convicted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence and argumentation on the
Jewish skeleton collection is contained in its closing brief against the
defendant Sievers. An extract from this brief is set forth below on
pages 739 to 741. A corresponding summation of the evidence by the
defense has been selected from the closing brief for the defendant
Sievers. It appears below on pages 741 to 747. This argumentation is
followed by selections from the evidence on pages 748 to 759.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                           DEFENDANT SIEVERS_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                         _Skeleton Collection_

In response to a request by the defendant Rudolf Brandt, on 9 February
1942, Sievers submitted to him a report by Dr. Hirt of the University of
Strasbourg on the desirability of securing a collection of Jewish
skeletons. (_NO-085, Pros. Ex. 175._) In this report, Hirt advocated
outright murder of “Jewish Bolshevik Commissars” for the procurement of
such a collection. He stated:

    “By procuring the skulls of the Jewish Bolshevik Commissars, who
    personify a repulsive, yet characteristic subhumanity, we have
    the opportunity of obtaining tangible scientific evidence. The
    actual obtaining and collecting of these skulls _without_
    difficulty could be best accomplished by a directive issued to
    the Wehrmacht in the future to immediately turn over alive all
    Jewish Bolshevik Commissars to the field police.”

These units were to report to a special office which would send out
specialists to have photographs and anthropological measurements taken
and ascertain the origin, birth date, and other personal data of the
victims. Hirt further stated:

    “Following _the subsequently induced death_ of the Jew, whose
    head must not be damaged, he will separate the head from the
    torso and will forward it to its point of destination in a
    preserving fluid in a well-sealed tin container especially made
    for this purpose. On the basis of the photos, the measurements,
    and other data on the head and, finally, the skull itself,
    comparative anatomical research, research on racial
    classification, pathological features of the skull formation,
    form and size of the brain, and many other things can begin. In
    accordance with its scope and tasks, the new Reich University of
    Strasbourg would be the most appropriate place for the
    collection of and research upon these skulls thus acquired.”
    [Emphasis supplied.]

On 27 February 1942, Brandt informed Sievers that Himmler would support
Hirt’s work and would place everything necessary at his disposal. Brandt
requested Sievers to inform Hirt accordingly and to report again on
Hirt’s work. (_NO-090, Pros. Ex. 176._)

Hirt’s murderous and inhuman plan was carried out in a way which
differed but slightly from the suggestion made in his preliminary
report. (_NO-085, Pros. Ex. 175._) The proof has shown that it was
decided to preserve the whole skeletons of the victims rather than
merely the skulls. On 2 November 1942 Sievers requested Brandt to make
the necessary arrangements with the Reich Security Main Office for
providing 150 Jewish inmates from Auschwitz to carry out this plan.
(_NO-086, Pros. Ex. 177._) On 6 November Brandt informed Adolf Eichmann,
the Chief of Office IV-B-4 (Jewish affairs) of the Reich Security Main
Office to put everything at Hirt’s disposal which was necessary for the
completion of the skeleton collection. (_NO-089, Pros. Ex. 179._)

From Sievers’ letter to Eichmann of 21 June 1943, it is apparent that SS
Hauptsturmfuehrer Beger, a collaborator of the Ahnenerbe Society,
carried out the preliminary work for the assembling of the skeleton
collection in the Auschwitz concentration camp on 79 Jews, 30 Jewesses,
2 Poles, and 4 Asiatics. In this letter, Sievers stated that Beger had
to interrupt his work because of the danger of infectious diseases in
the camp. Sievers requested that the inmates on whom Beger had carried
out this work be transferred to the Natzweiler concentration camp
because further activities in Auschwitz were impossible due to the
danger of infection. Special accommodation for the thirty women was to
be provided in the Natzweiler concentration camp “_for a short period_”.
[Emphasis added.] (_NO-087, Pros. Ex. 181._)

The statement of the camp commandant of the Natzweiler concentration
camp, SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Josef Kramer, reveals that approximately 80
inmates of the Auschwitz concentration camp, among them females, were
transferred to the Natzweiler concentration camp and killed there by gas
at the request of Hirt in the beginning of August 1943. A special gas
chamber had been built for this purpose. The corpses of the victims were
sent in three shipments to the Anatomical Institute of Hirt in
Strasbourg University. (_NO-807, Pros. Ex. 185._) This evidence is
corroborated by the testimony of the witness Henripierre. He testified
that in the beginning of August 1943, the principal autopsy technician
of the Anatomical Institute, Bong, received the order from Hirt to
prepare the tanks in the cellar of the Institute for approximately 120
corpses. At intervals of a few days, three shipments of corpses, 30
female, 30 male, and 26 male, arrived by truck from an unknown place.
All of these victims were Jewish. These corpses were preserved in the
cellar of the Anatomical Institute in the tanks prepared by Bong. (_Tr.
pp. 712-4._) See also the affidavit of Wagner. (_NO-881, Pros. Ex.
280._) As proved by the Sievers’ diary, Beger was ordered to prepare
plaster casts of the victims. (_3546-PS, Pros. Ex. 123._)

Early in September 1944, when the Allied armies were threatening
Strasbourg, Sievers approached the defendant Brandt with the request for
instructions as to what should be done with the Jewish bodies which were
still stored in the tanks in the cellar of the Anatomical Institute. He
informed Brandt that Hirt would be able to “de-flesh” the corpses and
thus render them unrecognizable, but in this case part of the work would
have been done in vain “and it would be a great scientific loss for this
_unique collection_ because casts could not be made afterwards. The
skeleton collection is not conspicuous. Viscera could be declared as
remnants of corpses, apparently left in the Anatomical Institute by the
French and ordered to be cremated.” Sievers requested a directive from
Brandt whether the collection should be preserved, partly dissolved, or
completely dissolved. (_NO-088, Pros. Ex. 182._)

From the memorandum of SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Berg, and his telephone
conversation with Sievers on 15 October 1944, it is apparent that it was
first decided to destroy the evidence of these brutal crimes, but with a
temporary improvement in the military situation, this decision was
rescinded. Sievers informed Berg on 21 October 1944 that, in compliance
with the orders he had received previously, the dissolution of the
collection had been completed. (_NO-091, Pros. Ex. 183._) But such was
not the case. Hirt had ordered Bong and his assistant, Meyer, to cut up
the 86 corpses and have them cremated in the Strasbourg crematorium, but
these two men alone were unable to carry out this enormous task. A
number of corpses remained un-dissected and were left in the tanks,
together with partially dissected corpses, in order to create the
impression that they were used for normal anatomical research. (_Tr. p.
715; NO-881, Pros. Ex. 280._)

The pictures of these corpses and of the gas chambers in the Natzweiler
concentration camp, where the victims of the Jewish skeleton collection
were murdered, taken by the French authorities after the liberation of
Strasbourg, tell the grim story of this mass murder more vividly than
witnesses and documents ever could. (_NO-483, Pros. Ex. 184_; _NO-807,
Pros. Ex. 185_.)

                 *        *        *        *        *

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

                  _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR
                           DEFENDANT SIEVERS_

                 *        *        *        *        *

In 1943 a collection of Jewish skeletons was set up in the Anatomy
Department of the Reich University of Strasbourg according to plans
which had been prepared in 1941 by Himmler and the Director of this
Anatomy Department, Professor Dr. Hirt. The skeletons were to be
obtained by selecting the required number of persons in the
concentration camp at Auschwitz from among the Bolshevist commissars who
had been taken prisoner in the campaign against the Soviet Union. The
liquidation of the persons chosen took place in the concentration camp
at Natzweiler.

Whether the liquidation entailed a death which was deserved or
undeserved on the part of the persons chosen depends upon whether the
“Commissar Order,” which was the basis of the liquidation, can be
regarded as legal and permissible or not. A detailed examination of this
question can be excluded here, since subjective grounds are of decisive
significance in this connection.

Sievers did _not_ take part personally _either in the selection or in
the liquidation_ of those persons designated for the skeleton
collection. The choosing was undertaken by a certain Dr. Beger in the
concentration camp at Auschwitz. (_NO-087, Pros. Ex. 181._) Sievers
himself was never in Auschwitz. The liquidation took place in the
concentration camp at Natzweiler. The _earliest date_ at which the
liquidation could have taken place is shown by the date of the
aforementioned document which is dated 21 June 1943. After 23 January
1943, Sievers was no longer in Natzweiler. Therefore, any personal
participation of Sievers in the selection as well as the liquidation is
out of the question.

We must now examine whether the setting up of the skeleton collection
and the associated liquidation of those persons selected took place on
Sievers’ orders or instructions—

The _prosecution_ has submitted and read:

    Letter of the Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer of the Ahnenerbe to
    Brandt, dated 9 February 1942, with a report from Dr. Hirt in
    which the latter suggests a collection of skulls for the
    University of Strasbourg which was to be obtained from
    Jewish-Bolshevist Commissars. (_NO-085, Pros. Ex. 175._)

    Letter of Brandt to Sievers, dated 27 February 1942, with the
    report that the Reich Leader SS is quite interested in the work
    of Professor Hirt and will place at his disposal everything
    which he requires for his experiments. (_NO-090, Pros. Ex.
    176._)

    Letter of the Reichsgeschaeftsfuehrer of the Ahnenerbe to Dr.
    Brandt, dated 2 November 1942, regarding the requisition of 150
    skeletons of prisoners for certain anthropological examinations.
    (_NO-086, Pros. Ex. 177._)

    Personal staff Reich Leader SS to Reichssicherheitshauptamt
    (Main Office for the Security of the Reich), dated 6 November
    1942, regarding transmission of the order of the Reich Leader SS
    to make possible the construction of the skeleton collection as
    planned. (_NO-089, Pros. Ex. 179._)

    Letter of the personal staff Reich Leader SS to the Ahnenerbe,
    dated 3 December 1942, regarding remedying of deficiencies
    through SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl. (_NO-092, Pros. Ex. 180._)

    Letter of the Institute for Military Scientific Research of the
    Reichssicherheitshauptamt (Main Office for the Security of the
    Reich), dated 21 June 1943, regarding the transfer of the 115
    persons selected by SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Beger in the
    concentration camp at Auschwitz. (_NO-087, Pros. Ex. 181._)

    Telegram of the personal staff, office “A”, to Dr. Brandt, dated
    5 September 1944, regarding the procurement of instructions as
    to what should happen to the collection in the event Strasbourg
    should be endangered. (_NO-088, Pros. Ex. 182._)

    Two memoranda of Berg, dated 15 and 26 October 1944, regarding
    the breaking up of the collection. (_NO-091, Pros. Ex. 183._)

    Several entries in the diary of Sievers, 1943-44.

    A letter of Sievers to Dr. Hirt, dated 3 January 1942, has been
    offered by the prosecution. (_NO-3629, Pros. Ex. 547._) This
    letter contains the request of Himmler to Hirt to make available
    to him a detailed report regarding his experiments which then
    could serve as basis for a conference.

    Letter of the Reich Business Manager to Dr. Hirt, dated 29
    October 1942, regarding the granting of subsidies for research
    activities. (_NO-3819, Pros. Ex. 550._)

In this respect, _counsel for the defense_ declares:

The idea of setting up a skull collection of Jewish-Bolshevist
Commissars initiated with Dr. Hirt, director of the Anatomy Department
of the University of Strasbourg. Dr. Hirt himself submitted to Himmler
the suggestion for setting up such a collection. (_Tr. p. 5704._) The
suggestion received Himmler’s complete assistance. Himmler issued
instructions to place everything at Hirt’s disposal which he required
for his experiments. (_NO-090, Pros. Ex. 176._) In addition to this,
Himmler issued an order through his personal staff on 6 November 1942
that everything necessary will be placed at the disposal of Professor
Dr. Hirt. (_NO-089, Pros. Ex. 179._)

It can be seen from the letter of the personal staff of the Reich Leader
SS to the Reich Business Manager of the Ahnenerbe, dated 25 March 1942,
how energetically Himmler favored the experiments of Dr. Hirt. This
letter states:

    “In this connection, please get in touch with Hirt as soon as
    possible and consider further how Hirt can best be brought
    closer to us.” (_Sievers 53, Sievers Ex. 49._)

It can be seen further from the direct examination of Sievers that Dr.
Hirt was a confidant of Himmler, for Sievers was able to establish this
fact as early as 1936 and in the subsequent years had an opportunity to
repeat this observation. (_Tr. pp. 5706-7._)

This can also be established by means of the conference which took place
at Easter 1942 regarding the course of which Sievers has given a
detailed description. Among other things, Sievers called attention to
the fact that Hirt and his anatomical collection, which was a University
matter, did not concern the Ahnenerbe in any way.

Himmler became quite active after this aggressive action of Sievers,
following which the latter requested an order in writing. (_Tr. p.
5715._)

In this connection, the order of Himmler, dated 7 July 1942, must also
be mentioned. Figure 2 reads as follows (_NO-422, Pros. Ex. 33_):

    “I order the Ahnenerbe

    “1. * * *

    “2. To aid in every possible manner the research activities of
    SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Professor Dr. Hirt and in the same way
    promote all the experiments and work pertinent to same.”

These facts were necessary in order to clarify matters for the chief
instigators, Himmler and Hirt. Everyone cognizant of the conditions
knows that it was also impossible in this case to act in any way
contrary to the orders issued by Himmler.

Until the Easter conference of 1942, Sievers knew nothing of the
Commissar Order; Himmler at that time showed him pictures of Bolshevist
Commissars, men and women who had been arrested, as well as pictures of
German soldiers and civilians who had been killed and mutilated in the
most horrible manner by these male and female monsters. This influenced
Sievers’ attitude toward the “Commissar Order,” the contents of which he
learned in outline at that time. The original text of the “Commissar
Order” could not be produced during the Goering[85] trial. For a
clarification of the contents of this order, counsel for the defense
refers to the—

    “Directives for the commands of the Chiefs of the Security
    Police and of the Security Service (SD) to be transferred to the
    Stalags.” (_Sievers 54, Sievers Ex. 50._)

As in the other cases, Sievers’ activity consisted in forwarding
correspondence, whether it came from “above,” that is, Himmler, Rudolf
Brandt, or from Hirt or other third parties. It can be shown
conclusively that he himself issued no instructions and orders and
thereby exercised no decisive activity.

The suggestion to set up a Jewish-Bolshevist skull collection did not
originate with Sievers but with Dr. Hirt. The order for this was issued
by Himmler, who also ordered that Hirt should be granted all possible
assistance.

Himmler requested information about the anthropological experiments of
Dr. Hirt from Sievers and ordered the presentation of a report from Dr.
Hirt. Thereafter, Sievers submitted, on 9 February 1942, the report
requested again by Dr. Brandt on 29 December 1941.

                 *        *        *        *        *

After his meeting with Hirt in May 1941 and his brief report to Himmler,
Sievers obviously did not concern himself further with the entire
matter, until Himmler, in his letter dated 29 December 1941, requested a
detailed report from Hirt through Dr. Brandt. This can be seen from the
reference memorandum of Sievers dated 9 February 1942 in his letter of 9
February 1942 to R. Brandt (_NO-085, Pros. Ex. 175_) and was also stated
by Sievers on direct examination. (_Tr. p. 5704._) At that time, Himmler
imparted the information which Sievers passed on to Hirt in his letter
of 3 January 1942. In this letter, the question of a Jewish-Bolshevist
skull collection was never mentioned but simply the matter of
anthropological experiments. It is generally known that the carrying out
of anthropological experiments forms a part of the chief duties of every
anatomical institute, and also that such experiments are conducted on
designated groups of persons, and that persons who have been executed
are turned over to anatomical institutes for research purposes. Upon the
request of Hirt for assistance in his anthropological experiments,
Himmler immediately made a corresponding offer; as the competent chief
of the German police, he was in a position to do so. And Sievers, at
that time, need not have assumed, by any stretch of the imagination that
the experimental subjects were to be killed for this purpose. On the
basis of the general practice, he could perhaps more easily assume that
only the corpses of those legally condemned to death and legally
executed would be considered for the experiments of Hirt. Today we know
that it was compatible with his criminal mentality insofar as human
experiments and the like were concerned. At that time, the latter part
of 1941, no one who, like Sievers, had not up to this time come in
contact with experiments on human beings could have suspected in advance
that in this case it would be a question of criminal acts.

In addition, there was no provision made at all at this time for Hirt’s
working in connection with the Ahnenerbe. In his letter of 3 January
1942 to Hirt, Sievers writes:

    “In order to effect your transfer to the Ahnenerbe, that is, to
    the Personal Staff of the Reich Leader SS, I would like some
    information from you.”

Naturally, Himmler wanted Hirt to be as close to him as possible, but in
reference to the transfer Sievers adds: “* * * that is, to the Personal
Staff of the Reich Leader SS”, for neither Sievers nor Hirt assumed that
Hirt would receive the support of Himmler through the Institute for
Humanistic Studies of the Ahnenerbe of all things. This was also
testified to by Sievers on direct examination. (_Tr. pp. 5715 6._)

Not until later did Hirt’s connection with the Ahnenerbe develop as a
result of the personal and extraordinary urging of Himmler, as can be
proved by the two letters, dated 27 February 1942 (_NO-090, Pros. Ex.
176_), and 25 March 1942 (_Sievers 33, Sievers Ex. 49_). On the basis of
these letters and the efforts of Himmler, Sievers then lodged a protest
with Himmler at Easter, 1942—5 April—as he set forth in detail on
direct examination. (_Tr. pp. 5714-15._)

As a matter of fact, Hirt did not become a member of the Ahnenerbe until
the fall of 1942, as can be seen from the prosecution rebuttal Document
NO-3819, Prosecution Exhibit 550.

The rebuttal documents submitted by the prosecution in this matter do
not, therefore, refute the testimony of Sievers on his direct
examination, but _confirm them_, which is also shown by the affidavits
of Frau Dr. Schmitz (_Sievers 45, Sievers Ex. 46_; _Sievers 55, Sievers
Ex. 51_), and is shown in a further summary in the affidavit of Sievers.
(_Sievers 64, Sievers Ex. 59._)

Letter of the Chief of the Security Police (SIPO) and of the Security
Service (SD) dated 9 November 1941, regarding the transportation of the
Soviet-Russian prisoners of war, who were to be executed, to the
concentration camps (_1234-PS, Pros. Ex. 555_):

It can be seen from this document that Soviet-Russian prisoners of war
who were to be executed were taken to the concentration camps. Although
the Commissar Order was not known to Sievers in detail, it follows from
the context of the Easter conference of 1942, which Sievers had with
Himmler, that Soviet-Russian Commissars were affected by this order. At
that time, it was generally known in the German Wehrmacht and also among
the German civilian population that there were female commissars in the
Soviet-Russian Army who evidenced an unusual degree of fanaticism. It
was also known that strong gangs of insurgents were being formed behind
the German front line, who were conducting a ruthless and brutal war
against members of the German Wehrmacht of both sexes contrary to all
the rules of international law. In the ranks of these gangs there were
many riflewomen who, in complete accordance with the provisions of
international law, were condemned to death. In this respect, it must be
stated that all or the great majority of the Soviet-Russian Commissars
did not commit crimes against international law. However, there can be
no doubt that within their great numbers, a certain number could have
also been found who could have committed such crimes. Since the number
of skeletons requested by Hirt was small, Sievers could assume that only
such criminals could be considered for the collection.

Therefore, it cannot be argued that Sievers must in any case have
assumed from the letter dictated by Dr. Beger to the Reich Security Main
Office, dated 21 June 1943, that the persons who had been chosen by Dr.
Beger in the concentration camp at Auschwitz were to be liquidated
without trial or without any legal basis. It was not the duty of Sievers
to check this matter. Here we must examine only whether Sievers in any
case is bound to have recognized that the proceedings were illegal or
whether he could rely on the fact that there existed a legal basis for
the liquidation ordered by Himmler. Considering the war conditions in
the East, Sievers could assume the latter fact without further ado.

These statements are only made in case it should be assumed that Sievers
had the obligation to examine this independently. We think, however,
that someone who was only engaged in a subordinate position was entitled
to rely on the legality of the decisions of his superior.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_

Doc. No.    Pros. Ex. No.           Description of Document           Page
NO-085           175        Letter from Sievers to Rudolf Brandt, 9    748
                              February 1942, and report by Hirt
                              concerning the acquisition of skulls
                              of Jewish-Bolshevik Commissars.
NO-086           177        Letter from Sievers to Rudolf Brandt, 2    750
                              November 1942, requesting with
                              Himmler’s approval, 150 skeletons.
NO-087           181        Letter from Sievers to Eichmann (copy to   751
                              Rudolf Brandt), 21 June 1943,
                              concerning selection of subjects for a
                              skeleton collection.
NO-807           185        Tank containing formaldehyde for the       905
                              preservation of corpses; corpses
                              assembled in tanks prior to
                              dissection; corpse showing incisions
                              in preparation for dissection. (_See
                              Selections from Photographic Evidence
                              of the Prosecution._)

                           _Defense Documents_

Doc. No.     Def. Ex. No.           Description of Document           Page
Sievers 45  Sievers Ex. 46  Extract from the affidavit of Dr. Gisela   752
                              Schmitz, 27 March 1947, on Sievers’
                              position in the Ahnenerbe Society and
                              his connection with the skeleton
                              collection.
Sievers 54  Sievers Ex. 50  Regulations for the Commandos              754
                              (Einsatzkommandos) of the Security
                              Police and the Security Service to be
                              activated in Stalags.

                               _Testimony_

Extract from the testimony of defendant Rudolf Brandt                  757

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-085
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 175

  LETTER FROM SIEVERS TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 9 FEBRUARY 1942, AND REPORT BY
HIRT CONCERNING THE ACQUISITION OF SKULLS OF JEWISH-BOLSHEVIK COMMISSARS

The Ahnenerbe
The Reich Business Manager

                                                 Berlin, 9 February 1942
                                                            G/R/2 page 1

To: SS Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Brandt
Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Strasse 8

                                 Secret
Dear Comrade Brandt:

For the reason that Professor Dr. Hirt has in the meantime become
seriously ill, I regret that I have been unable to submit any sooner Dr.
Hirt’s report which you requested in your letter of 29 December 1941,
Journal No. AR/493/37. He was stricken with pulmonary hemorrhages, the
diagnosis was “cystlung”, so at least it is not TB. In addition to that
he suffered from circulatory asthenia. At present he is still in the
hospital, but hopes that the doctor will release him soon so that he
can, at least to a limited degree, resume his work. Due to those
circumstances Professor Hirt was able to furnish only a preliminary
report which, however, I still should like to submit to your attention.
The report concerns—

1. His research in the field of microscopy of living tissues, the
discovery of a new method of examination, and the construction of a new
research microscope, and

2. a proposal for securing skulls of Jewish-Bolshevik Commissars.

As a supplement to report 1, some special publications are attached; of
which the two parties from the “Zeiss Nachrichten” #10 (Vol. II) and 1-5
(Vol. III) facilitate most rapid general orientation, whereas other
publications deal with difficult, individual scientific studies.

                                                    Sincerely yours
                                                         Heil Hitler!
                                                       [Signed] SIEVERS

_Enclosures_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Enclosure_

Subject: Securing skulls of Jewish-Bolshevik Commissars for the purpose
of scientific research at the Reich University of Strasbourg.

There exist extensive collections of skulls of almost all races and
peoples. Of the Jewish race, however, only so very few specimens of
skulls are at the disposal of science that a study of them does not
permit precise conclusions. The war in the East now presents us with the
opportunity to remedy this shortage. By procuring the skulls of the
Jewish-Bolshevik Commissars, who personify a repulsive yet
characteristic subhumanity, we have the opportunity of obtaining
tangible scientific evidence.

The actual obtaining and collecting of these skulls without difficulty
could be best accomplished by a directive issued to the Wehrmacht in the
future to immediately turn over alive all Jewish-Bolshevik Commissars to
the field police [Feldpolizei]. The field police in turn is to be issued
special directives to continually inform a certain office of the number
and place of detention of these captured Jews and to guard them well
until the arrival of a special deputy. This special deputy, commissioned
with the collection of the material (a junior physician attached to the
Wehrmacht or even the field police, or a medical student equipped with
car and driver), is to take a prescribed series of photographs and
anthropological measurements, and is to ascertain, insofar as is
possible, the origin, date of birth, and other personal data of the
prisoner. Following the subsequently induced death of the Jew, whose
head must not be damaged, he will separate the head from the torso and
will forward it to its point of destination in a preserving fluid in a
well-sealed tin container especially made for this purpose. On the basis
of the photos, the measurements and other data on the head and, finally,
the skull itself, comparative anatomical research, research on racial
classification, pathological features of the skull formation, form and
size of the brain, and many other things can begin. In accordance with
its scope and tasks, the new Reich University of Strasbourg would be the
most appropriate place for the collection of and research on the skulls
thus acquired.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-086
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 177

 LETTER FROM SIEVERS TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 2 NOVEMBER 1942, REQUESTING WITH
                   HIMMLER’S APPROVAL, 150 SKELETONS

The Ahnenerbe
The Reich Business Manager

                                                 Berlin, 2 November 1942
                                                              [Stamp]
                                          Personal Staff Reich Leader SS
                                      Registration of Files Secret 5/116

                                 Secret

To: SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Brandt
Berlin

Dear Comrade Brandt!

The Reich Leader SS once ordered, as you know, that SS Hauptsturmfuehrer
Prof. Dr. Hirt should be provided with all necessary material for his
research work. I have already reported to the Reich Leader SS that for
some anthropological studies 150 skeletons of inmates or Jews are needed
and should be provided by the Auschwitz concentration camp. It is only
necessary for the Reich Security Main Office to be furnished now with an
official directive by the Reich Leader SS; by order of the Reich Leader
SS, however, you could issue it yourself.

                                                   Sincerely yours,
                                                         Heil Hitler!
                                                       [Signed] SIEVERS

1 enclosure:
Draft of a letter to the Reich Security Main Office

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-087
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 181

 LETTER FROM SIEVERS TO EICHMANN (COPY TO RUDOLF BRANDT), 21 JUNE 1943,
       CONCERNING SELECTION OF SUBJECTS FOR A SKELETON COLLECTION

                                                [Handwritten] XI a 56

Ahnenerbe Office
Institute for Military Scientific Research
G/H/6, S2/He.

                        Berlin-Dahlem, Puecklerstrasse 16, 21 June 1943
                               Top Secret

                                                G.R.Z.I. A.H. Sk. No. 10
                                                5 copies—2d copy
                                                no enclosures

To
Reich Security Main Office
Office IV B 4
Attention: SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Eichmann,
Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Strasse 8
Subject: Assembling of a skeleton collection.

With reference to your letter of 25 September 1942, IV B 4 3576/42 g
1488, and the personal talks which have taken place in the meantime on
the above matter, you are informed that the coworker in this office who
was charged with the execution of the above-mentioned special task, SS
Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Bruno Beger, ended his work in the Auschwitz
concentration camp on 15 June 1943 because of the existing danger of
infectious diseases.

A total of 115 persons were worked on, 79 of whom were Jews, 2 Poles, 4
Asiatics, and 30 Jewesses. At present, these prisoners are separated
according to sex and each group is accommodated in a hospital building
of the Auschwitz concentration camp and are in quarantine.

For further processing of the selected persons an _immediate transfer to
the Natzweiler concentration camp is now imperative_; this must be
accelerated in view of the _danger of infectious diseases in Auschwitz_.
Enclosed is a list containing the names of the selected persons.

It is requested that the necessary directives be issued.

Since with the transfer of the prisoners to Natzweiler the danger of
spreading diseases exists, it is requested that an immediate shipment of
_disease-free and clean prisoners’ clothing_ for 80 men and 30 women be
ordered sent from Natzweiler to Auschwitz.

At the same time one must provide for the accommodation of the _30
women_ in the Natzweiler concentration camp for a short period.

                                                  [Signature] SIEVERS
                                                   SS Standartenfuehrer

Carbon copies to—
_a._ SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Beger
_b._ SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Prof. Hr. Hirt
_c._ SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. Brandt

                              PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT SIEVERS 45
                              SIEVERS DEFENSE EXHIBIT 46

  EXTRACT FROM THE AFFIDAVIT OF DR. GISELA SCHMITZ, 27 MARCH 1947, ON
 SIEVERS’ POSITION IN THE AHNENERBE SOCIETY AND HIS CONNECTION WITH THE
                          SKELETON COLLECTION

                 *        *        *        *        *

In 1937 I was appointed Secretary in the Research and Instruction
Society, the Ahnenerbe, Registered Association, where I remained until
the end of the war in 1945. During all these years I worked for Wolfram
Sievers, who was Reich Business Manager, and I gained thereby a fairly
comprehensive insight into the organization of the Ahnenerbe and into
Sievers activity.

The organization of the Ahnenerbe during the time when I was attached to
it was as follows:

Himmler was the president; Professor Wuest, Rector of Munich University,
was his curator; Sievers was responsible to the latter as Reich Business
Manager.

An internal code of procedure laid down as a regulation for the Reich
Business Manager stipulated that all decisive functions were the concern
of the department chief and curator of the Ahnenerbe. According to this
all decisions had to be obtained by the Reich Business Manager from the
department chief if they were not dealt with by the president. Professor
Wuest had the right to report direct to Himmler as president on all
questions; Sievers could only do so on administrative concerns, and then
only when Himmler consulted him on special matters and requested a
report of him.

Sievers’ own sphere was financial and staff administration and the
supervision of the business dealings of the Ahnenerbe. In scientific
matters Sievers was denied the right to issue any orders. He was also
forbidden personally to sign letters concerning scientific matters.
However, as it was not always possible in practice to send all letters
from Berlin to Munich, the domicile and permanent residence of the
curator, for signature, Sievers often signed; Wuest then countersigned
the copy.

When in 1942 the Ahnenerbe became a department of the personal staff of
the Reich Leader SS, Professor Wuest became department chief. He was
thus made responsible for all matters of administration and personnel,
which had hitherto been the responsibility of the Reich Business
Manager. Himmler personally made it quite clear to Sievers that he was
not to interfere in scientific affairs.

In this connection I mention briefly the Ahnenerbe diary which it was
Sievers’ duty, as Reich Business Manager, to write up. By express order
of Himmler, all departments of the Reich Leader SS had to keep diaries.
They were a hobby-horse of Himmler’s, and failure to comply with this
order would have had very unpleasant consequences for the person
responsible. Sievers who was frequently away from Berlin used to dictate
the diary entries on his return. I know that the entries would not
always have been able to stand close examination—they were inaccurate
in parts and sometimes fabricated. Sievers insisted upon keeping the
diary ostensibly correct, so as not to offend Himmler. The reasons for
this will be explained by a later part of my statement. Sievers also
mentioned to me the collection of Jewish-Bolshevik skulls, which was
planned by Professor Hirt of Strasbourg.

Document NO-085, Prosecution Exhibit 175, regarding the collection of
Jewish skeletons has been submitted to me. With the exception of the
last paragraph which begins with the words “For the preservation * * *”,
the report was—as far as I remember—drafted by Dr. Bruno Beger who had
come from the SS Race and Settlement Main Office (RuSHA).[86] I first
saw the report in the autumn of 1941. The report had already been
circulated in all possible offices and one copy had also been sent to
the Ahnenerbe. The reasons why the report had also been sent to the
Ahnenerbe are unknown to me; in any case, Sievers showed me this
proposal with all signs of horror and defined it as a hybrid outgrowth
of the propaganda which at that time used to describe the eastern
nations as “subhuman.” The report itself was filed away, as it did not
concern us, or passed on to the chief of the Ahnenerbe, Professor Wuest,
as it was really a “scientific” matter. One day Sievers told me that
Himmler had mentioned this matter in a private conversation—I believe
it was in connection with Professor Hirt—and ordered the document to be
submitted after obtaining an opinion from Professor Hirt. Hirt then
added the last paragraph. With this addition the report was forwarded to
the personal staff of the Reich Leader SS and to Dr. Rudolf Brandt.

With regard to the Document NO-087, Prosecution Exhibit 181, as shown to
me, I can state: the letter to the Reich Security Main Office bears the
dictation reference S 2/Ha. According to this, the letter was not
dictated by Sievers himself, but—as I remember—by Dr. Beger who
dictated the letter in the office of subdepartment Chief Wolff, whose
reference number was S 2.

With regard to Document NO-088, Prosecution Exhibit 182, I can say that
Professor Hirt had asked by telephone for a decision on the suggestions
which appear at the end of this document. Sievers only passed this
request of Hirt on to the personal staff of the Reich Leader SS.

Sievers spoke to me repeatedly about the experiments on humans and also
about the collection of skeletons and always said that these things were
very much against his inner feelings. Repeatedly, I had an opportunity
to see how much Sievers suffered in this connection. He sometimes had
pronounced periods of depression.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                      TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT SIEVERS 54
                                      SIEVERS DEFENSE EXHIBIT 50

  REGULATIONS FOR THE COMMANDOS (EINSATZKOMMANDOS)[87] OF THE SECURITY
       POLICE AND THE SECURITY SERVICE TO BE ACTIVATED IN STALAGS

                                                   B 101
                                                   Enclosures 2
Office IV                                          Berlin, 17 July 1941

                               Top Secret

The activation of commandos will take place in accordance with the
agreement of the Chief of the Security Police and Security Service and
the Supreme Command of the Armed Forces as of 16 July 1941. The
commandos will work independently according to special authorization and
in consequence of the general regulations given to them in the limits of
the camp organizations. Naturally, the commandos will keep close contact
with the camp commander and the defense officers assigned to him.

The mission of the commandos is the political investigating of all camp
inmates, the elimination and further treatment—

_a._ of all political, criminal, or in some other way unbearable
elements among them.

_b._ of those persons who could be used for the reconstruction of the
occupied territories.

For the execution of their mission, no additional means can be put at
the disposal of the commandos. The Deutsche Fahndungsbuch [German Wanted
List] the Aufenthaltsermittlungsliste [Residence Locator List] and the
Sonderfahndungsbuch UdSSR [Special Wanted List, Union of the Soviet
Socialist Republic] will prove to be useful in only a small number of
cases; the Sonderfahndungsbuch UdSSR is not sufficient, because it
contains only a small part of Soviet Russians considered to be
dangerous.

Therefore, the commandos must use their special knowledge and ability
and rely on their own findings and self-acquired knowledge. Therefore,
they will be able to start carrying out their mission only when they
have gathered together appropriate material.

The commandos must use for their work as far as possible, at present and
even later, the experiences of the camp commanders which the latter have
collected meanwhile from observation of the prisoners and examinations
of camp inmates.

Further, the commandos must make efforts from the beginning to seek out
among the prisoners elements which appear reliable, regardless if there
are Communists concerned or not, in order to use them for intelligence
purposes inside of the camp and, if advisable, later in the occupied
territories also.

By use of such informers and by use of all other existing possibilities,
the discovery of all elements to be eliminated among the prisoners must
succeed step by step at once. The commandos must learn for themselves,
in every case, by means of short questioning of the informers and
eventual questioning of other prisoners.

The information of one informer is not sufficient to designate a camp
inmate to be a suspect without further proof; it must be confirmed in
some way if possible.

Above all, the following must be discovered; all important functionaries
of state and party, especially—

    Professional revolutionaries.

    Functionaries of the Comintern.

    All policy forming party functionaries of the Communist Party of
    the Soviet Union and its subsidiary organizations in the central
    committees, in the regional and district committees.

    All Peoples Commissars and their deputies.

    All former Political Commissars in the Red Army.

    Leading personalities of the Main and intermediate offices of
    the state authorities.

    Members of the Soviet Russian intelligentsia.

    All Jews.

    All persons who are found to be agitators or fanatical
    Communists.

It is not less important, as mentioned already, to discover all those
persons who could be used for the reconstruction, administration, and
management of the conquered Russian territories.

Finally, all such persons must be secured who are still needed for the
completion of further investigation, regardless if they are police
investigations or other investigations, and for settling questions of
general interest. Among them are all those especially who, because of
their position and their knowledge, are able to give information about
measures and working methods of the Soviet-Russian State, of the
Communist Party, or of the Comintern.

In the final analysis, consideration must be given to origin in all
decisions to be made. The leader of the Einsatzkommando will give a
short report every week by telephone or an express letter to the Reich
Security Main Office, containing:

1. Short description of their activities in the past week.

2. Number of all definitely suspicious persons (report of number
sufficient).

3. Individual names of all persons found to be functionaries of the
Comintern, leading functionaries of the party, Peoples Commissars,
leading personalities, and political commissars.

4. Number of all persons found not to be suspicious informers, with a
short description of their position.

A. Prisoners of war.

B. Civilians.

On the basis of those activity reports the Reich Security Main Office
will issue immediately the further measures to be applied. For the
measures to be applied on the basis of this successive directive, the
commandos are to demand the surrender of the prisoners involved from the
camp command.

The camp commandants have received orders from the Supreme Commander of
the Armed Forces to approve such requests.

Executions are not to be held in the camp or in the immediate vicinity
of the camp. If the camps in the General Government are in the immediate
vicinity of the border, then the prisoners are to be taken for special
treatment, if possible, into former Soviet-Russian territory.

Should executions be necessary for reasons of camp discipline, then the
leader of the Einsatzkommando must apply to the camp commander for it.

The commandos have to keep lists about the special treatments carried
out and must contain—

    Current number.

    Family name and first name.

    Date and place of birth.

    Military rank.

    Profession.

    Last residence.

    Reason for special treatment.

    Day and place of special treatment (card file).

In regard to executions to be carried out and to the possible removal of
reliable civilians and the removal of informers for the Einsatz group in
the occupied territories, the leader of the Einsatzkommando must make an
agreement with the nearest state police office, as well as with the
commandant of the security police unit and security service and beyond
these with the chief of the Einsatz group concerned in the occupied
territories.

Reports of that kind are to be transmitted for information to the Reich
Security Main Office, IV A 1. Excellent behavior during and after duty,
the best cooperation with the camp commanders, and careful examinations
are the duty of all leaders and members of the Einsatzkommando.

The members of the Einsatzkommando must be constantly aware of the
special importance of the missions entrusted to them.

       EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT RUDOLF BRANDT[88]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. KAUFFMANN: Witness, I now put to you documents concerning, among
other things, procuring skulls of Jewish-Bolshevist Commissars. Please
look at page 1 of Document NO-085, Prosecution Exhibit 175. This is a
letter from the Ahnenerbe, of 9 February 1942, addressed to you. It is a
secret communication, and it bears Sievers’ signature. There are two
annexes to this document. One of them concerns research into microscopy,
and the other one concerns the suggestion for procuring the
afore-mentioned skeletons for the purpose of scientific research. Now, I
ask you whether you received this document, whether you are familiar
with the contents of this letter, and whether you still remember it
today?

DEFENDANT RUDOLF BRANDT: I received the letter with the inclosures, but
I recall as little about this as I recall about the other matters.

Q. Do you wish to say then that you did not read the two inclosures to
this letter?

A. That is what I really should like to say because, as I have already
said, reports which were destined for the Reich Leader were put with the
mail that he was to read personally, and it would have been the same in
the case of Professor Hirt’s report, which is really incomprehensible to
a lay reader.

Q. Perhaps I might point out to the Tribunal that the two inclosures are
wrongly bound in the document. The first inclosure refers to the
microscopic research and the second inclosure to the procuring of
skeletons. Is that also your opinion, Herr Brandt?

A. Yes. That is how the letter states it. First, comes the microscopic
study and then the other.

Q. Now, I ask you, with particular regard to the fact that you are
testifying under oath, did you know in detail that, as can be seen from
this report, human beings were to be killed and that the skulls or
skeletons were then to be sent to the University of Strasbourg? Did you
know these details?

A. No. I did not know these details.

Q. Would you tell us just what you did know, in broad terms?

A. I knew the contents of the letter which I sent on to Eichmann.

Q. This is Document NO-116, Prosecution Exhibit 178. In this letter you
inform Eichmann that everything necessary would be done for Professor
Hirt to build up this collection of skeletons, and you say further that
SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers will communicate with Eichmann as to the
details of this. I now ask you, who is Eichmann?

A. I do not think that I had any idea who Eichmann was at that time.
Sievers sent me the draft of this letter, which I certainly did not send
on in this form as it appears here. As was always the case, I showed it
to Himmler, and only then did I send it on. I am quite sure that I heard
Eichmann’s name then for the first time. I did not know him otherwise,
nor did I know him later.

Q. Can you not tell us whether you did not have some idea as to what was
going on here in this whole business? When, for instance, one heard that
a collection of skeletons was to be made, then one would surely ask
oneself what was really going on?

A. I certainly had no other ideas concerning this matter than those that
would normally arise in connection with a collection of skeletons for
anatomical purposes; and it would never have occurred to me that any
prisoners would be used for this except those who had died a normal
death.

Q. Did you work on this affair independently thereafter, or did you
submit the matter to Himmler for him to decide and arrange?

A. It was submitted to Himmler, like all other questions. To begin with
I was not thoroughly versed in such matters, and secondly, owing to my
lack of technical knowledge, I could not give orders or instructions for
it to be carried out.

Q. I draw your attention now to Document NO-087, Prosecution Exhibit
181, again a letter to Eichmann marked “secret”, dated 21 June 1943. The
letter was apparently sent by Sievers with copies for two other persons
and also with a copy to be sent to you. This letter says that altogether
115 persons would be affected and that the selected persons should be
sent to the concentration camp at Natzweiler. How would such a letter be
handled by you in your registry office—I refer now to the copy which
was sent to you? Did you again submit it to Himmler, and did you or
someone else lay the letter aside?

A. I do not remember ever having seen this letter. The file note on it
bears an initial that is not mine, but that of my collaborator Berg. He
also initialed for filing several of the documents that are in the
document book.

Q. Now, please look at the file note of Berg. (_NO-091, Pros. Ex. 183._)
Would you say that that is the same Berg who initialed the foregoing
document?

A. Yes. That is the same Berg.

Q. Now, please look at Document NO-091. Here it says, “Note—for SS
Standartenfuehrer Dr. Brandt”, and it is signed by Berg. This reproduces
a talk that Berg had with Sievers; do you remember seeing this notation?

A. I do not remember having seen it.

Q. Let me point out the date, 26 October 1944.

A. That was the last day of our stay at our East Prussian quarters. The
Russians were only about 30 to 40 kilometers away. Berg would have made
the note so that I could get a final report to Himmler. As, however, we
had to clear out by that evening, there were more important things to do
than to submit such a memorandum, so that possibly he did not show it to
me at all.

-----

[85] Trial before International Military Tribunal. See Trial of the
Major War Criminals, vols. I-XLII, Nuremberg, 1947.

[86] See Case 8, United States _vs._ Ulrich Greifelt, et al. in vols. IV
and V.

[87] See Case 9, United States _vs._ Otto Ohlendorf, et al. in vol. IV.

[88] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 24, 25,
26 March 1947, pp. 4869-4994.


             C. Project To Kill Tubercular Polish Nationals

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Blome and Rudolf Brandt were charged with participation
in and responsibility for the murder and mistreatment of tens of
thousands of Polish Nationals allegedly infected with incurable
tuberculosis (par. 8 of the indictment). On this charge both defendants
were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence and argumentation on this
charge is contained in its closing brief against the defendant Blome. An
extract from this brief is set forth below on pages 760 to 763. A
corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense has been selected
from the final plea for the defendant Blome. It appears below on pages
763 to 768. This argumentation is followed by selections from the
evidence on pages 769 to 794.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                            DEFENDANT BLOME_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Personal Participation in Criminal Activities—Murder and Mistreatment of
                           Polish Nationals_

By 1941 it was the accepted policy of the Third Reich to exterminate the
Jewish population of Germany and the occupied countries. (IMT
judgment.[89]) In pursuance of this policy the Reich Governor of the
Warthegau, Greiser, obtained permission from Himmler to exterminate the
Jewish population in this province. In a letter of 1 May 1942, he
informed Himmler that the “special treatment” of about 100,000 Jews
would be completed within 2 to 3 months. He stated that as soon as this
task was completed, the “existing and efficient special commandos” could
be used for the extermination of approximately 35,000 Polish Nationals
who suffered from open tuberculosis. These Poles allegedly were a danger
to the German officials and their families because they were a possible
source of tubercular infection. Greiser went on to say:

    “The ever-increasing risks were also recognized and appreciated
    by the deputy of the Reich Health Leader for Public Health
    [Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer] Comrade Professor Dr. Blome as well
    as by the leader of your X-ray battalion, SS Standartenfuehrer
    Prof. Dr. Hohlfelder.

    “Though in Germany proper it is not possible to take appropriate
    draconic steps against this public plague, I think I could take
    responsibility for my suggestion to have cases of open
    tuberculosis exterminated among the Polish race here in the
    Warthegau. Of course, only a Pole should be handed over to such
    an action who is not only suffering from open tuberculosis, but
    whose incurability is proved and certified by a public health
    officer.

    “Considering the urgency of this project I ask for your approval
    in principle as soon as possible. This would enable us to make
    the preparations with all necessary precautions now to get the
    action against the Poles suffering from open tuberculosis under
    way, while the action against the Jews is in its closing
    stages.” (_NO-246, Pros. Ex. 196._)

In a letter of 27 June 1942 Himmler gave consent in principle to this
plan and instructed Greiser to discuss the individual measures in detail
with the security police first, in order to assure an inconspicuous
accomplishment of the task. (_NO-244, Pros. Ex. 201._) On 21 November
1942 Greiser informed Himmler that the examinations which were to be
carried out in order to separate the curable and incurable would be
executed by Professor Hohlfelder and his X-ray battalion. He estimated
that the first utilization of the method would be in approximately six
months. He further stated:

    “In this stage of the proceedings, Professor Dr. Blome, in his
    capacity as Deputy Chief of the Public Health Office [Hauptamt
    fuer Volksgesundheit] of the NSDAP is raising some objections as
    to its execution, as he states in a letter of 18 November. These
    objections are expressed only now, although Dr. Blome and Dr.
    Hohlfelder and myself have spent months of preliminary work on
    examination, clarification, and straightening out the whole
    procedure.

    “I enclose a copy of Blome’s letter of 18 November for your
    information * * *.” (_NO-249, Pros. Ex. 202._)

In this letter, Blome stated that among the Polish population of the
province, at least 35,000 persons were suffering from open tuberculosis,
and besides this number, about 120,000 consumptives were in need of
treatment. This constituted an enormous danger to the German settlers in
all parts of the province. In order to make further German immigration
possible, counter measures were to be taken soon. Blome then outlined
the three ways for the practical elimination of the danger of infection:

    “1. Special treatment [Sonderbehandlung] of the seriously ill
    persons.

    “2. Most rigorous isolation of the seriously ill persons.

    “3. Creation of a reservation for all tubercular patients.”

As to the first proposal he stated:

    “The approximately 35,000 Poles who are incurable and infectious
    will be ‘specially treated’. All other Polish consumptives will
    be subjected to an appropriate cure in order to save them for
    work and to avoid their causing contagion.” (_NO-249, Pros. Ex.
    202._)

Blome pointed out that one of the practical difficulties of outright
extermination of all tubercular Poles was that it might provide
excellent propaganda material for the enemies of Germany, especially
with regard to the strong Catholic feelings of the Italian nation and
“all the physicians of the world.” He therefore considered it necessary
that Hitler himself personally decide on this step. Should Hitler
consider this radical solution as unsuitable, preparations for the
execution of the plan as outlined in points 2 and 3 should be made. The
exclusive settlement of all tubercular Poles, irrespective of whether
they were curable or incurable, would remove the danger of infection for
the German settlers. These Poles should be used for labor. Not only the
tubercular Poles of the Warthegau, but also those in Danzig-West
Prussia, those of the administrative district of Zichenau, and of the
Province of Upper Silesia should be isolated in the same settlement. He
stated:

    “Another solution to be taken into consideration would be a
    strict isolation of all the infectious and incurable
    consumptives, without exception, in nursing establishments.
    _This solution would lead to the comparatively rapid death of
    the sick._ With the necessary addition of Polish doctors and
    nursing personnel, the character of a pure death camp would be
    somewhat mitigated.” (_NO-249, Pros. Ex. 202._)

Finally Blome advocated as the most practicable solution the creation of
a reservation similar to the reservation for lepers. Within the
reservation, the strict isolation of the strongly contagious could
easily be achieved. In this way the danger of infection would be removed
and the problem of the German consumptives in the province would be
overcome. (_NO-250, Pros. Ex. 203._) Blome admitted that the expression
“special treatment” which he used in the letter meant the killing of the
tubercular Poles. (_Tr. p. 4791._)

Himmler approved Blome’s plan to create a reservation for tubercular
Poles, incurable and curable alike, in a letter to Greiser dated 3
December 1942. It would be possible to exploit this action for
propaganda purposes, whereas on the other hand, outright extermination
of those inflicted with open tuberculosis would take too long, as the
X-ray examinations of the Polish population would require at least six
months. (_NO-251, Pros. Ex. 204._)

That at least some of the tubercular Poles were exterminated, while the
others were taken to death camps where they were left to die, is proved
by the affidavit of the defendant Rudolf Brandt. (_NO-441, Pros. Ex.
205._) Brandt tried to explain, not to say repudiate, this affidavit by
testifying that he made the statements on the basis of documents shown
to him in pretrial interrogations. He stressed the point, however, that
he insisted the wording of one sentence be changed. This sentence
originally read: “As a result of the suggestions made by Blome and
Greiser, 8-10,000 Poles were exterminated”! He changed the expression
“8-10,000” to “numerous.” (_Tr. pp. 4890, 4953._) This proves in itself
that Brandt did not make his statement in exclusive reliance on the
contents of the documents shown to him in pretrial interrogations (_Tr.
p. 4891_) but also on the basis of the knowledge he obtained as
collaborator of Himmler. The documents do not show the execution of
“numerous” Poles. Moreover, Brandt states in these documents that Dr.
Blome visited Himmler from time to time and supported Greiser’s
suggestions. There is no document in evidence or in the possession of
the prosecution which would give the basis for this statement. It is,
therefore, clear that Brandt’s statements are founded upon knowledge
which he obtained from Himmler.

Without a doubt, Rudolf Brandt is as well advised on the crimes which
are the subject of this trial as any man in Germany. There is no reason
whatever for refusing to give full weight to the pretrial statements of
Brandt. There has been no proof that these statements were obtained by
fraud or duress. Brandt’s testimony before the Tribunal can be summed up
in one sentence: “I remember nothing.” Aside from a description of
Himmler’s personality, he contented himself with giving answers to
leading questions by his attorney which were calculated to reveal him as
a disembodied stenographic automaton—something in the nature of a
proficient half-wit. Surely his pretrial affidavits are entitled to more
weight than the blatant nonsense which was his testimony.

Blome denied that he ever planned or suggested that Poles suffering from
open tuberculosis should be exterminated and that the remainder should
be put in reservations and left there to die (_Tr. pp. 4578, 4790-1_)
but he is contradicted by the proof of his own making.

                 *        *        *        *        *

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

             _EXTRACT FROM THE FINAL PLEA FOR THE DEFENDANT
                               BLOME_[90]

                 *        *        *        *        *

Probably the most serious accusation against Dr. Blome seemed to be the
allegation that he had proposed the murder of 25,000-30,000 tubercular
Poles and had taken part in carrying out this plan. The evidence clearly
shows, however, that this accusation is quite unfounded. I maintain on
the contrary (_a_) it is not true that Dr. Blome approved or supported
this murderous plan, and (_b_) it is also untrue that this plan was ever
carried out. It is true, however, that it was Dr. Blome himself who
prevented this devilish plan. It was Dr. Blome who, by his clever
intervention saved the lives of the 25,000-30,000 tubercular Poles who
were to be “liquidated.”

The documents show that this plan originated with Gauleiter Greiser and
Reich Leader SS Himmler. Blome was then assigned to this matter because
it was known that he had for many years made the fight against
tuberculosis the aim of his life, and because he built his cancer
institute in the same Gau which Gauleiter Greiser governed. Blome stated
his attitude to this plan clearly at the time in the well-known letter
of 18 November 1942. (_NO-250, Pros. Ex. 203._) He discussed the three
possibilities which existed and explained the pro’s and con’s of each of
these three possibilities in detail. These three possibilities were
either “Liquidation,” i. e., the murder of those Poles suffering from
incurable tuberculosis, their internment in isolated institutions, or
lastly, their settlement in a reservation. In his letter of 18 November
1942 (Appendix 25) he definitely rejected the first possibility and
advocated the latter.

In this, Blome was completely successful. Greiser was so much impressed
by Blome’s arguments that he no longer dared to carry out the
liquidation of the Poles which had been decided upon. In fact, he
submitted Dr. Blome’s memorandum to the Reich Leader SS Himmler, so that
he should obtain a decision from Hitler himself. (_NO-249, Pros. Ex.
202._) This was already a remarkable success for Blome, because Himmler
had already ordered the liquidation of the Poles. Blome’s arguments made
such an impression even on the bloodhound Himmler that, contrary to
Greiser’s expectations, he cautiously put the matter before Hitler again
and obtained his definite ruling. It should be remembered that this in
itself would no longer have been necessary, because not only had Conti
agreed to the murder, but from Greiser’s covering note of 21 November
1942 it is obvious that Hitler had also given his approval to the
extermination of the Poles before.

Thereupon, after a subsequent examination of the matter, Hitler withdrew
the extermination order and thus Himmler had no alternative but to do
the same. This is clearly proved by Himmler’s letter of 3 December 1942.
(_NO-251, Pros. Ex. 204._)

The extermination of the Poles did not take place; _this is due to
Blome_.

Although these facts are incontestably proved by the documents
presented, the prosecution nevertheless upheld the charge against Blome.
This evidently was due to the peculiar wording of Blome’s letter to
Greiser of 18 November 1942. The prosecution in their speech of 19
December 1946 described this letter a “devilish masterpiece of murderous
intent.” In considering this case, the prevailing conditions should be
borne in mind. Dr. Blome knew that the tuberculous Poles were lost, that
their murder had been decided upon, unless it was possible on some
grounds to change Hitler’s mind at the last moment. The statement of the
witness Dr. Gundermann (_Blome 1, Blome Ex. 8_) proved that Blome at
that time, as is confirmed by Blome’s own testimony (_Tr. pp. 4574-78_),
strove for days for a successful wording of his letter; he repeatedly
drafted the letter, then rejected the wording again, and finally
introduced arguments in the letter which he hoped would be successful.
From the very beginning he was aware, of course, that his intervention
was bound to fail and have no success if he described Hitler’s planned
extermination of the Poles as a crime and downright murder and solemnly
protested against it. In this way Blome would have achieved nothing for
the Poles, but would have had to expect to be brought before a court
himself and sentenced for sabotaging an order of the Fuehrer, or to have
disappeared in a concentration camp without any legal sentence. With
such simple method as entering a solemn protest by calling on the laws
of humanity or of justice nothing would have been achieved with Hitler,
especially when he had already made up his mind and had decided on a
certain matter and had already given the necessary orders for execution;
in such cases Hitler was usually inaccessible and would not listen to
any counterproposals. Dr. Blome knew this, of course, just as well as,
for instance, the Gauleiter of the Lower Danube, who in connection with
a similar problem (sterilization), in his letter of 24 August 1942
(_NO-039, Pros. Ex. 153_) pointed out the importance of “enemy
propaganda,” as he considered this most likely to be successful. Dr.
Blome therefore looked for reasons which would perhaps have a decisive
influence on Hitler and these were either the Church or other nations.
It is understandable that Hitler, in view of the tense situation at that
time, in the middle of the Second World War, did not want to break
completely with the Church, and he also had to consider the opinion of
foreign countries so as not to antagonize neutral states. Dr. Blome
speculated on these two points. In his letter of 18 November 1942 he
emphasized in a skillful manner, and with full determination, these two
points of view, and with those two references he achieved full success.
(_NO-250, Pros. Ex. 203._)

It may now be realized why Blome, in the early part of his letter, tried
to give Hitler the impression that he (Blome) fully agreed with the plan
as such for the extermination of the Poles, and why he even pretended
that everything was already prepared for the execution of this plan.
Hitler had, so to speak, only to press the button and 25,000-30,000
Poles would be done away with. This was merely a trick which Blome used
in order to ensure a favorable consideration of his second and third
proposals (internment or reservation).

If Dr. Blome had written that he declined to approve such an order of
the Fuehrer, that, in consequence, no preparations for its execution had
been made, and that he would rather resign than become a party to a mass
murder, then Hitler would have had his customary outburst, and Blome
would have been finished as far as he was concerned; he would, of
course, have entirely disregarded the protest of such a “saboteur,” and
in the interests of so-called “reasons of State,” the Fuehrer’s orders
would have been strictly carried out. To prevent this, Dr. Blome had to
pretend for the time being, that he was ready to acknowledge the
Fuehrer’s orders as a matter of course and, where possible, to
participate personally in their execution, if Hitler, as Head of the
State, so desired. However, when weighing the pro’s and con’s, Dr. Blome
was able to bring to the foreground points of view against the plan of
extermination which conceivably might greatly impress Hitler.

Blome’s letter of 18 November 1942 can only be explained thus, and was
intended in this way. (_Blome 1, Blome Ex. 8._) So Dr. Blome, on the
strength of this letter, cannot be convicted. For it is certain that
Hitler thereupon dropped his plan and completely rescinded his orders
for the murder.

This success, which could hardly have been anticipated because of
Hitler’s obstinacy and vainglory, completely justifies the defendant
Blome. It proves that Blome’s conception was the right one and that his
manipulations saved the lives of the Poles.

Another matter helped Blome considerably, which must not be overlooked
here. Shortly before, Hitler had cancelled the continuation of the
Euthanasia Program. Apparently he did this under the influence of
numerous protests which had been made by the two Christian Churches. The
reaction abroad also played a considerable part in this because mass
destruction of the insane had been taken up repeatedly by the foreign
press with particular reproaches against the Nazi regime. Dr. Blome made
use of these points of view which had proved effective in the case of
the Euthanasia Program, and they also produced telling effects in the
case of the tubercular Poles.

Why did the prosecuting authorities maintain the accusation against. Dr.
Blome in spite of all this? Apparently this was solely on account of an
affidavit by the codefendant Rudolf Brandt. In his affidavit of 24
October 1946 Rudolf Brandt completely suppresses the letters which cause
the complete rescinding of the plan for murder. (_NO-441, Pros. Ex.
205._) He is silent about these letters, although it can be proved that
they passed through his hands, were initialed, and handed down to lower
offices by him.

During his examination by the defense, Rudolf Brandt was charged with
untruthfulness. He was unable to offer an explanation, failed to answer,
and was forced to submit to the charge of untruthfulness, of deliberate
untruthfulness. Altogether, Rudolf Brandt has made an amazing number of
affidavits; he has, without scruples, supplied the prosecution with
practically every affidavit desired for the incrimination of
codefendants, and with equal readiness, he has given affidavits for
these same codefendants which directly contradicted his former
assertions. What he confirms under oath today, he denies under oath
tomorrow, and vice versa. However, it must be stated that the affidavit
which Rudolf Brandt made against Dr. Blome, dated 24 October 1946, was
the climax of his mendacity. After the experiences in this trial, and
after having become acquainted, as we have, with a man like Rudolf
Brandt, it would be ridiculous even to consider attaching any weight to
the affidavit of a man such as we have got to know in Rudolf Brandt. His
affidavit of 24 October 1946 has been entirely refuted by documents
introduced by the prosecution. It is unnecessary, therefore, to examine
to what extent Rudolf Brandt’s untruthfulness can be traced to his state
of mental health.

During the session of 9 December 1946 the prosecuting authorities
announced:

    “The prosecution will introduce evidence to show that the
    program was in fact carried out at the end of 1942 and the
    beginning of 1943, and that as a result of the suggestions made
    by Blome and Greiser, many Poles were ruthlessly exterminated
    and that others were taken to isolated camps, utterly lacking in
    medical facilities, where thousands of them died.”

This evidence has not been produced so far by the prosecuting
authorities, although the defense, during the session of 17 March 1947,
referred in particular to this lack of evidence. The assertions of a
Rudolf Brandt in this respect cannot be evaluated as “evidence,” even if
it had not been completely retracted and even if it had not already been
completely refuted by additional documents submitted by the prosecution.
If the prosecuting authorities had succeeded in producing the witness
Perwitschky, who had already been proposed in 1946, and who had been
approved by the Tribunal, then his testimony would have produced
additional clear proof that Blome actually prevented the proposed mass
murder.

We know that later fate of these Poles who suffered from incurable open
tuberculosis from the affidavit of Dr. Gundermann, the highest medical
officer of the Warthegau (the territory in which the tubercular Poles
were to be liquidated). (_Blome 1, Blome Ex. 8._) The fight against
tuberculosis was a legal task of the Public Health Offices which were
subordinated in the Warthegau to the witness Dr. Gundermann. As a result
of difficulties caused by the war, it was not possible to accommodate
during the war, either in restricted institutions or in a segregated
area, those suffering from tuberculosis; these two possibilities, which
had been examined in a letter dated 18 November 1942 from Blome to
Greiser were therefore out of the question for the time being. (_NO-250,
Pros. Ex. 203._) Therefore, the tubercular Poles were provided for
according to the same legal regulations which applied to tubercular
Germans in Germany proper. Legal regulations notwithstanding, a separate
Tuberculosis Welfare Office, with Polish physicians and nurses, was
established in the various health offices of the Warthegau. (_Blome 1,
Blome Ex. 8._) Therefore, the contention of the prosecution “that the
accommodation of sick Poles in restricted institutions resulted in the
comparatively rapid death of the sick” or, that the transportation of
the sick into a reserved area meant that, “they were left to their fate,
provided with few physicians and with few or no nursing personnel,” is
devoid of application. (_Tr. pp. 757-59._)

It should be observed, however, that these proposals by Blome (for
internment or reserved areas) did not originate from him, but had
already been discussed during the meeting of the German Tuberculosis
Society in 1937, and went back to proposals which had already been
worked out years before by English research workers in tuberculosis on
instructions from the International Tuberculosis Commission, and which
had been generally approved. (_Blome 14, Blome Ex. 6._) Therefore, even
if the existence of these proposals had been known, it cannot be said
that they contradicted in any way the laws of humanity. According to
widespread views held by the responsible circles, such measures are
necessary if tuberculosis, from which millions die yearly, is to be
fought effectively, and if the healthy portion of the population is to
be protected effectively against the dangers of infection through
incurable tubercular patients. In this case, the protection of the
healthy population against infection appears more important than
consideration for the unrestricted liberty of incurable patients.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_

Doc. No.    Pros. Ex. No.           Description of Document           Page
NO-247           197       Letter from Koppe to Rudolf Brandt, 3 May   769
                             1942, concerning the killing of
                             tubercular Poles.
NO-244           201       Letter from Himmler (signed by Rudolf       770
                             Brandt) to Greiser, 27 June 1942,
                             concerning the extermination of
                             tubercular Poles.
NO-250           203       Letter from Blome to Greiser, 18 November   771
                             1942, concerning the mass extermination
                             of tubercular Poles.
NO-441           205       Affidavit of defendant Rudolf Brandt, 24    775
                             October 1946, concerning the plan to
                             exterminate tubercular Polish
                             Nationals.
NO-246           196       Letter from Greiser to Himmler, 1 May       776
                             1942, concerning the plan for mass
                             extermination of tubercular Poles.

                           _Defense Documents_

Doc. No.    Def. Ex. No.            Description of Document           Page
Blome 14     Blome Ex. 6   Extracts from a report on the German        777
                             Tuberculosis Conference of 18 to 20
                             March 1937, at Wiesbaden.
Blome 1      Blome Ex. 8   Extracts from the affidavit of Dr. Oskar    778
                             Gundermann, 28 December 1946, stating
                             that Blome opposed the plan to
                             exterminate tubercular Poles and that
                             the plan was never carried out.

                               _Testimony_

Extract from the testimony of defendant Blome.                         780

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-247
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 197

LETTER FROM KOPPE TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 3 MAY 1942, CONCERNINGTHE KILLING OF
                            TUBERCULAR POLES

The Higher SS and Police Leader on the Staff of the Reich Governor in
Poznan,

In Military District XXI [Wehrkreis XXI], Journal No. 132/42 g

                                                 Poznan, 3 May 1942
                                                 Fritz-Reuter Street, 2a
                                                 Tel: 6501-05

                                 Secret

To the Reich Leader SS, Personal Staff,
Attention: SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Brandt,
Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Street 8.
Subject: Poles afflicted with TB.
Dear Comrade Brandt,

May I ask that you submit the following matter to the Reich Leader SS:

The Gauleiter will shortly ask the Reich Leader SS for permission to
have Poles who have been shown to be afflicted with open TB admitted to
the detachment Lange for special treatment. This request is motivated by
the Gauleiter’s serious and understandable concern for the physical
welfare of the German people here. For there are about 20-25,000 Poles
in the Gau who, according to the doctors’ opinion, are afflicted with
incurable TB and who will not be fit for assignment to work again. In
view of the fact that these Poles live very closely crowded together,
particularly in the cities, and that, on the other hand, they come in
constant contact with the German population, they constitute a
tremendous source of infection which must be checked as quickly as
possible. If this is not done, the infection of large numbers of Germans
and most serious damage to the health of the German population must be
expected. Today already the number of cases of Germans, among them also
members of the police force, becoming infected by Poles with TB is
increasing.

Under these circumstances, I consider the solution desired by the
Gauleiter as the only possible one and ask that you inform the Reich
Leader SS accordingly.

   With comradely greetings,
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                               Yours,
                                                   [Signature] W. KOPPE

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-244
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 201

LETTER FROM HIMMLER (SIGNED BY RUDOLF BRANDT) TO GREISER, 27 JUNE 1942,
            CONCERNING THE EXTERMINATION OF TUBERCULAR POLES

                               Top Secret

Reich Leader SS
Journal No. 1247/42
Reference: Yours of 1 May 1942, P 802/42. Bra/V.

                                      [Handwritten] XI 2/97
                                      Fuehrer Headquarters, 27 June 1942

                                 Secret

Reichsstatthalter SS Obergruppenfuehrer Greiser, Poznan
1. Dear Comrade Greiser!

I am sorry that I was not able until today to give a definite answer to
your letter of 1 May 1942.

I have no objection to having protectorate people and stateless persons
of Polish origin, who live within the territory of the Warthegau and are
infected with tuberculosis, handed over for special treatment as you
suggest; as long as their disease is incurable according to the
diagnosis of an official physician. I would like to request, however, to
discuss the individual measures in detail with the security police
first, in order to assure inconspicuous accomplishment of the task.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                               Yours,
                                                    [Signed] H. HIMMLER

2. SS Obergruppenfuehrer Koppe
3. Reich Security Main Office
   Copies for information.
      By order:

                                                    [Signature] BR.
                                             SS Obersturmbannfuehrer.
                                                    [Initialed] M 25/6.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-250
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 203

  LETTER FROM BLOME TO GREISER, 18 NOVEMBER 1942, CONCERNING THE MASS
                   EXTERMINATION OF TUBERCULAR POLES

Dr. med. Kurt Blome
Deputy Head
NSDAP Main Office for Public Health

                                                       18 November 1942
                                      Berlin, SW 68, Lindenstrasse 42

To the Reichsstatthalter and Gauleiter, Party Member Greiser, Poznan
Reference: Tuberculosis action in the Warthegau.

Dear Party Member Greiser,

Today I return to our various conversations concerning the fight against
tuberculosis in your Gau, and I will give you—as agreed on the 9th of
this month in Munich—a detailed picture of the situation as it appears
to me.

Conditions for quickly getting hold of all consumptives in your Gau
exist. The total population of your Gau amounts to about 4.5 million
people, of which about 835,000 are Germans. According to previous
observations, the number of consumptives in the Warthegau is far greater
than the average number in the old Reich. It was calculated that in 1939
there were among the Poles about 35,000 persons suffering from open
tuberculosis, and besides this number about 120,000 other consumptives
in need of treatment. In this connection it must be mentioned that, in
spite of the evacuation of part of the Poles further to the east, the
number of sick persons is at least as great as in 1939. As, in
consequence of the war, living and food conditions have deteriorated
steadily, one must expect an even higher number.

With the settlement of Germans in all parts of the Gau an enormous
danger has arisen for them. A number of cases of infection of children
and adults occur daily.

What goes for the Warthegau must to a certain degree also hold true for
the other annexed territories, such as Danzig-West Prussia, the
administrative districts of Zichenau and Katowice. There are cases of
Germans settled in the Warthegau who refuse to have their families
follow because of the danger of infection. If such behavior is imitated,
and if our compatriots see that necessary measures for combating
tuberculosis among the Poles are not carried out, it is to be expected
that the necessary further immigration will come to a halt. In such a
way the settlement program for the East might reach an undesired state.

Therefore, something basic must be done soon. One must decide the most
efficient way in which this can be done. There are three ways to be
taken into consideration:

1. Special treatment of the seriously ill persons.

2. Most rigorous isolation of the seriously ill persons.

3. Creation of a reservation for all TB patients.

For the planning, attention must be paid to different points of view of
a practical, political, and psychological nature. Considering it most
soberly, the simplest way would be the following: Aided by the X-ray
battalion we could reach the entire population, German and Polish, of
the Gau during the first half of 1943. As to the Germans, the treatment
and isolation are to be prepared and carried out according to the
regulations of tuberculosis relief. The approximately 35,000 Poles who
are incurable and infectious will be “specially treated.” All other
Polish consumptives will be subjected to an appropriate cure in order to
save them for work and to avoid their causing contagion.

According to your request I made arrangements with the offices in
question, in order to start and carry out this radical procedure within
half a year. You told me that the competent office agreed with you as to
this “special treatment” and promised support. Before we definitely
start the program, I think it would be correct if you would make sure
once more that the Fuehrer will really agree to such a solution.

I could imagine that the Fuehrer, having some time ago stopped the
program in the insane asylums, might at this moment consider a “special
treatment” of the incurably sick as unsuitable, and irresponsible from a
political point of view. As regards the Euthanasia Program it was a
question of people of German nationality afflicted with hereditary
diseases. Now it is a question of infected sick people of a subjugated
nation.

There can be no doubt that the intended program is the most simple and
most radical solution. If absolute secrecy could be guaranteed, all
scruples—regardless of what nature—could be overcome. But I consider
maintaining secrecy impossible. Experience has taught that this
assumption is true. Should these sick persons, having been brought, as
planned, to the old Reich supposedly to be treated or healed, actually
never return, the relatives of these sick persons in spite of the
greatest secrecy would some day notice “that something was not quite
right”. One must take into consideration that there are many Polish
workers in the old Reich who will inquire as to the whereabouts of their
relatives; that there are a certain number of Germans related to or
allied by marriage with Poles who could in this way learn of the
transports of the sick. Very soon more definite news of this program
would leak out which would be taken up by enemy propaganda. The
Euthanasia Program taught in which manner this was done and which
methods were used. This new program could be used better politically, as
it concerns persons of a subjugated nation. The Church will not remain
silent either. Nor will people stop at discussing this program. Certain
interested circles will spread the rumor among the people that similar
methods are also to be used in the future for German consumptives—even,
that one can count on more or less all incurably ill being done away
with in the future. In connection with this I recall the recurring
recent foreign broadcast in connection with the appointment of Professor
Brandt as commissioner general spreading the news that he was ordered to
attend as little as possible to the healing of the seriously sick, but
all the more to healing the less sick. And there are more than enough
people who listen to illegal broadcasts.

Furthermore, it is to be taken into consideration that the planned
proceeding will provide excellent propaganda material for our enemies,
not only as regards the Italian physicians and scientists, but also as
regards all the Italian people in consequence of their strong Catholic
ties. It is also beyond all doubt that the enemy will mobilize all the
physicians of the world. And this will be all the more easy as the
general age-old conception of medical duty practice is “to keep alive
the poor and guiltless patient as long as possible and to allay his
suffering.”

Therefore, I think it necessary to explain all these points of view to
the Fuehrer before undertaking the program, as, in my opinion, he is the
only one able to view the entire complex and to come to a decision.

Should the Fuehrer decline the radical solution, preparations for
another way must be made. An exclusive settlement of all Polish
consumptives, both incurable and curable, would be one possibility of
assuring an isolation of the infected. One could settle with them their
immediate relatives, if they so desire, so that nursing and livelihood
would be assured. As regards labor commitment, besides agriculture and
forestry certain branches of industry could be developed in such
territories. I cannot judge whether you can conceive such a possibility
within your Gau. I also could imagine the creation of a common area for
the settlement of the consumptives not only of your Gau, but also of the
districts of Danzig-West Prussia, of the administrative district of
Zichenau and of the province of Upper Silesia. In order to avoid
unnecessary overtaxing of public means of transport, the transfer could
be accomplished by walking. This would be a solution that world
propaganda could hardly use against us, and one, on the other hand, that
would not arouse any of those stupid rumors in our own country.

Another solution to be taken into consideration would be a strict
isolation of all the infectious and incurable consumptives, without
exception, in nursing establishments. This solution would lead to the
comparatively rapid death of the sick. With the necessary addition of
Polish doctors and nursing personnel, the character of a pure death camp
would be somewhat mitigated.

The following Polish accommodation possibilities are at present
available in your Gau:

  Nursing Home Walrode                                           400 beds
  Nursing Home “Grote Wiese”                                     300 beds
  Smaller establishments                                         200 beds
  Liebstadt barracks, district of Leslau as of 1 Jan 1943      1,000 beds
                                                                    —————
Total                                                          1,900 beds

Should the radical solution, i. e., proposal No. 1, be out of question,
the necessary conditions for proposals 2 or 3 must be created.

We must keep in mind the conditions of the war deprive us of the
possibility of arranging for a fairly adequate treatment of the curable
consumptives. To do so would require procuring at least 10,000 more
beds. This figure, under the condition that the program is to be carried
out within half a year, could not be met.

After a proper examination of all these considerations and
circumstances, the creation of a reservation, such as the reservations
for lepers, seems to be the most practicable solution. Such a
reservation should be able to be created in the shortest time by means
of the necessary settlement. Within the reservation one could easily set
up conditions for the strict isolation of the strongly contagious.

Even the case of the German consumptives represents an extremely
difficult problem for the Gau. But this cannot be overcome, unless the
problem of the Polish consumptives is solved at the same time.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                               Yours,
                                                     [Signed] DR. BLOME

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-441
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 205

 AFFIDAVIT OF DEFENDANT RUDOLF BRANDT, 24 OCTOBER 1946, CONCERNING THE
            PLAN TO EXTERMINATE TUBERCULAR POLISH NATIONALS

I, Rudolf Emil Hermann Brandt, being duly sworn, depose and state:

1. I am the same Rudolf Brandt who on 30 August 1946 swore an affidavit
concerning certain low-pressure experiments which were also conducted
with test subjects of the Dachau concentration camp without their
consent.

2. I am entitled by the same reasons as already stated in paragraphs 1,
2, and 3 of my affidavit of 30 August 1946 to state as follows:

3. In the middle of 1942 the Reich Governor of the Warthegau, Herbert
[Arthur(?)] Greiser, suggested to Himmler to annihilate Poles infected
with incurable tuberculosis. In submitting this suggestion, Greiser gave
as a reason that the Germans in Poland would be exposed to this
epidemic. Dr. Kurt Blome, Deputy Chief of the Main Office for Public
Health of the NSDAP, and radiologist Dr. Hohlfelder conferred with
Greiser about this matter. Dr. Blome was from time to time with Himmler
and supported Greiser’s suggestion.

4. The Higher SS and Police Leader, and Chief of the Warthegau, Koppe,
further, Mueller of Office IV of the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA),
and the Chief of the Reich Security Main Office, Heydrich, were involved
in this operation. At the end of 1942 and the beginning of 1943 Greiser
carried out the annihilation of the Jews in the Warthegau, and the
rounding up of the tubercular Poles was finished at the same time as the
rounding up of the Jews. As a result of the suggestions made by Blome
and Greiser numerous Poles were exterminated. Many thousands of
tubercular Poles were taken to isolation camps where they had to take
care of themselves.

I have read the above affidavit in the German language, consisting of
one page, and it is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and
belief. I was given the opportunity to make changes and corrections in
the above affidavit. This affidavit was given by me freely and
voluntarily without promise of reward, and I was subjected to no threat
or duress of any kind.

Nuernberg, 24 October 1946
                                                   [Signature] R. BRANDT

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-246
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 196

LETTER FROM GREISER TO HIMMLER, 1 MAY 1942, CONCERNING THE PLAN FOR MASS
                   EXTERMINATION OF TUBERCULAR POLES

Reich Governor of the Reichsgau Wartheland.

                                  Poznan, Schlossfreiheit 13, 1 May 1942
                                                   Telephone No. 1823 24

[Handwritten note]
P 802/42

                               Top Secret

Personal.
To the Reich Leader SS Heinrich Himmler,
Fuehrer Headquarters.

Reich Leader,

The special treatment [Sonderbehandlung] of about 100,000 Jews in the
territory of my district [Gau], approved by you in agreement with the
Chief of the Reich Security Main Office, SS Obergruppenfuehrer Heydrich,
can be completed within the next 2-3 months. I ask you for permission to
rescue the district immediately after the measures taken against the
Jews, from a menace which is increasing week by week, and use the
existing and efficient special commandos for that purpose.

There are about 230,000 people of Polish nationality in my district, who
were diagnosed to suffer from tuberculosis. The number of persons
infected with open tuberculosis is estimated at about 35,000. This fact
has led in an increasingly frightening measure to the infection of
Germans who came to the Warthegau perfectly healthy. In particular,
reports are received with ever-increasing effect of German children in
danger of infection. A considerable number of well-known leading men,
especially of the police, have been infected lately and are not
available for the war effort because of the necessary medical treatment.
The ever-increasing risks were also recognized and appreciated by the
deputy of the Reich Leader for Public Health [Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer],
Comrade Professor Dr. Blome, as well as by the leader of your X-ray
battalion, SS Standartenfuehrer Prof. Dr. Hohlfelder.

Though in Germany proper it is not possible to take appropriate draconic
steps against this public plague, I think I could take responsibility
for my suggestion to have cases of open tuberculosis exterminated among
the Polish race here in the Warthegau. Of course only a Pole should be
handed over to such an action who is not only suffering from open
tuberculosis, but whose incurability is proved and certified by a public
health officer.

Considering the urgency of this project I ask for your approval in
principle as soon as possible. This would enable us to make the
preparations with all necessary precautions now to get the action
against the Poles suffering from open tuberculosis under way, while the
action against the Jews is in its closing stages.

                                                         Heil Hitler!
                                                    [Signature] GREISER

                                PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT BLOME 14
                                BLOME DEFENSE EXHIBIT 6

EXTRACTS FROM A REPORT ON THE GERMAN TUBERCULOSIS CONFERENCE OF 18 TO 20
                        MARCH 1937, AT WIESBADEN

        (Published in Berlin, Publishers: Julius Springer, 1937)

Extract from the report by Dr. Erwin Dorn, chief physician of the
Charlottenhoehe Sanatorium, chief physician of the Tuberculosis Welfare
Center of the Oberamt Neuenbuerg, Calmbach (Wuerttemberg) concerning
Task and Aims of the Method of Treatment and its Application in
Consideration of the Awaited Special Laws for the Tubercular Patients

                 *        *        *        *        *

[Page 770]

In former years, particularly at the beginning of this century, every
attempt at a labor treatment of tubercular patients was condemned as
useless, as only a limited treatment was known. On the other hand, in
countries such as Holland, England, and Switzerland, where treatment
lasting many months is possible, labor treatment was firmly established.
We all know that several months are frequently needed in order to effect
a change by the conservative or radical treatment. Our surgical patients
(plastics, plugging, bilateral pneumothorax, premicectory) also require
a long time until the severe stage of tuberculosis has been alleviated,
and until they themselves again reach full working capacity. In a
similar manner to those treated conservatively, these patients
frequently remain contagious for the rest of their lives. In the
sanatorium they are superfluous, in every day life, useless. But they
should not be regarded as wholly incapacitated for years.

The aim of the labor treatment for active tubercular people is to fill
this gap between the remedial treatment and full working capacity. It
should be carried out in a work-sanatorium or a settlement.

Various conditions are necessary to enable tubercular persons with only
a limited working capacity to derive satisfaction from their work. The
right type of work must be provided for them; the work periods must be
graduated according to the amount of work they can handle, and it must
be suited to their capabilities and to what they did in their former
life.

The place of work and the tools should be satisfactory. _At a
work-sanatorium, in favorable climatic surroundings, these requirements
are best met if the patients are assigned to factory work._ * * *

                 *        *        *        *        *

[Page 772]

In my last year’s report on the forced treatment of tuberculosis
patients, I showed that a patient suffering from open tuberculosis
should remain in a work-sanatorium or settlement until the disease no
longer presents a peril to himself and to his fellow men.

                                 PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT BLOME 1
                                 BLOME DEFENSE EXHIBIT 8

 EXTRACTS FROM THE AFFIDAVIT OF DR. OSKAR GUNDERMANN, 28 DECEMBER 1946,
STATING THAT BLOME OPPOSED THE PLAN TO EXTERMINATE TUBERCULAR POLES AND
                  THAT THE PLAN WAS NEVER CARRIED OUT

                 *        *        *        *        *

From the summer of 1940 on I was chief medical officer in the department
of the Reich Governor in Poznan.

The frequency of tuberculosis in the region of the Wartheland, at one
time incorporated into the Reich, was, according to statistics recorded
before 1939—at the time of the Polish Health
Administration—considerably higher than in the German Reich. When the
administration was taken over, no modern welfare service for
tuberculosis for the whole region existed. Among other things, there
were insufficient beds to effect a successful treatment and the
isolation of tuberculosis patients. The estimates made from the
statistical material of infectious tuberculosis cases amounted to a
round figure of 20,000 to 25,000 people of the Polish population. To
check this tuberculosis epidemic, the authorities immediately began
building 40 health offices with modern welfare centers, as well as
sanatoria and isolation homes with approximately 2,500 beds for Germans
and Poles (the latter under Polish medical direction with Polish doctors
and Polish nursing staff), and these were speedily finished. These
measures by the office of the Reich Governor were supported by the
superior Reich authority (Health Section of the Reich Ministry of the
Interior).

Since the above institutions were able to check the spreading of the
tuberculosis epidemic to a certain degree, but particularly owing to the
increasing difficulties arising from the war, they were not able to get
the urgently needed sanitary measures running effectively, all the
medical officers of the Wartheland untiringly continued to warn their
superiors and heads of departments urgently of the danger.

The whole affair took an unexpected turn in the autumn of 1942, because
the Gauleiter and Reich Governor Greiser supposedly said that in case of
necessity he would stop at nothing to check the tuberculosis epidemic
effectively in the Wartheland in the interest of the entire population.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I thought it my duty to talk personally to the head of the Department of
Health in the Reich Ministry of the Interior and the Reich Health
Leader, Dr. Conti, in Berlin, about this matter and the entire
tuberculosis problem.

                 *        *        *        *        *

As I was unable to get a clear answer from Dr. Conti and could not be
satisfied with such information as I received, I immediately called on
the Deputy Reich Health Leader, Dr. Blome. I knew that he dealt with
special questions concerning tuberculosis in the Reich Health Leader’s
office. From the beginning Blome showed a clearly negative attitude
toward any possible solution contrary to humanity or medical ethics. He
showed me the draft of a letter addressed to Greiser; I asked him to
make a few additions and alterations.

We discussed the formulation of the letter in detail from the point of
view of convincing Greiser that an intensive continuation of the health
and welfare measures so far taken, and a further extension of the health
program set up for the fight against tuberculosis could effectively
avert the acute dangers. The suggestion for a large tuberculosis
settlement was particularly discussed. This plan was based on smaller
examples, and its final aim was the establishment of a widely spread,
but nevertheless closed settlement for tuberculosis patients and their
families. In this settlement, all modern examination, treatment,
isolation, and welfare facilities should be provided for the patients
and members of their families who might be in danger.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Dr. Blome and I having agreed on the tactics to be taken toward Greiser
and on the contents of the said letter, Dr. Blome began, in my presence,
to dictate the draft of a new letter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I concluded that the letter from Dr. Blome to Gauleiter Greiser was
successful, mainly from the development in the fight against
tuberculosis in the Wartheland. The regulation about tuberculosis relief
having become effective for the whole Reich territory on 1 April 1943, a
similar regulation for protection against tuberculosis could be decreed
in the Wartheland in favor of the Polish population. A central office
for the fight against tuberculosis was established under the management
of a specialist. This office gave the same treatment to German and to
Polish cases.

                 *        *        *        *        *

During my period in office as chief medical officer in Poznan, until
January 1945, no tuberculosis patients were “liquidated” in the
Wartheland as far as I know. I never received an order for such a
measure, much less brought one about either directly or indirectly. On
the contrary, the office always tried to give all tuberculosis patients
proper treatment.

                 *        *        *        *        *

           EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT BLOME[91]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. SAUTER: Now, Witness, I come to a different problem. It is the
suggestion made at that time that Poles suffering from incurable
contagious tuberculosis should be liquidated. You were interrogated in
January 1946 at Oberursel concerning your participation in the plan for
the extermination of tubercular Poles, and also on 9 and 22 October 1946
here in the prison. Were the statements you made at that time true?

DEFENDANT BLOME: Yes. But I must add that concerning this matter of the
tubercular Poles, as far as I recall, I said it was in 1943, while in
reality, as the files now show, it took place in 1942. I must also say
that my letter to Greiser in November 1942 has been shown to me here. I
was asked whether this was my letter, whether I had written this letter.
I said “No.” I said that because it was not a photostatic copy of the
original, but a photostatic copy of a copy. I objected to several things
in the letter and did not acknowledge it at that time. They were
external matters which occasioned me to make that statement. Later,
however, in December, when you took over my case, you gave me this
photostatic copy, and I had an opportunity to study it carefully and
reconstruct the conditions which existed at the time and, therefore, I
now acknowledge this letter as authentic.

Q. It is true, Dr. Blome, that the prosecution learned for the first
time of this plan to exterminate the Poles through you? Dr. Blome, what
can you say about that?

A. Yes. The prosecution learned from me for the first time of this plan.
In 1942 I told my interrogator Captain Urbach at Oberursel about it,
after he had described the details of the atrocities which I had not
known up to that time.

Q. You just said 1942.

A. I meant 1945. I meant December 1945. I beg your pardon. I do not
believe that the prosecution had any knowledge of this, at least not at
Oberursel.

Q. Dr. Blome, this whole matter begins with a letter from the Reich
Governor Greiser dated 1 May 1942. (_NO-246, Pros. Ex. 196._) Tell us
briefly who Greiser was.

A. This was Arthur Greiser, Gauleiter of the Warthegau, the Reich
Governor of the Wartheland, and the Reich Defense Commissioner of the
Wartheland.

Q. This Gauleiter Greiser, who was a Gauleiter in a district which now
belongs to Poland, sent a letter on May 1st to the Reich Leader SS
suggesting that Poles suffering from tuberculosis in the Wartheland
should be liquidated if the existence of open tuberculosis and the
incurability of the patients were established by official doctors. In
this connection Greiser writes and (this is what I want to ask you
about) I quote, “The increasing dangers were also recognized and
appreciated by Deputy Reich Leader of Public Health, Dr. Blome, as well
as by the Leader of your X-ray unit, SS Standartenfuehrer, Dr.
Hohlfelder.” That is the quotation. What can you tell us today about
these apparently early discussions between you and Gauleiter Greiser?

A. I talked to Gauleiter Greiser about three times, concerning the
combating of tuberculosis in Wartheland, certainly once in the presence
of Professor Hohlfelder. These discussions go back to the year 1941. I
can recall Greiser once saying that the simplest thing would be to treat
the incurable tubercular Poles exactly like the insane by means of
euthanasia. I pointed out that the comparison was not valid. The Poles,
I also said, were not German citizens. The plan which Greiser was
considering was a radical solution but I could not agree to it. When
sometime later I learned of the so-called Fuehrer order, according to
which the euthanasia action was stopped and prohibited, I considered
this matter and Greiser’s statement as settled. Then the year 1942 was
filled with purely organizational preparation for the tuberculosis
action. For example, all the population had to be registered in card
index files, Germans as well as Poles; preparations had to be made for a
series of X-ray examinations. Then these examinations had to be
evaluated, and so on. The latter was a matter for the state health
offices, that is the National Socialist welfare organization, and the
X-ray unit which was to carry out the technical side of these
examinations. From time to time I had a report from Professor Hohlfelder
about the preparations. Only when all prerequisites were fulfilled, did
I give my approval for such large scale action. The execution of this
action was dependent upon my personal approval. I only took action in
this tuberculosis question in the Warthegau when I received alarming
reports about an alleged liquidation order from Himmler. I learned of it
because at the beginning of November Sturmbannfuehrer Perwitschky came
to my office in Berlin and reported to me that Greiser had an order from
Himmler to the effect that incurably sick cases of tuberculosis found
during the planned examinations in the Wartheland were to be liquidated.
Perwitschky belonged to the X-ray unit and was business manager for the
society combating tuberculosis. Then I immediately reached an agreement
with Perwitschky that I would meet Professor Hohlfelder at Poznan to
discuss the matter and to prevent Himmler’s and Greiser’s plans from
being carried out. I went to Poznan and discussed the matter with
Hohlfelder. We were both greatly astonished at this order from Himmler.
We agreed that this order must not be carried out, and that we as German
doctors could not lend our aid to such an action. We discussed the
manner in which this Himmler-Greiser plan could be prevented. We decided
that I should go to Greiser first of all. I telephoned Greiser from this
conference and said that it was very important that I should speak to
him. Then I talked to him on the same day, or on the next day. When I
asked Greiser whether Himmler’s orders for liquidating were correct, he
said “Yes.” He said he had the order in his hands. I said that I was
willing to prevent this plan in any case and explained why. I said that
in the first place as a doctor I could not participate in this and, in
the second place, I pointed out the political danger connected with such
a crime.

Then Greiser agreed that I should write a letter for him which he would
pass on to Himmler for a decision. As for Greiser’s letter to Himmler of
May 1942 (_NO-246, Pros. Ex. 196_) which you just mentioned, Dr. Sauter,
I learned of it for the first time from files here, and Himmler’s
opinion concerning my letter of November 1942 I learned of here for the
first time too. Up to that time I did not know about Himmler’s letter to
Greiser. In the letter of May 1942, from Greiser to Himmler, Greiser
writes, I quote, “that Hohlfelder and Blome recognized the
ever-increasing risks and appreciated them.” But he does not say that
Hohlfelder and I approved liquidation. The letter does not say that. My
basic opinion on the problem is the following: Let us suppose that we in
Germany had a valid law for the liquidation of incurably sick persons.
Assuming that such a law did exist, it would, of course, be out of the
question to apply it to non-Germans. Application in this case would be a
crime, especially during war. Germany had occupied foreign territory
and, as an occupying power, had to observe international law in the
treatment given to the occupied territories. As for the problem of
tuberculosis, I had dealt with it for some time, especially since 1935
when I had incorporated the tuberculosis question into the post-graduate
medical training. In 1937 Professor Janker, Bonn, a well-known X-ray
specialist, called upon me for aid in developing a new procedure which,
with a minimum of cost, would make it possible to examine large groups
of the population. This was the so-called X-ray screen photography which
was developed. I shall give you a brief explanation of this. Previously
for an X-ray picture of the lungs, a film had been needed of 24 by 30
centimeters. This new procedure required a film of about only 4 by 4
centimeters. That is, the so-called Leica size. The pictures were taken
with a Leica. The X-ray screen was photographed. The successful
development of this procedure meant that for an X-ray photograph, in
place of the price of from twelve to thirteen marks, which the social
insurance had paid, it now could be produced for about ten pfennigs:
that is, less than one percent.

The further value of the development of this process was that one would
no longer need several minutes for an X-ray photograph, but this
procedure was developed to such an extent that we could take two hundred
to three hundred pictures per minute. I developed this screen picture
process together with Janker until we reached the results which I have
just described. At the X-ray Congress in May 1938 in Munich I made this
process public and I stated that with its aid one could begin a
large-scale fight against tuberculosis. Only a few people believed my
words at the time, and some smiled pityingly. After this congress,
Professor Hohlfelder, who was later commander of the X-ray unit, came to
me, and working with X-ray science, the optical industry, the film
industry, X-ray industry, screen industry, etc., we developed the
process during the course of that same year to such an extent that in a
short time we were able to X-ray practically every inhabitant in the
whole province of Mecklenburg. The procedure was then gradually
developed until we could easily have X-rayed ten million or more in
Germany per year. Then, during the war, at my instigation, in 1939 and
1940, we X-rayed the population of the whole province of Westphalia;
then in 1941, the whole province of Wuerttemberg, including
Hohenzollern. Now there was the plan to X-ray the people of Wartheland.
Gauleiter Greiser had approached me, because approval had to be obtained
from me, and I gave such approval only if all prerequisites were given,
so that the cases which were discovered could be given some medical and
clinical attention. It had been our experience in these examinations
that one percent new tuberculosis cases were discovered which had
hitherto been completely undetected. For the Warthegau alone, with a
Polish population of four and one-half millions, that would have meant
forty-five thousand new cases of tuberculosis, not counting the ten
thousand from among the one million German population. I had withheld my
approval for such actions because at that time, with the development of
this invention, a plan of irresponsible X-raying was being carried out
by various Gauleiters and by large industries. Everyone wanted to take
up the battle against tuberculosis but that would have been a disaster
unless there had been some check. When whole groups of population were
X-rayed, there had to be the necessary preparation of medical supplies
from the beginning, otherwise there would have been a catastrophe.
Through this action and through these many new cases of tuberculosis
which were discovered, I consciously put the state in a difficult
situation. I forced the state to issue a new law for the fight against
tuberculosis. This law which was issued was the Tuberculosis Aid Law.
This law formed the basis for the lung examination of the population of
the Wartheland which was actually carried out in 1943-1944. This law, it
can be proved, was not only of benefit to the German population in the
Warthegau, but also to the Polish population, as is clearly seen from
the affidavit of Regierungsdirektor Dr. Gundermann. (_Blome 1, Blome Ex.
8._) Dr. Gundermann was the chief medical officer of the Wartheland;
that is, he had the main responsibility for the fight against
tuberculosis in this Gau.

Q. Dr. Blome, before we go into the letter of 18 November 1942, I should
like to return to the spring of 1942. (_NO-250, Pros. Ex. 203._) We just
heard of a letter from Gauleiter Greiser dated May 1942, in which he
suggests that Poles suffering from tuberculosis should be liquidated. He
writes “that the ever-increasing risks were also recognized and
appreciated by the Deputy of the Reich Leader for Public Health,
Professor Dr. Blome.”

You said that Greiser does not mention that you approved the plan for
the liquidation of the Poles. I would be interested to know what your
attitude was at that time, in the spring of 1942, towards this plan. Did
you approve of the plan to liquidate tubercular Poles? Did you reject
it? What did you say about it?

A. In the spring of 1942 I expressed no opinion at all in respect to
this plan. The discussions with Greiser, as I said, were in the year
1941, at the time when the euthanasia action was still in operation. In
1942 I did not talk to Greiser about such a plan at all. I did not know
that Greiser intended to write this letter in May 1942 to Himmler, or
that he did actually write it. I heard about it only here and after
Greiser had made his statements in connection with the euthanasia
action. But the euthanasia action had been stopped by Hitler’s order,
and of course I assumed that such ideas on the part of Greiser were
settled too. I did not approve of his ideas, as I said before.

Q. Then, if I understand you correctly, you did not deal with this
matter in the fall of 1942 when this Perwitschky brought you alarming
news?

A. Yes. That is right.

Q. Can you tell us why Gauleiter Greiser discussed this tuberculosis
problem with you particularly?

A. The reason was, as I have already said, that the execution of such an
action depended on my approval. If I had said the Warthegau was not to
be X-rayed, then it would not have been X-rayed, no matter what the
Gauleiter did.

Q. Dr. Blome, Gauleiter Greiser was not thinking apparently of X-raying
but of liquidating. The letter of 1 May 1942, where he makes the
suggestion, speaks only of liquidation. It says nothing about X-raying.
I would like to find out how you became involved in this matter, and
when you heard of Greiser’s plan for the first time, the plan to
eliminate the tubercular Poles?

A. Of course Gauleiter Greiser was thinking of X-raying; that is
essential for detecting incurable cases of tuberculosis.

Q. Then, Witness, on the 18th of November you wrote a letter. (_NO-250,
Pros. Ex. 203._) This is the letter which the prosecution has described
as a “masterpiece of murderous intention.” Did you discuss this letter
beforehand with the Reich Physician Leader, Dr. Conti?

A. No. After I had talked to Greiser I saw Conti for a short time in
Berlin, or I went to see Conti to report to him about the plan and about
my talk with Greiser. Dr. Conti said, “What do you want? That’s an order
from the Reich Leader, that is, Himmler!” Then I told Conti what I had
agreed upon with Greiser, and that I would write a letter to that effect
to be sent on to Himmler. This he agreed to and also to my writing this
letter. But I did not discuss the contents with Dr. Conti. I did not see
any point in doing so. This statement of Conti’s showed that he knew
about this plan of liquidation.

Q. Witness, this letter which you wrote to Gauleiter Greiser, in which
you opposed liquidation of the Poles, did you write it by yourself or
did you discuss the draft of this letter with anyone?

A. First of all I wrote the letter by myself. After I had returned to
Berlin from Poznan I had to go to Munich. When I came back from Munich I
wrote this letter. I made various rough drafts. It was not easy. I had
discussed the general tactics with Hohlfelder according to which we
would start right at the beginning of the letter by appearing to agree
to the ideas, but then in the second part of the letter we would list
all the political factors which might induce Himmler and the others to
give up such an action. It was not easy to write such a letter. I
worried about this letter a great deal until I thought I finally had a
right draft.

In my preliminary interrogation an interrogator asked me something to
this effect: “Why did you not simply give up your office and resign when
you heard about this plan?” My answer is as follows: It would, of
course, have been the simplest thing for me to take advantage of this
opportunity to give up my position. Then I would have had nothing more
to do with the whole matter; at least 40,000 Poles would have been
murdered, and I would not be under indictment today on this charge.
Please excuse me for saying this, but I must say it, when such a charge
is made against me. I will try to speak as dispassionately as possible.
Dr. Sauter had just said that the prosecution considers my letter a
“masterpiece of murderous intention”. I now state the following: Apart
from this questionable affidavit of Rudolf Brandt, the prosecution has
not produced a single document to prove the murder of tubercular Poles
by me. On the contrary, the prosecution has submitted Himmler’s reply
dated the end of November 1942, according to which Himmler, in answer to
my letter, prohibited the liquidation of the tubercular Poles, and this
letter expressly says that my suggestion was to be carried out and that
this matter was to be used as propaganda. In spite of that, the
prosecution makes such charges as these against me. I am accused of
being a murderer 10,000 times for a crime which I did not commit but
which I prevented, as I can prove. I should like to say something else.
The press, of course, has taken up this charge. I cannot hold that
against the press. The consequence of this news, however, was that my
family, my wife and my little children, are subjected to unpleasantness
and even threats. Through this assertion of the prosecution, the name of
Blome has been defamed in a way which it does not deserve, especially if
it can be proved that I prevented the crime with which I am charged.

MR. HARDY: If it please your Honor, I object to any further comment of
this type from the witness.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Objection overruled. Witness may continue.

DEFENDANT BLOME: I beg your pardon if I got rather excited. I should
like to conclude my statement by saying that I hope that this case will
be soon cleared up, and that then the press will be chivalrous enough to
state that I not only did not commit this crime, but that I actually
prevented it.

DR. SAUTER: Mr. President, I should like to discuss with the witness the
letter of 18 November 1942 in which the defendant prevented the murder
of the Poles. It will take some time. I believe this would be a good
time to take a recess.

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. SAUTER: Witness, during the morning session you explained to us
among other things the new method of X-ray photography, the so-called
screen photography; you stated that using this new method one could take
200 to 300 photographs per minute. Were you not wrong, didn’t you mean
perhaps per hour and not per minute?

DEFENDANT BLOME: Yes, per hour.

Q. I just wanted to correct that so that it does not appear erroneously
in the record. We shall continue, Witness, with the letter which we have
repeatedly discussed, the letter of 18 November 1942, regarding the
extermination of Poles. (_NO-250, Pros. Ex. 203._) It is a letter in
which you define your attitude towards the proposal made by Greiser,
namely to liquidate the tubercular Poles. Do you know the contents of
this letter?

A. Yes.

Q. In this letter you made certain proposals. May I ask you to tell us
what suggestions you actually made in that letter? Do you need the
letter for that purpose?

A. Thank you, I have it. The most suitable suggestion I considered to be
my suggestion to create an area in which one could put the tubercular
Poles, and I recalled the leper colonies well known throughout the
world. I must emphasize that there is a considerable difference between
tuberculosis and leprosy.

As I made the last draft of my letter, the leading medical officer of
Warthegau was suddenly announced. It was Dr. Gundermann, the highest
state medical officer of Warthegau. He reported that he had just come
from Dr. Conti, and that he had heard rumors from Warthegau that
tubercular Poles were to be liquidated. Dr. Conti had maintained a very
evasive attitude toward him, so he had left Dr. Conti without having
achieved any results and thereupon he had decided to come to me. I told
him that he had come at the most suitable moment, and I explained to him
the position as it had developed in the meantime. I told him of my
conversation with Hohlfelder and with Greiser, and of the letter which
had been decided upon. He was very pleased about it and was also pleased
that I shared his attitude of rejection. I showed him my draft letter
and he made a few suggestions. The number of geographical details in the
letter actually originated from Gundermann. In particular, he emphasized
the importance of a special settlement for tubercular Poles and
recognized this as the most suitable solution. I had already heard of
such suggestions, especially those arising from the tuberculosis meeting
in 1937. During that meeting two well-known German tuberculosis experts,
Dr. Dorn and Dr. Hein, had lectured on tuberculosis settlements. Very
useful experience had been obtained from such tuberculosis settlements,
not only in Germany but also in England. When making my suggestion to
Himmler I explained in detail how such a suggestion could be realized.
In my letter I explained the tactics that were to be used, taking into
consideration the mentality of people like Greiser and Himmler, and made
it appear as though I wanted to agree with their liquidation program.
Afterwards I cited all the political misgivings I had, naming individual
examples. Then I said that in one experiment the people who were
seriously ill and those who were contagious would be segregated, and
that Polish physicians and Polish nursing personnel would be attached to
these seriously ill patients in order to avoid the appearance of a death
camp. Every physician knows, and it is also known in lay circles, that
if one isolates seriously ill people, such an isolation soon comes to be
considered as an isolation for death. That is why I said that the
necessary Polish physicians and nursing personnel must be attached to
these camps. My best suggestion I considered to be the creation of a
colony for all tubercular Poles.

In particular I wished to point out the following in my letter, I said,
and I quote: “I could imagine that as the Fuehrer stopped the program in
the insane asylums sometime ago, he might at this moment consider
’special treatment’ of the incurably sick as unsuitable, and unwise from
a political point of view.” I mentioned that because Greiser’s
suggestion in the year 1941 pointed to a comparison with the euthanasia
action. In order, however, to be quite sure that these political
misgivings also reached Hitler and that the decision did not rest mainly
in Himmler’s hands, I sent a copy of my letter direct to Martin
Bormann.[92] I furthermore want to point out the following matter. I
said: “I consider any secrecy completely impossible.” In this
connection, I should like to refer to a letter concerning a different
action, namely the letter from the Deputy Gauleiter of the Lower Danube,
dated 1942, which suggests experiments on the sterilization of national
groups such as gypsies. In this letter, contrary to my letter,
completely different tactics are used. The Deputy Gauleiter of the Lower
Danube stated that one must keep such an action very secret, because
otherwise it would have serious consequences from the point of view of
the state.

MR. HARDY: Is it the intention of the defendant to put the letter he is
referring to in as evidence, or is he merely quoting from his own
letter?

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Can counsel for the defendant Blome advise the
Tribunal on that point?

DR. SAUTER: This is a letter which has already been used by the
prosecution and thus came to the knowledge of the defendant. Therefore
he can quote it. It is certainly not necessary to submit this letter
once more.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Would counsel please identify the letter, the
exhibit number, and where it may be found?

DR. SAUTER: One moment, please. Mr. President, this letter was submitted
by the prosecution concerning sterilization experiments. It was
submitted as Document NO-039—I repeat NO-039—Prosecution Exhibit 153.
It is a letter from the Deputy Gauleiter of the Lower Danube district
addressed to Reich Leader SS Himmler dated 24 August 1942. This letter
was already submitted by the prosecution.

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. SAUTER: Doctor, will you please finish your answer?

DEFENDANT BLOME: In this letter the Deputy Gauleiter of the Lower Danube
district writes to Himmler, and I quote:

    “We are quite clear about the fact that such examination must be
    considered as an absolute state secret.”

That is exactly contrary to the tactics which I used. I say “I think
that any secrecy is quite impossible,” and I give detailed reasons for
this. I will merely give you a short excerpt from my letter. I point out
how many Polish workers there are in the German Reich, and that there
would be questions from their relatives about their whereabouts. Then I
indicate the number of Germans who are related to these Poles. I also
mention that, in the case of the Poles, we are concerned with members of
a conquered nation. I further point out that certain circles would
spread rumors among the population to the effect that similar methods
would be used in the case of German tubercular patients in the future. I
further show that in connection with the appointment of Professor Brandt
as Commissioner General, foreign broadcasts spread reports that Brandt
was no longer concerned with the rehabilitation of seriously wounded
people, but only with those people who had been slightly wounded. I
refer to the reaction which would result in the case of such a crime on
the part of the Italian physicians and scientists as well as the entire
Italian population. I furthermore refer to the Church, and I then say
and quote: “Therefore, I think it is necessary to explain all these
points of view to the Fuehrer before undertaking the program.”

With reference to my suggestion for a kind of reservation, I say in the
last paragraph of my letter, and I quote: “After a proper examination of
all these considerations and circumstances, the creation of a
reservation such as the lepers colonies seems to be the most practical
solution.”

Before that I had suggested that these tubercular settlements should be
arranged in such a manner that relations who were willing could also be
settled there. In this way in addition to the necessary nursing
personnel and the necessary Polish physicians, the necessary medical
care would be safeguarded.

Q. Witness, you previously referred to your suggestions, and you spoke
about a congress on tuberculosis questions in which you participated.

DR. SAUTER: Mr. President, I have an excerpt from the record of this
tuberculosis congress. It is a report on the Third International
Congress. It is a report on the proceedings of the German Tuberculosis
Conference dated 18 to 20 March 1937, which took place at Wiesbaden. Two
speeches are reproduced here in excerpt form.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Counsel, this document is found in supplemental
documents?

DR. SAUTER: Yes, in the supplemental volume. In this report a paper by
two well-known German tuberculosis experts is mentioned, a Dr. Erwin
Dorn, who was the chief physician of a sanatorium for chest diseases at
Charlottenhoehe, and a certain Dr. Joachim Hein, who was the director of
a sanatorium for chest diseases in Holstein. I am not going to read
these papers in detail, but I beg the Tribunal to take judicial notice
of them. I submitted these reports of the conference in order to show
that the same suggestions which this defendant, Dr. Blome, made in 1942
when writing to Gauleiter Greiser, are also contained here in the year
1937, and were made during the German Tuberculosis Conference. These
proposals did not concern foreign tubercular persons, but German
tubercular persons.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Does counsel offer this document into evidence?

DR. SAUTER: It will become exhibit 6, Blome Exhibit 6. Witness, in this
letter of 18 December 1942, about which we are speaking now, you really
dealt with three proposals: (1) special treatment for the seriously ill
persons; (2) most rigorous isolation of the seriously ill persons—that
is to say, separation from the outside world; and (3) the creation of a
reservation area for all tubercular patients in Poland. Now when reading
your letter, one gains the impression—at least one might gain the
impression—that you were speaking in favor of your first suggestion in
the first part of your letter, namely, the “special treatment” of the
seriously ill, which is to say their liquidation as was suggested and
desired by Himmler and Greiser.

My question is: Why did you not simply state very frankly in your letter
of 18 November 1942 that this liquidation of the incurably ill
tubercular Poles, as suggested by Greiser and Himmler, was a crime; that
it could under no circumstances be permitted, and that you, Dr. Blome,
would have nothing to do with any such proposal? Why did you not write
to Greiser on those lines at that time?

DEFENDANT BLOME: I think that I already defined my attitude towards that
question very briefly this morning, and I state again, I would have
preferred merely to have pointed out the criminal aspects of this
proposal in my letter, but I knew the mentality of these men, and it was
quite clear to me that the expression of any such point of view could
only have had a negative result. In doing that I would not have saved
myself, and much less 30,000 tubercular Poles—they would actually have
then been liquidated. If I had not wanted to present my true point of
view frankly, I would not have had to think for days about the letter;
it would only have been a matter of five or ten minutes. I would just
have had to dictate the letter and mail it. I had, however, realized,
and it was also the opinion of Professor Hohlfelder, that I would have
to make it appear as if I agreed to the plan if I wanted to have any
success with my counterproposals. I was convinced that the mention of
all the political aspects which might involve danger would be the only
effective weapon. The success of my procedure quite clearly speaks for
the correctness of my tactics. Yes, Himmler really wanted to carry out
this proposal I had made and he wanted to exploit it as propaganda; that
is clearly stated in Himmler’s letter to Greiser, dated the end of
November 1942. The documentary value of my letter can be seen only in
the following: It shows, firstly, that during that period of brutal
thinking, men like Himmler had no time for any considerations of a
humane nature; secondly, only by a clear and definite statement on my
part could the crime of the murder of 10,000 Poles be prevented, and I
was only concerned with that result.

Q. Witness, the suggestion which you made in your letter was that under
No. 2: the most rigorous isolation of the seriously ill persons. With
reference to this suggestion, the prosecution considers that during the
meeting of 19 December you had the idea of sending these tubercular
patients to institutions and I quote: “That opinion was voiced because
then the comparatively quick death of these patients would ensue in
these institutions.”

Was that really your intention, and did you think of any such
possibility at that time, that is, when you made the suggestion?

A. On the contrary I cannot recognize the evidence of the prosecution
regarding that point as being logical. Had it been my intention to let
the patients die, I would not have demanded that they be given the
necessary physicians and nursing personnel. In addition, I want to refer
to my former testimony on this point.

Q. The other suggestion you made at that time and which is listed under
No. 3 of your letter is the creation of a reservation for all tubercular
patients. During the same meeting of 19 December the prosecution said
with reference to that proposal, and I quote:

    “With this plan, that is, to send all patients into a
    reservation and thereby isolate them from the rest of the
    population, you, Dr. Blome, wanted to cause these sick Poles to
    be left to their fate with very few doctors and scanty nursing
    personnel. The aim of liquidating these Poles was to be realized
    in this way.”

What do you have to say, Dr. Blome, to this motive which the prosecution
imputes to you?

A. This motive is not correct. The contrary can clearly be seen from my
letter. In that connection I may refer to my previous explanation
regarding my letter. Furthermore, I refer to the affidavit of Dr.
Gundermann. (_Blome 1, Blome Ex. 8._) My interest was exactly the
contrary to what the prosecution tries to impute to me, for I was
planning the very same thing for Germany after the war. If I had been
able to carry through such an action, and had been able to show success
in that action, it would have been easier for me later on to refer to
the plans mentioned during the Tuberculosis Congress of 1937 by pointing
out the success I had achieved in the Warthegau. Even today I realize
that until we are able to bring about really effective medical
treatment, or vaccination against the spread of tuberculosis, the only
really practicable and effective solution is the creation of such
settlement areas or reservations.

Q. Dr. Blome, from your book, entitled “Physician in Combat”, which has
been submitted in evidence in its entirety as Blome Exhibit 1, it can be
seen that for quite a long time you had waged war against tuberculosis.
Can you tell us on the basis of your experiences whether these proposals
which you made in your letter of 18 December 1942—that is, either
housing the sick in tuberculosis institutions, or placing the
consumptives in a reservation area—whether these suggestions were
completely different from the manner of combating tuberculosis as
practiced in various foreign countries up to that time, or, if not
tuberculosis, other infectious diseases of the same importance as
tuberculosis?

A. Naturally the plan to set up a tuberculosis settlement on a large
scale does not represent anything absolutely new, because, as can be
seen from the documents submitted regarding the Tuberculosis Congress,
such tuberculosis settlements had existed in England and Holland in
addition to Germany, with good results; but, on the other hand, the
realization of this settlement idea would make an enormous difference to
fight against tuberculosis generally. The war difficulties that existed
in 1942 and 1943 did not permit this plan to be realized as suggested by
me for the Warthegau. The fight against tuberculosis continued, however,
in the usual way, as far as it was possible during the war, and as it
was dealt with throughout the Reich for Germans as well.

In other countries, other experiments were made. For instance in the
year 1935 certain well-known people in the city of Detroit, in America,
made a large-scale experiment for the combat of tuberculosis. After
preparations were made the entire population of Detroit was asked, by
means of enormous propaganda by press and radio, to submit to an
examination for tuberculosis, in order to find out the source of the
infection. The city of Detroit had made the necessary facilities
available for carrying out the examination and a certain success was
obtained. In particular, nearly the whole of the colored population of
Detroit reported for these examinations, whereas the American press, on
the other hand, complained that this was not fully the case with the
white population.

This action started in 1936 and was continued in 1937. I could not hear
anything about the ultimate results because the war had started. All
actions such as that action in Detroit, and small settlements in the
form of little villages for consumptives, will not solve the entire
problem unless done on a large scale. There is no doubt that the problem
of tuberculosis has not been tackled on a large scale in the world
today. The sole reason for that is that tuberculosis cannot be compared
with any other contagious disease such as diphtheria, cholera, typhoid.
These epidemics have a shorter course and quickly claim their victims.
If that had been the case with tuberculosis the fight against it would
have progressed much farther throughout the world. The tragic thing in
that problem is the manner of the disease itself, the slow tricky
course. That is why, in my opinion, there are nowhere in the world laws
which definitely secure the isolation of infectious tubercular subjects,
although such plans are being considered at all congresses dealing with
tuberculosis all over the world. As far as I know nobody has made a
decisive step, and I think the sole reason lies in the slow tricky
course of tuberculosis, in spite of the fact that tuberculosis is
regarded as having the second highest mortality of all diseases.

Q. In addition to that letter of 18 December 1942 about which we are
speaking now, did you take any more steps to frustrate the plan of
Greiser, namely, to liquidate all tubercular Poles, and in particular
did you turn to Hitler or Himmler personally in that matter?

A. No. I did not speak to Hitler at all throughout the entire war.

Q. How about Himmler?

A. I spoke to Himmler on various occasions, but that was about one year
later. At that time I had as yet no official relations with Himmler, and
I did not know him. Had this happened one year later, when I already had
official contact with Himmler, and had I known him better, I would not
have written a letter; I would have approached Himmler personally and
would have been able to frustrate the action without having to write a
letter. Having written this letter I received a report through Greiser
very shortly afterwards to the effect that Himmler had withdrawn his
order, and that settled the affair as far as I was concerned. I was only
informed that everything was handled in an orderly and legal manner in
the Warthegau as regards the examination and the registration of
tubercular persons.

Q. Who told you that this plan had been withdrawn on the basis of your
suggestion?

A. I heard it from Hohlfelder as well as from Perwitschky.

Q. These were the two men—

A. Hohlfelder was the commanding officer of the X-ray unit, and
Perwitschky was the business manager of the association for combating
tuberculosis.

Q. Did you find out how the rejection of this plan really came about,
and, in particular, do you know that when Greiser’s letter was shown to
him Himmler said that Hitler himself had to decide, and that Hitler
himself actually did decide that this plan was to be rejected for the
reasons which you, Dr. Blome, stated in your letter to Greiser? Did you
hear about that later?

A. At that time I only learned from Professor Hohlfelder and Perwitschky
that the reasons stated in my letter had moved Hitler to withdraw his
order. I only heard of Himmler’s letter here in this courtroom, through
the documents, and I am, therefore, very grateful to the prosecution for
not having withheld this letter from me.

Q. Witness, when you say that this plan of Greiser’s was frustrated
because of you, I must remind you of what the prosecution said here on 9
December in this courtroom. The prosecution said at that time, “We shall
introduce evidence to show that the program was in fact carried out at
the end of 1942 and the beginning of 1943 * * *.” And by that, the
program for the liquidation of the tubercular Poles was meant. Further,
“that as a result of the suggestions made by Blome and Greiser, many
Poles were ruthlessly exterminated and that others were taken to
isolated camps, utterly lacking in medical facilities where thousands of
them died.” These were statements made by prosecution. I must again ask
you very definitely, did you at any time later hear that on the basis of
these proposals tubercular Poles were, in effect, exterminated?

A. No. The assertions of the prosecution are not true. Nothing happened
to one Pole within the framework of this tubercular action in the
Warthegau. On the contrary they received decent medical treatment.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[89] Trial of the Major War Criminals, vol. I, pp. 247-253, Nuremberg,
1947.

[90] Final plea is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 16 July 47, pp.
10972-10994.

[91] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 13, 14,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21 March 1947, pp. 4450-4812.

[92] Defendant (in absentia) before International Military Tribunal. See
Trial of the Major War Criminals, Vols. I-XLII, Nuremberg, 1947.


                             D. Euthanasia

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Blome, Brack, and Hoven were charged with
participation in and responsibility for the execution of the so-called
“Euthanasia Program” in the course of which hundreds of thousands of
human beings, including nationals of German occupied countries, were
murdered (pars. 9 and 14 of the indictment). On this charge the
defendants Karl Brandt, Brack, and Hoven were convicted, and the
defendant Blome was acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on euthanasia is contained
in its closing briefs against the defendants Karl Brandt and Brack.
Extracts from these briefs are set forth below on pages 795 to 813. A
corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on this program
has been selected from the closing brief for the defendant Karl Brandt
and from the final plea for the defendant Brack. It appears below on
pages 813 to 839. This argumentation is followed by selections from the
evidence on pages 842 to 896.

        b. Selections from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

              _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST THE
                         DEFENDANT KARL BRANDT_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                        _The Euthanasia Program_

A. _Procedure_

On 1 September 1939 Hitler charged the defendant Karl Brandt and
Reichsleiter Bouhler with the execution of the Euthanasia Program. The
letter of appointment stated:

    “Reichsleiter Bouhler and Dr. Brandt, M. D., are charged with
    the responsibility of enlarging the authority of certain
    physicians to be designated by name in such a manner that
    persons who, according to human judgment, are incurable can,
    upon a most careful diagnosis of their condition of sickness, be
    accorded a mercy death.” (_630-PS, Pros. Ex. 330._)

This document in no way limited the application of euthanasia to insane
persons but included anyone who might be designated as “incurable.”

The witness Mennecke testified that the program was carried out in the
following way:

Every German mental institution received questionnaires from the Reich
Ministry of the Interior which were to be completed for each inmate of
the institution and to be sent back to the Reich Ministry of the
Interior. Experts then had to examine the questionnaires after they had
been photostated; they had to express their medical opinion on them, and
had to return them, with their opinion, to the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft
(Reich Labor Association). (_Tr. pp. 1872, 1873._)

This Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft cooperated with the “Stiftung”
(Charitable Foundation for Institutional Care), and the Patients
Transport Corporation. The “Stiftung” was in charge of the financial
side of the program, while the Patients Transport Corporation was used
when patients were moved from one institution to another in order to
bring them closer to the euthanasia institutions and finally into the
euthanasia institutions themselves. These three organizations,
Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft, “Stiftung,” and Patients Transport
Corporation, were in fact camouflaged names for the operation of the
Euthanasia Program and were under the supervision of one management.
They did not work independently but together. (_Tr. p. 1874._)

As to the questionnaires, three experts received photostated copies,
and, independently of each other, they expressed their opinion on
individual cases. Then so-called top experts expressed their opinion. A
list was made up of the patients who were judged subject to euthanasia,
and the patients were removed from the institution to so-called
collecting points, and from there were transferred to euthanasia
institutes. (_Tr. pp. 1877, 1878._) Non-German nationals and Jews were
subjected to euthanasia as well as Germans. (_Tr. p. 1881._)

The activities of the experts were extended in the early summer of 1940
to inmates of concentration camps. A doctors commission, which consisted
of doctors and officials from the Euthanasia Program, filled out the
questionnaires on inmates from among those who had been preliminarily
selected by the camp doctors. Numerous concentration camps were visited,
some of them twice, in the period between 1940 and the end of 1941.
(_Tr. pp. 1882, 1883._) Dr. Mennecke, who visited a number of
concentration camps to select inmates, received the orders for these
activities from the top experts in the Euthanasia Program and from the
defendant Brack. (_Tr. p. 1882._) Announcements about these trips were
made from the Berlin agency of the program to the individual
concentration camps. (_Tr. p. 1885._) Non-German Nationals and Jews who
were inmates of concentration camps were subjected to the Euthanasia
Program in extensive numbers. (_Tr. p. 1887._)

Another function of the Euthanasia Program was the killing of mentally
and bodily deficient children. The witness Walter Schmidt testified that
the agency which handled this part of the program was called the Reich
Committee for Research on Hereditary and Constitutional Severe Diseases
[Reichsausschuss zur wissenschaftlichen Erfassung von erb- und
anlagebedingten schweren Leiden]. The questionnaires were filled out by
the health departments, the chief of children’s clinics, physicians,
doctors, midwives, hospitals, etc., and reports were made to Dr.
Linden’s office in Berlin. Linden was a member of the Ministry of the
Interior. There a committee of chief experts, on the strength of these
reports, decreed euthanasia through so-called authorizing orders in the
form of a photostatic copy of the report, which had been approved in
writing. These activities continued until 1944. (_Tr. pp. 1833, 1834._)
Schmidt himself was in charge of a special department for the killing of
such deformed children. (_Tr. p. 1833._)

Workers from the occupied eastern territories who had become unfit for
labor were executed pursuant to the Euthanasia Program. Busses belonging
to the Patients Transport Corporation, which were operated by the
personnel of the Patients Transport Corporation, took these victims to
the extermination center of Hadamar, where they were killed. (_Tr. pp.
1842-1845_; _NO-1116, Pros. Ex. 415_.)

This evidence on the method of carrying out the program is corroborated
by the affidavit of the defendant Brack (_NO-426, Pros. Ex. 160_), the
affidavit of Pauline Kneissler (_NO-470, Pros. Ex. 332_), the chart
drawn by Brack (_NO-253, Pros. Ex. 331_), as well as numerous other
documents in the record.

The evidence concerning the activities of the top experts and experts of
the Euthanasia Program in the various concentration camps is
corroborated by the affidavit of the camp doctor of the Dachau
concentration camp, Dr. Muthig (_NO-2799, Pros. Ex. 497_), who states
that in the fall of 1941, Professor Heyde, as leader of a commission of
four psychiatrists, came to the Dachau concentration camp. This doctors
commission selected inmates, unable to work, for extermination by gas.
Heyde was the first top expert of the Euthanasia Program. (_Tr. p.
2495._) The affidavit of Dr. Gorgass reveals that he and Dr. Schumann,
both of whom were active in the Euthanasia Program, visited the
Buchenwald concentration camp in June 1941. Gorgass states explicitly
that the purpose of this trip was to acquaint himself with the
assignment of concentration camp inmates to euthanasia institutions.
This visit was made on the order of Brandt, and was transmitted by the
defendant Brack. (_NO-3010, Pros. Ex. 503._)

B. _Non-German Nationals and Jews_

Non-German nationals and Jews, who were inmates of the concentration
camps, were victims of the Euthanasia Program which operated in these
camps under the code name “14 f 13.” (_NO-429, Pros. Ex. 281._)

A few documents submitted by the prosecution on one “14 f 13” action in
Gross-Rosen show how the Euthanasia Program operated in concentration
camps. The list of concentration camp inmates of the Gross-Rosen
concentration camp, who were sent to the Bernburg euthanasia station for
extermination, contains many names of non-German nationals and
non-German Jews. (_NO-158, Pros. Ex. 410._) Jews in protective custody,
Poles in protective custody, Jews who were habitual criminals, Jews who
were “shirkers,” Jews who “defiled the race,” Czech “shirkers,” and
Czechs in protective custody were among the inmates selected by the camp
physicians for “examination” by the experts. (_1151-PS, Pros. Ex. 411._)

By comparing the names on the lists contained on Documents NO-158 and
1151-PS, it is proved that, of the 240 names listed for extermination in
the Bernburg euthanasia station, at least 51 were of Polish or Czech
nationality. How many of the Jews listed were of non-German nationality
cannot be ascertained from these documents, but a substantial number of
them were born in countries other than Germany, as the list contained in
Document NO-158 shows, and it is therefore apparent that a further
substantial number of the inmates selected for extermination were of
non-German nationality. (_NO-158, Pros. Ex. 410_; _1151-PS, Pros. Ex.
411_.)

On 17 March 1942, 70 inmates were transferred to Bernburg for
extermination. (_NO-1873, Pros. Ex. 556._) Of these, 27 of the
non-Jewish prisoners on the transport list were of Czech or Polish
nationality. Compare transport list with list of inmates originally
selected in Gross-Rosen. (_1151-PS, Pros. Ex. 411._) On 19 March 1942 an
additional 57 inmates arrived at Bernburg from Gross-Rosen. (_NO-158,
Pros. Ex. 410._) Of these, 15 of the non-Jewish prisoners of the
transport list were of Czech or Polish nationality. Thus, of the total
of 127 inmates proved to have been sent to Bernburg in March 1942, at
least 42, or one-third of the total, were non-German citizens forcibly
detained in an enemy country. That all of these inmates were
exterminated in Bernburg is conclusively proved by the laconic report
from Gross-Rosen to the Economic and Administrative Main Office that
“special treatment of 127 prisoners was concluded on 2 April 1942.”
(_1234-PS, Pros. Ex. 555._)

This evidence as to Action 14 f 13 is amplified by the testimony of the
witnesses Neff (_Tr. pp. 600-605_), Kogon (_Tr. pp. 1210-13_), Roemhild
(_Tr. pp. 1634-37, 1641_), and Holl (_Tr. p. 1060_).

Non-German nationals and Jews other than those in concentration camps
were not exempt from the program, and many of them were killed. Besides
the evidence cited under A above, there is ample proof that non-German
nationals were subjected to extermination from the beginning of 1940
through the war. (_NO-1135, Pros. Ex. 334_; _NO-818, Pros. Ex. 373_.)
Jews of German and Polish nationality and stateless Jews were also
subjected to the program. (_NO-1310, Pros. Ex. 337._) Polish and Russian
nationals and other non-German nationals were subjected to the program.
(_NO-720, Pros. Ex. 366._)

The questionnaires had a space provided for “race”, being defined:
German or similar blood (of German blood), Jew, Jewish mixed breed
Grades 1 or 2, Negro (mixed breed). (_1696-PS, Pros. Ex. 357._) This
question would have been completely unnecessary if non-Germans were
exempted from the program. Questionnaires had to be filled out about all
patients who were not of German nationality or German related blood,
indicating their race and nationality. (_NO-825, Pros. Ex. 358._) These
questionnaires had to be processed by the experts. (_Tr. p. 1881._)
Those who were active in euthanasia never received an order that
non-German nationals were to be excluded from the program. (_NO-817,
Pros. Ex. 368._) The witnesses Mennecke (_Tr. pp. 1877, 1922_) and
Schmidt (_Tr. pp. 1860-1_) also testified to this effect. Hugo Suchomel,
LL. D., the highest official after the Minister in the Austrian Federal
Ministry of Justice, says in his affidavit that when Brack, as
representative of the defendant Brandt, gave a lecture on euthanasia in
the Ministry of Justice in 1942, he enumerated, as the classes of
persons who were exempted from the program, the war-wounded and persons
who had become insane as a result of air attacks. Foreigners and Jews
were not mentioned among the groups of persons who were excluded.
(_NO-2253, Pros. Ex. 557._) Brack admits having held the lecture. (_Tr.
p. 7589._)

As early as 1939 inmates of insane asylums in occupied Poland were
killed. (_3816-PS, Pros. Ex. 370._) In the autumn of 1940, funds for the
evacuation of 1,558 inmates of mental institutions of East Prussia and
approximately 250 to 300 insane Poles were made available by the
defendant Brack, who was the administrative executive of the Euthanasia
Program. As these transfers were carried out by a special detachment
(Sonderkommando) of the infamous SD, which was used for special tasks,
there is no doubt that these insane Poles were killed. (_NO-2909, Pros.
Ex. 500_; _NO-2911, Pros. Ex. 501_.) In September 1941, an order was
issued that the inmates of the insane asylums in Russia, in the
occupation zone of the German Army Group “Nord,” were to be killed.
(_NO-1758, Pros. Ex. 444._)

Eastern workers were also dealt with. (_NO-1430, Pros. Ex. 429_;
_NO-1436, Pros. Ex. 430_.) Eastern workers, who had been forcibly
brought into Germany, who were no longer able to work, and who were
considered a burden on the mental institutions of Germany, were brought
together in a collecting institution and, unless they could be
discharged in a matter of six weeks, they were exterminated under the
Euthanasia Program. (_NO-891, Pros. Ex. 414_; _NO-1116, Pros. Ex. 415_.)
Half-Jewish healthy children (_NO-1427, Pros. Ex. 431_) and adult
gypsies (_3882-PS, Pros. Ex. 371_) were also killed.

C. _Inadequate Examination and Lack of Supervision_

The selection and examination of the persons who were subjected to
euthanasia were criminally negligent and inadequate.

The defendant Karl Brandt testified that the doctors in the Euthanasia
Program were given enormous responsibility. (_Tr. p. 2425._) He,
together with Bouhler, had authority over the physicians who were
participating in the program. (_Tr. p. 2408._) He admitted, however,
that he did not make observation in, or visits to, insane asylums. He
was only once in the Bethel insane asylum and visited a special clinic
in Kassel. He admitted having no expert knowledge in the field of
psychiatry. (_Tr. p. 2470._) He, the doctor of the two persons who were
charged by Hitler with the execution of euthanasia (Bouhler was not a
doctor), authorized the doctors to administer euthanasia. He did not
make investigations as to the medical abilities of these men. (_Tr. p.
2476._) He does not know one single name of the total of ten to fifteen
doctors who, according to his testimony, were charged with the execution
of euthanasia. (_Tr. pp. 2478-9._) Brandt testified that he only visited
one of the extermination stations, Grafeneck, in 1940, one time (_Tr. p.
2480_), and never went to an observation station. (_Tr. p. 2481._) In
winter 1939-1940, however, he visited, together with the defendant
Brack, Bouhler, and Conti, the euthanasia station of Brandenburg, where
the first gas chamber was set up. The purpose of this visit was to
observe a test experiment in which four insane persons were gassed.
(_Tr. pp. 7645-6._)

Victims of euthanasia were condemned to death by so-called top experts
who had never so much as seen the patient. The victims were only
superficially examined on the basis of questionnaires. (_NO-470, Pros.
Ex. 332._) Pfannmueller, an expert, received no less than 159 shipments
of questionnaires, averaging between 200 and 300 questionnaires each,
prior to 15 April 1941, for judgment as to life and death. (_NO-1129,
Pros. Ex. 354_; _NO-1130, Pros. Ex. 355_.) Since his main occupation was
that of manager of an insane asylum, his judgment of the questionnaires
was only a secondary activity. In a period of 18 days, this same expert
passed judgment on no less than 2,058 questionnaires. (_NO-1129, Pros.
Ex. 354_; _Tr. p. 7384_.)

Questionnaires on patients who were in an asylum for as short a time as
one month were filled out and formed the basis for judgment as to
whether the particular inmate should be killed. (_NO-825, Pros. Ex.
358._) Many of these questionnaires were inadequately completed so that
it was impossible in any event to form a clear medical opinion. Experts
were also exposed to pressure to induce them to give positive opinions.
(_Tr. p. 1881._) Unanimous opinion of the experts was not necessary to
bring about a positive judgment which would condemn the patient to be
killed. The dissenting opinion of one expert did not suffice to save the
life of the patient. (_Tr. pp. 1907-8._)

In a concentration camp 105 Aryans were “examined” by the expert
Mennecke in an afternoon. The “examination” of 1,200 Jews, which
consisted in the transcription of the reason for their arrest from the
files to the reports, took only a few days. In a letter to his wife,
Mennecke himself put the word “examination” in quotation marks. It is
impossible that any kind of mental examination of the patients was
carried out. (_Tr. p. 1892_; _NO-907, Pros. Ex. 412_.) In fact, these
Jews were mentally and physically healthy. (_Tr. p. 1893._) It was
impossible for Dr. Heyde and his doctors commission, which was active in
the Dachau concentration camp, to examine the great number of inmates
selected in the short time they spent there. The examination consisted
solely in the cursory study of personal records in the presence of the
inmate. (_NO-2799, Pros. Ex. 497._) Doctors Schumann and Gorgass
screened approximately 100 concentration camp inmates during a one day’s
visit in the Buchenwald concentration camp. (_NO-3010, Pros. Ex. 503._)

It was not the degree of insanity which was the decisive factor in the
decision as to whether or not the inmates should be killed, but rather
their usefulness for work. The manner of employment, the value of work,
if possible compared with the average performance of healthy persons,
had to be carefully filled out in the questionnaires. (_1696-PS, Pros.
Ex. 357._) Valuable workers were not sent to euthanasia stations.
(_3865-PS, Pros. Ex. 365._)

Patients who had arteriosclerosis, tuberculosis, cancer, and other
disabling illnesses were included in the program. (_3896-PS, Pros. Ex.
372._) “Useless eaters” were starved to death. (_3816-PS, Pros. Ex.
370_; _NO-823, Pros. Ex. 399_.) Persons who no longer had any value to
the state were considered “useless eaters.” It was pointed out that
during the war healthy people had to give up their lives while these
severely ill people continued to live, and would continue to live unless
euthanasia was carried out. In addition, it was stated the lack of food
and nursing personnel justified the elimination of these people. (_Tr.
p. 1906._) Concentration camp inmates were examined as to their capacity
for work and their political reliability and were selected accordingly
for euthanasia. (_NO-2799, Pros. Ex. 497._) Questionnaires were
completed on concentration camp inmates who were not insane. (_NO-3010,
Pros. Ex. 503._) Prior to 27 April 1943, Action 14 f 13 encompassed the
execution not only of insane persons, but persons suffering from
tuberculosis, bedridden individuals, and others unfit for manual work.
(_NO-1007, Pros. Ex. 413._) Only inmates who were no longer fit for work
were to be brought before the examining commission. (_1151-PS, Pros. Ex.
411._)

In the case of killing of children, a previous consultation with the
parents or relatives did not take place. (_3864-PS, Pros. Ex. 367._) The
defense witness Pfannmueller testified that, after having received
authorization to kill the individual child, he invited the relatives to
visit the child because it was sick. However, he never notified the
parents or guardians that he was going to kill the child, as this was a
top secret matter. (_Tr. p. 7394._) From the documents submitted by the
defendant Brack, it is clear that the parents were deceived about the
purpose of the transfer of the children to institutions where they were
to be killed. It was the business of the medical officers to induce the
parents to send their children to such institutions. To accomplish this,
the parents were told that in the case of individual diseases there was
a possibility of achieving certain successes with treatment. (_Brack 52,
Brack Ex. 43_; _Tr. p. 7717_.) The parents were told that the best care
would be taken of the child in such institutions and everything possible
in the way of modern therapy would be carried out. (_Brack 51, Brack Ex.
42._) From these documents it is clear that the parents and relatives
were not only not asked for their consent in the case of killing of
children, but were deceived in order to make the transfer to a
euthanasia institution possible. A letter from the Reich Committee for
Research on Hereditary and Constitutional Severe Diseases to the
Eichberg Sanatorium shows on its face that, in the case of euthanasia of
children, the consent of the parents was not sought. (_NO-890, Pros. Ex.
443._) This evidence is corroborated by the affidavit of Dr. Suchomel.
(_NO-2253, Pros. Ex. 557._) The defendant Brack testified that the
consent of the parents to the killing of children was an absolute
prerequisite. The medical officers who made the arrangements for the
transfer of the children to the killing stations were allegedly charged
with the task of informing the parents and requesting their consent.
This statement is in contradiction to Brack’s own documents, which
clearly show what the parents really were told, as well as the top
secret character of the program. The proof has further shown that
Pfannmueller himself was one of the doctors who had, according to the
decree of the Minister of the Interior of 18 August 1939, to report
deformed and deficient children. (_NO-3355, Pros. Ex. 553._) He himself
testified that he never informed the parents about the fate their
children had to expect. Brandt admitted that in the case of the killing
of insane adults, the consent of the relatives was not requested and
their opinion not heard. (_Tr. pp. 2427-8._)

There is abundant proof that the German public was horrified by
euthanasia and the manner of its execution. A police report stated:

    “The wildest scenes imaginable are reported to have taken place,
    as some of these people did not board the bus voluntarily and
    were therefore forced to do so by the accompanying personnel.
    There were people who were imbeciles and feeble-minded, and were
    said to have other epileptic illnesses as well, and whose upkeep
    the state and other public bodies up till now had to provide for
    completely, or at least for the greater part. People went so far
    as to formulate and disseminate more or less the following
    assertion: ‘The state must be in a bad way now or it could not
    happen that these poor people should simply be sent to their
    death solely in order that the means, which until now have been
    used for the upkeep of these people, are made available for the
    prosecution of the war.’” (_D-906, Pros. Ex. 376._)

D. _General Extermination of the Jews_

Personnel active in the Euthanasia Program also took part in the
extermination of the Jews in the East from about 1941 until the
liberation of the eastern territories. Some time in the second half of
1941 part of the personnel, who were until then executing the Euthanasia
Program in Germany, was sent to Lublin and put at the disposal of SS
Brigadefuehrer Globocnik in order to assist in the mass extermination of
the Jews, which was then common knowledge in the higher circles of the
NSDAP. Among the doctors who assisted in the extermination of the Jews
were Drs. Eberle and Schumann, both of whom had been previously active
in the Euthanasia Program in Germany. All of this Brack admitted in his
pretrial affidavit:

    “The order to send these men to the East could only have been
    given by Himmler to Brandt, possibly through Bouhler.” (_NO-426,
    Pros. Ex. 160._)

The connection between the “Stiftung” (Charitable Foundation for
Institutional Care) and the extermination camps in Lublin was also known
to the lower employees of the euthanasia stations. (_NO-470, Pros. Ex.
332._) The witness Gorgass stated in his affidavit that Police Captain
Wirth told him, late in the summer of 1941, that he had been transferred
by the Foundation for Institutional Care (which was one of the code
names under which the Euthanasia Program operated) to a euthanasia
institute in the Lublin area. (_NO-3010, Pros. Ex. 503._) The SS judge,
Dr. Morgen, who investigated the Jewish extermination program in Lublin,
testified before the International Military Tribunal that Wirth, having
previously carried out the task of removing the incurably insane, was a
specialist in mass destruction of human beings. The office from which
Wirth obtained his orders was Berlin, Tiergartenstrasse, and among the
people who were connected with this operation was Blankenburg.
(_NO-2614, Pros. Ex. 504._) Brack admitted that Wirth was an official of
the Brandenburg euthanasia station. (_Tr. p. 7733._) Brandt visited
Brandenburg in the winter of 1939-40. (_Tr. pp. 7645-6._) The central
office for the Euthanasia Program was set up in Tiergartenstrasse 4, and
Blankenburg was Brack’s deputy in the Euthanasia Program. (_Tr. pp. 7563
and 7707._)

The defendant Brack reported to Himmler about these activities on 23
June 1942, as follows:

    “On the instructions of Reich Leader Bouhler I placed some of my
    men—already some time ago—at the disposal of Brigadefuehrer
    Globocnik to execute his special mission. On his renewed request
    I have now transferred additional personnel. On this occasion
    Brigadefuehrer Globocnik stated his opinion that the whole Jew
    action should be completed as quickly as possible, so that one
    would not get caught in the middle of it one day if some
    difficulties should make a stoppage of the action necessary. You
    yourself, Reich Leader, have already expressed your view that
    work should progress quickly for reasons of camouflage alone * *
    *.” (_NO-205, Pros. Ex. 163._)

The affidavit of Kurt Gerstein, which also mentions Wirth, gives a vivid
description of the terrible way in which the victims were killed by the
thousands by order of Globocnik. (_1553-PS, Pros. Ex. 428._)

In October 1941, Brack, the administrative head of the Euthanasia
Program, forwarded plans whereby Jews who were unable to work should be
exterminated by gas. He declared his readiness to send some of his
assistants and especially his chemist, Kallmeyer, to the East, where the
necessary gassing apparatus could be easily manufactured. Eichmann, whom
Hitler had charged with the extermination of the Jews, was in agreement
with these plans. Consequently, there were “no objections to doing away
with those Jews who are unable to work, by means of the Brack remedy”.
(_NO-365, Pros. Ex. 507._)

Kallmeyer, who was charged with the manufacture of the gassing apparatus
and equipment, had been trained for this task in the Euthanasia Program.
Previously he had been responsible for the proper operation of the gas
chambers of the different euthanasia institutions. (_Tr. p. 7743._)
According to Eichmann’s own estimate, four million Jews were killed in
extermination institutions. (_NO-2737, Pros. Ex. 505._)

E. _Legality_

The evidence outlined above makes it clear that the Euthanasia Program
can only be described as mass murder. This Tribunal is not called upon
to define with juridical nicety what a state may lawfully legislate with
respect to euthanasia. The prosecution asks only that this Tribunal
find, as other tribunals have already held, that there was no valid law
in the Third Reich permitting euthanasia, and that the execution of
persons under the guise of euthanasia, with the connivance and
assistance of certain defendants in this dock, constituted the crime of
murder—a war crime and a crime against humanity.

The first and foremost authority on the legality of euthanasia as
practiced under the Nazis is in the judgment of the International
Military Tribunal.[93]

These findings draw no distinction between German nationals executed
under the program and non-German nationals. These executions are
described with the word “murders” and constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity under the Charter and Control Council Law No. 10. This
was one of the principal crimes which led to the judgment of guilty and
the sentence of death against Frick.[94]

The Review of the Deputy Theater Judge Advocate in the case of the U. S.
_vs._ Klein, Wahlman, et al., held at Weisbaden, Germany, from 8 October
through 15 October 1945 is a clear precedent that the execution of
non-German nationals pursuant to the Euthanasia Program was a crime.
(_NO-1116, Pros. Ex. 415._)

The defendants were there charged with the execution of some 400 persons
of Polish and Russian nationality, alleged to be suffering from
incurable tuberculosis, at the Hadamar euthanasia station between July
1944 and April 1945. They were not charged with murdering German
nationals and that issue was not considered. After taking judicial
notice of the fact that foreign laborers were pressed for service in
Germany, the reviewing authority held that the killings in issue were a
violation of the international laws of war and of Article 46 of The
Hague Convention. Three of the seven defendants were sentenced to death.

According to German law, euthanasia was nothing other than murder.
Paragraph 211 of the German Criminal Code, in its old form reads:

    “Whoever kills a person willfully will be punished by death for
    murder if the killing was premeditated.”

In the new form, which was in effect from 4 September 1941 on, the
section stated:

    “The murderer will be punished by death.

    “A murderer is one who kills a person out of sheer desire to
    murder, for the satisfaction of the sexual instincts, for
    covetousness or other vile motives; one who kills another
    maliciously or cruelly, or by publicly dangerous means, or to
    create the preconditions for another punishable action, or to
    conceal such an action.

    “Certain exceptional cases where capital punishment is not
    appropriate will be punished by life sentence.” (_NO-705._[95])

For expert commentaries on the legality of euthanasia, see NO-708 and
NO-706.[96]

The defense witness Hans Lammers, a German legal expert, testified that
the Hitler letter to Bouhler and Brandt was not a law, and that official
legislation was necessary to legalize euthanasia. (_Tr. pp. 2672-2679._)
The Reich Minister of Justice, Guertner, on 24 July 1940, wrote a letter
to Lammers informing him that, as the Fuehrer had refused to issue a law
it was necessary to discontinue immediately the secret extermination of
insane persons. (_NO-832, Pros. Ex. 393._) A copy of this letter was
sent to Bouhler on 27 July 1940. (_NO-833, Pros. Ex. 394._)

During Brack’s lecture in the Ministry of Justice, referred to in B
above, the legal authorities present were completely misinformed about
the extent of the program. From the remarks of the speaker, the
impression was obtained that only a very limited circle of persons, at
the utmost several hundred, throughout Germany, Austria, and the
Protectorate Bohemia and Moravia, would be affected. The opinion created
was that only very dangerous patients and delirious maniacs who might
injure themselves would be subjected to the program. (_NO-2253, Pros.
Ex. 557._) This obviously was done to quiet the misgivings of the
persons present. Brack, when questioned as to whether, during the
lecture, he gave an approximate number of persons who would be subjected
to euthanasia, could or would not give any answer. Contrary to the
impression created during the conference in the Ministry of Justice, the
defendants Brandt and Brack now admit that about 50,000 to 60,000 people
were killed in the Euthanasia Program in Germany and Austria alone.
(_Tr. p. 2465_; _Tr. p. 7610_.)

Since the end of the war, German and Austrian courts have repeatedly
held that the killing of persons of any nationality under the guise of
euthanasia was in violation of the German Criminal Code and punishable
as murder. The witnesses Schmidt and Mennecke who testified before this
Tribunal had themselves been convicted by a German court for
participation in the Euthanasia Program and sentenced to life
imprisonment and death, respectively.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The Court of Assizes in Berlin, at the session on 25 March 1946, found
the defendants Hilde Wernicke and Helene Wieczorek guilty of murder and
sentenced them to death.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The Court of Appeals in the same case rejected the appeals of both,
defendants. The following quotation from the findings may be of
interest:

                 *        *        *        *        *

    “_It cannot be mistaken that the defendants Wernicke and
    Wieczorek are only the last links of a long chain, and that they
    are preceded by persons whose guilt is still greater._”
    [Emphasis added.] (_NO. 447_[97]).

Thus it is established that euthanasia was murder according to German
law.

In connection with this question, it is again pointed out that the whole
program was kept completely secret. Hitler’s letter of 1 September 1939
(_Tr. p. 1516_) marked “Top Secret” was never published, and the
Minister of Justice received a copy of it only one year after its
issuance. (_630-PS, Pros. Ex. 330._) Transfers of inmates of insane
asylums to euthanasia stations were allegedly carried out by the order
of the Reich Defense Commissioner. (_NO-1133, Pros. Ex. 335._) The
officials active in the program had to sign a written oath of secrecy.
(_NO-1312, Pros. Ex. 338_; _NO-1311, Pros. Ex. 339_.) The doctors who
performed euthanasia were warned that they would be severely punished if
they sabotaged the work. (_Tr. p. 1894._) The whole program of
euthanasia was to be kept secret, as they were told from the beginning
that it was a top secret matter. The reason given was to avoid unrest
among the population. Breach of secrecy was considered sabotage. (_Tr.
p. 1923._) Others had to sign a written oath binding them to secrecy. It
was known that the result of breach of this oath was confinement in a
concentration camp. (_Tr. p. 1826._)

F. _Personal Responsibility of Karl Brandt_

Brandt was put in charge of the program, together with Bouhler, by the
above-quoted letter of Hitler of 1 September 1939. His position as
highest authority in the Euthanasia Program is outlined in the affidavit
of Dr. Boehm, one of the oldest members of the NSDAP. When, in November
1940, Boehm approached Martin Bormann[98] with the request to obtain an
audience with Hitler to complain about the execution of the Euthanasia
Program, Bormann referred him to Brandt as the responsible authority for
the execution of euthanasia. As a result, Boehm had a discussion with
Brandt and when he complained, among other things, that the Euthanasia
Program was not regulated by law and should not be carried out in a
secret manner, Brandt admitted that the Minister of Justice, Guertner,
had also urged legislation. From his conversation with Bormann and
Brandt, Boehm was sure that Brandt was the leading personality in the
program. (_NO-3059, Pros. Ex. 558._) Brandt admitted that it was
necessary to set up a special organization to carry out euthanasia.
(_Tr. p. 2407._)

He, together with Bouhler, had authority over the physicians who were
participating in this program, and furthermore he had to keep Hitler
informed from the medical point of view (_English translation is
garbled, therefore reference is made to German Tr. p. 2420_) and had to
maintain contact with Bouhler. (_Tr. p. 2408._) He further admitted that
authorizations for the killing of children were submitted to him and
Bouhler. (_Tr. p. 2544._)

He stated that he resigned his job some time in 1942. (_Tr. p. 2433._)
While this is of no material significance, it is established that he
held his position as the leading figure in the program until 1944. Dr.
Ludwig Sprauer, in his affidavit, stated:

    “I heard the name of Professor Dr. Karl Brandt for the first
    time at a conference in Berlin in the middle of 1941. At this
    conference I learned that Karl Brandt and Philipp Bouhler were
    the leading figures in the Euthanasia Program. The conference
    was called by Dr. Linden on behalf of the Department of the
    Interior, and problems of institutions and asylums were
    submitted. Dr. Linden directed the proceedings.

    “To the best of my knowledge and belief, Philipp Bouhler as well
    as Professor Dr. Karl Brandt were the leading figures in this
    so-called Euthanasia Program from 1941 to the collapse of
    Germany.

    “The connection between the Department of the Interior and
    Professor Karl Brandt, in the framework of the Euthanasia
    Program, was that Karl Brandt gave orders to Conti and Linden,
    which were passed on by these persons on behalf of the
    Department of the Interior. Brandt was the dominating figure
    without doubt.” (_NO-818, Pros. Ex. 373._)

The witness Wesse said in his affidavit that Brandt was in charge of the
Euthanasia Program at least until March 1944. (_NO-1428, Pros. Ex.
432._)

The witness Mennecke testified that he learned in the beginning of 1941
that the defendant Brandt was active in the Euthanasia Program. (_Tr. p.
1874._) He further testified:

    “When, in 1944, I was treated as a patient in the army hospital
    at St. Blasien, I found out through conversations with officers
    that Professor Brandt had an essential part in the collection of
    insane persons in the area of Lublin, Poland.” (_Tr. p. 1903._)

He further testified, in connection with this Lublin action, that it
must have continued up to 1944 and that it was said that insane persons
and Jews were collected in Lublin in large numbers. (_Tr. p. 1904._)

The witness Schmidt testified that Professor Brandt had the medical
direction of the program, and only in 1944 was he told that Brandt had
left the program. (_Tr. p. 1825._) He also knew that Brandt played the
leading part in the task which had to be accomplished (Euthanasia
Program), that he (Brandt) was to accomplish this task. (_Tr. p. 1847._)

Both witnesses, Schmidt and Mennecke, also testified that the chart
(_NO-253, Pros. Ex. 331_), which shows Brandt in the center of the
program, is correct. (_Tr. pp. 1833, 1876._)

The evidence shows further that Brandt gave orders in the Euthanasia
Program as late as July 1943. In a letter from the Patients Transport
Corporation, dated 20 July 1943, to the Mental Institution
Hadamar—which was, as documents and testimony show, an extermination
station—the following sentences are found:

    “I order transfer of insane persons to your institution also, by
    order of Professor Brandt, the Commissioner General of the
    Fuehrer for Medical and Health Service. You will get, on 26 July
    1943, 150 insane women from the Mental Institution Warstein if
    the Reichsbahn will furnish the necessary cars as requested.”
    (_NO-892, Pros. Ex. 442._)

Brandt was the person who had to be approached if one were to save a
child from euthanasia. In a letter from the Reich Committee for Research
on Hereditary and Constitutional Severe Diseases, dated 16 November
1943, to Dr. Schmidt’s sanatorium, Eichberg (as the evidence shows, a
killing station for deficient children), we find the sentence:

    “On the basis of a letter directed to Professor Dr. Brandt
    concerning the above mentioned, I request an elaborated
    diagnosis about the mentioned Anna Gasse who is reported to be
    in your institution at present.”

And further:

    “If from a medical point of view such a release is warranted,
    one could take into consideration whether one should not perhaps
    comply with such a request in the interest of the good
    reputation of the institution.” (_NO-890, Pros. Ex. 443._)

That the defendant Karl Brandt was in a position to issue instructions
and assign tasks to insane asylums in Germany is further corroborated by
the affidavit of the defendant Rose, who said that in 1943 Brandt put an
insane asylum in Thuringia at his disposal and made arrangements that
this institution would not be converted into a general hospital; and
further, that in 1944 Brandt made arrangements for the better feeding of
inmates of this asylum in order to enable Rose to proceed with his
malaria therapy. (_Tr. p. 1717._) If this statement in itself has
nothing to do with euthanasia, it shows the scope of influence and power
Brandt still commanded over insane asylums in 1943 and 1944. (_NO-872,
Pros. Ex. 408._)

According to his own testimony, Brandt was in charge of euthanasia until
1942. (_Tr. p. 2433_; _Tr. p. 2532_.) There is no proof, other than his
own statement, that he resigned his commission at that time. On the
contrary, the proof has shown that he was active in this field until
some time in 1944. In any event, the program was criminal in its
inception. The murder of concentration camp inmates pursuant to
euthanasia began as early as 1940. Non-German nationals were included in
substantial numbers. Healthy Jews were exterminated without examination.
Trained killers from euthanasia stations were sent to the East as early
as 1941 to aid in the mass murder of Jews. Persons whose only crime was
physical inability to work were subjected to euthanasia from the very
beginning. Indeed, the elimination of “useless eaters” was the principal
rationale of the whole program.

Brandt stated that an order existed which exempted non-German nationals,
but he was unable to give any explanation as to how this order operated,
who received it, and why, if such an order existed, questionnaires for
foreign nationals were filled out at all. (_Tr. pp. 2499-2503._) The
evidence has shown that non-German nationals were never exempted and
were killed in large numbers. There is nothing to be said in mitigation
for Brandt.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                            DEFENDANT BRACK_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Moral and Humanitarian Justification_

In the brief against Karl Brandt the prosecution has summarized the
overwhelming proof that euthanasia, far from being “an act of grace”,
was a measure to eliminate “useless eaters” and other “undesirable”
persons. Brack himself, when questioned by the Tribunal, was unable to
explain why war veterans of the First World War (1914-18) were exempted
from this “act of grace.” (_Tr. pp. 7650, 7664._) Contrariwise, he could
not explain why this grace was extended to insane criminals,
irrespective of the length of time they had spent in an insane asylum.
(_NO-825, Pros. Ex. 358._)

Brack personally reprimanded Mennecke, who was an expert in the
Euthanasia Program, on the ground that his expert opinions were far too
soft and did not recommend euthanasia as often as he desired. (_Tr. pp.
1881, 1907._) The so-called “observation stations” where the patients,
according to Brack’s statement, were examined for several weeks by
expert doctors were nothing but collecting points for the victims. (_Tr.
pp. 1822, 1878, 1879._)

Brack admitted that the work of Binding and Hoche is considered the
standard work on euthanasia. (_Tr. p. 7633._) This work leaves no doubt
that the will to live, of even those who are most seriously ill, suffer
most gravely, and are of least use, should be fully respected, and that
any authority for the annihilation of life is excluded in cases where
the will to live must be broken. (_NO-2893, Pros. Ex. 496._) Brack
himself admitted that euthanasia is inadmissible in cases where the
patient has the will to live. (_Tr. p. 7701._) The witness Schmidt
testified that the victims, who obviously knew or suspected their fate,
had to be _forced_ to enter the busses which took them to the
extermination stations. (_Tr. pp. 1856, 1861._) This evidence is
corroborated by documentary proof. (_D-906, Pros. Ex. 376._) While many
of those victims may have been insane, they certainly did not lack the
will to live. Moreover, Brack himself admitted, when questioned by the
Tribunal, that Bouhler ordered that the arrangements for the killing had
to be made in such a way that the patients would not realize what was
being done to them. (_Tr. p. 7660._) The gas chambers where the victims
were annihilated resembled shower rooms. (_Tr. p. 7659._) The patients
were deceived into thinking that they were to take a shower bath and,
therefore, had to undress. (_Tr. pp. 7644, 7660._) Such precautions
would certainly not have been necessary if the victims had desired the
“privilege of a mercy death.”

_Action 14 f 13_[99]

                 *        *        *        *        *

If the testimony of Brack and Brandt as to the number of doctors who
were active in the Euthanasia Program is correct, it is clear from the
record that all doctors active in this program collaborated in Action 14
f 13. Brandt estimated the number of doctors who were charged with the
execution of the Euthanasia Program as 10 to 15 (_Tr. p. 2478_), Brack,
as 12 to 15. (_Tr. p. 7573._) Mennecke testified that about 15 doctors
from the Euthanasia Program were commissioned to carry out the
“examinations” in the concentration camps. (_Tr. p. 1891._)

Brack was unable to explain how it came about that concentration camps
inmates selected in Action 14 f 13 were killed in euthanasia stations.
(_Tr. p. 7541._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Legality_

                 *        *        *        *        *

Even Brack’s own documents reveal that he misinformed the legal
authorities about the legal situation in respect to the Euthanasia
Program. The ministerial director in the Reich Ministry of Justice, Karl
Engert, states in his affidavit (which, according to the defense counsel
of Brack, is “of great interest because it shows the opinion of the
influential jurists on this question”): “Brack’s statements reassured me
because, according to them, it was to be definitely assumed that a Reich
law would then be enacted in the customary form, i. e., by publication
in the Reich Law Gazette. I saw no reason why any difficulties should
arise.” (_Brack 37, Brack Ex. 37._) Needless to say, Brack did not
mention that Hitler had refused to issue such a law until after the war.

That Brack was well aware of the fact that the Euthanasia Program was a
criminal one is proved by his attempt to destroy evidence prior to the
occupation of Germany by the Allies. The affidavit of Claussen proves
that he sent the following teletype to the commandant of the
concentration camp at Mauthausen (_NO-2429, Pros. Ex. 498_):

    “To the Concentration Camp Mauthausen, SS Standartenfuehrer
    Ziereiss.

    “Hartheim must be destroyed immediately. Execution must be
    reported by order of the Fuehrer.

                                        [Signed] OBERFUEHRER BRACK”

Brack admitted that Hartheim was a euthanasia station where the victims
of the Euthanasia Program were killed. (_Tr. p. 7714._)

_General Extermination of the Jews_

                 *        *        *        *        *

That the defense of Brack is fabricated is proved by other evidence in
the record. SS judge, Dr. Morgen, who investigated the criminal case of
Wirth, testified before the International Military Tribunal that when
Wirth took over the mass extermination of the Jews, he was already a
specialist in the extermination of human beings. He had previously
carried out the task of annihilating the insane. He had received this
assignment from the Chancellery of the Fuehrer, Bouhler’s office. A
system which Wirth had devised in his activities in the Euthanasia
Program made it possible to exterminate large numbers of people with the
help of only a few assistants. The same system, with a few improvements,
was employed for the extermination of the Jews. Wirth’s assignment for
the extermination of the Jews came from Bouhler’s office, from the very
office where Brack was active. Morgen investigated Wirth’s mail and
found out that the courier who brought this mail came from the Fuehrer’s
Chancellery, Tiergartenstrasse, the place where the office of the
Euthanasia Program was located. Among the people connected with this
extermination program, Morgen remembers Blankenburg, Brack’s deputy.
(_NO-2614, Pros. Ex. 504._) Brack admitted that Wirth was active in the
Euthanasia Program. (_Tr. p. 7733._) It may well be that Morgen started
his investigations in July 1943[100] but by the affidavit of Gorgass, it
is proved that Wirth received his assignment from the “Foundation”, one
of the camouflaged societies of the Euthanasia Program, as early as the
summer of 1941. (_NO-3010, Pros. Ex. 503._)

This evidence is fully corroborated by the affidavit of Gerstein.
Globocnik was in charge of the extermination camps near Lublin, and
Wirth collaborated with him in the extermination of the Jews. The gas
chambers were camouflaged as “bath and inhalation” rooms and called
“Foundation” Heckenholt. Doctors’ commissions toured the towns and
villages of Poland and Czechoslovakia in order to select persons for
extermination. (_1553-PS, Pros. Ex. 428._) Brack when questioned by the
Tribunal, admitted that the gas chambers of the euthanasia stations
where the victims of the Euthanasia Program were killed were camouflaged
as “shower rooms”. (_Tr. p. 7659._) “Foundation” was one of the code
names under which the Euthanasia Program operated. (_NO-3010, Pros. Ex.
503._) The similarity between the extermination arrangement in the
euthanasia stations and that used by Globocnik and Wirth is not
coincidental.

The proof has shown that Brack himself advanced plans for the mass
extermination of the Jews. In the beginning of October 1941 Brack had a
conference with Eichmann from the Reich Security Main Office of the SS
and Wetzel of the Reich Ministry for the Occupied Territories on the
“solution of the Jewish question”. (_NO-997, Pros. Ex. 506._) Brack
declared himself ready to collaborate in the manufacture of the
necessary gas chambers and gassing apparatus for the extermination of
all Jews who were unfit to work. Since the manufacture of this apparatus
was easier to accomplish in the East, Brack agreed to send some of his
collaborators, and especially his chemist, Kallmeyer, there for this
purpose. Brack proposed outright extermination of all Jews who were
unable to work. Since Eichmann, whom Hitler had charged with the
solution of the Jewish question, was in agreement with Brack’s
proposals, no objection was voiced against the extermination of those
Jews who were unable to work with the “Brack remedy”. (_NO-365, Pros.
Ex. 507._) Kallmeyer was the technical expert on operation of the gas
chambers in the euthanasia station. (_Tr. p. 7743._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

          c. Selections from the Argumentation of the Defense

             _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT
                              KARL BRANDT_

                              _Euthanasia_

_Position taken in the indictment_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Position of the defense_

The aim of euthanasia was to solve an old medical problem.

    Statement of Karl Brandt according to which the subject of
    “useless eaters” was never mentioned in the presence of Karl
    Brandt. (_Tr. pp. 2397, 2434._)

    Statement of Schmidt according to which the ethical points of
    view were stressed during the conference of the experts in
    Berlin, 1941. (_Tr. p. 1852._)

    Statement of Mennecke according to which medical motives were
    given at the informative conference. (_Tr. p. 1906._)

    Statement of Brack regarding what was involved was the solution
    of the old medical problem. (_Tr. p. 7544._)

The ethical aims of the euthanasia planned can also be seen from the
drafts of a final bill of law.

    Statement of Lammers in which the witness compiled a draft
    according to medical and ethical points of view. (_Tr. p.
    2683._)

    Statement of Brack stating that Bouhler worked out a draft in
    cooperation with Brack based on scientific contributions. The
    heading “Law relating to the granting of ultimate medical
    assistance to incurable persons” shows the characteristic
    features of the law. (_Tr. p. 7581._)

The peculiar individual attitude of Karl Brandt is of an ethical nature.

    Affidavit of Schwerin-Krosigk, according to which Pastor
    Bodelschwingh, chief of the mental institutions of Bethel,
    declared that Karl Brandt had stated his point of view as
    regards euthanasia in a respectful way, making every allowance
    for the contrary opinion of Bodelschwingh. (_Karl Brandt 26,
    Karl Brandt Ex. 83._)

    Affidavits of Pastor Woermann. The witness, successor of Pastor
    Bodelschwingh, said that Bodelschwingh had told him about the
    idealistic attitude of Karl Brandt and said that Karl Brandt had
    supported euthanasia for the fully extinct spirit. (_Karl Brandt
    23, Karl Brandt Ex. 19._)

    Affidavit of Rueggeberg. The witness reported on a radio
    interview of the London radio commentator Robert Graham with
    Pastor Bodelschwingh in the summer of 1945. Bodelschwingh
    himself declared there that one should not consider Karl Brandt
    as a criminal but as an idealist. (_Karl Brandt 19, Karl Brandt
    Ex. 16._)

    Affidavit of Rach. According to the statement of this witness,
    Bodelschwingh visited Karl Brandt at his house in Berlin as late
    as the summer of 1943 and spent an afternoon there in a friendly
    discussion. (_Karl Brandt 6, Karl Brandt Ex. 7._)

Suspension of euthanasia in August 1941.

    Affidavit of Kirchert. According to this statement euthanasia
    was stopped in the summer of 1941 although at that time economic
    reasons had become rather more important than before. The
    statement of the prosecution admits with certain limitations
    that euthanasia had been stopped in August 1941. (_Karl Brandt
    18, Karl Brandt Ex. 15_; _Tr. p. 1752_.)

Special responsibility and participation of Karl Brandt.

    The authorization of 1 September 1939 was founded on a purely
    medical point of view, namely euthanasia for incurable persons
    “under _most_ careful scrutiny of their state of illness.” An
    economic or political motive as the basis is therewith rejected.
    The drafts for a law for further implementation of the
    euthanasia idea also show medical and ethical motives.

    The report sheets and memorandum slips were sent to mental
    institutions _only_, which proves that euthanasia was
    practically restricted to insane persons. Had the elimination of
    “useless eaters” been the aim, this restriction would have been
    meaningless for there were “useless eaters” in other places too
    (nursery homes for cripples, hospitals, etc.). Undesirable
    foreigners were rarely to be found in mental institutions at the
    start of the Euthanasia Program since aliens entered the area of
    the Reich only with the beginning of the allocation of foreign
    labor.

    The suspension of euthanasia in August 1941 argues against the
    intention to eliminate “useless eaters”, for only from that time
    on economic reasons of that kind acquired a certain importance.

    The transfer of sick persons by order of the Reich Defense
    Commissioner did not point to a special war interest but was an
    administrative and local measure in order to evade difficulties
    as regards competence. The Reich Defense Commissioner was a new
    regional administrative office which made it possible to combine
    the various offices without regard to their competencies for the
    different tasks. It seems possible that it was only a
    camouflage. The blank draft contains contradictions, for
    according to that draft the director of a mental institution
    gives directives to the general public prosecutor and refers to
    a decree of the Reich Defense Commissioner. (_NO-841, Pros. Ex.
    360._)

    The motive of elimination of “useless eaters” appears only in
    the subsequent statements of the ideological opponents as a
    propaganda measure of the resistance movement where a symptom is
    passed off as a motive. At the conferences, no economic reason
    was given for the euthanasia measures; but this was mentioned
    only as a secondary phenomenon.

    The attitude of Karl Brandt himself was proved by the statements
    of Bodelschwingh as the authoritative leader in matters of
    medical and nursery treatment among convinced Christians.
    Bodelschwingh’s attitude towards Karl Brandt would be
    inconceivable if he had enforced the liquidation of all
    undesirable sick persons. (_Karl Brandt 115, Karl Brandt Ex.
    91._)

The statement in the judgment of the International Military Tribunal is
subject to revision on the grounds of the evidence material of this
trial.

                _Legal Foundation of Medical Euthanasia_

_Position taken in the indictment_

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Position of the defense_

The authorization of 1 September 1939 was a sufficient legal basis.
(_630-PS, Pros. Ex. 330._) The form of the authorization was sufficient.

The sheet with the golden eagle chosen for that purpose shows the
special importance of the authorization.

No recipient was mentioned to whom the authorization in the form of a
