letter is remarkable: “Report on the Lost experiments carried out by
order of the Wehrmacht.” Dr. Hirt mentions further on page four of the
report that he submitted the written report on the results of his Lost
experiments to the surgeon general who was his superior at that time.
From this report, it is quite clear that experiments on human beings,
with the exception of cadets, had not yet been carried out by Hirt.
However, Dr. Hirt made a further short report, which the Reich Business
Manager of the Ahnenerbe forwarded to the personal staff of the Reich
Leader SS on 27 August 1942. (_NO-794, Pros. Ex. 259._)

In a letter of 13 July 1942 the Reich Leader SS ordered that Dr. Hirt
should carry out the research work assigned to him in the Natzweiler
concentration camp. (_NO-098, Pros. Ex. 263._) Sievers set out for
Natzweiler with Dr. Hirt at the end of August 1942 in order to ascertain
whether the prerequisites existed. As is shown in Dr. Hirt’s report of
19 October 1942, nothing had yet happened besides the drafting of
Oberscharfuehrer Walbert, the animal-keeper. The extension of the
laboratories and stables had not yet begun. And now Dr. Hirt’s report
continues:

    “We were further informed that prisoners, who are later to be
    experimented on, would have to be paid by us while they are
    subjected to the experiment. For the prisoners in the
    L-experiment we propose that they are put on full diet (guards’
    diet), so that the experiments can be carried out under the same
    conditions as would prevail with the troops in an actual case.
    To begin with we intend to take 10 prisoners for the
    experiment.” (_NO-098, Pros. Ex. 263._)

As Hirt reported in addition that the assignment of a second physician
to the Natzweiler concentration camp would be difficult, Sievers was
asked to participate in the efforts to obtain the release of Dr. Wimmer,
surgeon captain of the air force, in order to make him assistant to Dr.
Hirt, especially as the Reich Leader SS expressly wished that Dr.
Wimmer’s transfer should take place as soon as possible. (_NO-194, Pros.
Ex. 265._)

It was the duty of Sievers to deal with questions of billets, laboratory
finance and similar matters. Therefore, in August and September 1942 he
wrote to SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks, who was responsible for the
administration of the concentration camps. (_NO-935, Pros. Ex. 481_;
_NO-977, Pros. Ex. 482_; _NO-978, Pros. Ex. 480_.) They contain only
administrative matters.

How little Sievers knew about concentration camps is seen from Document
NO-935. Sievers asks to be sent the exact address of the camp and of the
commandant of Natzweiler. This letter is particularly worthy of notice.

As for the question whether and to what extent Sievers had knowledge of
the performance of Lost experiments in the Natzweiler concentration
camp, the following can be stated:

Ferdinand Holl, witness for the prosecution, when giving evidence on 3
January 1947, said nothing about Sievers’ taking part in any way in the
performance of the Lost experiments at the Natzweiler concentration
camp. The experimenters were Dr. Hirt and officers of the Luftwaffe. The
witness Holl did not mention Sievers at all. If Sievers, who wore SS
uniform, had become known at all in connection with the Lost
experiments, this witness would certainly have made some such statement,
especially as he was dispensary assistant [Revierkapo] and prisoners’
guard in the so-called Ahnenerbe block in the Natzweiler concentration
camp. (_German Tr. pp. 1051-1059._)

The witness Grandjean too, who was at the Natzweiler concentration camp
hospital as medical assistant from April 1944 on, knows nothing of
Sievers’ presence at the Natzweiler concentration camp or of any
connection between Sievers and the Lost experiments. (_Tr. p. 1099 ff._)

Sievers was in Natzweiler concentration camp on 25 January 1943 and also
visited the barracks where the experimental persons for the Lost
experiments were housed. Dr. Wimmer showed Sievers some of the
experimental persons with their forearms in bandages. There were about
10 persons altogether who gave the impression of being quite lively. One
of the experimental subjects was just having his bandage changed, and
Sievers saw that the place being treated on the arm was covered with a
scab. Dr. Wimmer reported nothing about fatal incidents. On the other
hand, by questioning the experimental subjects himself, Sievers found
that they volunteered for those experiments after a lecture by Professor
Hirt. Sievers also learned that from Dr. Hirt himself, who at the end of
the experiments confirmed that he had sent to the camp commandant a
report on the good behavior of the prisoners with a recommendation for
their release. (_German Tr. pp. 5732-33._) The lecture which Hirt had
previously delivered to the experimental persons is also confirmed by
the witness Holl. (_German Tr. pp. 1051-1059._) This was the only visit
Sievers paid to the experimental subjects of the Lost experiments. After
25 January 1943 Sievers never went to Natzweiler again. This is already
known from his diary entries.

Sievers attached a certain danger to the experiments, but, not being a
physician, he was in no position to judge exactly from the experiments
and the way in which they were carried out whether there was reason to
be prepared for fatal results. In March 1943 Sievers asked Dr. Hirt
whether any experimental subjects had died. Hirt admitted two deaths
which, he remarked, however, had no connection with the Lost
experiments. (_German Tr. pp. 5732-33._)

The statement of the witness Nales, heard in the session of 30 April
1947, deserves special attention. This witness confirmed that the
experimental subjects who had reported for the “Burning Experiments”
were _volunteers_. The witness thereby confirmed Sievers’ statement of
10 April 1947. (_German Tr. pp. 5732-33._) The witness admitted under
cross-examination that Professor Dr. Hirt, as well as the SS camp
physician, explained to the experimental subjects the nature of the
planned experiments. It may be that the SS camp physician did not
precisely state the actual danger of the experiments. But it may
certainly be supposed that Dr. Hirt described the nature of the planned
experiments more closely in his instructions, which are also confirmed
by the witness Holl. Here Sievers had just as little to do with the
choice of experimental subjects as in all the other cases. He was
present neither at the lecture of the camp physician nor at that of Dr.
Hirt. He could and had to rely on what Dr. Hirt told him concerning the
question of volunteering.

4. In the case in question, Sievers was again not in a position to give
instructions or orders on the carrying out of the Lost experiments.
Neither did he do so. In as far as he came into contact with the Lost
experiments, he only forwarded correspondence and did subordinate
administrative work, which had no decisive or important influence on the
experiments carried out by Dr. Hirt.

5. The knowledge that the experiments could exceed certain limits or
become inhuman existed neither before they began nor in the course of
the experiments.

We still have to examine whether Sievers did not receive, through some
report or other, more exact knowledge of the course of the experiments.
As a result of the experiments carried out by Dr. Hirt and Dr. Wimmer,
the “Proposed Treatment of Poison-Gas Injuries Caused by Lost” was
produced. (_NO-099, Pros. Ex. 268._) From this report nothing at all is
to be learned of the course of the experiments in its effect on the
experimental subjects. Since no further report exists, the correctness
of Sievers’ statement must be accepted, according to which he knew no
more of the Lost experiments than what he had seen and heard himself at
Natzweiler. There was nothing in that to make him believe in criminal
experiments.

This must also form the basis for the judging of Documents NO-195 and
NO-015, Prosecution Exhibits 266 and 275. Sievers could only give
information on what he knew. By virtue of his own observation of the
information which he had received from Dr. Hirt and the correspondence
submitted here, Sievers could only give information on the subject of
the experiments carried out by Dr. Hirt and the circumstances under
which they were carried out. It is also quite absurd to suppose that
anyone who himself had detailed knowledge of the course of the
experiments would have been used to pass on information. In his letter
to Dr. Rudolf Brandt of 11 April 1944, Sievers further stated that on 31
March he had given a report to SS Brigadefuehrer Professor Dr. Brandt on
the research work of SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Professor Dr. Hirt. The
contents of this so-called report were reproduced by Dr. Karl Brandt in
his examination on 4 November 1947. According to that, Sievers only
stated that he had been commissioned by order of Himmler to hand over to
him the final report on Lost by Dr. Hirt. But Sievers said nothing about
being commissioned to discuss the contents with Dr. Karl Brandt. No
discussion took place between Dr. Karl Brandt and Sievers on the
performance of the experiments. This was the “report” from which the
prosecution believes it can draw the conclusion that Sievers had
detailed knowledge of the Lost experiments. (_German Tr. pp. 2365-66._)

The question still arises, whether Sievers, as a result of the report
made by Hirt on 8 March 1944 to the Reich Leader SS, was not aware of
deaths in connection with the Lost experiments. Hirt’s report did not
disclose anything from which one could conclude that a special
endangering of the experimental subjects was involved. Moreover Hirt
declared that he could arrive at further results only through
experiments on animals. (_German Tr. p. 5734._)

Finally, an opinion is expressed in regard to the possible assertion of
the prosecution that the application of intravital microscopy
constituted a crime against humanity. The intravital microscope used by
Dr. Hirt could only be used on animals. (_Tr. p. 5734._) Letter from the
firm of Zeiss of 13 January 1947. (_Sievers 9, Sievers Ex. 10_; _Tr. p.
5879_; _Sievers 55, Sievers Ex. 51_.) That intravital microscopic
experiments were carried out on human beings by Dr. Hirt was not
testified to by any of the witnesses and also cannot be seen from any
document. If this had been the case, it certainly would have become
known to third parties through experimental subjects or records.

6. Sievers had neither the power nor the opportunity to prevent the Lost
experiments or to stop them. Sievers could in no way hinder the course
of experiments against Himmler’s order.

7. Under these circumstances Sievers could not have become guilty of
criminal negligence either.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
              Pros. Ex.
    Doc. No.     No.             Description of Document          Page
       NO-794    259     Letter from Sievers to Rudolf Brandt, 27   336
                           June 1942, concerning mustard gas and
                           its effect on human beings.
       NO-098    263     Memorandum from Sievers to Rudolf          337
                           Brandt, 3 November 1942, concerning
                           research in the Natzweiler
                           concentration camp.
       NO-193    264     Letter from Sievers to Rudolf Brandt, 22   340
                           April 1943, regarding prevention of
                           Dr. Wimmer’s to active duty with the
                           air force.
       NO-099    268     Report by Hirt and Wimmer on the           341
                           proposed treatment of poisoning caused
                           by Lost gas.
       NO-005    279     Letter from Grawitz to Himmler, 22         344
                           November 1944, requesting prisoners
                           for experiments.
      NO-1852    456     Extract from report on medical             345
                           experiments addressed to Karl Brandt.
       NO-978    480     Letter from Sievers to Gluecks, 11         349
                           September 1942, concerning military
                           scientific research work to be
                           conducted at Natzweiler concentration
                           camp.

                           _Defense Documents_
     Doc. No.     Def. Ex. No.       Description of Document       Page
   Karl Brandt 12 Karl Brandt  Affidavit of Dr. Walther Schieber     350
                    Ex. 11       on his efforts to purchase
                                 experimental animals in Spain and
                                 bring them to Germany.
  Karl Brandt 101 Karl Brandt  Affidavit of Dr. Otto Ambros, 21      351
                    Ex. 41       April 1947, concerning the
                                 urgency of experiments in the
                                 field of chemical-warfare agents
                                 and their countermeasures.
  Karl Brandt 103 Karl Brandt  Affidavit of Dr. Walter Mielenz, 21   352
                    Ex. 42       April 1947, concerning the
                                 assignment of Karl Brandt in
                                 connection with chemical warfare.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-794
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 259

 LETTER FROM SIEVERS TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 27 JUNE 1942, CONCERNING MUSTARD
                   GAS AND ITS EFFECT ON HUMAN BEINGS

The Ahnenerbe

The Reich Business Manager

                                             Berlin-Dahlem, 27 June 1942
                                          G/H/6, g/Sch/4, A/1/101 S/wo

To: SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. R. Brandt
Personal Staff of the Reich Leader SS
  Berlin
Subject: Use of mustard gas for exterminating rats.
Re: Your letter of 13 July 1942—A 19/95/1942

Dear Comrade Brandt!

On request SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Prof. Dr. Hirt, Strasbourg tells me:

    “Mustard gas in a dilution of 1:100 is dangerous to human beings
    if it contacts the body in an adequate amount. Above all,
    mustard gas is dangerously effective to clothing, as is known,
    even when greatly diluted, especially in connection with
    dampness. Mustard gas touching the skin even in a dilution of
    1:100 causes reddening, possibly it causes little cysts without
    effecting necrosis. That is, the effect is much weaker than that
    of pure mustard gas. In spite of that, coming in contact with
    the clothes in sufficient quantities, especially in the regions
    of perspiration as the armpit, or the inguinal region, it can
    have exactly the same effect as concentrated mustard gas. For
    this, only a trace of it is frequently sufficient. This I
    experienced in a laboratory accident with a chemical student,
    who touched his armpit with one of the rabbits only for a second
    and a reddening ensued which spread over the entire body the
    following day, however, without further consequences. In my
    opinion, only a place which can be temporarily evacuated by
    human inhabitants can be used for gassing. The use of mustard
    gas in the vicinity of food stores, especially grain dumps, has
    to be absolutely excluded because one cannot know to what extent
    the rats carry the mustard gas there. Only gassing of rat holes
    would be possible with full application of precautionary
    measures. How this will work out technically, I cannot of course
    determine. Proper experts would have to judge that. Probably the
    case may be the same as with other poisons used for the
    extermination of rats (Phosphor-arsenic, strychnine, etc.)—that
    means that the use of every type of poison has two sides. In
    spite of this, your idea to try the extermination of vermin by
    means of poison gas does not seem strange at all, but an expert
    on poison gas would have to determine if there are not other
    means of killing rats which are less harmful to human beings.”

  With kind regards
                                                         Heil Hitler!
                                                    [Signature] SIEVERS

P. S. I shall talk over this matter thoroughly with Professor Hirt one
of these days, and I will see which poison gas expert we might consult
for the solution of the problem.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-098
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 263

 MEMORANDUM FROM SIEVERS TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 3 NOVEMBER 1942, CONCERNING
             RESEARCH IN THE NATZWEILER CONCENTRATION CAMP

The Ahnenerbe
Reich Business Manager
                                          Berlin-Dahlem, 3 November 1942
                                                            S/Wo G/H/6
Personal Staff Reich Leader SS [Filing stamp]
File Room Document No. Secret/51/16 [shorthand notation]

                                 _Note_

    Re: Research order SS Hauptsturmfuehrer, Professor Dr. August
    Hirt, Strasbourg, at the Institute for Military Scientific
    Research of the Ahnenerbe.

The Reich Leader SS [Himmler] ordered, in his letter of 13 July
1942—Journal number AR/48/7/42—that SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Prof. Dr.
Hirt carry out the research tasks assigned him, in conjunction with the
Natzweiler concentration camp. It was determined at a conference, for
which I drove, along with SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Prof. Dr. Hirt, to
Natzweiler on 31 August 1942, that the necessary conditions exist in
Natzweiler. I reported on this orally on 9 September 1942, and
afterwards in writing on 11 September 1942 to SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks,
who agreed and promised his full support. In view of the urgency of
these research tasks, I asked SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Professor Dr. Hirt to
go to Natzweiler again because until then no report on the beginning of
the work had arrived. SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Prof. Dr. Hirt reported the
following, among other things, concerning this conference which took
place at Natzweiler on 19 October 1942:

    “The conference was due to the fact that until now nothing
    besides the detachment of Oberscharfuehrer Walbert had been
    accomplished. Nor had the installation of the laboratories been
    started to date.

    “It has now been decided to start with the laboratories this
    week.

    “It was further established that the camp for security suspects,
    Schirmeck, would erect the sheds. Its commander fortunately is
    ready, as he told us at once, to place the necessary people at
    our disposal free of charge; whereas Natzweiler would not have
    been in a position to do so owing to the overbearing and
    inconvenient demands of the workers.

    “We were furthermore informed that the prisoners who would later
    be used for experiments would have to be paid for by us during
    the period that experiments were being made upon them.

    “We are to request that the prisoners of the Lost experiment
    receive full rations (food for guards) to enable the experiments
    to be carried out under the same conditions as the troops would
    be under in a possible emergency. We intend for the time being
    to take 10 prisoners as subjects for experiments.

    “Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Blanke said that he was refused the
    assistance of a second physician in supervising the experiments
    on patients, so that he probably would not have enough time to
    concern himself with the experiments.

    “The X-ray apparatus which I could procure here has not yet been
    definitely allocated by Berlin. We must get it immediately,
    otherwise we may lose it.

    “The installation of direct current causes difficulties. One,
    however, gets the impression that the building operators had not
    dealt with this problem at all. According to their opinion, a
    transformer should be procured which is able to transform 220
    volts alternating current into direct current. This is most
    likely quite improbable at this place.

    “To equip the laboratory, I would ship the needed things
    (freezing microtome, incubators, etc.) from the stocks of the
    Anatomical Institute to Natzweiler during the next week. They
    remain, of course, the property of the Anatomical Institute. The
    two prisoners trained in handling the microtome can then be put
    to work. According to Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Blanke, both should
    be proficient at it.”

On the basis of this report, I have the impression that not too much
interest in cooperative work exists at Natzweiler. As such cooperation
is ordered by the Reich Leader SS and as SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks is
willing, the whole thing is not understandable to me. I was very much
surprised by the fact that the prisoners to be used for experiments
should be paid for. If we use only 10 prisoners for one experiment,
which might under certain circumstances last 10 months, the cost for the
prisoners alone would total approximately 4,000 RM. When I think of our
military research work conducted at the concentration camp Dachau, I
must praise and call special attention to the generous and understanding
way in which our work was furthered there and to the cooperation we were
given. Payment of [for] prisoners was never discussed. It seems as if at
Natzweiler they are trying to make as much money as possible out of this
matter. We are not conducting these experiments, as a matter of fact,
for the sake of some fixed scientific idea, but to be of practical help
to the armed forces and beyond that to the German people in a possible
emergency. The budget of the institute will be met, according to the
order of the Reich Leader of the SS and as already discussed by me in
detail with SS Standartenfuehrer Loerner, out of the funds of the Waffen
SS.

Under the supposition that the prisoners needed for experiments are in
the prescribed condition as regards nourishment by this time, the
experiments could start approximately on 10 November 1942.

Special treatment in Dachau was never the subject of special
instructions but was understood to be necessary and issued without
further ado. On the occasion of his personal inspection of the
experiments at Dachau, the Reich Leader SS also ordered special food as
an additional measure. Just as the Reich Leader SS appeared one day at
Dachau to have a look at the experiments there, this is possible at
Natzweiler too.

                                                  [Signature] SIEVERS
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

1. To SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. R. Brandt to read in reference to our
discussion of today and with the request for help in comradely fashion
in setting up the necessary conditions at Natzweiler.

2. Documents.

                                                        [Initials] SI

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-193
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 264

     LETTER FROM SIEVERS TO RUDOLF BRANDT, 22 APRIL 1943, REGARDING
 PREVENTION OF DR. WIMMER’S TRANSFER TO ACTIVE DUTY WITH THE AIR FORCE

                                  Copy

Ahnenerbe Society

The Reich Business Manager

                                              Berlin-Dahlem, 22 April 43
                                                              G/H/6 S/No
Note [Handwritten]
               Some information on W. is also in the files of Prof. Hirt
                                                       Diary No. 41/8/43
                                                                 G. Mue.
To: SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. R. Brandt
Personal Staff Reich Leader SS
Berlin SW 11, Prinz Albrecht Str. 8.

Subject:    Dr. med. habil. Karl Wimmer, born on 24 October 1910, staff
            physician of the Luftwaffe, commanded by Air Gau Physician 7,
            Munich, for service with the Anatomical Institute of
            Strasbourg University. Co-worker at the Institute for Military
            Scientific Research of the Ahnenerbe Society, Department SS
            Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Hirt, Strasbourg.
Re:  Your letter of 10.42. No. AR/48/7/42.
     Our letter of 25.7.42.

Dear Comrade Brandt!

Effective immediately, Dr. Wimmer has been transferred to the XIth
Fliegerkorps [subordinate operational Command of an Air Fleet], and
according to information given by the Air Gau Medical Department 7 was
to report today to Oberstabsarzt Dr. Jaeger, Berlin-Tempelhof, Manfred
von Richthofenstr. 6./II. As Jaeger is going to be absent until 27
April, Dr. Wimmer will have to wait for a decision, until that date. The
transfer of Dr. Wimmer means discontinuance of the gas experiments at
Natzweiler and Strasbourg, as—

1. Replacement cannot be supplied due to the specialized knowledge
necessary.

2. The practical knowledge gained by Dr. Wimmer through an extensive
series of experiments can only be used by him.

3. On Dr. Wimmer’s leaving, SS Hauptsturmfueherer Prof. Dr. Hirt will
have to take over his lectures and as he, considering his state of
health, is already more than overworked, he can no longer go on with
research work.

Interim report on experiment results up to now will follow next week to
be submitted to the Reich Leader SS. The intensification of experiments
and research, as well as the continuation of the work at all, as ordered
by the Reich Leader SS on the basis of our discussion on 7 April, is out
of the question, if the small staff of co-workers at the disposal of
Prof. Dr. Hirt, especially Dr. Wimmer, is withdrawn. The problems to be
solved constantly demand scientists with long years of experience and
specialized knowledge. Dr. Wimmer would now be employed only as an army
doctor, which is totally uneconomical considering his knowledge and
abilities, as his services as an army doctor will never be of vital
importance as regards the war, while this may well be said of his
scientific activities. Obviously the Recruiting Office of the Waffen SS
at that time contented itself with the information of the Reich Air
Minister and Supreme Commander of the German Luftwaffe, without
concluding a definite agreement. I request immediate steps for this to
be remedied; the best would be to order Dr. Wimmer to the Waffen SS at
least until 31.13.43 [sic] and if necessary the Reichsarzt SS should
send an army doctor in his place to the Luftwaffe for the time Dr.
Wimmer is assigned to the Waffen SS.

   With best regards
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours
                                         [Signed] SIEVERS [typewritten]

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-099
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 268

REPORT BY HIRT AND WIMMER ON THE PROPOSED TREATMENT OF POISONING CAUSED
                              BY LOST GAS

                               Top Secret

 [Handwritten]        Enclosure of Top Secret Z. I. A. H. No. 36
                        G. Tgb. S. 19, No. 170

From the Institute for Military Scientific Research Department H of the
Research and Instruction Society Ahnenerbe (Reich Leader SS Personal
Staff, Office “A”) Strasbourg, Anatomical Institute.

         _Proposed treatment of poisoning caused by Lost [Gas]_

     (By Professor Dr. A. Hirt, and Staff Surgeon of the Luftwaffe,
                Professor Dr. Wimmer, Strasbourg, 1944)

                         _General Observations_

The effect of Lost as a poison gas is immediate and, by causing other
pathological reactions within the cells and organs, it damages the
entire efficiency of the individual cell as well as that of the organs.
The organism stands the best chance of absorbing the damage caused by
Lost if there is a large vitamin reserve in the body. In administering
the vitamin treatment after Lost damage has been inflicted, care must be
taken that the medicaments are not administered indiscriminately. The
vitamin combinations (A, B complex, C) taken orally or vitamin B_{1}
administered intravenously in glucose suspension have proved most
effective. Both methods aim at raising the resistance of the
reticuloendothelial system, while simultaneously introducing therapeutic
measures to protect the liver which can be further strengthened by food
with a high carbohydrate and vitamin content. When definite damage to
the organs (liver, cardiac muscles, kidneys) manifests itself, vitamin
treatment has to be discontinued and injections of B_{1} glucose
substituted, as the excretion of the surplus quantity of vitamins
results in a temporary additional overstimulation of the cells of the
excretory organs.

In addition the inter-connection between the effect of sulfanilamide and
vitamin B complex should be noted. In the case of pulmonary
complications (bronchial pneumonia, pulmonary abscess) which are treated
with sulfanilamides, the administration of yeast is definitely not
indicated.

The general treatment, as set forth, especially the administration of
vitamin B_{1} glucose, also has a salutory effect on the healing of
cutaneous necrosis. In average and serious cases, the length of the
healing process can thereby be considerably decreased. Supporting
measures to be taken are bandaging the affected limb in splints until
the appearance of clean granulation or placing the patient in a suitable
recumbent position as well as vigorous, systematic psychotherapy. The
psychological influencing of the largely apathetic Lost patient
constitutes an essential part of the treatment, due to the possibility
of thereby influencing the parasympathetic system (circulation,
circulatory system).

                         _Outline of treatment_

1. All the directions given for the elimination of the Lost poison are
to be followed carefully. Only _after_ elimination of the poison has
resulted may Lost patients be treated and accommodated together in
enclosed rooms. (Inhalation of Lost vapors!)

2. Damp dressings with Rivanol (0.1-0.05 percent) and Trypaflavin (0.1
percent) have proved to be a successful treatment of the _skin symptoms_
(reddening, swelling, blisters) of the first to fourth day. If
necessary, ointment dressings (10 percent cod liver oil tannic ointment,
boric acid ointment, etc.) may be applied. With the opening of the
blisters, the exposed corium of the skin becomes extremely sensitive to
the drying reflex. Introductory treatment; daily bathing with a
potassium permanganate solution, constant damp dressings of
Rivanol-Trypaflavin solution; later on ointment dressings (5 percent cod
liver oil tannic ointment, boric acid ointment). With the development of
_cutaneous necrosis_ and increasing disinfection of the affected parts
of the skin, the damp dressings are to be substituted—if only for
nursing reasons—by ointment dressings, after bathing with a potassium
permanganate solution at body temperature, which are to be changed
daily. Usually after the 17th day, the necrotic spots on the skin can be
removed by drying them up or better still by brushing them off (under
narcosis if necessary) with a potassium permanganate solution. In this
way the local healing process is considerably shortened.

With the beginning of the knitting of the skin granulation stimulating
ointment dressings (alternately cod liver oil ointment, boric acid
ointment, unguentine, etc.) are sufficient. Lexer’s cod liver ointment
(only 2 hours, painful!) can provide a strong _stimulus_ should
granulation formation be slow and drag itself out.

3. General treatment of average and serious Lost damage begins with
administering a vitamin mixture compounded as follows:

    Vitamin A (in the form of Vogane oil) increasing from 4 to 10
    drops daily.

    Vitamin C (Cantan—Cebion tablets) 2 tablets 3 times daily.

    Yeast powder 3 teaspoonfuls daily.

One should consider whether a vitamin compound of similar
preparation—if need be with the addition of glucose—should be produced
for the combat troops. Such a powder mixture would have to be
administered in increasing quantities as well. In all cases of absorbed
Lost damage (liver damage indicated by increased secretion of
urobilinogen in the urine, later icteric skin coloring, cardiac muscle
damage with tachycardiacs, kidney damage with albumin secretion in the
urine) treatment with vitamin mixtures is to be discontinued and to be
substituted by injections of vitamin B_{1} glucose. (Betaxin—Betabion 2
cc.—also in larger dosages—intravenously with 10 cc. 20 percent
glucose solution.) Injections are to be given slowly, since at the
height of Lost damage the veins of the arms incline to thrombosis! In
the latter case glucose has to be administered orally and vitamin B_{1}
intramuscularly. There exists the possibility, in every case of
considerable Lost damage, of a sudden failure of circulation (frequently
between the 7th and 17th day) indicated by a weak response to heart and
circulatory stimulants. Heart stimulants (strophanthin, caffeine,
digitalis) and circulatory stimulants (sympatol, priscol, camphor,
cardiazol) have therefore to be administered with care in serious cases.
The therapeutic routine valid for all clinical treatment is particularly
valid for cases of organic damage.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-005
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 279

 LETTER FROM GRAWITZ TO HIMMLER, 22 NOVEMBER 1944, REQUESTING PRISONERS
                            FOR EXPERIMENTS

The Reich Leader SS
Reich Physician SS and Police
_Diary No. 39/44 Top Secret_

                                 Berlin W. 15, 22 November 1944
                                 Knesebeckstrasse 50/51
                                 Telephone: 924249.924374.924351.924406.

                               Top Secret

Subject: Experiment with N-substance.
Reference: Order of Reich Leader SS of 15 May 1944
                                                      2 copies, 1st copy
To: Reich Leader SS H. Himmler
Field H. Q.

Reich Leader:

The Chief of the Technical Office in the SS Administrative Main Office,
SS Gruppenfuehrer Schwab, contacted me in September of this year with
the request to furnish him with two doctors, who as medical experts were
to witness experiments with N-substance, which he was carrying out at
the time by order of the Fuehrer. This was above all a matter of the
clarification of the question whether N-substance was to be considered
for chemical warfare or not.

For this purpose I have furnished my leading pathologist, SS
Hauptsturmfuehrer University Teacher Dr. Sachs, as well as the doctor
working on the Ahnenerbe, SS Hauptsturmfuehrer University Teacher Dr.
Ploetner.

In accordance with the experiments carried out on 25 September 1944, the
necessity has now arisen to carry out several experiments on human
beings for the final clarification of the physiological effect of
N-substance on and through the human skin. Five prisoners are necessary
for the execution of these experiments. It is highly improbable that the
experiments will cause any permanent damage.

In accordance with your order of 15 May 1944, Reich Leader, I have
obtained the opinion of SS Gruppenfuehrer Professor Gebhardt, SS
Gruppenfuehrer Gluecks, and SS Oberfuehrer Panzinger. They read as
follows:

_1. SS Gruppenfuehrer Professor Dr. Gebhardt_

    “I am certainly in agreement with suggestion, and request that
    the directions for the supervision of the experiments be issued
    directly by the Reich Physician SS and Police.”

_2. SS Gruppenfuehrer Gluecks_

    “I have received your letter of 7 November 1944 with regard to
    the procurement of five prisoners for the experiments which are
    to be carried out with N-substance.

    “For this purpose I have had five prisoners in the Sachsenhausen
    concentration camp who have been condemned to death placed in
    readiness, on whom these experiments can be carried out.”

_3. SS Oberfuehrer Panzinger_

    “From the point of view of the criminal police the experiments
    to be carried out there are to be welcomed. Therefore, no
    misgivings exist against the handing over of prisoners for
    inoculation.

    “If political prisoners should be considered, the Chief of
    Office IV, SS Gruppenfuehrer Mueller would still have to be
    consulted, but he will certainly also grant permission.”

I respectfully request the permission so that the experiments can be
initiated.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                     [Signed] GRAWITZ

   [stamp]
Personal Staff of Reich Leader SS
Received: 26 November 1944
No. 1991/44

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-1852
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 456

  EXTRACT FROM REPORT ON MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS ADDRESSED TO KARL BRANDT

                               _Contents_

            Report.  (2d copy)
                       2 and 3 Phosgene experiments Ruehl
                       4 and 5 T-experiments Letz
                       6 Aerosol experiment Letz
                       7 Natzweiler (3d copy)

                       6. 1st copy
                       7. 1st copy

                 *        *        *        *        *

                               Top Secret
                                                        3 copies—3d copy

To the
Fuehrer’s Plenipotentiary General
for Health and Medical Services,
Surgeon-General Professor Dr. Brandt,
Berlin Ziegelstrasse 5/9
Surgical Clinic at the University

                              _7th Report_

On the protective effect of hexamethylentetramine in phosgene poisoning.

Experiments were carried out on 40 prisoners on the prophylactic effect
of hexamethylentetramine in cases of phosgene poisoning. Twelve of those
were protected orally, twenty intravenously, and eight were used as
controls.

                              _The method_

The chamber has a capacity of 20 cbm. In experiments I to XIV the
chamber was given a coat of paint which had a strong deteriorating
effect on phosgene. This decrease in concentration was measured after
experiment XI; the curves are shown on chart I [not reproduced].

The greatest decrease measured was taken as basis for the calculations
of the average concentration for experiments I to XI. In experiments XII
to XV, the initial concentration and its decrease were measured
separately in each case. In the tables II and III, c_{o} stands for the
quantity of phosgene infused into the chamber in mg/cbm, c_{m} for the
calculated average concentration, _t_ for the time of reaction. c_{m}
was measured as an arithmetic medium from 5 to 7 and calculated on the
curve values obtained through interpolation.

B. The experimental subjects were all persons of middle age, almost all
in a weak and underfed condition. On principle, the healthier ones were
used as controls, only control number 39 (J. Rei) and the orally
protected experimental subject No. 37 (A. Rei) had a localized cirrhotic
productive tuberculosis of the lungs. With the others, no pulmonary
disease could be found. In the first experiments up to 6g
hexamethylentetramine were given orally, later despite the much higher
concentrations 0.06 g/kg body weight, orally as well as intravenously.

                               _Results_

The intravenously protected experimental subjects, without exception,
all survived the phosgene poisoning with a c. t. of 247 to 5,400. There
were no symptoms of pulmonary oedema after intravenous protection even
with a c. t. of 2,970. Only experiment No. 10 with a c. t. of 3,960
suffered pulmonary oedema of the first degree, which was overcome
without any therapy and in experiment No. XIV the intravenous protection
was penetrated to an extent to cause pulmonary oedema of the 3d degree,
which however was overcome by oxygen inhalation. The experimental
subject recovered.

All control subjects fell ill. With a c. t. of 768 and 1,180 a first
degree pulmonary oedema resulted which was overcome. With a c. t. of
2,275, one control subject died, the second contracted a second degree
pulmonary oedema but recovered. A c. t. of 5,400 killed one control
subject after 4 hours, the other after 14 hours.

After oral protection, a c. t. of 247 to 768 was suffered without any
oedema, even when the protective solution of hexamethylentetramine was
drunk only 2-3 minutes before the inhalation of the phosgene. Two
control subjects showed a marked oedema with a c. t. of 768. With a c.
t. of 1,485 one protected subject fell seriously ill with a second
degree oedema, a second subject likewise protected, having breathed the
same phosgenic air, was unaffected. The cause of this striking
difference must be sought in the different resorption of the
hexamethylentetramine on the one hand and in the different reaction and
the different volume of respiration of the experimental subjects on the
other hand.

Even a c. t. of 2,275 resulted in only a slight pulmonary oedema in an
orally protected test subject, whereas one control subject died after 4
hours, and a second contracted a second degree pulmonary oedema. The
oral protection was penetrated by a c. t. of 5,400, the protected test
subject died, as did the two control subjects.

Experiment XV is characteristic of the test schedule and its results,
and will therefore again be specially described. Of four test subjects,
the first was protected orally, the second intravenously, the third
received an intravenous injection of hexamethylentetramine after the
poisoning, in order once more to ascertain the effect of therapeutic
treatment, the fourth was not treated at all. The four subjects were
placed in the chamber in which a phial containing 2.7 grams of phosgene
was smashed. The test subjects remained in this concentration for 25
minutes. The phosgene content was measured three times during the
inhalation. The readings showed an average concentration of 91 mg. per
cbm. The subject protected intravenously remained healthy, and did not
show the least signs of difficulties or symptoms, the orally protected
subject contracted a slight pulmonary oedema, subsequently
bronchopneumonia and pleurisy, from which he recovered. One control
subject also survived his pulmonary oedema; the second died a few hours
later, and the autopsy showed the characteristics of very serious
pulmonary oedema.

                               _Summary_

The conclusions of the experiment are impaired by the varying
constitutions and the general poor state of nutrition and of physique of
the experimental subjects, as well as by the different behavior and the
different volume of respiration of the experimental subjects under gas,
which was here demonstrated for the first time. But the experiments gave
the following decisive conclusions:

1. A previous intravenous injection of 3 grams of hexamethylentetramine
completely prevents serious toxic and fatal phosgene poisoning from a c.
t. of 2,275.

2. An endurable quantity of hexamethylentetramine taken prophylactically
weakens a fatal poisoning to such an extent that it can be overcome
without treatment. c. t.=2,275.

3. Nonfatal but nevertheless oedema-producing poisonings are made
positively ineffective by intravenous application, and are weakened by
oral application, c. t. 250 to 1,980.

4. The oral application of hexamethylentetramine is no longer effective
against phosgene poisoning of a c. t.=5,400, the intravenous injection,
however, weakens the effect to such an extent that the protected subject
is able to overcome a lung oedema.

5. The _dosis letalis minima_ (minimum lethal dose) based on these
experiments cannot yet be determined with certainty. One c. t. of 2,275
resulted in the death of one experimental subject, and the second
developed second degree oedema of the lungs which was cured.

6. Some of the protected experimental subjects who did not develop
oedema of the lungs remained completely healthy, others suffered from
slight bronchitis with a brief fever. In every case they recovered
without treatment.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-978
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 480

 LETTER FROM SIEVERS TO GLUECKS, 11 SEPTEMBER 1942, CONCERNING MILITARY
  SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH WORK TO BE CONDUCTED AT NATZWEILER CONCENTRATION
                                  CAMP

The Reich Leader SS
Personal Staff
The Chief of the Office Ahnenerbe

                                          Berlin-Dahlem, 11 September 42
                                          Puecklerstr. 16

                                                    [handwritten] secret
                                                                  G/W/12

To: SS Brigadefuehrer Gluecks
Berlin-Oranienburg

Subject:   Military Scientific Research in Connection with the Natzweiler
             Concentration Camp.
Reference: Personal discussion of the 9th inst.

Brigadefuehrer,

Based on my report that, as proposed by the Reich Leader SS, there is a
good possibility for carrying out our military scientific research work
in the Natzweiler concentration camp, I hereby summarize what awaits
your approval:

1. Information to the commander’s office, Natzweiler concentration camp:
SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Professor Dr. Hirt, Stabsarzt Dr. Wimmer, and Dr.
Kieselbach are authorized to enter the Natzweiler concentration camp.
During their activity in the Natzweiler concentration camp, they are to
be provided with accommodations and board.

2. SS Oberscharfuehrer Walbert, at present supply sergeant in the
administration of the Natzweiler concentration camp, is to be detached
for service with the Institute for Military Scientific Research,
Personal Staff Reich Leader SS, Strasbourg-Natzweiler section. Walbert
will have to tend the animals under the supervision of SS
Hauptsturmfuehrer Professor Dr. Hirt. It is requested that another man
be assigned to the administration of the Natzweiler concentration camp
in order to replace SS Oberscharfuehrer Walbert.

3. The transfer of two prisoners from the group which has been trained
on the microtome for pathological research in the Buchenwald
concentration camp is requested.

4. It is furthermore requested, that a younger physician be assigned to
assist the camp medical officer, SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Blanke, in the
Natzweiler concentration camp.

5. The experiments which are to be performed on prisoners are to be
carried out in four rooms of an already existing medical barrack. Only
slight changes in the construction of the building are required, in
particular the installation of the hood which can be produced with very
little material. In accordance with attached plan of the construction
management at Natzweiler, I request that necessary orders be issued to
same to carry out the reconstruction.

6. All the expenses arising out of our activity at Natzweiler will be
covered by this office. I have already discussed the accounting
procedure with the administrative leader, SS Obersturmfuehrer
Faschingbauer.

In conclusion I would be very grateful to you, my dear Brigadefuehrer,
if you would inform the commander of the Natzweiler concentration camp,
that you have approved the execution of the work at Natzweiler, just as
it was discussed with me there, and about which I reported to you in
detail, and that you desire that we be given assistance in fulfilling
the duties with which we have been entrusted by the Reich Leader SS.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                     [Signed] SIEVERS
                                                SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

2. To SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Prof. Dr. Hirt

                                  TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT KARL BRANDT 12
                                  KARL BRANDT DEFENSE EXHIBIT 11

      AFFIDAVIT OF DR. WALTHER SCHIEBER ON HIS EFFORTS TO PURCHASE
        EXPERIMENTAL ANIMALS IN SPAIN AND BRING THEM TO GERMANY

                            _Affidavit 111_

I, Dr. Walther Schieber, at present in Nuernberg, Justice Prison, have
been duly warned that I am liable to punishment if I make a false
statement. I affirm under oath that my deposition corresponds to the
truth and was made to be offered in evidence before Military Tribunal
No. I at the Palace of Justice, at Nuernberg, Germany. During the summer
of 1944, Professor Karl Brandt informed me during discussions concerning
the execution of the especially urgently operated Brandt—and
defense—program against chemical warfare agents that he was having
considerable difficulties in procuring animals which were needed for
test purposes concerning the effect of the top chemical warfare agents
and for which he had requests from testing office.

At that time the problem was how to convert the production of chemical
warfare agents on account of raw material shortage to the production of
the top chemical warfare agent Sarin, the effect of which would not yet
be finally determined.

To carry out these tests, an action to procure animals was started by me
in Spain, instigated by Professor Karl Brandt; because of the biological
reaction parallels to human beings, apes resembling men were allegedly
needed. An assistant was sent there especially for this purpose. For
this, the armament office offered approximately 200,000 Swiss francs,
and after my resignation as Chief of the Armament Supply Office in
October 1944 from the Speer Ministry I made strenuous efforts, together
with Professor Karl Brandt, to have a large number of animals brought by
extremely difficult air transportation from Spain to Germany. These were
put at Professor Karl Brandt’s disposal for the testing offices.

                                              [Signed] WALTHER SCHIEBER

                                 TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT KARL BRANDT 101
                                 KARL BRANDT DEFENSE EXHIBIT 41

AFFIDAVIT OF DR. OTTO AMBROS,[39] 21 APRIL 1947, CONCERNING THE URGENCY
    OF EXPERIMENTS IN THE FIELD OF CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENTS AND THEIR
                            COUNTERMEASURES

I, Dr. Otto Ambros, at present in Nuernberg, Justice Prison, having been
duly informed that I shall render myself punishable if I submit a false
affidavit, declare under oath that my statement is true and was made for
presentation in evidence to Military Tribunal No. I in the Palace of
Justice, Nuernberg, Germany.

During the war I was a director of I. G. Farben and had to work on
chemical warfare agents and protective agents, and can therefore state
the following:

I got into touch with Professor Dr. Karl Brandt during 1944. On that
occasion Professor Brandt told me he had to take an interest in chemical
warfare agents and countermeasures. At the same time he showed me a
letter from Adolf Hitler referring to this subject. Furthermore, he
stated that he did not understand very much about chemical warfare, as
he was not an analytical chemist. His primary concern in this field was
the question of the supply of materials for gas masks, i. e., activated
charcoal and the synthetic materials and textiles which are necessary
for these.

Professor Brandt visited two poison gas plants at Dyherrnfurth and
Gendorf, to become generally acquainted with the nature of poison gas
itself.

There was the greatest uneasiness at that time regarding protection
against chemical warfare, as it was thought that the Allies would use
poison gas. It was said that they had brought poison gas over with them
when they landed at Tunis.

It was also said that the Russians had new gas masks which fact pointed
to the possibility of the use of a new kind of poison gas.

On the German side, there was definitely a serious shortage of chemical
warfare protective equipment, as not even the most urgently needed gas
masks were available, nor was it even possible to produce the required
number.

Nuernberg, 21 April 1947.

                                            [Signature] DR. OTTO AMBROS

                                 TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT KARL BRANDT 103
                                 KARL BRANDT DEFENSE EXHIBIT 42

     AFFIDAVIT OF DR. WALTER MIELENZ, 21 APRIL 1947, CONCERNING THE
     ASSIGNMENT OF KARL BRANDT IN CONNECTION WITH CHEMICAL WARFARE

I, Dr. Walter Mielenz, born 20 November 1888 in Berlin, residing in
Berlin-Friedenau, Ceciliengaerten 45 (business address:
Berlin-Lichterfelde W, Kadettenweg 67, Telephone 245218), have been duly
advised that I shall render myself liable to punishment if I give a
false affidavit. I declare under oath that my statement is true and was
made to be submitted in evidence to Military Tribunal No. I, at the
Palace of Justice, Nuernberg, Germany.

From 1933 to 1945 I worked at the Reich Air Ministry as an analytical
chemist, technical advisor on the question of the protection of the
civilian population against gas.

I am familiar with the decree of 1 March 1944 in which special tasks
were assigned to Professor Dr. Karl Brandt in connection with chemical
warfare. As far as I remember, the decree was worded approximately as
follows:

    “I have ordered my Commissioner General for the Medical and
    Health Service (Professor Dr. Brandt) to take a major part in
    all matters concerning protection against chemical warfare (of
    the army and the civilian population) and to issue orders to the
    stations (military and civilian) established for this purpose.
    In questions of the protection of the civilian population
    against chemical warfare, he must obtain in advance the approval
    of the Reich Air Minister and Commander in Chief of the
    Luftwaffe.”

The decree certainly did not contain any order for research in
connection with chemical warfare agents.

The reason for the appointment of Professor Karl Brandt was the
assumption that the initiation of chemical warfare by the enemy was
shortly to be expected. This assumption was based on the fact that
intelligence was accumulating, according to which gas was being prepared
in large quantities by the enemy. Thus confidential agents reported that
poison gas ammunition was being stored at Tunis and Dakar, and these
reports were constantly being confirmed.

The greatest alarm was caused by the examination of captured Russian gas
masks, which showed that they afforded protection against far stronger
concentrations of poison gas than it had so far been believed possible
to achieve at the front. Their protective capacity far surpassed that of
the German Army and civilian gas masks. From this fact, it could be
concluded that the scientists and technicians of the Red Army had
succeeded in developing new and particularly effective methods of attack
in chemical warfare for known or new chemical warfare agents.

The German measures for gas defense were totally inadequate in number,
too. The civilian population in particular was exposed almost without
defense to gas attacks because the issue of civilian and infants’ gas
masks in many town and country districts was seriously behind schedule.
The relevant figures for civilian gas masks in the different supply
areas were between 10 and 70 percent of the population to be equipped,
the average figure being about 32 percent, and for infants’ gas masks,
about 7 percent. This estimate is based on the total number of civilian
and infants’ gas masks manufactured up to that date, in relation to the
total number of persons entitled to supply. This estimate did not take
into consideration the fact that, without doubt a large part of the
equipment which, in some cases had been in the hands of the population
for years, was no longer completely fit for use on account of faulty
unsuitable storage, or had been rendered useless by air raid damage,
evacuation of the owners, and other reasons, or lost completely. The
losses in civilian gas masks were estimated at about 15,000,000 (almost
50 percent of the total output up to that date) so that for the
completion of the initial equipment (without reserves) the manufacture
of 45,000,000 gas masks had to be planned.

In view of these facts, Professor Dr. Karl Brandt was assigned the task
of providing with the utmost speed for the improvement of gas defense to
avert the danger which threatened.

Through the initiative of Professor Brandt, the gas defense program was
finally given the highest priority and had an equal standing with the
program for the construction of fighter planes and tanks.

I know that Professor Dr. Brandt was most strongly opposed to the
propaganda demand spread by extreme Party circles for the initiation of
chemical warfare by Germany.

I regularly had to work with Professor Karl Brandt on gas defense and I
know that in view of their importance and urgency, he dispatched all
matters himself. The Department of Science and Research and its chief,
Professor Rostock, were not concerned with these matters.

The N-agent was not one of the chemical warfare agents. It is an
incendiary agent composed of chlorine and fluorine (ClF_{3}); this
N-agent has never been mentioned in connection with gas defense.

I know that there existed in the Armament Ministry a special commission
for the decontamination of drinking water; this had neither been
established by Professor Brandt nor was it under his command. The task
of this commission was the production of decontamination equipment but
not the development of such equipment, and especially not the
development of new processes for the decontamination of water. The
repeated suggestions made by Professor Haase in this context were
therefore beyond the field of activity of the commission. They were
discussed, however, at a meeting in December 1944, at which I was
present.

At this meeting the representatives of the army and the air raid
protection service stated that for their sphere, i. e., for the gas
defense of the troops and the civilian population, there was no need to
continue this work. Professor Brandt who was present at the meeting had
already agreed in advance with the general opinion that the efforts of
Haase did not admit of the expectation of any improvement on the
experiences presented for consideration, and that they should therefore
be rejected. He therefore asked me to work towards this end.

As far as I know, the commission was never concerned with sea-water
experiments. In particular, to my knowledge, the commission had no
knowledge of human experiments for the testing of agents designed to
render sea-water potable.

I can state with certainty that the undertaking of gas experiments on
human subjects was never spoken of by Professor Brandt and myself.
Moreover, during discussions with army experts concerned with gas
defense and chemical warfare, I never heard that Professor Brandt in any
way suggested human experiments or otherwise spoke of such experiments.

Nuernberg, 21 April 1947

                                       [Signature] DR. WALTER MIELENZ

-----

[39] Defendant in case of United States vs. Carl Krauch, et al. See
Vols. VII and VIII.

                      5. SULFANILAMIDE EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants, Karl Brandt, Handloser, Rostock, Schroeder, Genzken,
Gebhardt, Blome, Rudolf Brandt, Mrugowsky, Poppendick, Becker-Freyseng,
Oberheuser, and Fischer were charged with special responsibility for and
participation in criminal conduct involving sulfanilamide experiments
(par. 6 (E) of the indictment). During the trial the prosecution
withdrew this charge in the cases of Schroeder, Blome, and
Becker-Freyseng. On this charge the defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser,
Gebhardt, Mrugowsky, Oberheuser, and Fischer were convicted and the
defendants Rostock, Genzken, and Poppendick were acquitted. Regarding
the defendant Rudolf Brandt, the judgment makes no reference to this
charge.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the sulfanilamide
experiments is contained in its final brief against the defendant
Gebhardt. An extract from that brief is set forth below on pages 355 to
364. A corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on these
experiments has been selected from the closing brief for the defendant
Gebhardt. It appears below on pages 364 to 370. This argumentation is
followed by selections from the evidence on pages 371 to 391.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

                _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                           DEFENDANT GEBHARDT_

                 *        *        *        *        *

A. SULFANILAMIDE EXPERIMENTS

Experiments to test the effectiveness of sulfanilamide on infections
were conducted in the Ravensbrueck concentration camp from 20 July 1942
until August 1943. These experiments were performed by the defendants
Gebhardt, Fischer, and Oberheuser. (_NO-228, Pros. Ex. 206._)

Gebhardt personally requested Himmler’s permission to carry out the
sulfanilamide experiments and their execution was his responsibility.
(_Tr. pp. 4024-5._) He himself carried out the initial operations. (_Tr.
p. 4032._)

The experimental subjects consisted of 15 male concentration camp
inmates, who were used during the preliminary experiments in July 1942,
and 60 Polish women who were experimented on in 5 groups of 12 subjects
each.

The purpose of the experiments was stated in a preliminary report by
Gebhardt dated 29 August 1942, in which he stated:

    “By order of the Reich Leader SS, I started on 20 July 1942 at
    Ravensbrueck concentration camp for women on a series of
    clinical experiments with the aim of analyzing the sickness
    known as gas gangrene, which does not take a uniform course, and
    to test the efficacy of the known therapeutic medicaments.

    “In addition, the simple infections of injuries which occur as
    symptoms in war surgery had also to be tested; and a new
    chemo-therapeutic treatment, apart from the known surgical
    measures, had to be tried out.” (_NO-2734, Pros. Ex. 473._)

The sulfanilamide experiments, as substantially all of the experiments
with which the case is concerned, were directly related to the German
war effort. Allied propaganda about the “miracle drug” sulfanilamide was
having considerable effect on the confidence of the German soldiers in
their medical officers. Heavy casualties had been sustained from gas
gangrene on the Russian front in the winter of 1941-42. The theoretical
question to be answered by these experiments was whether the wounded
should be treated surgically in the front line hospitals or should be
treated by field medical officers with sulfanilamide and then sent down
the long lines of communication to a base hospital for further
treatment. (_Tr. pp. 4010-14._)

The same report cited above states that the defendant Fischer was
appointed by Gebhardt as his assistant; Dr. Blumenreuter, a subordinate
of the defendant Genzken, made available the surgical instruments and
medicines; the defendant Mrugowsky put his laboratory and co-workers at
the disposal of Gebhardt; and Dr. Lolling, chief medical officer of all
concentration camps, assigned Dr. Schiedlausky and the defendant
Oberheuser as co-workers.

This preliminary report concerns itself with the early experiments on 15
male subjects to determine a mode of infection with gangrene. Gebhardt
was assisted by the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS, which made
available the bacteria and gave advice on the method of bringing about
gangrene infection artificially. The experimental technique was
described in the report as follows:

    “The point was to implant the lymph cultures on the damaged
    muscle tissue, to isolate the latter from atmospheric and
    humoral oxygen supply, and to subject it to internal tissue
    pressure. The inoculation procedure was as follows: a
    longitudinal cut of 10 centimetres over the musculus peroneus
    longus; after incision into the fascia the muscle was tied up
    with forceps in an area the size of a five-Mark piece; an
    anaemic peripheral zone was created by injection of 3 cc.
    adrenalin and in the area of the damaged muscle the inoculation
    material (a gauze strip saturated with bacteria) was imbedded
    under the fascia, subcutaneous adipose tissue and skin sutured
    in layers.” (_NO-2734, Pros. Ex. 473._)

In the first series of experiments the subjects were infected with
staphylococci, streptococci, para oedema malignum, bacteria Fraenkel,
and earth. The resulting infections were not considered serious enough,
and a conference was held with the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS
and the bacteria used in bringing about the infections were changed. Six
additional male subjects were then infected, but again the results were
not considered serious enough. After further consultation with the
collaborators in the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS, the infectious
material was changed by adding wood shavings. During the course of these
experiments the subjects were treated with various types of
sulfanilamides, including catoxyn and marfanil-prontalbin, the latter
being strongly recommended by the Army Medical Inspectorate. Efforts
continued to make the gangrene infection more serious, and the report
concluded with the following paragraph:

    “We are now investigating the problem as to why the gangrene in
    the present cases did not fully develop. Therefore, the injuring
    of the tissue and the exclusion of a muscle from the circulation
    of the blood were undertaken during a separate operating
    session, _and the large-scale necrosis resulting therefrom, was
    to be inoculated with bacteria strain which had already had one
    human passage_. For it is only when the really definite clinical
    picture of the gangrene has appeared that conclusions may be
    drawn on therapy with chemo-therapeutics in connection with
    surgical operations.” [Emphasis supplied.] (_NO-2734, Pros. Ex.
    473._)

This report was certified as a correct copy by the defendant Poppendick.

In his zealousness to protect his fellow defendants, Gebhardt testified
that neither the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS nor the defendant
Mrugowsky played any part in these experiments, and that the infectious
material was sent to him by Grawitz. (_Tr. p. 4179._) This is clearly
contradicted by his own report cited above.

Following the conclusion of the preliminary experiments on the male
prisoners, experiments were continued on female Polish inmates. The
affidavit of the defendant Fischer states that three series of
operations were performed, each involving 10 persons, one using the
bacterial culture and fragments of wood, the second using bacterial
culture and fragments of glass, and the third using culture plus glass
and wood. (_NO-228, Pros. Ex. 206._) These experiments were undertaken
during the month of August 1942. While Fischer speaks of experimental
groups of 10 persons each, the defendant Gebhardt testified that the
groups were composed of 12 experimental subjects. (_Tr. p. 4056._) On 3
September 1942, after 36 women had been experimented on, Reich Physician
SS Grawitz visited Ravensbrueck and inspected the experimental subjects.
He asked Gebhardt how many deaths had occurred, and when it was reported
that there had been none, he stated that the experiments did not conform
to battlefield conditions. (_NO-228, Pros. Ex. 206_; _Tr. p. 4057_.) In
order to make the gangrene infections still more severe, a new series of
experiments involving 24 Polish female inmates was carried out. In this
series the circulation of blood through the muscles was interrupted in
the area of infection by tying off the muscles on either end. This
series of experiments resulted in very serious infections and a number
of deaths occurred. (_NO-228, Pros. Ex. 206._)

Gebhardt, Fischer, and Oberheuser all admit that three of the
experimental subjects died as a result of the experiments. (_NO-228,
Pros. Ex. 206_; _Tr. pp. 4059, 5492_.) Other evidence, however, proves
that five died as a direct result of the experiments and six were
executed by shooting at a later date. (_Tr. pp. 1438, 1449, 797, 845,
863._)

Four of the Polish women who were subjected to these experiments
testified before the Tribunal. Most of the women who were used as
subjects had been active in a resistance movement. (_Tr. pp. 787, 816,
840, 857._) Only healthy inmates were used. (_Tr. pp. 786, 815, 836,
856, 860-1._) None of them volunteered for the experiments. (_Tr. pp.
789, 819, 842, 844-5, 861._) On the contrary, they protested against the
experiments both orally and in writing. (_Tr. pp. 789, 794, 823-5._)
They stated that they would have preferred death to continued
experiments, since they were convinced that they were to die in any
event. (_Tr. pp. 795, 824, 863._) They testified that 74 Polish women, 1
German, and 1 Ukrainian woman were experimented upon. (_Tr. pp. 1438,
796, 818, 862._) Since Gebhardt placed the total number of Polish female
experimental subjects in the sulfanilamide experiments at 60, the
additional 16 women mentioned by the witnesses may well have been
subjects in the bone, muscle, and nerve regeneration experiments. (_Tr.
p. 1462._)

The witness Kusmierczuk was one of the subjects in the sulfanilamide
experiments. She is a Polish national and arrived in the Ravensbrueck
concentration camp in the fall of 1941. (_Tr. p. 857._) She was operated
on in October 1942 and a severe infection developed in her case. (_Tr.
p. 858._) She remained in the hospital from October 1942 until April
1943, but her wound was still not healed at the time she was discharged
from the hospital. Her condition deteriorated and she was readmitted to
the hospital on 1 September 1943. (_Tr. p. 860._) She left the hospital
the second time in February 1944, but her wound did not finally heal
until June 1944. (_Tr. p. 861._) She identified the defendants Gebhardt,
Fischer, and Oberheuser as having participated in the experiment upon
her. (_Tr. p. 860._) Kusmierczuk suffered permanent injuries as a result
of this experiment, and her condition was described by the expert
witness Dr. Leo Alexander. (_Tr. pp. 864-9._) The post-operational care
of this woman was not handled by Gebhardt and Fischer, but by the camp
doctors. On the occasion of her second admission to the hospital in
September 1943, Kusmierczuk was operated on by Dr. Treite in an effort
to cure the deep-seated infection. (_Tr. p. 861._) [See photographs, pp.
898 to 908.]

The expert witness Maczka, who worked as an X-ray technician in the
Ravensbrueck concentration camp during the course of the experiments,
testified concerning deaths of the five Polish experimental subjects
resulting from the sulfanilamide experiments. Weronica Kraska developed
typical tetanus symptoms a few days after the experimental operation was
performed on her. After a brief illness she died under cramps caused by
tetanus. (_Tr. p. 1438._) Kazimiera Kurowska was artificially infected
with gangrene bacillus. She was a healthy Polish girl of 23 years. From
day to day her leg became blacker and more swollen. She was given care
for only the first few days. After that she was taken to Room 4 in the
hospital where she lay for days in unbelievable pain and finally died.
Maczka was able to observe this case personally and in her opinion
immediate amputation would have saved her life. (_Tr. pp. 1439-40._) It
is quite clear that if a German soldier’s life had been endangered by
gangrene infection, an amputation would have been undertaken
immediately. In this experiment, where the very effort was to develop a
serious gangrene infection and to test the effects of sulfanilamide
preparations, it is equally clear why the leg of Kurowska was not
amputated. Aniela Lefanowicz was infected with oedema malignum. Her leg
kept swelling more and more, the blood vessels eroded, and she died from
bleeding. Maczka testified that the blood vessels should have been tied
off and an amputation carried out in order to save her life. She was
completely neglected after the first 2 or 3 days. (_Tr. pp. 1440-1._)
Zofia Kiecol died under similar circumstances. (_Tr. p. 1441._)

Alfreda Prus was infected with oedema malignum the same day as the
witnesses Kusmierczuk, Kiecol, and Lefanowicz. She was a beautiful,
young 21-year-old girl, and a university student. She proved to be
stronger than Kiecol and Lefanowicz and for that reason she lived a few
days longer. She suffered terrible pain and finally died of hemorrhage.
(_Tr. pp. 1142-3._) Kusmierczuk was the only subject to survive that
series of experiments. (_Tr. p. 1443._)

It is hardly necessary to point out that all of the experimental
subjects suffered severe pain and torture. (_Tr. pp. 790-1, 802, 820,
842, 859_; _NO-876, Pros. Ex. 225_; _NO-871, Pros. Ex. 227_; _NO-877,
Pros. Ex. 228._) The Tribunal was able to observe for itself the
mutilations to which the Polish witnesses were subjected, and pictures
of their scars were introduced to form a permanent part of the record.
(_NO-1079a, b, and c, Pros. Ex. 209_; _NO-1081a, and b, Pros. Ex. 211_;
_NO-1082a, b, and c, Pros. Ex. 214_; _NO-1080a-g, Pros. Ex. 219._)

The post-operational care of the experimental subjects was entirely
inadequate. (_NO-873, Pros. Ex. 226._) Many of the subjects were given
neither medicine nor morphine by order of defendant Oberheuser.
(_NO-877, Pros. Ex. 228._) They were given bandages from time to time
when the doctors felt like it. Sometimes they waited 3 days, sometimes 4
days. There was a terrible odor of pus in the rooms. The girls were
forced to help each other. (_Tr. p. 1444._) Post-operational care, such
as it was, was administered by the camp doctors. The witness
Broel-Plater testified that:

    “My leg pained me; I felt severe pain, and blood flowed from my
    leg. At night we were all alone without any care. I heard only
    the screaming of my fellow prisoners, and I heard also that they
    asked for water. There was nobody to give us any water or bed
    pans.” (_Tr. p. 790._)

The witness Karolewska testified that:

    “I was in my room and I made the remark to fellow prisoners that
    we had been operated on under very bad conditions and were left
    here in this room, and that we were not given even the
    possibility to recover. This remark must have been heard by a
    German nurse who was sitting in the corridor because the door of
    our room leading to the corridor was open. The German nurse
    entered the room and told us to get up and dress. We answered
    that we could not follow her order because we had great pains in
    our legs and could not walk. Then the German nurse came into our
    room with Dr. Oberheuser. Dr. Oberheuser told us to dress and go
    to the dressing room. We put on our dresses; and, being unable
    to walk, we had to hop on one leg going to the operating room.
    After one hop we had to rest. Dr. Oberheuser did not allow
    anybody to help us. When we arrived at the operating room quite
    exhausted, Dr. Oberheuser appeared and told us to go back
    because a change of dressing would not take place that day. I
    could not walk, but somebody, a prisoner whose name I do not
    remember, helped me to get back to the room.” (_Tr. p. 822._)

At least five human lives were sacrificed in the sulfanilamide
experiments, while an additional six were shot after having survived the
operations. All the surviving victims suffered terrible pains and were
crippled for life. Nevertheless, the experiments were not even
scientifically successful. The results, as reported by Gebhardt and
Fischer at the Third Conference of the Consulting Physicians of the
Wehrmacht at the Military Medical Academy in Berlin in May 1943, were
not adopted, and medical directives were issued which required the
continued use of sulfanilamide. (_Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser 3,
Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser Ex. 10._) The sulfanilamide experiments
were entirely unnecessary, since similar results could have been
achieved by the treatment of wound infections of German soldiers
normally contracted during the course of the war. (_Tr. pp. 3334,
3338._)

Gebhardt does not seriously contend that the experimental subjects were
volunteers. He admitted that he did not know whether the women
consented. He testified he was not interested in that. He left it to the
“legal authorities.” He did not discuss this matter with Himmler. (_Tr.
p. 4214._) By legal authorities, Gebhardt meant Himmler who, as he said,
“had the power to execute thousands of people by a stroke of his pen.”
(_Tr. p. 4025._) Gebhardt, however, showed no interest whatever in the
moral or legal character of that power. At one point in his testimony,
he stated that the subjects were nonvolunteers forced to submit to the
experiments by the State. (_Tr. p. 4064._) At still another point, they
were “more or less volunteers, condemned persons.” (_Tr. p. 4021._)

Gebhardt’s defense, if it can be dignified with that word, is rather
that the Polish women had been condemned to death for participation in a
resistance movement and that by undergoing the experiments, voluntarily
or otherwise, they were to have their death sentences commuted to some
lesser degree of punishment whereby they would at least not be executed.
This was no bargain reached with the experimental subjects; their wishes
were not consulted in the matter. It was, according to Gebhardt, left to
the good faith of someone unnamed to see to it the death sentence was
not carried out on the survivors of the experiments. Certainly Gebhardt
assumed no responsibility, or even interest, in this matter.

The prosecution points out, in connection with this alleged defense,
that the proof shows that the experimental subjects who testified before
this Tribunal were never so much as accorded a trial; they had no
opportunity to defend themselves against whatever crimes they were said
to have committed. They were simply arrested and interrogated by the
Gestapo in Poland and sent to a concentration camp. They had never so
much as been informed that they had been _marked for_, not sentenced to,
death. (_Tr. p. 831._) Article 30 of the Regulations Respecting the Laws
and Customs of War on Land annexed to the Hague Convention expressly
provides that even a spy “shall not be punished without previous trial.”
The alleged defense of Gebhardt is accordingly without merit.

Gebhardt would have the Tribunal believe that _but for_ the experiments
all these Polish girls would be dead; that he preserved the evidence now
being used against him. Nothing could be further from the truth. There
is no proof in the record that these women would have been executed if
they had not undergone the experiments. The witness Maczka is living
proof of the contrary. She was arrested for resistance activities on 11
September 1941, and shipped to Ravensbrueck on 13 September. (_Tr. p.
1433._) She was not an experimental subject yet she lives today.
Substantially all the Polish experimental subjects arrived in
Ravensbrueck in September 1941. (_Tr. pp. 788, 817, 840._) These girls
had not been executed by August 1942 when the experiments began. Indeed,
it was a surprise to Gebhardt, according to his testimony, that they
were used at all since during July 1942 the experiments were conducted
on men. There were some 700 Polish girls in that transport. (_NO-877,
Pros. Ex. 228_; _Tr. p. 4216._) There is no evidence that a substantial
number were ever executed even though most of them were not experimented
on.

No, the proof has shown beyond controversy that these Polish women
_could not have been legally executed_. The right to grant pardons in
cases of death sentences was exclusively vested in Hitler by a decree of
1 February 1935, Reich Law Gazette [RGBl], I, page 74. (_NO-3070, Pros.
Ex. 531._) On 2 May 1935, Hitler delegated the right to make _negative_
decisions on pardon applications to the Reich Minister of Justice.
(_NO-3071, Pros. Ex. 532._) On 30 January 1940 (_RGBl, I, p. 399_),
Hitler delegated to the Governor General for the occupied Polish
territories the authority to grant pardons and to make denying decisions
in pardon matters for the occupied Polish territories. (_NO-3072, Pros.
Ex. 533._) By edict, dated 8 March 1940, VOB1 GGP I p. 99, the Governor
General of occupied Poland ordered with reference to the execution of
the right to pardon in the case of death sentences that:

    “The execution of a death sentence pronounced by a regular
    court, a special court or a police court martial _shall take
    place only when my decision has been issued not to make use of
    my right to pardon_.” [Emphasis supplied.] (_NO-3073, Pros. Ex.
    534._)

Assuming _arguendo_ that the experimental subjects had all committed
substantial crimes, that they were all properly tried by a duly
constituted court of law, that they were legally sentenced to death, it
is still clear from the decrees set forth above that these women could
not have been legally executed until such time as the Governor General
of occupied Poland had decided in each case not to make use of his
pardon right. There has been no proof that the Governor General had ever
acted with respect to pardoning the Polish women used in the
experiments, or, for that matter, any substantial number of those not
used in the experiments.

The only reason these 700 Polish women were transported from Warsaw and
Lublin to Ravensbrueck was because the Governor General had not approved
their execution. Otherwise they would have been immediately executed in
Poland. At the very least, these women were entitled to remain
unmolested so long as the Governor General took no action. He may never
have acted or, when he did, he may have acted favorably on the pardon.

The affidavit of Schiedlausky, the camp doctor at Ravensbrueck, shows
that the Governor General had not turned down a pardon when the
experiments started. He said on page four of the original:

    “Polish women who had been sentenced to death by court martial
    and who were awaiting execution, after their sentences had been
    approved by the Governor General, were chosen as subjects.”
    (_NO-508, Pros. Ex. 224._)

At still a later point, on page 15 of the original, he said:

    “During my tour of duty at Ravensbrueck, I estimate that about
    25 women were executed by shooting. They were exclusively Polish
    women, who were already prisoners, _whose sentences were only
    approved after a long time by the Governor General_.” [Emphasis
    added.]

Schiedlausky was in Ravensbrueck from December 1941 until the middle of
August 1943. During that long period of time only 25 of over 700 Polish
inmates were made eligible for execution by action of the Governor
General. Who is to say that the majority of these 700 Polish women did
not live through the war even though they did not undergo the
experiments? Certainly it was incumbent on the defense to prove the
contrary by a preponderance of the evidence. This it did not do by any
evidence.

The defendants Gebhardt, Fischer, and Oberheuser cannot claim that they
believed in good faith that the Polish women could have been legally
executed. Even the camp doctor Schiedlausky knew that the Governor
General had to approve the execution. Moreover, the large number of 700
women being sentenced to death at this early stage of the war was enough
to put any reasonable person on notice that something was wrong.

Additionally, the uncontradicted evidence proves that survival of the
experiments was no guarantee whatever of avoiding execution in any
event. _At least six of the experimental subjects were executed after
having survived the experiments._ (_Tr. pp. 1449, 797, 845, 863._) The
names of the Polish girls who were shot were Pajaczkowska, Gans,
Zielonka, Rakowska, Sobolewska, and Gutek. (_NO-873, Pros. Ex. 226_;
_NO-861, Pros. Ex. 232_.) It was not a question of experimentation _or_
execution but experimentation _and_ execution.

Indeed, in February 1945, an effort was made to execute all the
experimental subjects. They were ordered to report to one block and
remain there. They were informed that they would be transferred to the
Gross-Rosen concentration camp, but it was common knowledge that
Gross-Rosen was already in the hands of the Allies. They, therefore,
knew that they were going to be executed and so took different
identification numbers and hid themselves. This was possible because of
disorganization in the camp. (_Tr. pp. 1450-1, 862-3_; _NO-876, Pros.
Ex. 225_; _NO-877, Pros. Ex. 228_.)

If one takes the case of the defense at its face value, the Tribunal is
in effect asked to rule that it is legal for military doctors of a
nation at war to experiment on political prisoners of an occupied
country who are condemned to death, to experiment on them in such a way
that they may suffer death, excruciating pain, mutilation, and permanent
disability—all this without their consent and in direct aid of the
military potential of their enemy. There is no valid reason for limiting
such a decision to civilian prisoners; the experiment would certainly
have been no worse had it been performed on Polish or American prisoners
of war. It is impossible to consider seriously the ruling being sought
for by the defense.

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

                  _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR
                           DEFENDANT GEBHARDT_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                    _The Sulfanilamide Experiments_

Of all medical experiments forming the subjects of the indictment, the
experiments for testing sulfanilamides were undoubtedly the most
directly connected with the war. The problem of wound infection is one
with which every nation at war must concern itself especially in modern
warfare. This problem is not only one of great importance to the life
and health of the individual wounded soldier, but it may have a decisive
effect on the strategical position and on the outcome of the war itself
through the resultant gaps in the ranks. Already the First World War
showed that the majority of soldiers do not die on the battlefield
itself and that in most cases death is not the direct result of a wound,
but that the heavy losses must be attributed to infection of wounds
received. These experiences have been confirmed in the Second World War
and the special conditions prevailing in Russia and the climatic
conditions due to the winter there have shown even more than in the
First World War that wound infection was a medical and tactical problem
of the highest importance for the troops and their health. As regards
details, I refer to statements made in this connection on the witness
stand by several defendants in these proceedings.

Consequently, it could not come as a surprise that in this war, too,
efforts were made to deal with wound infection not only by using
surgical measures, but that a way was sought to prevent the formation
and spreading of bacterial infections or at least to confine them within
reasonable limits by using chemical preparations.

Such efforts seemed the more called for as the war in the East not only
meant an immense strain on the resources in material and personnel in
general, but also in view of the fact that especially the supply of the
army troops and the Waffen SS with medical officers and, above all, with
trained field surgeons became more and more difficult. Had it been
possible to assist the field medical officers at the front and at the
main dressing stations with a reliable and effective chemo-therapeutic
preparation against bacterial wound infection, progress of vast
importance would have been achieved.

On the other hand, however, it was impossible to overlook the fact that
the introduction of a chemo-therapeutic preparation which did not
operate safely involved a certain amount of danger to an effective
medical care of the wounded and consequently to the war potential of the
wounded and consequently to the war potential of the German Wehrmacht
and its striking power. In his lecture on the chemo-therapy of wound
infection as delivered before the First Conference East of the
Consulting Specialists on 18 May 1943, which I submitted as part of the
report dealing with this conference, (_Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser 1,
Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser Ex. 6._) Professor Dr. Rostock referred to
the great danger of chemo-therapy, i. e., the possibility “of making
negligent physicians careless in the surgical aspect of wound dressing,
since they may place a certain trust in chemo-therapy.”

This warning was all the more in order since, at that time there was not
only complete uncertainty as regards the effects of sulfanilamides, but
also because there was a divergence in opinions as to the efficacy of
this preparation. It has been clearly shown by the evidence that, in
spite of close observation of the effects of sulfanilamides in peace
time and in war, it was impossible to answer this question. Opinions
were very much divided. While some were convinced of the efficacy of
these preparations in connection with wound infections, and ascribed
extraordinarily good results to them, others were of the opinion that
these chemical preparations could at the best be used as a supplement
and that if used by themselves, they did not have the properties to
prevent bacterial infection resulting from combat wounds. With regard to
the details I refer to the statements of the defendants Karl Brandt,
Handloser, Rostock, Gebhardt, and Fischer and to Gebhardt Exhibits 6, 7,
and 10 as submitted by me during the hearing of the evidence.

In this respect, it is highly interesting to review the scientific
discussions of the consulting specialists as contained in the report on
the First Conference East on 18 and 19 May 1942. (_Gebhardt, Fischer,
Oberheuser 1, Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser Ex. 6._) These discussions
which took place prior to the sulfanilamide experiments comprising the
subject of the indictment give a true picture of the situation as it was
at that time with regard to the efficacy of sulfanilamides.

In this respect we are able to distinguish three sharply defined groups.
In the group which rejected the chemo-therapeutic treatment of wound
infection, Geheimrat Professor Sauerbruch was the leader. He
emphatically voiced the opinion that these chemical preparations tend to
obscure surgical work and to lead to perfunctory treatment. He requested
that the preparations should be critically tested, that is to say, the
test should be made by surgeons experienced in general surgery.

In the other camp there were surgeons who claimed to have obtained
extraordinarily favorable results in the chemo-therapeutical treatment
of bacterially infected wounds. Among them was Dr. Krueger, the Berlin
professor of surgery, who claimed to have observed a favorable effect of
sulfanilamide in as many as 5,000 cases.

To the third group belonged the surgeons, bacteriologists, and
pathologists who took the view that nothing definite could be said as
yet as to the effects and the efficacy of sulfanilamides as agents in
the fight against bacterially infected wounds and that further tests
along these lines would have to be made.

Thus it can be said that after the experiences of the Russian winter
campaign of 1941-1942, the fight against bacterial wound infections, and
the question of the efficacy of the sulfanilamides had become a
military-medical and medical-tactical problem of the first importance,
about which opinions differed widely. A solution of this problem was the
more urgent as an answer had to be found quickly, and on the other hand
the fact was not to be disregarded that the experiences gained during
nearly 10 years of peace and war in clinics as well as in laboratories
were insufficient to answer this question.

           _The Order for the Execution of these Experiments_

The evidence has shown that the order to ascertain the effectiveness of
the sulfanilamides by experiments on human beings was given directly by
the Head of State and Supreme Commander of the Wehrmacht. Hitler’s order
was not at first submitted by Himmler to the defendant Gebhardt, but to
Dr. Grawitz, Reich Physician of the SS and police.

However, the evidence showed further that another circumstance arose
which from the point of view of time at least caused the order for these
experiments to be given, viz, the death of the Chief of the Reich
Security Main Office, General of the Waffen SS Reinhardt Heydrich, who
in May 1942 was assassinated in Prague. For the details I refer to the
testimony of Gebhardt in the witness box on this matter. Heydrich’s
death is connected with the experiments themselves only insofar as, at
that time, the charge was leveled that Heydrich’s life could have been
saved if sulfanilamides, and especially a certain sulfanilamide
preparation, had been administered to the wounded man in sufficient
quantities. The whole problem of sulfanilamide therapy came to the fore
once more in this one case, and then in such an obvious manner that the
Head of State himself gave the order to clarify by way of all-out
experiments the question which for a long time had been of general
importance for the fighting troops at the front.

Within the scope of this evaluation of evidence, it is irrelevant to
enter into the details which resulted in the experiments being carried
out by the defendant Gebhardt himself. Against the strict order of the
Reich Physician SS Grawitz, Gebhardt carried out the experiments not by
deliberately inflicting bullet wounds but by causing an infection while
observing all possible precautionary measures.

It was further shown by the evidence that the experiments were started
with 15 habitual criminals who had been sentenced to death and who had
been transferred from the concentration camp Sachsenhausen to
Ravensbrueck. In view of the fact that this part of the experiment is
not a subject of the indictment, it seems to be unnecessary to enter
into this matter. It should, however, be kept in mind that at the
conference on 1 June 1942, at which the conditions for the experiments
were determined in detail—the defendant Gebhardt has described this
conference in detail and I am referring to this—it was understood that
the experiments should be carried out with the male habitual criminals
who had been sentenced to death and who were to be pardoned in case of
survival.

   _The Experimental Arrangements for the Sulfanilamide Experiments_

It was shown by the evidence that the experiments for testing the
effectiveness of the sulfanilamides were carried out in three groups.
The first group included 15 men (habitual criminals). This group has
nothing to do with the charges of the indictment and it is therefore
superfluous to enter into this matter more closely.

The second group included 36 female prisoners who had been members of
the Polish Resistance Movement and who, for this reason, had been
sentenced to death by the German court martial in the General
Government. This second group was divided into 3 subgroups of 12
experimental persons each. As to the particulars of the provisions for
the experiments, I refer to the testimony of the defendants Gebhardt and
Fischer in the witness box. Contrary to the first group, contact
substances were used in this second group to accelerate the process of
infection. The contact substances were inserted into the open wound
together with the germs. Sterile and pulverized glass and sterile wood
particles were used as contact substances. These contact substances took
the place of earth and uniform particles and were to produce war-like
conditions for the wounds, without, however, producing at the same time
the general dangers created by infection of the wound by earth and parts
of clothing.

As in the case of the first group, staphylococci, streptococci, and gas
gangrene bacilli were used as agents. But the contention of the
indictment that tetanus germs were also used is incorrect. On the
contrary, the evidence has proved that the treatment of tetanus did not
come within the scope of these experiments. There was all the less
reason for this as it was realized long ago by German military surgery
that the sulfanilamide preparations are not suitable for the effective
prevention of traumatic tetanus. Here I refer to the directives for the
chemo-therapeutical treatment of wound infection which were issued at
the First Working Conference East of the Consulting Specialists in May
1943 (_Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser 1, Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser
Ex. 6_)—that is prior to the performance of the sulfanilamide
experiments charged in the indictment. In these directives it is
expressly pointed out that the outbreak of traumatic tetanus cannot be
prevented by means of the sulfanilamides and that tetanus anti-toxin has
to be administered as usual.

During the presentation of evidence, only the witness Dr. Maczka
maintained that tetanus was actually used in one individual case. This
witness did not make her own observations of the case but drew
conclusions based exclusively on the pathological picture presented by
one of the experimental subjects according to her statements. In view of
the fact that even according to the testimony of this witness tetanus
bacilli were employed only in one individual case, the assertion of this
witness can hardly be taken as a true representation of the facts, for
if it had really been the intention of the defendant Gebhardt to
determine the effect of sulfanilamides on tetanus too, one experimental
subject would certainly not have been sufficient, and more experiments
would have been necessary before a final decision regarding this
question could possibly have been made.

The third group consisted of 24 experimental subjects who were not
treated with any sort of contagion—unlike the procedure applied to the
second group—but only had part of the muscle ligatured. The defendants
Gebhardt and Fischer have given detailed evidence regarding these new
experimental arrangements, how they originated, what considerations had
to be regarded, and what part was played by SS Reich Physician Dr.
Grawitz. With regard to these details I refer to the testimony of the
defendants in the witness box.

The experimental subjects were treated with sulfanilamides as described
by the defendants in the witness box. A few persons were not treated
with sulfanilamides but were used as control subjects. But that did not
mean that these persons were not treated at all. As the evidence has
proved, all experimental subjects were treated, namely by surgical
measures if the sulfanilamides did not prove effective against the
inflammation. For this reason too the experimental subjects to whom
sulfanilamides were applied, and where the inflammation did not pass
away by itself, were given direct surgical treatment under observance of
the generally recognized principles of surgery, particularly as
developed in Germany by Gebhardt’s teacher Professor Dr. Lexer. This
direct surgical treatment resulted in the scars which the court has seen
on the experimental subjects questioned as witnesses. As explained by
Professor Dr. Alexander, the expert produced by the prosecution, these
scars are the result not of the bacteriological infection but of the
operations performed in order to eliminate this infection. In the
prosecution case, four experimental subjects were called to give
evidence. In addition, the prosecution submitted a series of affidavits
given by other persons used as experimental subjects. The statements of
the four witnesses questioned in court coincide largely with the
testimony given by the defendants Gebhardt, Oberheuser, and Fischer
themselves in the witness box. For this reason alone it appears
expedient and sufficient for the pronouncement of a just sentence and
for the establishment of the true facts to base the sentence exclusively
on the testimony of these four witnesses together with the statements of
the defendants themselves. This is not only in accordance with the
principle of direct and oral proceedings in court prevailing in any
modern criminal procedure and which should not be departed from without
urgent reason, but also such handling of the case seems suitable because
the statements of the four witnesses are identical essentially so that
they themselves, together with the statements given by the defendants,
can be regarded as a safe basis for a finding—apart from one point
which I shall go into later. In addition, the affidavits submitted by
the prosecution not only differ in essential points from the statements
made by the witnesses in court, but are inconsistent and contradictory
in themselves as well. This is shown, above all, by the fact that in
several of these affidavits contentions are quite obviously made which
are not based on personal and factual observation, but have become known
to these witnesses by hearsay. The affidavits, moreover, fail to
represent the circumstances in clear chronological order, which makes
the whole matter all the more doubtful, as it was proved by the evidence
that in the Ravensbrueck camp experiments were obviously also performed
by other physicians with whom the defendant in this case had no
connection.

Considerable doubts also exist regarding the statements made by the
witness Dr. Maczka. The prosecution has submitted two affidavits given
by this witness as part of its evidence. When questioned in court, this
witness could not maintain the most incriminating contentions which
appeared in the two affidavits. Under these circumstances, the court has
to consider whether it regards the statements of this witness as
sufficiently reliable to enter into the judgment. I would answer this
question in the negative, not only because she had to revoke the most
essential points of her previous affidavits, but because a large part of
her testimony was based not on her own observations, but either on
information obtained from other prisoners or on conclusions drawn by
her.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_

Doc. No.              Pros. Ex. No.     Description of Document      Page
NO-228                          206 Affidavit of defendant Fischer,    371
                                      19 November 1946, concerning
                                      sulfanilamide experiments
                                      conducted in the concentration
                                      camp Ravensbrueck.
NO-472                          234 Affidavit of the defendant         376
                                      Fischer, 21 October 1946,
                                      supplementing his affidavit
                                      concerning sulfanilamide
                                      experiments.
NO-1080 A, E, F         219 A, E, F Exposures of the witness Maria     901
                                      Kusmierczuk who underwent
                                      sulfanilamide and bone
                                      experiments while an inmate of
                                      the Ravensbrueck concentration
                                      camp. (_See Selections from
                                      Photographic Evidence of the
                                      Prosecution._)
NO-1082 A, C               214 A, C Exposures of the witness Jadwiga   903
                                      Dzido who underwent
                                      sulfanilamide and bone
                                      experiments while an inmate of
                                      the Ravensbrueck concentration
                                      camp. (_See Selections from
                                      Photographic Evidence of the
                                      Prosecution._)

                           _Defense Documents_

    Doc. No.        Def. Ex. No.        Description of Document
   Gebhardt,     Gebhardt, Fischer, Extract from affidavit of Dr.      377
    Fischer,     Oberheuser Ex. 20    Karl Friedrich Brunner, 14
 Oberheuser 21                        March 1947.
   Gebhardt,     Gebhardt, Fischer, Extract from report on the First   377
    Fischer,      Oberheuser Ex. 6    Conference East of Consulting
  Oberheuser 1                        Specialists on 18 and 19 May
                                      1942 at the Military Medical
                                      Academy, Berlin.
   Gebhardt,     Gebhardt, Fischer, Extracts from report on the        378
    Fischer,     Oberheuser Ex. 10    Third Conference East of
  Oberheuser 3                        Consulting Specialists on 24
                                      to 26 May 1943 at the Military
                                      Medical Academy, Berlin.

                               _Testimony_

Extracts from the testimony of prosecution witness Jadwiga Dzido       381
Extracts from the testimony of the prosecution expert witness Dr.      386
  Leo Alexander
Extracts from the testimony of defendant Gebhardt                      388

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-228
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 206

      AFFIDAVIT OF DEFENDANT FISCHER, 19 NOVEMBER 1946, CONCERNING
     SULFANILAMIDE EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED IN THE CONCENTRATION CAMP
                              RAVENSBRUECK

                               AFFIDAVIT

I, Fritz Ernst Fischer, having been duly sworn, depose and state under
oath:

I am a doctor of medicine, having been graduated from the University of
Hamburg. I passed my state examination in 1936. On 13 November 1939 I
was inducted into the Waffen SS and after having served with a combat
division as medical officer, I was hospitalized and then assigned to the
SS hospital at Hohenlychen, as assistant surgeon.

In addition to my normal duties as surgeon at the SS hospital at
Hohenlychen, I was ordered by Professor Gebhardt to begin medical
experiments in my capacity as assistant surgeon to Professor Gebhardt on
or about 12 July 1942. The purpose of the proposed experiments was to
determine the effectiveness of sulfanilamide, which I was informed at
that time was a matter of considerable importance to military medical
circles.

According to the information which I received from Professor Gebhardt,
these experiments were directed initially by the Reich Leader SS and the
Reich Physician Dr. Grawitz.

Professor Gebhardt instructed me, before the operations were undertaken,
on the techniques to be followed and the procedure to be employed. The
persons who were to be the subjects of these experiments were inmates of
the concentration camp at Ravensbrueck who had been condemned to death.

The administrative procedure which was followed in obtaining the
subjects for the experiments was established by Professor Gebhardt with
the camp commandant at Ravensbrueck. After the initial arrangements had
been made, it was the general practice to inform the medical officer at
Ravensbrueck as to the date on which a series of experiments was to be
begun and the number of patients who would be required, and then he took
the matter up with the commandant of the camp, by whom the selections of
subjects were made. Before an operation was undertaken, the persons who
had been selected in accordance with this procedure were given a medical
examination by the camp physician to determine their suitability for the
experiments from a medical standpoint.

The first of the series of experiments involved five persons. The
gangrenous bacterial cultures for use in the experiments were obtained
from the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS. The procedure followed in
the operations was as follows: The subject received the conventional
anesthetic of morphine-atropine, then evipan ether. An incision was made
5 to 8 centimeters in length and 1 to 1½ centimeters in depth, on the
outside of the lower leg in the area of the peronaeus longus.

The bacterial cultures were put in dextrose, and the resulting mixture
was spread into the wound. The wound was then closed and the limb
encased in a cast, which had been prepared, which was lined on the
inside with cotton so that in the event of swelling of the affected
member the result of the experiment would not be influenced by any
factor other than the infection itself.

The bacterial cultures used on each of the five persons varied both as
to the type of bacteria used and the amount of culture used.

After the initial operations had been performed, I returned to
Ravensbrueck each afternoon to observe the progress of the persons who
had been operated on. No serious illnesses resulted from these initial
operations. I reported the progress of the patients to Professor
Gebhardt each night.

When the five persons first operated on were cured, another series of
five was begun. The surgical procedure and the post-operative procedure
was the same as in the initial experiments, but the bacterial cultures
were more virulent. The results from this series were substantially the
same as in the first and no serious illnesses resulted.

Since no inflammation resulted from the bacterial cultures used in the
first two series of operations, it was determined, as a result of
correspondence with Dr. Mrugowsky, the Chief of the Hygiene Institute of
the Waffen SS, and conversations with his assistant, to change the type
of bacterial culture in the subsequent operations. Using the new
culture, two more series of operations were performed, each involving
five persons.

The difference between the third and fourth series was in the bacterial
cultures used. The Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS prepared them from
separate combinations of the three or four gangrene cultures which were
available. In the third and fourth series, more pronounced infection and
inflammation were discernible at the place of incision. Their
characteristics were similar to a normal, local infection, with redness,
swelling, and pain. The circumference of the infection was comparable in
size to a chestnut. Upon the completion of the fourth series, the camp
physician informed me that the camp commandant had instructed him that
male patients would no longer be available for further experiments, but
that it would be necessary to use female inmates.

Accordingly, five women were prepared for the operation, but I did not
operate on them. I reported the change of situation to Professor
Gebhardt and suggested that in view of these circumstances, it would be
desirable to stop the experiments. He did not adopt this suggestion,
however, and pointed out that it was necessary for me as an officer to
carry out the duties which had been assigned to me.

The experiments, however, were interrupted for a period of 2 weeks,
during which Professor Gebhardt told me he had discussed the matter in
Berlin and had been instructed to carry on the experiments, using Polish
female prisoners who had been sentenced to death. In addition, he
instructed me to speed up the experiments since the Reich Physician, Dr.
Grawitz, intended to go to Ravensbrueck soon to test the results of the
experiments. Accordingly, I went to Ravensbrueck and operated on the
female prisoners.

Since the infections which resulted from the first four series of
experiments were not typical of gangrenous battlefield infections, we
communicated with the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS to determine
what steps could be taken more nearly to simulate infections caused by
battle. As a result of this correspondence and a conference at
Hohenlychen presided over by Professor Gebhardt, it was decided to add
tiny fragments of wood shavings to the bacterial cultures, which would
simulate the crust of dirt customarily found in battlefield wounds.

As a result of this conference, three series of operations were
performed, each involving 10 persons, one using the bacterial culture
and fragments of wood, the second using bacterial culture and fragments
of glass, and the third using the culture plus glass and wood.

About two weeks after these new series were begun, Dr. Grawitz visited
Ravensbrueck. Professor Gebhardt introduced him to me and explained to
him the general nature of the work. Professor Gebhardt then left, and I
explained to Dr. Grawitz the details of the operations and their
results. Dr. Grawitz, before I could complete my report on the
procedures used and the results obtained, brusquely interrupted me and
observed that the conditions under which the experiments were performed
did not sufficiently resemble conditions prevailing at the front. He
asked me literally, “How many deaths have there been?” and when I
reported that there had not been any, he stated that that confirmed his
assumption that the experiments had not been carried out in accordance
with his directions.

He said that the operations were mere flea bites and that since the
purpose of the work was to determine the effectiveness of sulfanilamide
on bullet wounds it would be necessary to inflict actual bullet wounds
on the patients. He ordered that the next series of experiments to be
undertaken should be in accordance with these directions. That same
evening, I discussed these orders of Dr. Grawitz with Professor Gebhardt
and we both agreed that it was impossible to carry them out, but that a
procedure would be adopted which would more nearly simulate battlefield
conditions without actually shooting the patients.

The normal result of all bullet wounds was a shattering of tissue, which
did not exist in the initial experiments. As a result of the injury, the
normal flow of blood through the muscle is cut off. The muscle is
nourished by the flow of blood from either end. When this circulation is
interrupted, the affected area becomes a fertile field for the growth of
bacteria; the normal reaction of the tissue against the bacteria is not
possible without circulation.

This interruption of circulation usual in battle casualties could be
simulated by tying off the blood vessels at either end of the muscle.

Two series of operations, each involving 10 persons, were begun
following this procedure. In the first of these, the same bacterial
cultures were used as were developed in the third and fourth series, but
the glass and wood were omitted. In the other series, streptococci and
staphylococci cultures were used. In the series using the gangrenous
culture a severe infection in the area of the incision resulted within
24 hours.

Eight patients out of ten became sick from the gangrenous infection.
Cases which showed symptoms of an unspecific or specific inflammation
were operated on in accordance with the doctrine and manner of septic
surgery. The Lexer doctrine formed the basis of the procedure. The
technique is that an incision in the area of the gangrene is made, from
healthy tissue to healthy tissue on either side. The wound and fascian
corners were laid open, the gangrenous blisters swabbed, and a solution
of H_{2}O_{2} (hydrogen peroxide) was poured over them. The inflamed
extremity was immobilized in a cast. With most patients it was possible
to improve the gangrenous condition of the entire infected area in this
manner.

In the series in which banal cultures of streptococci and staphylococci
were used, the severe resultant infection with accompanying increase in
temperature and swelling did not occur until 72 hours later. Four
patients showed a more serious picture of the disease. In the case of
these patients, the normal professional technique of orthodox medicine
was followed as outlined above, and the inflamed swelling split. Due to
the slight virulence of the bacteria it was possible in the case of all
patients except one to prevent the threatened deadly development of the
disease.

The incisions were made on the lower part of the leg only in all series
to make an amputation possible. It was not made on the upper thigh
because then no area for amputation would remain. However, in this
series the inflammation was so rapid that there was no remedy and no
amputations were made.

Since after the tying up of the circulation of the muscles, a very
severe course of infection was to be expected, 5 grams of sulfanilamide
were given intravenously in the amount of 1 gram each, beginning 1 hour
after the operation. After the wound was laid open to expose all its
corners, sulfanilamide was shaken into the entire area and the area was
drained by thick rubber tubes.

The infection normally reached an acute stage over a period of 3 weeks,
during which time I changed the bandages daily. After the period of 3
weeks the condition was normally that of a simple wound which was
dressed by the camp physicians rather than by me.

The procedure prescribed for the post-operative treatment of the
patients was to give them three times each day 1 cc. of morphine, and
when the dressings were changed, to induce an esthesia by the use of
evipan.

In all the series of experiments, except the first, sulfanilamide was
used after the gangrenous infection appeared. In each series two persons
were not given sulfanilamide as a control to determine its
effectiveness. When sulfanilamide and the bacteria cultures together
were introduced into the incision no inflammation resulted.

                 *        *        *        *        *

My behavior towards all patients was very considerate, and I was very
careful in the operations to follow standard professional procedure.

In May 1943, on the occasion of the Fourth Conference of the Consulting
Physicians of the Wehrmacht, a report was made by Professor Gebhardt and
myself as to these operations. This medical congress was called by
Professor Handloser, who occupied the position of Surgeon General of the
Armed Forces, and was attended by a large number of physicians, both
military and civilian.

In my lecture to the meeting I reported on the operations frankly, using
charts which demonstrated the technique used, the amount of
sulfanilamide administered, and the condition of the patients. This
lecture was the focal point of the conference. Professor Gebhardt spoke
about the fundamentals of the experiments, their performance and their
results, and then asked me to describe the technique. He began his
lecture with the following words: “I bear the full human, surgical, and
political responsibility for these experiments.”

This lecture was followed by a discussion. No criticism was raised. I am
convinced that all the physicians present would have acted in the same
manner as I.

Subsequent to my repeated urgent requests, I went to the front as
surgeon immediately after this conference. Only after I was wounded did
I return as a patient to Hohenlychen. I never entered the Ravensbrueck
camp again. I protested vigorously against these experiments on human
beings, endeavored to prevent them, and to limit their extension after
they had been ordered. In order not to be forced to participate in these
experiments, I repeatedly volunteered for front-line service. Insofar as
it was in my power, I tried to dissuade Doctor Koller and Doctor
Reissmayer from performing these experiments. I declined habilitation at
the University of Berlin because I felt that it might result in my being
obliged to carry on additional experiments at Ravensbrueck. After I
succeeded in scientific discoveries of the highest practical importance,
that is, the solution of the cancer problem and its therapy, I did not
communicate this fact to Professor Gebhardt and did not publish this
work in order not to be ordered again to carry out experiments.

                                                  FRITZ ERNST FISCHER

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-472
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 234

 AFFIDAVIT OF THE DEFENDANT FISCHER, 21 OCTOBER 1946, SUPPLEMENTING HIS
             AFFIDAVIT CONCERNING SULFANILAMIDE EXPERIMENTS

                 *        *        *        *        *

3. At the conference of May 1943, which I described on page 12 of my
affidavit (last paragraph) the following officials were present to the
best of my recollection: Dr. Paul Rostock as chairman of the conference;
Dr. Siegfried Handloser, who was then the Chief of the Medical Service
of the German Armed Forces, who had sent out the invitations to the
meeting; Professor Karl Brandt, who sat in the center of the front row;
Dr. Leonardo D. Conti, the Reich Health Leader; Professor Dr.
Sauerbruch; Dr. Frey; and Professor Heubner. The Medical Service of the
Luftwaffe was represented by Dr. Hippke, who was the Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe; and by Dr. Oskar Schroeder. The
Medical Service of the Waffen SS was represented by its chief, Dr. Karl
Genzken. Dr. Helmut Poppendick, who was the Chief of Staff of the Reich
Physician SS and Police, and Dr. Grawitz were also present.

                 *        *        *        *        *

5. It was made perfectly clear during the speeches made by Dr. Gebhardt
and myself that the experiments were conducted on inmates of a
concentration camp.

6. Six months after this, the 10th anniversary of the hospital at
Hohenlychen was celebrated. Dr. Karl Brandt, Dr. Siegfried Handloser,
Dr. Leonardo D. Conti, and Professor Dr. Sauerbruch were invited to the
celebrations.

7. When the sulfanilamide experiments started, I was told by Professor
Gebhardt, my military and medical superior, that these experiments were
being carried out by order of the Chief of the Medical Office of the
Wehrmacht and the Chief of the State Medical Office, with the initial
order from Hitler, and I must therefore carry out these orders.

8. Dr. Herta Oberheuser and Dr. Schiedlausky assisted me in the
sulfanilamide experiments.

9. As a result of these experiments, three people died.

                                         [Signed] FRITZ ERNST FISCHER

                        TRANSLATION OF GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER
                            DOCUMENT 21
                        GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER DEFENSE EXHIBIT 20

  EXTRACT FROM AFFIDAVIT OF DR. KARL FRIEDRICH BRUNNER, 14 MARCH 1947

I only heard of the sulfanilamide experiments on human beings at
Ravensbrueck after their conclusion through the public report made by
Professor Gebhardt and Dr. Fischer before the Third Conference East of
Consultant Specialists of 24 and 26 May 1943 at the Military Medical
Academy, Berlin. I attended this conference as Stabsarzt in the army
from a military reserve hospital in Berlin. Later on I read a report in
the directives. Professor Dr. Gebhardt did not speak to us about this
point subsequently. On the other hand, the existence of this
sulfanilamide experiment was known and was not kept secret, although
even foreigners were continuously to be found among the assistants, as,
for instance, the Swiss surgeon, Dr. Meyer, during my time.

                         TRANSLATION OF GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER
                             DOCUMENT 1
                         GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER DEFENSE EXHIBIT 6

     EXTRACT FROM REPORT ON THE FIRST CONFERENCE EAST OF CONSULTING
   SPECIALISTS ON 18 AND 19 MAY 1942 AT THE MILITARY MEDICAL ACADEMY,
                                 BERLIN

                 *        *        *        *        *

         _Directives for the chemo-therapy of wound infections_

The treatment of war wounds with sulfanilamide preparations in order to
combat wound infections seems to have prospects. In stock now in the
medical stores are: prontalbin-marfanil powder, prontosil,
neo-uleron-albucid, eubasinum, sulfapyridine-cibazol, and eleudron
pills.

Traumatic tetanus cannot be prevented by these preparations; tetanus
antitoxin must therefore be given as usual.

Chemotherapeutics are not a safe precaution against gas oedemata. The
collection of further experiences in this field is especially desirable.

When treating war wounds, an operative arrangement of the wound must
first be made by removing the dead tissue and opening all cavities of
the wound. Then the remedy is applied with a powder distributor or with
dredging boxes, in dosages of from 5-20 grams according to the size of
the wound. This is repeated whenever a change of dressing is necessary.
Independently of the change of dressing, and spread evenly over the day,
the patient is given 8 grams on the first day, 6 grams on the second
day, 5 grams on the third day and on each of the fourth, fifth, and
sixth days, 4 grams of sulfanilamide preparations per os (if necessary,
rectal or intravenous injections). Then the drug treatment is
discontinued and started again if necessary. The earlier this treatment
is begun the better are its chances.

Local treatment with the available sulfanilamide powders together with
an internal treatment with albucid, cibazol, eleudron, eubasinum,
globucid (particularly for gas oedema), marfanil-prontalbin, protosil is
suggested.

If, in rare cases, secondary reactions occur such as nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, buzzing in the ears, headaches, skin rashes, or icterus, these
remedies must be discontinued at once. A blood transfusion may be
useful.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                        PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF GEBHARDT, FISCHER,
                            OBERHEUSER DOCUMENT 3
                        GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER DEFENSE EXHIBIT 10

    EXTRACTS FROM REPORT ON THE THIRD CONFERENCE EAST OF CONSULTING
SPECIALISTS ON 24 TO 26 MAY 1943 AT THE MILITARY MEDICAL ACADEMY, BERLIN

                 *        *        *        *        *

5. SS Gruppenfuehrer and Major General, Professor Gebhardt, and F.
Fischer.

            _Special Experiments on Sulfanilamide Treatment_

                              CONCLUSIONS

    “1. The development of suppuration on the soft parts caused by
    bacteriae cannot be prevented, even if sulfanilamides are
    applied immediately, locally, or internally.

    “2. It could not be proved that the course of an inflammatory
    illness caused by aerobic organisms on abscesses and phlegmons
    of the limbs was influenced by sulfanilamides. We were of the
    impression that combined gas gangrene therapy took a milder
    course under the influence of sulfanilamides.

    “3. Surgical measures are indispensable for a successful
    treatment of inflammations.”

_Additional Remarks_

The sprinkling of sulfanilamide powder on wounds can be injurious, if,
by so doing, the fundamentals of surgery are infringed, if, for
instance, the powder basis is not dissolved by the tissue fluids, and if
the discharge of secretions is hampered by coagulation. The wounds
treated with sulfanilamide powder show a slight tendency to exudation.

_Hypothesis of Functions_

The inflammation on the mesodermal soft parts shows a tendency towards
necrosis at an early stage. The necrosis is the seat of the bacterial
culture. Its surroundings show thrombosed vessels. Access to it by
chemo-therapeutic reagents is very difficult.

                 *        *        *        *        *

           _Directives for the Application of Sulfanilamides_

_Experiments_ (_Gebhardt-Fischer_) showed the following results: Even
the immediate internal and external application of sulfanilamide
preparations cannot prevent a suppuration of the soft parts due to
ordinary suppurative organisms. It could not be proved that the course
of the inflammatory disease caused by anaerobions is influenced by
sulfanilamides. The sulfanilamides seemed to have an easing effect on
the course of combined gangrene therapy.

_Disorders caused by sulfanilamides_ (_Randerath_) are relatively rare.
They occur directly as liver disorders including acute yellow liver
atrophy, as kidney disorders, and as agranulocytosis. Therefore, as far
as is possible under front-line conditions, the white and red blood
count should be controlled. The decrease of the body temperature caused
by an infection of the central regulatory system may be looked upon as
an indirect disorder, so that the temperature curve permits no
conclusions as to the development of the wound infection. Furthermore,
local powder treatment may lead to an occasional increase in the depth
of the wound infection. Direct injury to the tissue at the spot where
the preparations were applied was not observed.

_The endolumbal application of the sulfanilamides_ (_Mueller_) must also
be rejected for the treatment of meningitis, since it leads to serious
disturbances in the region of the spinal cord and may result in
paralysis.

_The clinical discourse_ (_Frey_) emphasized the decrease of optimistic
and the increase of critical opinions. The clinical doctor considers the
principal disorders to be anorexia, nausea, and increasing exhaustion.
Early application in the wound itself is essential for the efficacy. The
enteral or parenteral inducing of sulfanilamide drugs cannot prevent
wound infections, but can favorably influence its course.

_The following rules for practice therefore result_: All surface wounds,
that is, grazing shot wounds, sulcus-shaped wounds and large gaping
wounds of the soft parts should be sprinkled as soon as possible with
sulfanilamide powder. The powder treatment is of no use if the depths of
the wound are not reached. It is ineffective to powder the small wounds
caused by the penetration and exit of the bullet. The powdering of the
skin is senseless and may cause eczema. Deeper wounds must be treated in
the quickest and most thorough manner. After this, the wound can be
additionally treated with sulfanilamide powder which must reach the
deepest cavities. It is not advisable to powder granulating wounds.

If the powder treatment cannot be applied during the first hours or does
not seem to suffice, a pororal application of sulfanilamides should take
its place or be performed supplementarily. Front-line conditions will
not always allow intravenous injections. According to the danger of a
wound infection, the wound should be treated for a short time with large
doses of sulfanilamides (6-10 grams during 3-4 days, not more than a
total of 50 grams). On the whole, small doses are insufficient and
therefore have no influence on the course of an infection, but if
applied too long they may be injurious. Suitable preparations are
preferably eleudron, cibazol, and globucide. If possible, the treatment
should be applied by a medical officer.

Wounds endangered by gas oedema—and this means all large and deep
muscle wounds—should, in addition to the local and oral treatment with
sulfanilamide, also be treated with gangrene serum. At subsequent
operations, for example resection of the ribs, empyema of the chest,
secondary sutures, and late amputations, the new wound caused by the
operation may be powdered adequately with sulfanilamides when bleeding
has stopped.

The thoroughness of the surgical wound treatment should in no way be
lessened even by the additional application of sulfanilamides.

Abdominal gunshot wounds can also be treated with sulfanilamide powder
(about one tablespoon) or the sulfanilamide may be induced into the
abdominal cavity in the form of an emulsion.

  EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF PROSECUTION WITNESS JADWIGA DZIDO[40]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

MR. HARDY: Witness, what is your full name?

WITNESS DZIDO: Jadwiga Dzido.

Q. Do you spell that J-a-d-w-i-g-a, last name spelled D-z-i-d-o?

A. Yes.

Q. Witness, you were born on 26 January 1918?

A. Yes.

Q. You are a citizen of Poland?

A. Yes.

Q. Have you come here to Nuernberg voluntarily to testify?

A. Yes.

Q. Would you kindly tell the Tribunal your present home address?

A. Warsaw, Garnoslonska 14.

Q. Witness, are you married?

A. No.

Q. Are your parents living?

A. No.

Q. What education have you received?

A. I finished elementary school and high school at Warsaw. In 1937 I
started to study pharmacology at the University of Warsaw.

Q. Did you graduate from the University in Warsaw?

A. No.

Q. What did you do after you had finished school in the University of
Warsaw?

A. I started studying pharmacology at the University, and then when I
was studying the second year, the war broke out.

Q. What did you do after the war broke out?

A. In 1939 I was working in a pharmacy during the holidays.

Q. Were you a member of the Resistance Movement?

A. In the autumn of 1940 I entered the Resistance Underground.

Q. What did you do in the Resistance Movement?

A. I was a messenger.

Q. Then were you later captured by the Gestapo and placed under arrest?

A. I was arrested by the Gestapo on 28 March 1941.

Q. What happened to you after your arrest by the Gestapo?

A. I was interrogated by the Gestapo in Lublin, Lukow, and Radzin.

Q. And what happened after that?

A. In Lublin, I was beaten while naked.

Q. Did you then receive any further treatment from the Gestapo, or were
you released?

A. I stayed in Lublin 6 weeks in the cellar of the Gestapo building.

Q. Then were you sent to the Ravensbrueck concentration camp?

A. On 23 September 1941, I was transported to the Ravensbrueck
concentration camp.

Q. Were you told why you were sent to the concentration camp in
Ravensbrueck?

A. No, I was not told.

Q. Were you ever given a trial in any German court?

A. Never.

Q. Who sent you to Ravensbrueck concentration camp?

A. All the prisoners in the prison at Lublin were sent there, and I went
with them.

Q. Now will you tell the Court, Miss Dzido, in your own words what
happened to you after you arrived at Ravensbrueck?

A. When I arrived in the Ravensbrueck concentration camp, I thought that
I would stay there till the end of the war. The living conditions in the
prison were such that we could not live there any longer. In the camp we
had to work, but in the camp it was not so dirty, and there were not so
many lice as used to be in the prison.

Q. What work did you do in the camp, Witness?

A. I did physical work inside or outside the camp.

Q. Were you ever operated on in the Ravensbrueck concentration camp?

A. I was operated on in November 1942.

Q. Will you kindly explain the circumstances of this operation to the
Tribunal?

A. In 1942 great hunger and terror reigned in the camp. The Germans were
at the zenith of their power. You could see haughtiness and pride on the
face of every SS woman. We were told every day that we were nothing but
numbers, that we had to forget that we were human beings, that we had
nobody to think of us, that we would never return to our country, that
we were slaves, and that we had only to work. We were not allowed to
smile, to cry, or to pray. We were not allowed to defend ourselves when
we were beaten. There was no hope of going back to my country.

Q. Now, Witness, did you say that you were operated on in the
Ravensbrueck concentration camp on 22 November 1942? [See photographs,
pp. 898-908.]

A. Yes.

Q. Now, on 22 November 1942, the day of this operation, will you kindly
tell the Tribunal all that happened during that time?

A. That day the policewoman, camp policewoman, came with a piece of
paper where my name was written down. The policewoman told us to follow
her. When I asked her where we were going, she told me that she didn’t
know. She took us to the hospital. I didn’t know what was going to
happen to me. It might have been an execution, transport for work, or
operation.

Dr. Oberheuser appeared and told me to undress and examined me. Then I
was X-rayed. I stayed in the hospital. My dress was taken away from me.
I was operated on 22 November 1942 in the morning. A German nurse came,
shaved my legs, and gave me something to drink. When I asked her what
she was going to do with me she did not give me any answer. In the
afternoon I was taken to the operating room on a small hospital trolley.
I must have been very exhausted and tired and that is why I don’t
remember whether I got an injection or whether a mask was put on my
face. I didn’t see the operating room.

When I came back I remember that I had no wound on my leg, but a trace
of a sting. From that time I don’t remember anything till January. I
learned from my comrades who lived in the same room that my leg had been
operated on. I remember what was going on in January, and I know that
the dressings had been changed several times.

Q. Witness, do you know who performed the operation upon your leg?

A. I don’t know.

Q. Now, you say that you had dressings changed. Who changed the
dressings on your leg?

A. The dressings were changed by Drs. Oberheuser, Rosenthal, and
Schiedlausky.

Q. Did you suffer a great deal while these dressings were being changed?

A. Yes, very much.

Q. Witness, will you step down from the witness box and walk over to the
defendants’ dock and see if you can recognize anyone in that dock as
being at Ravensbrueck concentration camp during the period and during
the time that you were operated on?

A. (Witness points.)

Q. Will you point to the person again that you recognized, Witness?

A. (Witness points.)

Q. And who is that, Witness?

A. Dr. Oberheuser.

MR. HARDY: May we request that the record so show that the witness has
identified the defendant Oberheuser?

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: The record will so show.

MR. HARDY: Do you recognize anyone else in that dock, Witness?

WITNESS DZIDO: Yes.

Q. Point out who else you recognize, Witness?

A. (Witness points.)

Q. Who is that, Witness?

A. This man I saw only once in the camp.

Q. Do you know who that man is, Witness?

A. I know.

Q. Who is that man, Witness?

A. Dr. Fischer.

MR. HARDY: Will the record so show that the witness has properly
identified the defendant Fischer as being at the Ravensbrueck
concentration camp?

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: The record will so show.

MR. HARDY: Witness, do you have any other details to tell the Tribunal
about your operation?

WITNESS DZIDO: (No answer.)

Q. Witness, how many times were you operated on?

A. Once.

Q. When Dr. Oberheuser attended you, was she gentle in her treatment
toward you?

A. She was not bad.

Q. Witness, have you ever heard of a person named Binz in the
Ravensbrueck concentration camp?

A. I know her very well.

Q. Do you remember what time your friends were called to be operated on
in August of 1943?

A. Yes.

Q. Will you kindly tell the Tribunal some of the details there and the
names of the persons who were to be operated on?

A. In the spring of 1943 the operations were stopped. We thought that we
could live like that till the end of the war. On the 15th of August a
policewoman came and called ten girls. When she was asked what for, she
answered that we were going to be sent to work. We knew very well that
all prisoners belonging to our transport were not allowed to work
outside the camp. The chief of the block where we were living was
forbidden under capital punishment to let us outside the camp. That’s
why we know that it was not true. We didn’t want to let our comrades out
of the block. The policewoman came, and the assistants, the overseers,
and with them Binz. We were driven out of the block into the street. We
stood there in line 10 at a time and Binz herself read off the names of
10 girls. When they refused to go because they were afraid of a new
operation and were not willing to undergo a new operation, she herself
gave her word of honor that it was not going to be an operation and she
told them to follow her.

We remained standing before the block. Then several minutes later our
comrades ran to us and told us that SS men have been called for in order
to surround them. The camp police arrived and drove our comrades out of
the line. We were locked in the block. The shutters were closed. We were
3 days without any food and without any fresh air. We were not given
parcels that arrived in the camp at that time. The first day the camp
commandant and Binz came and made a speech. The camp commandant said
that there had never been a revolt in the camp and that this revolt must
be punished. She believed that we would reform and that we would never
repeat it. If it were to happen again, she had SS people with weapons.
My comrade, who knew German, answered that we were not revolting, that
we didn’t want to be operated on because five of us died after the
operation and because six had been shot down after having suffered so
much. Then Binz replied: “Death is victory. You must suffer for it and
you will never get out of the camp.” Three days later, we learned that
our comrades had been operated on in the bunker.

Q. Now, Witness, how many women, approximately, were operated on at
Ravensbrueck?

A. At Ravensbrueck 74 women were operated on. Many of them underwent
many operations.

Q. Now, you have told us that five died as a result of the operations,
is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. And another six were shot down after the operation, is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know why those other six were shot, Witness?

A. I don’t know.

Q. Witness, were any of these victims asked to volunteer for these
operations?

A. No.

Q. Were any of them promised freedom if they would submit to operations?

A. No.

Q. When you were operated on, did you object?

A. I could not.

Q. Why?

A. I was not allowed to talk and our questions were not answered.

Q. Do you still suffer any effects as a result of the operation,
Witness?

A. Yes.

Q. Were you ever asked to sign any papers with respect to the operation?

A. Never.

Q. When did you finally leave Ravensbrueck?

A. On 27 April 1945.

Q. Have you ever received any treatment since you have left Ravensbrueck
in the last year?

A. Yes.

Q. Tell us what treatment you have received.

A. Dr. Gruzan in Warsaw transplanted tendons on my leg.

Q. When did he do that?

A. On 25 September 1945.

Q. Do you have to wear any special shoes, now, Witness?

A. Yes, I should wear them, but I can’t afford to buy them.

Q. What are you doing now, Witness? Are you working now, or what is your
occupation?

A. I am now continuing my studies which I started before the war.

Q. I see. I will ask the witness to identify these pictures.

MR. HARDY: This is Document NO-1082_a_, _b_, and _c_. I will pass these
up to the Tribunal for your perusal. Were these photographs taken of you
in Nuernberg in the last day or two, Witness?

WITNESS DZIDO: Yes.

Q. Witness, would you kindly take your stocking and shoe off your right
leg, please, and will you step out to the side and show the Tribunal the
results of the operations at Ravensbrueck? (Witness complies.) That’s
all, Witness, you may sit down.

MR. HARDY: I have no further question on direct examination, your Honor.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Is there any defense counsel who desires to
cross-examine this witness?

DR. SEIDL (counsel for defendants Gebhardt, Oberheuser, and Fischer): I
do not want to cross-examine the witness; however, I do not wish the
conclusion to be drawn that my clients admit all the statements made by
the witness.

 EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF THE PROSECUTION EXPERT WITNESS DR. LEO
                             ALEXANDER[41]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

MR. HARDY: Dr. Alexander, have you examined Miss Dzido before today?

WITNESS DR. ALEXANDER: Yes, sir, I did, on several occasions during the
last 3 days.

Q. During your examination, did you have X-rays made of the patient’s
legs?

A. I did, sir.

MR. HARDY: At this time I will introduce Document NO-1091 which is the
X-ray of the witness, Miss Dzido. We will pass two copies to the
Tribunal and one copy to the Secretary General. Dr. Alexander, in the
course of your diagnosis of these X-rays, will you kindly diagnose this
X-ray in English and then repeat in German for the benefit of the
defendants?

WITNESS DR. ALEXANDER: Yes, sir.

Q. Doctor, will you identify that X-ray which carried Document NO-1091?

A. Yes. This is the X-ray which included the lower two-thirds of the
thigh bone, the femur, and the knee joint, and—

MR. HARDY: I offer this X-ray as Prosecution Exhibit 215.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Doctor, this X-ray you are referring to now is Document NO-1092?

A. This is Document NO-1091. The arrow points to the osteoporotic
atrophy of the tibia. Document NO-1092 is the X-ray of the leg. It shows
the fibula which is the smaller of the two larger bones of the leg,
about in the middle between the area just mentioned under the bracket
called “B”. On the side, looking toward the tibia is the
osteoperiostitis of the periosteum. This group of marks is particularly
severe in the smaller area which I have marked with the bracket “A”,
which indicates a smaller area of the shaft of the tibia within the
larger area of the disturbance marked as “B”. This alteration is
indicative and consists of an ordinary inactive Coxa, which in view of
the osteoperiostitis of the periosteum was probably an osteomyelitis
process. However, there is no active osteomyelitis at the present
examination of the right foot. In pictures 1093 and 1094, it shows
arthritic changes of the cuniform navicula joints with narrowing of the
joint spaces and increased marginal sclerosis. This has been marked in
the X-ray with an arrow pointing to the joint. The other prints are the
same. The prints have come out too dark, but it shows the condition
clearly in the film.

This arthritis is due to the immobilization of the right foot. Secondary
to the muscles and especially the paralysis of the perineal nerve. It is
evidently arthritis of an immobilization nature which one sees also by
inspection of the patient’s foot.

Q. Doctor, can you determine from your examination——

A. (Interposing) 1094—have I mentioned it?—shows the same as 1093 in a
slightly different exposure. The marks are the same pointing to the most
marked arthritis between the cuniform navicular joints.

Q. Doctor, in your opinion, from your examination of this patient can
you determine what was the purpose of the experiment?

A. It appears that in this experiment a highly infectious agent was
implanted, probably without the addition of a bacteria static agent such
as sulfanilamide, and for that reason the infection got out of hand and
became very extensive.

         EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT GEBHARDT[42]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

DR. SEIDL: The experiments on Polish internees were carried out in such
a way that, first of all, three series of experiments were performed on
three groups of 12 persons each. Is that correct?

DEFENDANT GEBHARDT: Yes. What I wanted to solve by means of this second
experimental group was the task given me in my orders, namely, the
testing of the drugs prescribed. I definitely hoped in these
experiments, which produced gangrene, that if there was anything in the
sulfanilamide drugs, which I had reason to hope, then the advantages
connected with one or the other drug would become apparent, and I would
be able to discontinue the experiments. Of course, I could not stop at
the initial instructions. I really had to go on to a localized and
definite infection, and for that there is an internationally known
precept, not discovered by us, which is to produce a _locus minoris
resistentia_—that is to say, the place of least resistance—where germs
combine with contact substances. So we did not insert dirt, glass, or
earth, cruelly; the dirt in the wound was represented by sterile glass
silicate; soil and textiles which would enter a wound were replaced by
us through sterile cellulose, finely ground. You all know that if you
cut yourself and a nonsterile piece of glass remains in the wound, if
you do not move the spot, it will heal with the glass inside without any
aggravated symptoms. The only effect it has is to produce a catalysis
for the germs and a local obstruction to the flow of blood, and possibly
to damage a few cells slightly. In other words, we produced inflammation
in the safest way possible for such an experiment. That is an
unquestionable scientific train of thought in this sphere. We proceeded
in just that manner and in addition, we gave our sulfanilamide, or
zeibazol 1., eleutron, and nitron. Two control persons, however, were
not without protection, because they were taken care of in the old
established way.

Now, don’t suggest that I should know the schedule or that there was
some schedule regarding the supply of sulfanilamide used. A schedule is
always bad in medicine because it is no longer original. One thing is
characteristic, however, with sulfanilamides and that is that you give a
big dose at the beginning, and here there is a question of whether it is
correct to introduce it locally or to leave it open. Someone might mix
it, somebody else might have a different combination and that is how we
did it. I would be a bad scientist if I were to write down for you now
that I knew exactly that they were all given in a certain manner on the
third day, or that they are all like this and this now. It states
expressly in Thomas’ statement, of course, that any prearranged table
for the administration is wrong, and that we also cannot prescribe the
correct way to apply these drugs. It was obviously clear that there was
a strong impression made by sulfanilamides and, even in the first group,
we were astonished to find a certain result, which is useful for the
idea as such, but not for practical purposes. Among other things we
immediately and simultaneously sprinkled a mixture of germs together
with sulfanilamide powder into the wound. That was the only exception
made in the first group and it didn’t produce any results at all. Now,
if I were a bad scientist then I would have assumed that that, in
itself, was a success. No matter whether it was the ultrasepsis or the
powder we had used, I would have been satisfied, and I would have said,
“Everybody now has to take a little bag of sulfanilamide along with him
and powder the wounds with it immediately because we know that if they
are inserted simultaneously into the wound—the germ and the drug—then
there will be no inflammation.” Only in complete ignorance of wound
conditions and war conditions could one adopt that point of view. The
disadvantage of the sulfanilamide bag is that a man who is badly shot
isn’t in a position to act; he would be lying somewhere badly wounded
and not be able to do anything. On the other hand, of course, the
position is that the surface of the wound can easily be powdered, but of
course not right down to the very bottom of the wound, and we know
particularly well that sulfanilamides when applied wrongly in this way
have caused injury.

Q. The second group consisted of the 36 women, 3 times 12 women?

A. Yes. Infection, plus contact materials.

Q. Is it true that the Reich Physician SS, Dr. Grawitz, on 3 September
1942, when inspecting Ravensbrueck, demanded that the experimental
conditions had to be made more severe in order to create conditions
similar to wartime conditions?

A. At the beginning of September, on the basis of my report, I was
called to Grawitz to report on the results which might be expected.
Grawitz, and as I shall explain later, Stumpfegger, came to me at the
beginning of September. Since Grawitz was coming to Ravensbrueck I
turned up on the same day, so that Fischer could demonstrate the
patients under my protection. That is the impression probably created
repeatedly by the testimony of witnesses; they have to wait for a time,
and then I say “These are the patients whom I operated on.” I assume the
same description was given each time. Grawitz was able to prove to me
that the effects were circumscribed and not of a war nature. And he was
able to prove to me that I had obtained no clear medical information,
only assumptions, and the clinical conditions resulting might perhaps be
expected after surgery at home. For another reason, which can be seen
from the documents, the argument became rather violent. Grawitz turned
to Fischer, who presented the cases to him. At any rate he then said,
unfortunately, that a speedy clarification had to be reached and that
wounds similar to combat wounds had to be created, that is, a gunshot
wound infected by earth and matter. Of course, I did not accept these
conditions and I looked for some way to get the experiment into my own
hands so that, using all safeguards, a higher degree of infection might
be brought about, and the cases might still remain under my control. I
did not want to give up and say, “I have not reached any conclusion,”
thereby impliedly giving permission for wounds similar to combat wounds
to be inflicted elsewhere. And so we arrived at the idea of tying off
the arteries of the third group, which is also a customary means of
bringing about a locus minoris resistentiae in international
experimental technique.

Q. You did not carry out the order then?

A. No.

Q. Then how were the experiments continued in order to create severe
local inflammation in warlike wounds?

A. We kept to our old technique, the infusion, that is an incision on
the outer side of the calf far from the joint, where it is not under
pressure, and where the cast does not hurt it. In other words, we chose
the most suitable place according to all medical considerations. Then we
administered the infection in a place where the circulation of the blood
had been reduced.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. What do you know about the deaths, and why was there no amputation in
these cases?

A. I believe that I can remember the three deaths very well. But I only
remember three—I have always testified that—with all the things that
have happened in the meantime and all the patients I have taken care of.
It was not that Fischer or I overlooked an amputation, and it is
certainly not true that an amputation can save the life of the patient
in all cases of gangrene. As I remember the case histories, the most
serious patient had a large abscess on the hip. Probably the
corresponding glands had been affected. The infection on the calf and
the abscess on the hip—what can I amputate? One can amputate when the
infection is limited to the calf. We did not have such cases because we
forced the infection to the place where we wanted it, but we were not
able to prevent the infection spreading to a different area and running
into the blood vessel as does happen occasionally. There are infections
of the veins, and then the patient dies suddenly, and it is a definite
risk to perform an operation because the power of resistance is on the
borderline, hanging by a hair. If we perform such major operations to
save the patient’s life, then you may assume that we would have
undertaken an amputation, or would you assume that a surgeon of my
experience does not know when he has to amputate? Unfortunately that is
the first thing that an operative surgeon like Fischer learns in
wartime, to amputate in time.

As far as I remember, the deaths were from an abscess of the glands, an
inflammation of the veins, an inflammation of the blood vessels, and one
died from general sickness, in spite of all transfusions. This happens
in cases of infection when there is no possibility of stopping the
infection by local surgery. But one cannot conclude that any medical
measures which should have been taken were overlooked, because just by
seeing a case history from a distance one cannot decide that at such and
such a moment the patient should have been operated on. I am convinced
that in these three cases which Fischer reported to me exactly, which I
saw, and in which the therapy was discussed, that we certainly did not
overlook anything. As far as one can humanly say, we did what we
considered necessary.

I wanted to publish this result or to report it to the public from the
beginning. Therefore, it was obvious from the very beginning, if you did
not assume that I had any humane or surgical motives, that I did
everything in order to be able to publish the results.

-----

[40] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 20
December 1947, pp. 838-847.

[41] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 20 Dec.
1946, pp. 848-855.

[42] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 4, 5, 6,
7, 10 Mar. 47, pp. 3931-4256.

    6. BONE, MUSCLE AND NERVE REGENERATION AND BONE TRANSPLANTATION
                              EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser, Rostock, Gebhardt, Rudolf Brandt,
Oberheuser, and Fischer were charged with special responsibility for and
participation in criminal conduct involving experiments on bone, muscle,
and nerve regeneration and experiments on bone transplantation (par. 6
(F) of the indictment). During the trial, the prosecution withdrew this
charge in the case of Rudolf Brandt. On this charge the defendants
Gebhardt, Oberheuser, and Fischer were convicted and the defendants Karl
Brandt, Handloser, and Rostock were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on these experiments is
contained in its final brief against the defendant Gebhardt. An extract
from this brief is set forth below on pages 392 to 396. A corresponding
summation of the evidence by the defense on these experiments has been
selected from the final plea for the defendant Gebhardt. It appears
below on pages 396 to 399. This argumentation is followed by selections
from the evidence on pages 400 to 418.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

      _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT GEBHARDT_

    _Bone, Muscle, and Nerve Regeneration, and Bone Transplantation
                              Experiments_

These experiments were carried out in the Ravensbrueck concentration
camp during the same period of time and on the same group of Polish
inmates as the sulfanilamide experiments. (_Tr. p. 1458._)

The defendant Fischer made the following statement about these
experiments in his affidavit:

    “After the arrival of Doctor Stumpfegger from general
    headquarters in the fall of 1942, Professor Gebhardt declared
    before some of his co-workers that he had received orders to
    continue with the tests at Ravensbrueck on a larger scale. In
    this connection, questions of plastic surgery which would be of
    interest after the end of the war should be clarified. Doctor
    Stumpfegger was supposed to test the free transplantation of
    bones. Since Professor Gebhardt knew that I had worked in
    preparation for my habilitation at the university on
    regeneration of tissues, he ordered me to prepare a surgical
    plan for these operations, which, after it had been approved he
    directed me to carry out immediately. Moreover, Doctor Koller
    and Doctor Reissmayer were ordered to perform their own series
    of experiments. Professor Gebhardt was also considering a plan
    to form the basis of an operative technique of remobilization of
    joints. Besides the above, Doctors Schulze and Schulze-Hagen
    participated in this conference.

    “Since I knew Ravensbrueck I was ordered to introduce the new
    doctors named above to the camp physician. I was specially
    directed to assist Doctor Stumpfegger, since, as physician on
    the staff of Himmler, he would probably be absent from time to
    time.

    “I had selected the regeneration of muscles for the sole reason
    because the incision necessary for this purpose was the
    smallest. The operation was carried out as follows:

    “Evipan and ether were used as an anaesthetic, and a 5
    centimeter longitudinal incision was made at the outer side of
    the upper leg. Subsequent to the cutting through the fascia, a
    piece of muscle was removed which was the size of the cup of the
    little finger. The fascia and skin were enclosed in accordance
    with the normal technique of aseptic surgery. Afterwards a cast
    was applied. After 1 week the skin wound was split under the
    same narcotic conditions, and the part of the muscle around the
    area cut out was removed. Afterwards the fascia and the sewed-up
    part of the skin were immobilized in a cast.” (_NO-228, Pros.
    Ex. 206_; _Tr. p. 774_.)

The responsibility of the defendant Gebhardt for these experiments is
also proved by the affidavit of Oberheuser. She stated:

    “The experiments with bone transplantations were carried out, as
    far as I can remember, at the end of 1942 and beginning of 1943
    by Dr. Stumpfegger of Hohenlychen. I helped Dr. Stumpfegger in
    the same way as I helped Dr. Fischer with the sulfanilamide
    experiments, and as I have described already in paragraph 4 of
    this affidavit. Before the operation I had to examine, as in the
    other case, the condition of health of the selected persons. The
    operations consisted of the removal and transplantation of a
    piece of the bone from the tibia. Fifteen to twenty persons were
    used for these experiments.

    “The persons necessary for these experiments were requisitioned
    by Dr. Schiedlausky from the camp commander.

    “Dr. Karl Gebhardt was in charge of the sulfanilamide
    experiments and bone transplantations. I do not know whether he
    himself performed operations of this type. But I know that all
    these experiments were performed under his direction and
    supervision and upon his instructions. He was assisted by the
    doctors already mentioned, Dr. Fischer and Dr. Stumpfegger, and
    also by Drs. Schiedlausky and Rosenthal. Also only healthy
    Polish prisoners were used for these experiments.

    “I cannot remember that a single one of the experimental
    subjects used was pardoned after the completion of the
    experiments.” (_NO-487, Pros. Ex. 208._)

The witness Maczka, a graduate of the Medical School of the University
of Krakow and a practicing physician, testified that in the course of
her duties as X-ray technician in the Ravensbrueck concentration camp
she had occasion to observe approximately 13 cases in which experimental
operations were performed on the bones of inmates. There were three
kinds of bone operations—fractures, bone transplantations, and bone
splints. Some of the Polish girls were operated on several times. In the
case of Krystyna Dabska, Maczka took X-ray pictures of both legs and
discovered that small pieces of the fibulae had been removed. In the
case of one leg the periosteum had also been taken out. Zofia Baj was
operated on in a similar manner. Janina Marczewska and Leonarda Bien
were subjected to the bone fracture experiments. The tibia was broken in
several places and in the case of one of the girls, clamps were applied
while in the case of the other they were not. These operations impeded
the locomotion of the girls operated on. Bone incision operations were
performed on Barbara Pietczyk, a Polish girl 16 years old. She was
operated on six times. During the first operation incisions were made in
each tibia. During a later operation pieces of the tibia were cut out
where incisions had been previously made. Maczka took an X-ray of the
pieces of tibia that were removed. As a result of these bone operations,
Maczka observed the development of two cases of osteomyelitis, Maria
Grabowska and Maria Cabaj. (_Tr. pp. 1445-7._)

A rather large group of muscle experiments were performed. Here again
multiple operations were carried out on the same subject. Gledziewjowska
was operated on most frequently. During the first operation certain
muscles were removed and during subsequent operations additional pieces
were cut out, always at the same place, so that the legs got thinner and
weaker all the time. (_Tr. p. 1447._)

Transplantation of whole limbs from one person to another was also
carried out. Maczka testified that about 10 feeble-minded inmates were
selected, taken to the hospital and prepared for operation. She knew
personally that at least two of these persons were operated on. One case
was a leg amputation. Following this operation, the experimental subject
was killed and placed in a special room where the dead were kept. Maczka
was able to observe the corpse and saw that there was only one leg. In
the second case an abnormal woman was operated on by Dr. Fischer. When
he left the operating room he carried with him a bundle wrapped up in
linen about the size of an arm. He took this away with him. The prison
nurse, Quernheim, informed Maczka that the whole arm with shoulder blade
was removed from this woman. (_Tr. p. 1448._)

The amputation of the arm and shoulder blade mentioned by Dr. Maczka
obviously refers to the transplantation performed on the patient Ladisch
at Hohenlychen. As to this, the defendant Fischer stated in his
affidavit as follows:

    “As a disciple of Lexer, Gebhardt had already planned long ago a
    free heteroplastic transplantation of bone. In spite of the fact
    that some of his co-workers did not agree, he was resolved to
    carry out such an operation on the patient, Ladisch, whose
    shoulder joint was removed because of a sarcoma.

    “I and my medical colleagues urged professional and human
    objections up until the evening before the operation was
    performed, but Gebhardt ordered us to carry out the operations.
    Dr. Stumpfegger, in whose field of research this operation was,
    was supposed to perform the removal of the scapula at
    Ravensbrueck and had already made initial arrangements for it.
    However, because Professor Gebhardt required Doctor Stumpfegger
    to assist him in the actual transplantation of the shoulder to
    the patient Ladisch, I was ordered to go to Ravensbrueck and
    perform the operation of removal on that evening. I asked
    Doctors Gebhardt and Schulze to describe exactly the technique
    which they wished me to follow. The next morning I drove to
    Ravensbrueck after I had made a previous appointment by
    telephone. At Hohenlychen I had already made the normal initial
    preparation for an operation, namely, scrubbing, etc., merely
    put on my coat, and went to Ravensbrueck and removed the bone.

    “The camp physician who was assisting me in the operation
    continued with it while I returned to Hohenlychen as quickly as
    possible with the bone which was to be transplanted. In this
    manner the period between removal and transplantation was
    shortened. At Hohenlychen the bone was handed over to Professor
    Gebhardt, and he, together with Doctor Schulze and Doctor
    Stumpfegger, transplanted it.” (_NO-228, Pros. Ex. 206._)

Gebhardt admitted that he, together with Stumpfegger, personally
performed the bone transplantation operation on Ladisch. He testified
further that Fischer only removed the scapula, shoulder blade, from the
Polish female inmate at Ravensbrueck. (_Tr. p. 4235._) It is impossible
to raise the arm above the horizontal if the scapula has been removed.
(_Tr. p. 4235._) Gebhardt further admitted that Stumpfegger reported to
him on the bone experiments in Ravensbrueck concentration camp. (_Tr. p.
4235._)

The affidavit of Gustawa Winkowska corroborates the testimony of Maczka
concerning the transplantation of whole limbs and establishes that the
experimental subjects were later killed. (_NO-865, Pros. Ex. 231._)

The witness Karolewska was a subject in both the sulfanilamide and bone
experiments. (_Tr. pp. 833, 836-7._) She was operated on a total of six
times. The first operation was conducted on 14 August 1942 by Fischer.
(_Tr. p. 819._) Gebhardt inspected her early in September. (_Tr. p.
821._) She was sent back to her block on 8 September 1942, but was
unable to walk and remained in bed for a week. On 16 September 1942 she
was again taken to the hospital and operated on for the second time by
Fischer. (_Tr. pp. 821-2._) She left the hospital on 6 October 1942 and
remained in bed for several weeks. Her leg did not heal until June 1943
(_Tr. pp. 822-3_). She filed a written protest with the camp commander,
together with other experimental subjects in February 1943. In August
1943 she was operated on literally by force in the bunker at
Ravensbrueck. Both her legs were cut open. These operations were carried
out on five other Polish girls under indescribably filthy conditions. On
15 September 1943 a further operation was performed on her right leg by
a doctor from Hohenlychen. Two weeks later her left leg was operated on
and pieces of the shinbone were removed. She stayed in the hospital for
6 months—until the end of February 1944. (_Tr. pp. 828-9._) Karolewska
identified the defendants Gebhardt, Fischer, and Oberheuser as having
participated in the experiments on her. (_Tr. pp. 818, 830._)

The defendant Fischer participated in these experiments until at least
23 February 1943. On that date he carried out a second operation on
Zofia Baj. (_NO-871, Pros. Ex. 227._)

The most disgusting series of operations were those carried out in
August 1943 in the bunker. The Polish girls selected had revolted and
refused to report to the hospital. The barrack block in which they had
barricaded themselves was then surrounded by male guards who carried
these women off forcibly to the camp prison, known as the Bunker, where
they were held down by these male guards and forcibly anaesthetized
without any pre-operative care, and with their bodies still in a filthy
condition from walking around the camp. The experimental subject
Piasecka stated in her affidavit as follows:

    “I resisted and hit Trommer in the face and called him a bandit.
    He called some SS male guards who threw me on the floor and held
    me down while ether was poured over my face. There was no mask.
    I fought and resisted until I lost consciousness. I was
    completely dressed and my legs were filthy dirty from walking in
    the camp. As far as I know my legs were not washed. I saw my
    sister during this time unconscious on a stretcher, vomiting
    mucous.” (_NO-864, Pros. Ex. 229_)

Piasecka stated that this operation was carried out by Dr. Villmann who
was an assistant doctor at Hohenlychen. A few weeks later two other
assistant doctors to Gebhardt came and operated on her right leg.
(_NO-864, Pros. Ex. 229._)

In his testimony Gebhardt attempted to disassociate himself from these
experiments. He admitted however that he received information from
Stumpfegger about the experiments. (_Tr. pp. 4082, 4087-9._) Stumpfegger
was a former assistant of Gebhardt’s and he stayed at Hohenlychen during
the course of these experiments. Fischer assisted Stumpfegger and
Gebhardt. (_Tr. pp. 4230, 4090._) It is further established by Fischer’s
own affidavit that the plan for the experiments was worked out with the
knowledge and approval of Gebhardt.

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

        _EXTRACT FROM THE FINAL PLEA FOR DEFENDANT GEBHARDT_[43]

_The Experiments Concerning Bone, Muscle, and Nerve Regeneration and Bone
                               Grafting_

The defendant Gebhardt is also charged in the indictment with particular
responsibility in the experiments, whose object according to the
indictment was the examination of the conditions under which the
regeneration of bones, muscles, and nerves resulted, and under what
conditions the grafting of bones was possible.

With regard to the general reasons why there can be no question of
guilt, I refer to the statements I have already made in connection with
the sulfanilamide experiments. These experiments, too, were occasioned
by conditions of war and were to open up new ways of treating seriously
wounded persons.

The evidence, however, has shown that the defendant Gebhardt, with a
single exception, had nothing to do with these experiments. These
experiments, insofar as they were concerned with the regeneration and
grafting of bones, were carried out by Sturmbannfuehrer Dr. Stumpfegger.
It is correct that Dr. Stumpfegger was assistant doctor in the clinic in
Hohenlychen before the war, and to that extent subordinate to its chief
doctor, Dr. Gebhardt. Dr. Stumpfegger, however, left in the early years
of the war, and in the year 1942 became consulting physician to Reich
Leader SS Himmler and later consulting physician to Hitler. The
experiments carried out by him in Ravensbrueck were carried out on his
own responsibility, and upon direct orders from the Reich Leader SS
Himmler. Dr. Stumpfegger at that time was neither under the military nor
the medical supervision of the defendant Karl Gebhardt. For the
remainder, Dr. Stumpfegger limited himself to carrying out experiments
in the removal and grafting of so-called bone splinters, the exact
number of which can no longer be determined now, but which certainly did
not exceed six to eight. These were aseptic operations, which
constituted no danger to the life of the experimental subjects. The
evidence has shown that the experimental subjects from whom the bone
splinters were removed suffered no reduction in the function of their
limbs. Besides, the examination of the transplantation process of bones
achieved a research result that could not be attained from the animal
experiments because of the variety of the stipulated regeneration areas
caused by the location of the various species and for the other reasons
given by Gebhardt.

The evidence has further shown that the experimental subjects were
members of the resistance movement who had been condemned to death and
who were in this way given an opportunity to obtain a pardon, and so to
escape execution. In view of the fact that no direct responsibility for
these experiments falls on the defendant Gebhardt, it is not necessary
to go into the purpose of these experiments further at this time. It
should, however, be emphasized once more that the experiments were to
open up new possibilities in wartime surgery and restorative surgery on
the wounded. In 1944, Dr. Ludwig Stumpfegger published the results of
his experiments in the periodical for surgery the editor of which was
Geheimrat Dr. Sauerbruch (vol. 259, issue 9-12) and this article was
also made available to the public in book form. I have submitted to the
Court (_Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser 6, Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser
Ex. 9_) a review of this work in the periodical, “Clinic and Practice”
of February 1946 and refer to this for the details.

The defendant Karl Gebhardt would certainly not have hesitated to admit
his responsibility for these experiments if he had actually been more
closely connected with them, and if the experiments had taken place at
his behest or under his medical supervision. There would have been
little reason to deny this responsibility since the experiments
concerned were completely without danger; they resulted in no reduction
of the function of the limbs, and, moreover, no fatalities occurred.
Furthermore, corresponding to the general practice in Germany, the work
of Dr. Stumpfegger under the scientific responsibility of the defendant
Gebhardt would have been made public if he had been directly concerned
with the experiments, and if they had been carried out under his
scientific supervision. Nor did the evidence prove that there were any
experiments carried out in connection with muscle and nerve regeneration
under the scientific supervision and by order of the defendant Gebhardt.
It even seems doubtful that any such experiments were ever carried out
in Ravensbrueck. The witnesses called before this court were unable to
make any statements about this matter and it may be taken for granted
that in any case the defendant Karl Gebhardt had nothing to do with
these experiments. There was no point in carrying out such experiments
as, long before the war, the surgical technique had already been
developed on scientific principles and set down in a system. It covers
plastic surgical bone regeneration but does not advocate free
transplantation.

The only new field of scientific research taken up by Dr. Gebhardt
during the war was that of experiments connected with nerve operations.
These experiments were, however, carried out on animals by the special
order and under the scientific supervision of the defendant Gebhardt
himself. I am here referring to the affidavits given by the witnesses
Koestler (_Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser 22, Gebhardt, Fischer,
Oberheuser Ex. 21_) and Brunner (_Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser 21,
Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser Ex. 20_), and to the statements made by
the defendant Gebhardt himself on the witness stand. I am further
referring to the report of the Third Session East of the Consulting
Specialists on 24-26 May 1943 (_Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser 3,
Gebhardt, Fischer, Oberheuser Ex. 10_) which I have presented in Court
and which proves that during this session he himself and the
aforementioned witness, Dr. Koestler, spoke about grafting operations in
cases of nervous paralysis. This is the same report to which the witness
Dr. Koestler referred in his affidavit of 27 February 1947.

Furthermore, I wish to draw the attention of this Court to the lecture
given by the defendant Gebhardt in the same report on “Gymnastic Therapy
and Mobilization of the Joints” which is also based upon clinical
experience in Hohenlychen and also has nothing whatever to do with
medical experiments on human beings. The evidence has further proved
that the defendant Gebhardt was concerned with the transplantation of
bones in one case only. This experiment was the free transplantation of
a shoulder blade from one person to another. The defendant Gebhardt has
given a detailed account of this on the witness stand and I am referring
you to his statement on this point. Generally speaking, the following
has to be added: The free transplantation of bones from one person to
another is one of the great problems of restorative surgery which has
yet to be solved. For decades, physicians have been trying to find a
solution to this problem. As early as the end of the First World War,
Geheimrat Lexer, the great teacher of the defendant Gebhardt, conducted
experiments along these lines in 23 cases, aiming at the replacement of
completely destroyed bones. The terrible injuries which occurred during
the Second World War made this problem still more urgent and it is,
therefore, understandable that in view of the progress Dr. Stumpfegger
had made in his research, he was ordered by the Reich Leader SS to make
use of this research result in the direct transplantation of bones. The
defendant Gebhardt himself did not take any steps in this direction. He
himself has stated his fundamental attitude as to this question and I
refer to his own statements. Only in one case did he give his approval,
viz: when Dr. Stumpfegger carried out the experiment of transplanting a
shoulder blade. The order to do this was given by the Reich Leader SS.
This experiment was justified in this particular case as it took place
for the benefit of a patient in serious danger. The experimental person
from whom the shoulder blade was taken was also a member of the
resistance movement and she, too, thus escaped execution. Furthermore,
the shoulder blade in question belonged to a hand restricted in its
function.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_

   Doc. No.       Pros. Ex. No.         Description of Document      Page
    NO-875             230         Affidavit of Mrs. Zdenka            400
                                     Nedvedova-Nejedla, M. D., of
                                     Prague, concerning experimental
                                     operations conducted on fellow
                                     inmates at Ravensbrueck
                                     concentration camp.
    NO-861             232         Affidavit of Sofia Maczka, 16       402
                                     April 1946, concerning
                                     experimental operations on
                                     inmates of the Ravensbrueck
                                     concentration camp.
    NO-579             288         Phosphorous burns artificially      904
                                     inflicted on inmates of the
                                     Buchenwald concentration camp.
                                     (_See Selections from the
                                     Photographic Evidence of the
                                     Prosecution._)

                           _Defense Documents_

   Doc. No.        Def. Ex. No.         Description of Document      Page
   Gebhardt,    Gebhardt, Fischer, Extract from “Clinic and            405
   Fischer,      Oberheuser Ex. 9    Practice”, weekly journal for
 Oberheuser 6                        the practicing physician,
                                     regarding bone transplantation.
   Gebhardt,    Gebhardt, Fischer, Extracts from affidavit of Dr.      407
   Fischer,     Oberheuser Ex. 20    Karl Friedrich Brunner, 14
 Oberheuser 21                       March 1945, concerning
                                     scientific experiments
                                     conducted at the clinic of
                                     Hohenlychen.
   Gebhardt,    Gebhardt, Fischer, Extract from affidavit of Dr.       408
   Fischer,     Oberheuser Ex. 21    Josef Koestler, 27 February
 Oberheuser 22                       1947, concerning Dr. Gebhardt’s
                                     activities.

                               _Testimony_

Extracts from the testimony of prosecution witness Miss Karolewska     409
Extract from the testimony of the prosecution expert witness Dr. Leo   417
  Alexander.

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-875
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 230

AFFIDAVIT OF MRS. ZDENKA NEDVEDOVA-NEJEDLA, M. D., OF PRAGUE, CONCERNING
  EXPERIMENTAL OPERATIONS CONDUCTED ON FELLOW INMATES AT RAVENSBRUECK
                           CONCENTRATION CAMP

1. I, Zdenka Nedvedova-Nejedla, M. D. came to Ravensbrueck concentration
camp in a transport from Auschwitz on 19 August 1943, and I worked in
the sick bay as a doctor prisoner from September 1943 until 30 May 1945.
In the beginning I worked in the Department for Contagious Diseases at
Station No. 1 and the Ambulatory. Besides this, I was in charge of
Sucking Block from the fall of 1944 until May 1945.

2. Of the victims of experimental operations, I nursed personally Helena
Piasecka, who was suffering from chronic osteomyelitis after completed
operation of both shin bones. I knew that these operations were
performed under Professor Gebhardt’s supervision by Doctor Fischer, and
a woman, Doctor Oberheuser, from the SS Hospital Hohenlychen, but I do
not know which one of them had operated on Piasecka. The operation was
performed in the “bunker,” camp prison, where there were not even the
most primitive sanitary installations and even fewer aseptic
installations. Her general condition was good, but the defect in both
bones made her an invalid for life. Before the operation Piasecka was
completely healthy.

3. All women on whom experimental operations had been performed were
placed in one block and they were generally known as “rabbits,” so that
I saw the effects of the operations on those women who had survived
them. In each case of abbreviation of limbs, muscular atrophy of the
highest degree set in, proving a grave injury of nerves during
operations and deep indrawn scars where parts of muscles had festered
away.

4. From lay reports of nursing personnel without any special training, I
tried to construct the types of experimental operations.

_a._ Culture of virulent germs (streptococci, staphylococci, maybe even
tetanus and gas phlegmon) were injected subcutaneously, intramuscularly,
and even directly into bones. These were the attempts to produce
osteomyelitis experimentally. The resulting sepsis was checked by daily
examination of the blood and urine to test the effectiveness of new
medicaments of the sulfanilamide group.

_b._ Parts of long bones, as much as 5 centimeters (fibulae and tibiae),
were removed and in some cases replaced by metal or left without
connection. These operations were probably to prove the inability of
bone to grow without periosteum.

_c._ High amputations were performed; for example, even whole arms with
shoulder blade or legs with osiliaca were amputated. These operations
were performed mostly on insane women who were immediately killed after
the operation by a quick injection of evipan. All specimens gained in
operations were carefully wrapped up in sterile gauze and immediately
transported to the SS hospital nearby (Hohenlychen presumably), where
they were to be used in the attempt to heal the injured limbs of wounded
German soldiers.

5. Operations were performed on 1 Yugoslav, 1 Czech, 2 Ukrainian, 2
German, and about 18 Polish women, of whom 6 were operated on by force
in the bunker with the help of SS men. Two of them were shot after their
operation wounds had healed. After operations, no one except SS nurses
was admitted to the persons operated on, whole nights they lay without
any assistance and it was not permitted to administer sedatives even
against the most intensive postoperational pains. From the persons
operated on, 11 died or were killed, and 71 remained invalids for life.

6. The report mentioned in paragraphs 3 to 5 was prepared on the basis
of evidence given to me at Ravensbrueck in the autumn of 1943 by these
fellow prisoners: Sofia Maczka, M. D., Poland; Isa Siczynska, medical
student, Krakow, Poland; Jola Krzyzanowska, medical student, Krakow,
Poland; Krisa Iwanska, medical student, Krakow, Poland; Emilie Skrbkova,
medical student, Praha, Czechoslovakia; and Inka Katnarova, M. D.,
Hradec Kralove, Czechoslovakia.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-861
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 232

 AFFIDAVIT OF SOFIA MACZKA[44], 16 APRIL 1946, CONCERNING EXPERIMENTAL
      OPERATIONS ON INMATES OF THE RAVENSBRUECK CONCENTRATION CAMP

                 *        *        *        *        *

Information concerning the experimental operations which took place in
Ravensbrueck concentration camp.

The operations were carried out in the period between the summer of 1942
and the summer of 1943. The operations were conducted in the camp
hospital, under the direction of Professor Dr. Gebhardt, SS
Brigadefuehrer. Professor Gebhardt was the head of the Hohenlychen
sanatorium at Hohenlychen (Mecklenburg). The operations were conducted
with the help of Dr. Fischer, who was Professor Gebhardt’s assistant.
There was also another assistant whose name I do not know. The following
camp doctors participated in this matter: Dr. Herta Oberheuser, Dr. Rolf
Rosenthal, Dr. Schiedlausky; all German nurses who were employed there
at the time and two German prisoners (Schutzhaftgefangene), Gerda
Quernheim and Fina Pautz, gave assistance. Polish political prisoners in
protective custody, from the transports from Warsaw and Lublin,
numbering 74, were chosen as victims. All those who were chosen were
young, healthy, and well-built women. Many were college or university
students. The youngest was 16 years of age, the oldest 48 years of age.
The operations were to be carried out for scientific purposes, but they
had nothing to do with science. They were carried out under horrible
conditions. The doctors and the assisting personnel were not trained
properly medically. Conditions were neither aseptic nor hygienic. After
operations, the patients were left in shocking rooms without medical
help, without nursing or supervision. The dressings were made according
to the whim of the doctors with unsterilized instruments and compresses.
Dr. Rosenthal, who did most of the dressings, excelled himself in
sadism. In the summer of 1943 the last operations were carried out in
the “bunker”. “Bunker” is the name of the horrible prison in the camp.
The victims were taken there because they resisted, and there in the
cell their dirty legs were operated on. This was the “scientific
atmosphere” in which the “scientific” operations were carried out.

All operations were carried out on the leg and all under anesthetic. The
operations were divided into two main groups:

1. Operations for infecting the patient.

2. Experimental aseptic operations.

The soft part of the calf of the leg was opened and the open wounds were
infected with bacteria which were introduced into the wounds. The
following were used: staphylococcus aureus, oedema malignum (clostridium
oedematis maligni), gas gangrene bacillus (clostridium perfrim gens),
and tetanus. Weronika Kraska was infected with tetanus. She died after a
few days. Kazimiera Kurowska was infected with gas gangrene bacillus;
she died after a few days. The following were infected with oedema
malignum: Aniela Lefanowicz, Zofia Kiecol, Alfreda Prus, and Maria
Kusmierczuk. The first three died after a few days; Maria Kusmierczuk
survived the infection. She was lying ill for more than a year and
became a cripple, but she is alive and is living evidence of the
experiments. Mostly pyrogen stimulants were employed. The wounds were
stitched after the infection and serious illness began. Many of the
patients were ill for months and almost all of them became cripples.

Why did Professor Gebhardt, with his education, carry out these
experiments? To test the new drugs of the German pharmaceutical
industry; mostly cibazol and albucid were used. Even tetanus was treated
in that way.

The results of the treatment were not checked, or if they were, it was
done in such an inadequate and superficial manner, that it was of no
value.

The aseptic, experimental operations consisted of bone experiments,
muscle experiments, and nerve experiments.

The bone experiments were checked by X-ray photographs. As ward
attendant I had to do all the X-ray photographs. In this way I was given
the opportunity of gaining an insight in this matter. The following were
carried out: (_a_) bone breaking; (_b_) bone transplantation; and (_c_)
bone grafting.

_a._ On the operating table, the bones of the lower part of both legs
were broken into several pieces with a hammer, later they were joined
with clips (for instance Janiga Marczewska) or without clips (for
instance Leonarda Bien) and were put into a plaster case. This was
removed after several days and the legs remained without plaster casts
until they healed.

_b._ The transplantations were carried out in the usual way, except that
whole pieces of the fibula were cut out, sometimes with periosteum,
sometimes without periosteum. The most typical operation of this kind
was carried out on Krystyna Dabska.

_c._ Bone grafting. These operations were with the school of Professor
Gebhardt. During the preparatory operation two bone splints were put on
the tibia of both legs; during the second operation such bone splints
were cut out together with the attached bones and were taken to
Hohenlychen. As a supplement to the bone splint operations such
operations were also carried out on two prisoners in protective custody
who suffered from deformation of bones of the osteomyelitis type. These
two were not Poles, one of them was a German who was a Jehovah’s
Witness, Maria Konwitschka, and the other was a Ukrainian, Maria
Hretschana. It was interesting for Professor Gebhardt to see how the
diseased bones would react to such an operation.

The muscle experiments consisted of many operations, always on the same
spot, the upper or lower part of the leg. At each further operation
larger and larger pieces of muscles were cut out. Once a small piece of
bone was planted into a muscle (this happened to Babinska). During nerve
operations parts of nerves were removed (for instance Barbara
Pytlewska).

What problem did Professor Gebhardt and his school wish to solve by
these experiments? The problem of the regeneration of bones, muscles,
and nerves.

Was the thing carried out? No. It was not checked at all, or only
insufficiently. I do not know what was done at Hohenlychen with those
pieces of bone, muscle, and nerves which were cut out and taken there.

What was the fate of the patients after they left the hospital? Almost
all of the patients became cripples, and suffered very much as a result
of these operations. Even more severe was the moral torture inflicted on
them since they lived under the conviction that they would all be shot
in order that they should not be evidence of these murderous operations.
The camp authorities—Commandant Suhren, Adjutant Braeuning and Chief
Supervisor Binz—ensured through their orders that the victims should
not forget that they were condemned to death. In the meantime, six of
the patients were shot after surviving the operations.

                 *        *        *        *        *

As a supplement to these operations I am submitting a description of
“special operations” which were carried out at the same time.

A few abnormal prisoners (mentally ill) were chosen and brought to the
operating table, and amputations of the whole leg (at the hip joint)
were carried out, or on others, amputation of the whole arm (with the
shoulder blade) were carried out. Afterwards the victims (if they still
lived) were killed by means of evipan injections and the leg or arm was
taken to Hohenlychen and served the purposes known to Professor
Gebhardt. Ten such operations, approximately, were carried out.

During the whole of the time these operations were carried out, I was
employed as a worker in the ward and investigated this matter risking my
own life, with the idea that it was my duty, if I were saved, to tell
the truth to the world. I conclude my statement with two questions: What
kind of recompense can the world offer to those who were operated on in
such a manner? What kind of justice has the world for those who carried
out such operations?

                                     [Signed] DR. MACZKA, ZOFIA
                                              Dr. med. Zofia Maczka
                                              X-ray specialist from
                                                Krakow. Former political
                                                prisoner in protective
                                                custody No. 7403 at
                                                Ravensbrueck, now in
                                                Stockholm,
                                                Serafimerlasarettet,
                                                Roentgen.

Stockholm, 16 April 1946

                            TRANSLATION OF GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER
                                DOCUMENT 6
                            GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER DEFENSE
                                EXHIBIT 9

 EXTRACT FROM “CLINIC AND PRACTICE”, WEEKLY JOURNAL FOR THE PRACTICING
               PHYSICIAN, REGARDING BONE TRANSPLANTATION

Editors: Dr. Herbert Volkmann and Dr. V. E. Mertens, Munich 2,
Alfonsstrasse 1

No. 1                    Munich, February 1946                 Volume 1

[page 12]

                       _Discussions and extracts_

[page 14]

                               _Surgery_

Ludwig Stumpfegger—Hohenlychen: The free autoplastic bone
transplantation in the restorative surgery of limbs—experiences and
results.

During the past 10 years, 471 free autoplastic bone transplantations
were carried out in Hohenlychen. Recent research results clearly showed
that apart from the osteoplastic activity, a metaplastic formation of
new bone occurs in the tissue. The newly formed bone trabeculae between
transplant and old bone begin to connect with those formed in the
osteoid tissue in the seventh week, and in this way constitute the bone
connection between the graft and the original bone which have completely
grown together in the ninth week. After the twelfth week no old bone can
be detected in the entire region of the original graft, but only new
bone trabecula. The question of the ever present hematoma can be
answered in this way: a blood extravasation, lying in the gap between
the transplant and the old bone, and not being subject to pressure,
represents an adequate stimulation to the mesenchymal germinal tissue
formation, while the large hemorrhage represents a negative stimulation
and permits only a scarry connection of the transplant and the defective
stump. The periosteum is no more important than the other layers, it is
transplanted with the bone, because in connection with the bone it has
osteogenetic properties, but above all it effects a speedy supply from
the surroundings. A careful technique must be employed to spare the
tissue layers, and bleeding must be stanched. Foreign bodies in the
shape of wire slings to hold the transplant usually heal well into the
body. Firm fixation in a plaster cast safeguards the result. When the
graft has taken, a careful start with remedial exercises may be made in
the third or fourth month. The clinical use of free bone
transplantations is discussed with the help of numerous examples and
many X-ray illustrations. The first task of the bone transplant to
bridge over a gap in the bone is to provide sufficient support for the
defective stump and, therefore, it has to be fairly strong. Bone
splinters in the lower arm have roentgenologically completely taken
after 1-1½ years, those in the tibia after 1½-2 years. The free bone
transplant, some distance from the joints, has proved to be particularly
valuable with the usual dislocations of the shoulder and the hip joints.
The overlapping bone ridge prevents the bone from coming out of the
articular cavity. In the course of years, the piece lying in the soft
parts is considerably reduced, so that only a small bone ridge remains.
The graft effects a regeneration of the damaged edge of the articular
cavity and in this way prevents further dislocation. Bone transplants in
bone gaps after removal of growths are subject to special conditions of
taking. Hyperemic phenomena in the zone of the tumor edge in the form of
a mild inflammation, possibly also fermentation processes, accelerate
the taking of the transplant compared with the process in healthy
tissue. Increased local resorption processes, occasionally with
spontaneous fractures, infrequently prevail, but they again are apt to
heal well. In wounds which heal with difficulty owing to suppurative
inflammations, there is a great danger of the transplant being pushed
out. When the whole transplant region is inflamed, total sequestration
cannot be stopped. If suppuration remains localized, partial
sequestration of the transplantation must be awaited. (_German Surgical
Journal, 1944, Vol. 299, H. 9-12. H. Floercken-Frankfurt am Main._)

                            TRANSLATION OF GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER
                                DOCUMENT 21
                            GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER DEFENSE
                                EXHIBIT 20

 EXTRACTS FROM AFFIDAVIT OF DR. KARL FRIEDRICH BRUNNER, 14 MARCH 1943,
CONCERNING SCIENTIFIC EXPERIMENTS CONDUCTED AT THE CLINIC OF HOHENLYCHEN

                 *        *        *        *        *

I can state the following regarding the scientific experiments at the
clinic [of Hohenlychen]: It was in accordance with the principles of the
clinic and, therefore, of the chief and his deputy to collect scientific
results arrived at through clinical observations. All reports at
congresses and lectures as well as publications were based on these
results. The scientific work and research were normally determined by
the observations made on the patients. In addition to this, and in order
to clarify the question of surgical treatment of nerve injuries,
experiments on dogs were carried out in close collaboration with
Gebhardt—first by Dr. Koestler in 1939-40, later by myself from 1943 to
the end of the war. I was ordered by Dr. Gebhardt to carry out the
experiments on animals at the training and experimental station for dogs
[Hundelehr- und Versuchsanstalt], which establishment was situated
outside the concentration camp Ravensbrueck, and I was strictly
cautioned not to enter into any kind of contact with the concentration
camp itself. The animal experiments were strictly continued until the
end of the war. The results were never published because of war
conditions.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Regarding Dr. Stumpfegger, I can state that he was an assistant of the
clinic in peacetime, before I arrived. At the outbreak of war in 1939 he
joined the Waffen SS, and was then, as far as I know, from 1942 onwards
an escorting physician of Himmler. I did not see Dr. Stumpfegger on my
return to Hohenlychen in autumn 1943, nor had he any official connection
with the clinic up to the end of the war, either in a medical or in a
military sense. He did not have to report his return or departure to the
chief physician or to his deputy. His family, however, still lived at
Hohenlychen. I still met him occasionally outside the medical sphere. I
emphasize that during my presence at the clinic from 1 September 1943 up
to the end of the war, as far as I know—and finally I was directing the
clinic—no assistant was drafted from Hohenlychen to Ravensbrueck.

I know that the specialist in pulmonary diseases, Dr. Heissmeyer, was
working as an assistant and later as chief physician in the so-called
sanatorium Hohenlychen even before Professor Gebhardt took over
Hohenlychen. This sanatorium was strictly detached from the surgical
wards of the hospital at Hohenlychen and was not under the professional
supervision of the chief physician nor of his deputy; i. e., Dr.
Heissmeyer looked after his patients without any supervision by the
surgeon, he made no reports to the chief or his deputy, he did not
participate in the daily discussions of the physicians, he had his own
staff of assistants and carried out his treatments and operations
independently; he also planned his duty journeys independently and made
these without reporting to the chief or his deputy on departure or
return.

                            TRANSLATION OF GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER
                                DOCUMENT 22
                            GEBHARDT, FISCHER, OBERHEUSER DEFENSE
                                EXHIBIT 21

     EXTRACT FROM AFFIDAVIT OF DR. JOSE KOESTLER, 27 FEBRUARY 1947,
                  CONCERNING DR. GEBHARDT’S ACTIVITIES

                 *        *        *        *        *

When Professor Dr. Karl Gebhardt and I, at the Third Conference of
Consulting Specialists of the German Wehrmacht in May 1943, lectured on
surgical aid for peripheral nerve damage, we were, on the one hand,
interpreting the results of animal experiments carried out on dogs from
1938 to 1940 in the Langenbeck-Virchow Hospital, Berlin, and in the
institutes of Professor Holz (Institute for Experimental Hormone and
Cancer Research) and Professor Ostertag (Pathological Institute), and,
on the other hand, announcing surgical methods as they had been
frequently used during the previous years.

Under the title of “Preparatory and Restorative Surgery in cases of
Peripheral Nerve Damage,” I recorded these experiences in the “German
Journal for Surgery,” volume 259, Nos. 1-4, 1943, and in my habilitation
paper (1943, University of Berlin).

I emphasize expressly that this series of experiments was carried out
exclusively on animals.

From 1 July 1938 to 26 August 1939 I was in the Red Cross hospital at
Hohenlychen (Department for Sport and Industrial Injuries). During the
following war years, after I was drafted into the Wehrmacht, I worked
there repeatedly for short periods. I am convinced that the medical care
there was on an especially high level and that Professor Gebhardt as
chief physician did everything possible to improve the treatment and its
results.

 EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF PROSECUTION WITNESS MISS KAROLEWSKA[45]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. MCHANEY: What is your name, please?

WITNESS KAROLEWSKA: Karolewska.

Q. And that is spelled K-a-r-o-l-e-w-s-k-a?

A. Yes.

Q. Were you born on 15 March 1909 at Yeroman?

A. I was born on 15 March 1909 in Yeroman.

Q. You are a citizen of Poland?

A. Yes, I am a Polish citizen.

Q. And have you come here as a voluntary witness?

A. Yes, I came here as a voluntary witness.

Q. What is your home address?

A. Warsaw, Inzynierska Street, No. 9, Flat No. 25.

Q. Are you married?

A. No.

Q. Are your parents living?

A. No, my parents are dead.

Q. Will you tell the Tribunal what education you have received?

A. I finished elementary school, and completed the training school for
teachers in 1928.

Q. And what did you do between 1928 and the beginning of the war in
1939?

A. I worked as a teacher in a children’s school in Grudenz.

Q. And when did you leave that post?

A. I finished my work in June 1939 and went on holiday.

Q. And did you go back to this position after your holiday?

A. No, I did not go back because the war broke out and I stayed in
Lublin.

Q. And what did you do while you were in Lublin?

A. I lived with my sister and did not work at all.

Q. Were you a member of the Polish Resistance Movement?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. And what did you do in the Polish Resistance Movement?

A. I was a messenger.

Q. And were you ever arrested for your activity in the Resistance
Movement?

A. I was arrested on the 13th of February 1941 by the Gestapo.

Q. Was your sister arrested with you?

A. Two sisters and two brothers-in-law were arrested with me on the same
day.

Q. What happened to you after you were arrested?

A. I was taken to the Gestapo.

Q. And what did the Gestapo do with you?

A. The first day the Gestapo took down my personal data and sent me to
the prison in Lublin.

Q. And then what happened? Just go on and tell the complete story about
what the Gestapo did with you and where you went.

A. I stayed 2 weeks in the prison in Lublin and then I was taken again
to the Gestapo. There I was interrogated and they wanted to force me to
confess what kind of work I used to do in the Resistance Movement. The
Gestapo wanted me to give them the names of persons with whom I worked.
I did not want to tell them the names and, therefore, I was beaten. I
was beaten by one Gestapo man, with brief intervals, for a very long
time. Then I was taken to a cell. Two days later, at night, I was taken
again to the Gestapo for interrogation. There I was beaten again. I
stayed in the Gestapo office one week and then I was taken back into the
prison in Lublin. I stayed in the prison till 21 September 1941. Then I
was transported with other prisoners to the concentration camp
Ravensbrueck, where I arrived on the 23d of September 1941.

Q. Now, Witness, before you continue, will you tell the Tribunal whether
you were ever tried by any court for the crime of being a member of the
Resistance Movement?

A. I was only interrogated by the Gestapo and I think that the sentence
must have been passed in my absence because no sentence was ever read
out to me.

Q. All right. Will you tell the Tribunal what happened to you at
Ravensbrueck?

A. At Ravensbrueck our dresses were taken away from us and we received
the regular prison dress. Then I was sent to the block and I stayed in
quarantine for 3 weeks. After 3 weeks we were taken to work. The work
was hard physical work. In the spring I was given other work and I was
transferred to the workshop, which was called in German “Betrieb.” The
work I did there was also very hard, and one week I had to work in the
daytime and the next week at night. In the spring the living conditions
in the camp grew worse and worse, and hunger began to reign in the camp.
The food portions were smaller. We were undernourished, very exhausted,
and we had no strength to work. In the spring of the same year, shoes
and stockings were taken away from us and we had to walk barefoot. The
gravel in the camp hurt our feet. The most tiring was the so-called
“roll calls”, which we had to stand several hours, sometimes even 4
hours. If a prisoner tried to put a piece of paper underneath her feet,
she was beaten and ill-treated in an inhuman way. We had to stand at
attention at the roll call place and we were not allowed to move our
lips, because then we were supposed to be praying and we were not
allowed to pray.

Q. Now, Witness, were you operated on while you were in the Ravensbrueck
concentration camp?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. When did that happen?

A. On 22 July 1942, 75 prisoners from our transport that come from
Lublin were summoned to the chief of the camp. We stood outside the camp
office, and present were Kogel, Mandel, and one person whom I later
recognized as Dr. Fischer. We were afterwards sent back to the block and
we were told to wait for further instructions. On the 25th of July, all
the women from the transport of Lublin were summoned by Mandel, who told
us that we were not allowed to work outside the camp. Also, five women
from the transport that came from Warsaw were summoned with us at the
same time. We were not allowed to work outside the camp. The next day 75
women were summoned again and we had to stand in front of the hospital
in the camp. Present were Schiedlausky, Oberheuser, Rosenthal, Kogel,
and the man whom I afterwards recognized as Dr. Fischer.

Q. Now, Witness, do you see Oberheuser in the defendants’ dock here?

INTERPRETER: The witness asks for permission to go near to the dock to
be able to see them.

MR. MCHANEY: Please do.

(Witness walks to dock and points to Dr. Oberheuser.)

MR. MCHANEY: And Fischer?

(Witness points to Dr. Fischer.)

MR. MCHANEY: I will ask that the record show that the witness properly
identified the defendants, Oberheuser and Fischer.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: The record will show that the witness correctly
identified the defendants Oberheuser and Fischer.

MR. MCHANEY: Witness, you have told the Tribunal that in July 1942, some
75 Polish girls, who were in the transport from Lublin, were called
before the camp doctors in Ravensbrueck.

WITNESS KAROLEWSKA: Yes.

Q. Now, were any of these girls selected for an operation?

A. On this day we did not know why we were called before the camp
doctors and on the same day 10 out of 25 girls were taken to the
hospital, but we did not know why. Four of them came back and six stayed
in the hospital. On the same day six of them came back to the block
after having received some injection, but we did not know what kind of
injection. On the 1st of August, those six girls were called to the
hospital again; those girls who received injections were kept in the
hospital, but we could not get in touch with them to hear from them why
they were put in the hospital. A few days later, one of my comrades
succeeded in getting close to the hospital and learned from one of the
prisoners that all were in bed and that their legs were in casts. On the
14th of August, the same year, I was called to the hospital and my name
was written on a piece of paper. I did not know why. Besides me, eight
other girls were called to the hospital. We were called at a time when
executions usually took place and I thought I was going to be executed
because some girls had been shot down before. In the hospital we were
put to bed and the ward in which we stayed was locked. We were not told
what we were to do in the hospital and when one of my comrades put the
question she got no answer but an ironical smile. Then a German nurse
arrived and gave me an injection in my leg. After this injection I
vomited and I was weak. Then I was put on a hospital cot and they
brought me to the operating room. There, Dr. Schiedlausky and Rosenthal
gave me the second intravenous injection in my arm. A while before, I
noticed Dr. Fischer, who left the operating theater and had operating
gloves on. Then I lost consciousness and when I revived I noticed that I
was in a proper hospital ward. I recovered consciousness for a while and
I felt severe pain in my leg. Then I lost consciousness again. I
regained consciousness in the morning, and then I noticed that my leg
was in a cast from the ankle up to the knee and I felt very great pain
in this leg and had a high temperature. I noticed also that my leg was
swollen from the toes up to the groin. The pain was increasing and the
temperature, too, and the next day I noticed that some liquid was
flowing from my leg. The third day I was put on a hospital trolley and
taken to the dressing room. Then I saw Dr. Fischer again. He had on an
operating gown and rubber gloves on his hands. A blanket was put over my
eyes and I did not know what was done with my leg but I felt great pain
and I had the impression that something must have been cut out of my
leg. Those present were Schiedlausky, Rosenthal, and Oberheuser. After
the dressing was changed I was again put in the regular hospital ward.
Three days later I was again taken to the dressing room, and the
dressing was changed by Doctor Fischer with the assistance of the same
doctors, and I was also blindfolded. I was then sent back to the regular
hospital ward. The next dressings were made by the camp doctors. Two
weeks later we were all taken to the operating theater again, and put on
the operating tables. The bandage was removed, and that was the first
time I saw my leg. The incision went so deep that I could see the bone.
We were told then that there was a doctor from Hohenlychen, Doctor
Gebhardt, who would come and examine us. We were waiting for his arrival
for 3 hours, lying on our tables. When he came, a sheet was put over our
eyes, but they removed the sheet and I saw him for a short moment. Then
we were taken back to our regular wards. On 8 September I went back to
the block. I couldn’t walk. The pus was draining from my leg; the leg
was swollen up and I could not walk. In the block, I stayed in bed for
one week; then I was called to the hospital again. I could not walk and
I was carried by my comrades. In the hospital I met some of my comrades
who were there after the operation. This time I was sure I was going to
be executed because I saw an ambulance standing outside the office,
which was used by the Germans to transport people intended for
execution. Then we were taken to the dressing room where Doctor
Oberheuser and Doctor Schiedlausky examined our legs. We were put to bed
again, and on the same day, in the afternoon, I was taken to the
operating theater and the second operation was performed on my leg. I
was put to sleep in the same way as before, having received an
injection. This time I again saw Doctor Fischer. I woke up in the
regular hospital ward, and I felt a much greater pain and had a higher
temperature.

The symptoms were the same. The leg was swollen and the pus flowed from
my leg. After this operation, the dressings were changed by Dr. Fischer
every 3 days. More than 10 days afterwards, we were again taken to the
operating theater and put on the table; and we were told that Dr.
Gebhardt was going to come to examine our legs. We waited for a long
time. Then he arrived and examined our legs while we were blindfolded.
This time other people arrived with Dr. Gebhardt, but I don’t know their
names, and I don’t remember their faces. Then we were carried on
hospital cots back to our rooms. After this operation I felt still
worse, and I could not move. While I was in the hospital, Dr. Oberheuser
treated me cruelly.

When I was in my room I remarked to fellow prisoners that we were
operated on in very bad conditions and left here in this room and that
we were not even given a chance to recover. This remark must have been
heard by a German nurse who was sitting in the corridor, because the
door of our room leading to the corridor was opened. The German nurse
entered the room and told us to get up and dress. We answered that we
could not follow her order because we had great pains in our legs and we
could not walk. Then the German nurse came into our room with Dr.
Oberheuser. Dr. Oberheuser told us to dress and come to the dressing
room. We put on our dresses; and, being unable to walk, we had to hop on
one leg into the operating theater. After one hop we had to rest. Dr.
Oberheuser did not allow anybody to help us. When we arrived at the
operating theater, quite exhausted, Dr. Oberheuser appeared and told us
to go back, because the change of dressing would not take place that
day. I could not walk, but somebody, a prisoner whose name I don’t
remember, helped me back to the room.

Q. Witness, you have told the Tribunal that you were operated on the
second time on the 16th of September 1942? Is that right?

A. Yes.

Q. When did you leave the hospital after this second operation?

A. After the second operation I left the hospital on 6 October.

Q. Was your leg healed at that time?

A. My leg was swollen up, caused me great pain, and the pus drained from
my leg.

Q. Were you able to work?

A. I was unable to work, and I had to stay in bed because I could not
walk.

Q. Do you remember when you got up out of bed and were able to walk?

A. I stayed in bed several weeks, and then I got up and tried to walk.

Q. How long was it until your leg was healed?

A. The pus was flowing from my leg till June 1943; and at that time my
wound was healed.

Q. Were you operated on again?

A. Yes, I was operated on again in the bunker.

Q. In the bunker? That is not in the hospital?

A. Not in the hospital but in the bunker.

Q. Will you explain to the Tribunal how that happened?

A. May I ask permission to tell something which happened in March 1943,
March or February 1943?

Q. All right.

A. At the end of February 1943, Dr. Oberheuser called us and said,
“Those girls are new guinea pigs”; and we were very well known under
this name in the camp. Then we understood that we were persons intended
for experiments, and we decided to protest against the performance of
those operations on healthy people.

We drew up a protest in writing and we went to the camp commandant. Not
only those girls who had been operated on before but other girls who
were called to the hospital came to the office. The girls who had been
operated on used crutches and they went without any help.

I would like to tell you the contents of the petition made by us. “We,
the undersigned, Polish political prisoners, ask the commandant whether
he knows that since the year 1942 experimental operations have taken
place in the camp hospital, under the name guinea pigs, explaining the
meaning of those operations. We ask whether we were operated on as a
result of sentences passed on us because, as far as we know,
international law forbids the performance of operations even on
political prisoners.”

We did not get any answer; and we were not allowed to talk to the
commandant. On 15 August 1943, a policewoman came and read off the names
of 10 new prisoners. She told us to follow her to the hospital. We
refused to go to the hospital, because we thought that we were intended
for a new operation. The policewoman told us that we were probably going
to be sent to the factory for work outside the camp. We wanted to make
sure whether the labor office was open because it was Sunday. The
policewoman told us that we had to go to the hospital to be examined by
a doctor before we went to the factory. We refused to go then because we
were sure that we would be kept in the hospital and operated on again.
All prisoners in the camp were told to stay in the blocks. All of the
women who lived in the same block where I was were told to leave the
block and stand in line in front of Block 10 at a certain time. Then the
Overseer Binz appeared and called out 10 names, and my name was among
them.

We went out of the line and stood before Block 9 in line. Then Binz
said: “Why do you stand in line as if you were to be executed?” We told
her that operations were worse for us than executions and that we would
prefer to be executed rather than to be operated on again. Binz told us
that she might give us work; there was no question of our being operated
on, but we were going to be sent for work outside the camp. We told her
that she must know that prisoners belonging to our group were not
allowed to leave the camp and go outside. Then she told us to follow her
into her office, that she would show us a paper proving that we were
going to be sent for work to the factory outside the camp. We followed
her and we stood before her office. She was in her office for a while
and then went out and went to the canteen where the camp commandant was.
She had a conference with him probably asking him what to do with us. We
stood in front of the office for half an hour. In the meantime one
fellow prisoner who used to work in the canteen walked past. She told us
that Binz had asked for help from SS men to take us to the hospital by
force. We stood for a while and then Binz came out of the canteen
accompanied by the camp commandant. We stood for a while near the camp
gate. We were afraid that SS men would come to take us, so we ran away
and mixed with other people standing in front of the block. Then Binz
and the camp police appeared. They drove us out from the lines by force.
She told us that she was putting us into the bunker as punishment for
not following her orders. Five prisoners were put into each cell
although one cell was only intended for one person. The cells were quite
dark, without lights. We stayed in the bunker the whole night long and
the next day. We slept on the floor because there was only one couch in
the cell. The next day we were given a breakfast consisting of black
coffee and a piece of dark bread. Then we were locked in again. People
were walking up and down the corridor of the bunker the whole time. The
same day in the afternoon we learned our fate. The woman guard of the
bunker unlocked our cell and took me out. I thought that I was to be
interrogated or beaten. She took me down the corridor. She opened one
door and behind the door stood SS man Dr. Trommel. He told me to follow
him upstairs. Following Dr. Trommel I noticed there were other cells,
with beds and bedding. He put me in one of the cells. Then he asked me
whether I would agree to a small operation. I told him that I did not
agree to it because I had already undergone two operations. He told me
that this was going to be a very small operation and that it would not
harm me. I told him that I was a political prisoner and that operations
could not be performed on political prisoners without their consent. He
told me to lie down on the bed; I refused to do so. He repeated it
twice. Then he went out of the cell and I followed him. He went quickly
downstairs and locked the door. Standing in front of the cell I noticed
a cell on the opposite side of the staircase, and I also noticed some
men in operating gowns. There was also one German nurse ready to give an
injection. Near the staircase stood a stretcher. That made it clear to
me that I was going to be operated on again in the bunker. I decided to
defend myself to the last. In a moment Trommel came back with two SS
men. One of these SS men told me to enter the cell. I refused to do it,
so he forced me into the cell and threw me on the bed.

Dr. Trommel took me by the left wrist and pulled my arm back. With his
other hand he tried to gag me, putting a piece of rag into my mouth,
because I shouted. The second SS man took my right hand and stretched
it. Two other SS men held me by my feet. Immobilized, I felt somebody
giving me an injection. I defended myself for a long time, but then I
grew weaker. The injection had its effect; I felt sleepy. I heard
Trommel saying, “That is all.”

I regained consciousness again, but I don’t know when. Then I noticed
that a German nurse was taking off my dress, I then lost consciousness
again; I regained it in the morning. Then I noticed that both my legs
were in iron splints and were bandaged from the toes up to the groin. I
felt a severe pain in my feet, and had a temperature.

On the afternoon of the same day, a German nurse came and gave me an
injection, in spite of my protests; she gave me this injection in my
thigh and told me that she had to do it.

Four days after this operation a doctor from Hohenlychen arrived, again
I was given an injection to put me to sleep, and as I protested he told
me that he would change the dressing; I felt a higher temperature and a
greater pain in my legs.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. How many times did you see Gebhardt?

A. Twice.

Q. I will ask you to step down and walk over to the defendants’ dock and
see whether or not you find the man Gebhardt sitting in the dock.

(The witness complied and pointed to the defendant Gebhardt.)

Thank you. Sit down.

I will ask that the record show that the witness properly identified the
defendant Gebhardt.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: The record will show that the witness identified
the defendant Gebhardt in the dock.

MR. MCHANEY: I have no further questions at this time.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Will Dr. Alexander again be put on the stand in
connection with the examination of this witness?

MR. MCHANEY: Yes, but if there is any cross-examination we can probably
finish that before lunch.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Do any of the defense counsel desire to
cross-examine this witness?

DR. SEIDL (counsel for the defendants Gebhardt, Oberheuser, and
Fischer): I do not intend to cross-examine this witness, but this does
not mean that my clients admit the correctness of all statements made by
this witness.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Does any other of the defense counsel desire to
examine the witness?

(No response.)

  EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF THE PROSECUTION EXPERT WITNESS DR. LEO
                             ALEXANDER[46]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

MR. MCHANEY: Doctor, can you express any opinion as to the purpose of
the type of operation to which she [Karolewska] was subjected, that is
the bone removal?

DR. ALEXANDER: I think it must have been one of the experiments which
aimed at the question of regeneration of bone or possible
transplantation of bone. Chances are that this tibial graft was either
implanted in another person or that grafts had been exchanged. Of course
today, 3 years after the experiment, no trace of transplantation is left
in this individual. Or if the object was, as alleged in some statements
I have seen, that tibial grafts were exchanged between the two legs, one
must conclude that the experiment was negative because there is no
evidence that a graft took. All we see now are the consequences of
removal of a graft, and the graft had included the entire compact part
of the bone, otherwise the repair would have been better. If some part
of the compact had remained, the periosteum would have probably
regenerated and today, 3 years after the operation, no X-ray would have
shown the defect. So I feel that rather deep grafts were taken which
went down into the spongiosa. Whether anything was replaced that later
was destroyed, I do not know, except the patient stated that there was a
purulent discharge, indicating that the wound had become infected, and
her statement of a subsequent operation, in fact, if I am not mistaken,
two subsequent operations, indicates the probability that the grafts did
not take and that they were removed after infection had become obvious.

-----

[43] Final plea is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 15 July 1947,
pp. 10874-10910.

[44] Dr. Maczka appeared as witness before the Tribunal, 10 January
1947, Tr. pp. 1430-1462.

[45] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 20 Dec.
1946, pp. 815-832.

[46] This testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 20 Dec.
1946, pp. 832-838.

                        7. SEA-WATER EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser, Rostock, Schroeder, Gebhardt,
Rudolf Brandt, Mrugowsky, Poppendick, Sievers, Becker-Freyseng,
Schaefer, and Beiglboeck were charged with special responsibility for
and participation in criminal conduct involving sea-water experiments
(par. 6 (G) of the indictment). In the course of the trial the
prosecution withdrew the charge in the case of Mrugowsky. On this charge
the defendants Schroeder, Gebhardt, Sievers, Becker-Freyseng, and
Beiglboeck were convicted and the defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser,
Rostock, Rudolf Brandt, Poppendick, and Schaefer were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the sea-water experiments
is contained in its final brief against the defendant Schroeder.
Extracts from that brief are set forth below on pages 419 to 443. A
corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on these
experiments has been selected from the final plea for the defendant
Schroeder and from the closing brief for the defendant Beiglboeck. It
appears below on pages 434 to 446. This argumentation is followed by
selections from the evidence on pages 447 to 494.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

     _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT SCHROEDER_

                        _Sea-Water Experiments_

                 *        *        *        *        *

On 19 May 1944 a conference was held at the German Air Ministry which
was attended by Christensen, Schickler, Becker-Freyseng, and Schaefer,
among others. This conference was concerned with the problem of the
potability of sea-water. Two methods of making sea-water drinkable were
then available to the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe. One, the
so-called Schaefer method, had been chemically tested and apparently
produced potable sea-water. It had the disadvantage, however, of
requiring substantial amounts of silver which was available only in
limited quantities. The second method, so-called Berkatit, was a
substance which changed the taste of sea-water but did not remove the
salt. It had the advantage of simplicity of manufacture and use.

At the conference on 19 May the defendant Becker-Freyseng reported on
certain clinical experiments which had been conducted by von Sirany to
test Berkatit. He came to the conclusion that the experiments had not
been conducted under sufficiently realistic conditions of sea distress.
He reported that the Chief of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe was—

    “* * * convinced that, if the Berka method is used, damage to
    health had to be expected not later than 6 days after taking
    Berkatit, which damage will result in permanent injuries to
    health and—according to the opinion of Unterarzt Dr.
    Schaefer—will finally result in death after not later than 12
    days. External symptoms are to be expected such as dehydration,
    diarrhea, convulsions, hallucinations, and finally death.”
    (_NO-117, Pros. Ex. 133._)

As a result of this conference it was agreed to conduct new experiments.
They were to include a series of experiments for a maximum of 6 days
during which one group was to be given sea-water processed with
Berkatit, another group ordinary drinking water, another group no
drinking water at all, and the final group such water as was available
in the emergency sea distress kits then used. A second series of
experiments was decided upon and the report stated:

    “Persons nourished with sea-water and Berkatit, and as diet also
    the emergency sea rations.

    “_Duration of experiments: 12 days._

    “Since in the opinion of the chief of the medical service
    permanent injuries to health, that is, the death of the
    experimental subjects has to be expected, as experimental
    subjects such persons should be used as will be put at the
    disposal by Reichsfuehrer SS.” (_NO-177, Pros. Ex. 133._)

Thus, with full knowledge that the use of Berkatit for periods of 6 days
would result in permanent injuries to the experimental subjects and that
death would result no later than the 12th day, plans were made to
conduct experiments of 6 and 12 days’ duration. _It should be noted that
the conference report does not state that the duration was a maximum of
12 days as in the case of the first series of experiment._ The duration
was to be 12 days in any event. Since it was known that volunteers could
not be expected under such conditions, the conference determined to use
inmates of concentration camps which would be put at their disposal by
the SS. At a second meeting on 20 May 1944, the report states that “it
was decided that Dachau was to be the place where the experiments were
(to be) conducted.” (_NO-177, Pros. Ex. 133._) Copies of the report on
the conferences were sent, among others, to the Medical Experimentation
and Instruction Division of the Air Force, Jueterbog, to which the
defendants, Schaefer and Holzloehner, who conducted the freezing
experiments with Rascher, were attached; to the German Aviation Research
Institute, Berlin-Adlershof, to which the defendants Ruff and Romberg
were attached; to the Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe (L. In. 14);
and to the Reich Leader SS. The report was signed by Christensen of the
Technical Office of the Reich Air Ministry.

On 7 June 1944 the defendant Schroeder wrote to Himmler through Grawitz
asking for concentration camp inmates to be used as subjects in the
sea-water experiments. This letter reads in part as follows:

    “Earlier already you made it possible for the Luftwaffe to
    settle urgent medical matters through experiments on human
    beings. _Today again_ I stand before a decision which, after
    numerous experiments on animals as well as human experiments on
    voluntary experimental subjects, demands a final solution. The
    Luftwaffe has simultaneously developed two methods for making
    sea-water potable. The one method, developed by a medical
    officer, removes the salt from the sea-water and transforms it
    into real drinking water; the second method, suggested by an
    engineer, leaves the salt content unchanged, and only removes
    the unpleasant taste from the sea-water. The latter method, in
    contrast to the first, requires no critical raw material. From
    the medical point of view this method must be viewed critically,
    as the administration of concentrated salt solutions can produce
    severe symptoms of poisoning.

    “_As the experiments on human beings could thus far only be
    carried out for a period of 4 days, and as practical demands
    require a remedy for those who are in distress at sea up to 12
    days, appropriate experiments are necessary._

    “Required are 40 healthy test subjects, who must be available
    for 4 whole weeks. _As it is known from previous experiments
    that necessary laboratories exist in the concentration camp
    Dachau, this camp would be very suitable._” [Emphasis supplied.]
    (_NO-185, Pros. Ex. 134._)

Schroeder concluded his letter by stating that the experiments would be
directed by the defendant Beiglboeck.

                 *        *        *        *        *

That these experiments were carried out on nonvoluntary subjects is also
proved by Grawitz’ letter to Himmler on 28 June 1944. (_NO-179, Pros.
Ex. 135._) In this letter Grawitz reports the opinions of Gebhardt,
Gluecks, and Nebe, as well as his own, on the proposed experiments.
Gluecks stated that he had no “objections whatsoever to the experiments
requested by the Chief of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe to be
conducted at the Rascher experimental station in the Dachau
concentration camp. _If possible, Jews or prisoners held in quarantine
are to be used._” It is impossible to imagine a Jew being asked to
volunteer for anything in the Third Reich when they were being
slaughtered by the millions in the concentration camps. Nebe stated: “I
proposed taking for this purpose the asocial gypsy half-breeds. There
are people among them, who, although healthy, are out of the question as
regards labor commitment. Regarding these gypsies, I shall shortly make
a special proposal to the Reich Leader, but I think it right to select
from among these people the necessary number of test subjects. Should
the Reich Leader agree to this, _I shall list by name the persons to be
used_.” It is a little difficult to imagine how Nebe, chief of the Reich
Criminal Police, could “list by name” gypsy volunteers for these
experiments. Grawitz raised the objection to the use of gypsies on the
ground that they were “of somewhat different racial composition” and he
therefore wanted experimental subjects racially comparable to European
peoples. Himmler decided that gypsies plus three others for control
should be used. (_NO-183, Pros. Ex. 136._)

Schroeder testified that he tried to arrange for carrying out the
sea-water experiments at the Luftwaffe hospital in Brunswick. He
remembered very specifically, according to his testimony, that he had
contacted the commander of that hospital on 1 June 1944. He stated that
he also attempted to obtain students as experimental subjects from the
Luftwaffe Medical Academy in the latter part of May 1944. Both of these
attempts to obtain volunteers allegedly failed because of the lack of
clinical facilities and the calling up of students to active service.
Schroeder testified that he went to the SS only after he had exhausted
all other possibilities. He would have the Tribunal believe that there
was no place to find 40 volunteers and the necessary clinical
facilities, although von Sirany had conducted such experiments in Vienna
on Wehrmacht soldiers, but of course _for only 4 days_. (_Tr. pp.
3657-9._)

In connection with this testimony of Schroeder’s, it should be noted
that the records of the conference on 19 and 20 May 1944 were
immediately sent to the SS. The decision to use concentration camp
inmates did not await any efforts to find volunteers but was made at the
conference of 19 May. It was known that because of the very nature of
the experiments which were planned volunteers could not be obtained.
Contrariwise, it is impossible to believe that the commanding officer of
the whole of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe was unable to obtain
40 volunteers for the experiments which he claims were so innocuous.
There were no regulations which forbade experiments on members of the
Wehrmacht. (_Tr. p. 3660._) The defense witness Haagen, in connection
with his proposed epidemic jaundice experiments on human beings, as set
forth in his letter of 27 June 1944 to Kalk, who was attached to the
staff of Schroeder, insisted at great length that he planned to use
volunteers from the student companies of the Wehrmacht at Strasbourg,
Freiburg, or Heidelberg. (_Tr. p. 9578._) He was positive that student
volunteers would have been made available. He stated that he could have
used them during their vacations. (_Tr. p. 9579._) Kalk was also sure
that this could have been done. Haagen emphasized repeatedly that
volunteers were available. (_Tr. p. 9580._) Clinical facilities would
have been easily obtained in reserve hospitals. (_Tr. p. 9581._)

Schroeder testified that he did not know that Berkatit would cause death
in not more than 12 days. (_Tr. p. 3666._) He could not remember whether
Schaefer had told him that taking Berkatit for 12 days would cause
death. In a pretrial interrogation, he specifically denied that. (_Tr.
p. 3668._) He testified that while both Becker-Freyseng and Schaefer
were at the Nuernberg meeting in October 1942 at which the report on the
freezing experiments at Dachau was given, neither of them reported to
him about it when he proposed going to Dachau to conduct the sea-water
experiments. (_Tr. p. 3669._) Schroeder denied that he had ever seen the
report on the meeting of 19 and 20 May 1944 (_NO-177, Pros. Ex. 133_) on
the sea-water experiments. (_Tr. p. 3662._) Although a copy of this
report was sent to Himmler, he would have the Tribunal believe that it
was a sheer coincidence that he turned to Himmler for experimental
subjects without having seen the report. (_Tr. p. 3669._) He testified
that he told Grawitz in a meeting with him that he wanted the
experiments carried out on dishonorably discharged soldiers. (_Tr. p.
3670._) Grawitz allegedly said that he would respect this wish.
Schroeder stated that he made it clear to Grawitz that the subjects had
to be volunteers, with a little food as a reward. (_Tr. p. 3672._) He
further testified that he told Grawitz that the experiments had to be
controlled by the Luftwaffe. During a pre-trial interrogation, he swore
that he knew nothing about the sea-water experiments, that the SS took
it out of his hands and he had no influence. (_Tr. pp. 3610-1._)
Schroeder had no idea, according to his testimony, that foreigners were
incarcerated in concentration camps. He said that he knew that gypsies
were used as experimental subjects only after the report by Beiglboeck
in Berlin in October 1944. (_Tr. p. 3676._) He testified that he
instructed Beiglboeck that Berkatit was to be used only until the
subjects said they could not tolerate any more. (_Tr. p. 3677._) He
admitted having heard the report by Beiglboeck on the experiments,
together with Becker-Freyseng and Schaefer, among others, but that he
did not hear the complete report as he had to leave the meeting early.
(_Tr. pp. 3679-80._)

The charts kept by the defendant Beiglboeck on each of the experimental
subjects—which the defense was finally forced into submitting in
evidence, after attempting to use them through the defense “expert”
Vollhardt without offering the documents themselves—give some of the
details as to the experiments, although under the circumstances their
reliability is doubtful. (_Tr. p. 9381._) Certain alterations in these
records which will be discussed at a later point, indicate that they are
not entitled to great weight. The experiments began in August 1944 and
continued until the middle of September. Forty-four experimental
subjects were used. Subjects one to six were deprived of all food and
water for periods from 5½ to 7½ days. The duration of the experiments
given herein is based upon the starting date of the morning of 22
August, as contended by the defense, although there is some evidence
indicating that the starting date was 21 August. If the experiment was
interrupted in the forenoon, no additional day or part thereof is
counted. If it was interrupted between noon and 1700 hours, one-half day
is added, while if it was interrupted after 1700 hours, a full day is
added. Subjects 7 through 10 were given 1,000 cc. of Schaefer water for
12, 13, and 12 days, respectively, and hungered for 7, 8, and 9 days,
respectively. Subject No. 9 was not used for reasons of health. This was
the defense witness Mettbach. Subjects 11 through 18 were given 500 cc.
of sea-water plus the emergency sea ration which contained approximately
a total of 2,400 calories. These experiments lasted from 5 to 10 days.
They hungered up to 6½ days. Several of these subjects, for example, 11,
13, 17, and 18 were subjected to two separate experiments of 8 and 6
days, 6 and 5 days, 7½ and 5 days, and 10 and 4 days, respectively.
Subjects 19 through 25 were given 500 cc. of Berkatit plus the emergency
sea ration. The duration of the experiments lasted from 5 to 9½ days
with periods of hunger up to 6½ days. Subjects 19 and 20 underwent two
separate experiments of 7 and 5 days each. Subjects 26 through 30 were
given 1,000 cc. of Berkatit plus the emergency sea ration. Duration of
the experiments was from 5 to 9½ days with periods of hunger up to 6½
days. Subject 29 underwent two experiments of 8 and 5 days. Subjects 31
and 32 were given 1,000 cc. of sea-water for 8 and 6 days, respectively.
Subject 31 was subjected to an additional experiment of 5 days. Subject
33 was given 500 cc. of Berkatit for 6 days; subject 34, 1,000 cc. of
Schaefer for 12 days, subjects 35 through 37, 39, 41, and 42 were given
500 cc. of sea-water for periods ranging from 4 to 6 days; subjects 38,
40, and 43 were given 1,000 cc. of sea-water for 6, 5, and 6 days; and
subject 44 was given Schaefer water for 12 days.

The clinical charts on the experiments also supply us with the ages of
the experimental subjects. Subjects 17, 19, 20, 35, 37, 40, and 43 were
all under the age of 21. Subject 40 was 16 years old; subjects 17, 19,
and 37 were 17 years old; subject 35 was 18 years old; subject 43 was 19
years old; and subject 20 was 20 years old. Needless to say, no effort
was made to obtain the consent of the parents or guardians of these
minors.

The defendant Beiglboeck testified that he reported to Berlin at the end
of June 1944 where he was told by Becker-Freyseng that he was to carry
out the sea-water experiments in Dachau. He also saw Schroeder
previously in connection with the experiments. He said he attempted to
withdraw because he had a horror of working in a concentration camp. He
did not refuse to perform the experiments because he was afraid of being
called to account for failure to obey orders. (_Tr. pp. 8828-9._)
Becker-Freyseng told him that the purpose of the experiments was, first,
to find out if Berkatit was useful; second, to test the Schaefer method;
and third, to see whether it would be better to go completely without
sea-water or to drink small quantities of it. (_Tr. p. 8832._) He said
he was told by the officials in Dachau that the gypsies who were to be
used in the experiments were held as “asocial” persons. Beiglboeck
apparently considers himself an expert on asocials. He testified that it
was his understanding that a whole family could be classified asocial,
although this “does not exclude the possibility that, in this family,
there may be a large number of persons who did not commit any crime.”
(_Tr. p. 8848._)

He testified that he called the experimental subjects together and told
them what the experiment was about and asked them if they wanted to
participate. (_Tr. p. 8849._) He did not tell them how long the
experiment would last. He did not tell them that they could withdraw at
any time. He testified that he _had to require_ that they thirst for a
certain period. The decision as to their being relieved from the
experiment lay with him. (_Tr. p. 8850._) During the course of the
experiments he testified that the subjects revolted on one occasion
because they did not get the food they had been promised. (_Tr. p.
8863._) They did not get food for several days because of a delay in
delivery. (_Tr. p. 8868._) The subjects were locked in a room during the
experiments. Beiglboeck testified that:

    “They should have been locked in a lot better than they were,
    because then they would have had no opportunity at all to get
    fresh water on the side.” (_Tr. p. 8864._)

He stated that the danger point would be reached in about seven days
drinking 500 cc. of sea-water, while in cases of 1,000 cc. of sea-water,
it would be 4½ days. (_Tr. pp. 8876-7._) Compare the much longer
duration of the experiments as set out above.

It was readily apparent to the prosecution after an inspection of the
clinical charts kept during the course of the experiments that a number
of alterations had been made in them. These records were in the
exclusive possession of defense counsel prior to the testimony of
Vollhardt, whose expert opinion was based in part upon such records. In
a large number of instances the names of the experimental subjects have
been erased from the charts, obviously in an effort to make it
impossible to locate such persons for the purpose of giving testimony.
An examination of the charts further reveals that the final weights of
the experimental subjects were written on the charts in a different
shade of ink from the remainder of the records. In some cases these
weights were written over the original pencil notations; for example, on
chart C-2 the final weight of 62 kilograms in pencil was written over in
ink to read 64½ kilograms. Beiglboeck admitted that the red arrows
purporting to indicate the start of the experiments, usually appearing
under the date August 22, were made by him in 1945, long after the
experiment had been completed. (_Tr. p. 8909._) In charts 1 to 32 a red
mark under the date August 21 appears, which would indicate that the
experiments very probably began on that date. Certain notes in German
shorthand appear on the back of chart C-23. Beiglboeck admitted that he
wrote these notes himself. (_Tr. p. 8970._) Beiglboeck testified that:

    “We [Beiglboeck and his defense counsel] were in agreement at
    all times that the charts and curves should be submitted in the
    same way as we received them here.” (_Tr. p. 8921._)

He repeatedly stated that he did not make any erasures on the charts in
Nuernberg. (_Tr. pp. 8922, 8973, 8975-6._) When the proof left him no
alternative, Beiglboeck finally admitted having made changes and
erasures in the notes on the back of chart C-23 in Nuernberg. (_Tr. p.
8978._) These notes give a clinical report on one of the experimental
subjects who was critically ill. The following is a restoration of the
original stenographic notes insofar as they could be translated:

    “The thirst assumes forms difficult to endure. The patient lies
    there quite motionless with half-closed eyes. He takes no notice
    of his surroundings. He asks for water only when he awakes from
    his semiconscious condition (half a line erased).

    “The appearance is very bad—looks doomed. The general condition
    gives cause for alarm.

    “Respiration more shallow, labored, moderately frequent.

    “Respirations 25 per minute.

    “The eyes are deeply hollowed, the turgor of the skin greatly
    reduced.

    “Skin dry, tongue completely dry, whitish coating in the middle
    fairly loose.

    “The mucous membranes of the mouth and the lips dry, latter
    covered with crusts. Lungs show slight very dry bronchitis lower
    border VI-XII, sharpened vesicular respiration.

    “Heartbeats very low hardly audible. Filling of the pulse
    weaker. Increased thickness of walls of blood vessels. Frequency
    72, liver, 2½-3 fingers below sternal margin, rather soft,
    moderately sensitive to pressure; spleen on percussion slightly
    enlarged.

    “Musculature hypotonic. Joints over-extendable. Calves slightly
    sensitive to pressure. Indications of transverse welt formation,
    marked longitudinal welt formation. Romberg plus plus. Reflexes
    plus plus. Abdominal reflexes plus plus. Babinski negative. Eife
    phenomenon. Oppenheim negative. Rossolimo negative. Tonus of the
    bulb of the eye bad. Bulbus reflex positive. (Interruption.)”

Beiglboeck had substituted the word “somnolent” for the word
“semiconscious” in the last line of the first paragraph. In this same
paragraph half a line was completely erased and could not be translated.
Beiglboeck purported not to remember what it said, an obvious falsehood
since it was erased out of fear of the truth. In the last sentence of
the second paragraph, Beiglboeck altered the notes to read “The general
condition gives no cause for alarm.” In the first line of the eighth
paragraph, Beiglboeck substituted the word “poorly” for “hardly.” The
notation “Romberg plus plus” means that the subject has an “uncertain”
ability to stand. (_Tr. p. 8982._) He said that these notes refer to
subject number 30 rather than subject 23. (_Tr. p. 8984._)

Beiglboeck testified that he made no further changes, erasures, or
alterations in Nuernberg. (_Tr. p. 8992._) That Beiglboeck’s testimony
as a whole is completely unreliable is evidenced by the fact that he
also made erasures in the notes on the back of chart A-29. These notes,
insofar as they can be translated, read as follows:

    “The thirst again becomes very severe. Patient lies down on his
    back and rolls about. Also gets * * * a typical stereotyped
    organic rigid seizure with severe tetanic symptoms such as from
    his * * *, symptoms * * *. In view of the fact that in the last
    two days he has been drinking a great deal of water * * *
    quarter plus half liter, he is being taken out of the
    experiment.

    “3/9 Again taken into the experiment.

    “5/9 Again complains about very severe thirst.

    “6/9 Feeling of thirst very severe, tongue dry and coated. Fetid
    smell from the mouth. Skin dry and hot, liver significantly
    enlarged, reflexes very lively, blood vessels show thickening of
    walls, musculature over-excitable.

    “7/9 Psychic state has changed. Somnolence. Tongue dry,
    musculature feels stiffened. Considerable weakness of
    musculature with atoxic manifestation. Romberg positive. Blood
    vessels still * * *, pulse poorly filled, marked bradycardia,
    respiration accelerated. General condition [the next word erased
    and not legible], liver greatly enlarged.”

In the case of subject 25, Beiglboeck testified that this man was
X-rayed several times and apparently had acute bronchitis. His fever
went up to 39.8 Centigrade. (_Tr. p. 8998._) He complained of a stomach
ailment before the experiment began. (_Tr. p. 9000._) He was still sick
when Beiglboeck left Dachau on 15 September. (_Tr. p. 9002._) Subject 39
was a man 49 years old; He was given 500 cc. of Berkatit for a period of
four days, namely, from 1 September to 4 September, when the experiment
was interrupted at 1930 hours. Beiglboeck used the truth with
characteristic economy when he testified that the man was undergoing the
experiment only three days. (_Tr. p. 9010._) He admitted having
performed numerous lumbar and liver punctures on the subjects. (_Tr. p.
8933._)

A number of experimental subjects were able to gain access to fresh
water in spite of the efforts of Beiglboeck to prevent them. Beiglboeck
and his defense counsel assumed the anomalous position that this somehow
mitigates his guilt. It is difficult to understand how this self-help on
the part of the subjects, which undoubtedly saved the lives of the
majority of them, could be raised as a mitigating factor when Beiglboeck
did everything in his power to prevent that. As a matter of fact he did
not even know that the experimental subjects in the first group, that is
to say from 1 to 32, had been able to get at fresh water. He testified
that:

    “I should like to say that in the second group, when I knew
    their devices from my experience with the first group, I knew
    what to do and broke off the experiments. If I had wanted to
    continue the experiments, I would have done it in the second
    group too. This I did in the first group _only became at first I
    did not realize the significance of their failure to lose
    weight_.” [Emphasis supplied.] (_Tr. p. 9022._)

_Thus Beiglboeck says, in effect, that although he did not know that the
experimental subjects gained access to fresh water, and although he
continued the experiments far beyond what he himself knew to be the
danger point, nonetheless he is to be excused because some of the
experimental subjects drank fresh water secretly in spite of his efforts
to prevent it._

The expert witness, Dr. Ivy, testified for the prosecution concerning
sea-water experiments. He, himself, participated in an experiment of
three days during which he consumed 2,400 cc. of sea-water with a
caloric intake of 108 per day in the form of candy. He suffered marked
dehydration and was at the point of developing hallucinations. A second
volunteer in these experiments took 2,000 cc. in a little over one day
and developed vomiting and diarrhea to such an extent that the
experiment had to be stopped. (_Tr. p. 9038-9._) Compare the amounts of
sea-water taken by Beiglboeck’s subjects. For scientific data concerning
the effect of sea-water on the human body, see Transcript pages 9039-41.
Dr. Ivy pointed out certain basic inconsistencies in the testimony of
the defense expert witness, Vollhardt. (_Tr. pp. 9041-43._) Dr. Ivy
testified that it was entirely unnecessary to perform these experiments
for the purpose of establishing the potability of sea-water processed by
the Berka method. This could have been determined chemically in a matter
of one-half hour. (_Tr. pp. 9043-4._) He stated that if 1,000 cc. of
sea-water or Berkatit were taken per day, it would cause death in less
than 12 days. Death would occur between the 8th and the 14th day if 500
cc. were consumed per day under ideal conditions. (_Tr. p. 9045._) The
statement in the report of the conferences on 19 and 20 May 1944 that if
Berka water was used, damage to health was to be expected not later than
six days and would lead to death not later than 12 days is essentially
correct. (_Tr. p. 9044._) This document shows that the planned duration
of the experiments was 12 days. Dr. Ivy testified that it would be
unnecessary to conduct experiments for more than three or four days to
show that Berkatit was just as dehydrating as sea-water. (_Tr. p.
9046._) He stated that these experiments make sense only if they were
trying to determine the survival time of human beings on 500 cc. and
1,000 cc. of sea-water per day. It is clear that the experimental plan
anticipated deaths. (_Tr. pp. 9046-7._)

Dr. Ivy testified that, on the basis of his studies of the charts kept
during the course of the experiments, there was an insufficient
observation period after the experiments to determine whether there were
any delayed damaging effects to the experimental subjects. (_Tr. p.
9049._) The results of the experiments are not scientifically reliable.
(_Tr. p. 9051._)

Dr. Ivy pointed out that the chart of subject 3 proved that he was too
weak to stand and have his blood pressure taken on several occasions.
(_Tr. p. 9052._) This was one of the subjects in the fasting and
thirsting group. He was given an injection of coronine on 29 August and
strychnine on 30 and 31 August. Both of these drugs are heart stimulants
and the clinical picture indicates that this subject was ill or markedly
disabled by the experiments. (_Tr. p. 9053._) Eight to fourteen days is
the range of _survival time_ of strong men under ideal conditions for
thirsting and fasting. (_Tr. p. 9053._)

As a result of his study of the clinical records, Dr. Ivy testified that
subjects 3, 14, 36, 37, 39, 31, 23 (or 30), 25, 28, and 29 were ill
during the experiments. Subjects 3, 23, (or 30), and 25 were especially
ill and there is a possibility that they were permanently injured or
died as a result of the experiments. (_Tr. pp. 9058-9._)

The subject to whom the notes on the back of chart C-23 applied was very
sick and in a coma. (_Tr. p. 9061._) The changes made in the
stenographic notes by the defendant Beiglboeck make the subject appear
to be in a better condition than he actually was. (_Tr. pp. 9062-3._)
The bulbous reflex referred to in these notes means the pressing of the
eyeball to determine the degree of coma. “Tonus of ball of eyes is bad”
indicates the blood pressure was low and the circulation was quite poor.
This is a bad prognostic sign and might indicate impending death. (_Tr.
p. 9064._) These notes indicate that the subject was in a dangerous
condition and required immediate remedial therapy. The follow-up
observation for subject 23 was four days, while for subject 30 it was
five days. This was entirely insufficient. This subject could have died
if not properly cared for. (_Tr. pp. 9065-6._)

Dr. Ivy testified that of the 44 subjects, 13 were too weak to stand on
one or more occasions, had fever, required cardiac stimulants, or were
unconscious—namely, subjects, 3, 4, 14, 21, 23, 25, 28, 29, 32, 36, 37,
39 and 40. (_Tr. pp. 9067-8._) The statement of the affiant Bauer to the
effect that he observed symptoms of heart weakness in the experimental
subjects as a result of certain electrocardiograms he took was
corroborated by Ivy. (_Tr. p. 9069._)

In Dr. Ivy’s opinion, an experimental subject who agrees to undergo an
experiment is no longer a volunteer if, during the course of the
experiment, he is forced to continue after having expressed a desire to
be relieved. (_Tr. pp. 9076-7._)

The testimony of the defense expert Vollhardt is entirely unreliable.
Although Vollhardt had nothing whatever to do with these experiments in
Dachau, he repeatedly testified in a highly partial manner concerning
matters about which he could not possibly have had any knowledge. For
example, he insisted that the subjects in Dachau were volunteers. He
testified that Beiglboeck eliminated three subjects before the
experiments began because of their physical condition, and that three
other persons immediately volunteered. (_Tr. pp. 8457-8._) Even
Beiglboeck made no such contention. He said that he considered it “quite
out of the question that the experimental subjects felt it necessary to
drink water out of mops, because there were air raid buckets and if they
felt they needed a drink, they could have drunk out of them.” (_Tr. p.
8467._) It is passing strange that Vollhardt could have such information
when he was never in Dachau. He believed it quite impossible that any of
the experimental subjects had cramps, although subject 29 is proved to
have had cramps and organic seizures by the notes quoted above. Although
Vollhardt admitted that the clinical data showed that a number of the
experimental subjects had secretly obtained fresh water, and although
Beiglboeck admitted that some of the subjects threw their urine away
(_Tr. p. 8865_), Vollhardt was quite sure that the experimental subjects
were all volunteers.

Vollhardt made no study of the clinical notes himself but turned them
over to a 25-year-old assistant to digest for him. (_Tr. p. 8432._) He
admitted that he relied on descriptions of the experiments made by
Becker-Freyseng and Beiglboeck since the trial began. (_Tr. p. 8438._)
Vollhardt had had no previous experience with sea-water problems, nor
had his assistant. (_Tr. p. 8451._) Vollhardt testified that he
conducted a volunteer experiment on five of his doctor assistants after
he had been approached by defense counsel. His subjects drank 500 cc. of
simulated sea-water per day and received 1,600 calories per day. (_Tr.
pp. 8440-2._) Four of the subjects continued the experiment for five
days and one for six days. The latter subject drank an extra 500 cc. on
the last day. The purpose of these experiments was to ascertain how much
a person suffers when undergoing a sea-water experiment. (_Tr. p.
8443._) Vollhardt’s subjects continued their work about the clinic,
although they ate and slept in the same room. He does not know whether
they went to the local cinema or left the clinic for other purposes
during the course of the experiments. (_Tr. p. 8445._) Four of the
subjects quit on the fifth day because of an engagement with a young
lady. (_Tr. p. 8450._) He testified that his subjects had no severe
thirst on the first two days, it became unpleasant on the third, reduced
thirst on the fourth, and very strong thirst on the fifth day; the
subject who went six days reported that it made very little difference.
All continued their work during the experiment. (_Tr. p. 8453._) It is
obvious that this experiment in no way compared to those conducted in
Dachau. While some of the experimental subjects in Dachau were too weak
on many occasions to have their blood pressure taken, Vollhardt’s
subjects were able to continue their work.

While Vollhardt’s subjects were trained doctors who participated in the
experiment because of interest, who were permitted to withdraw from the
experiment at any time, who were permitted to control their own
activities during the experiment, none of these important factors were
present in the Dachau experiments. (_Tr. p. 8479._) The wretched gypsies
were not permitted to withdraw when they felt like it. They did not know
how long the experiments were to last, they had no freedom of activity,
they had no interest in the experiment. Vollhardt’s regard for these
gypsies is apparent from his statement that “* * * people like that will
of course find a way” to cheat. (_Tr. p. 8468._) That Vollhardt knew
nothing of the experiments he purported to testify about is apparent
from his testimony regarding their duration. For example, he stated that
in the Berkatit group of 500 cc., the experiments were discontinued
after six days. (_Tr. p. 8462._) _The clinical charts which Vollhardt
had in his possession, and upon which his testimony purported to be
based, show that the duration of the experiments in this group ran as
high as 9½ days, and in all but two cases exceeded six days. He
testified that the group on sea-water was also discontinued after six
days while the clinical charts show some of them to have run as long as
ten days. In the fasting and thirsting group he testified that they were
discontinued after four to five days, while the chart shows that they
lasted from 5½ to 7½ days._ (_Tr. pp. 8462-3._) No, Vollhardt’s
testimony would indeed have been an unreliable substitute for the
charts.

The testimony of the prosecution witnesses proves that the sea-water
experiments resulted in murder and tortures. The Austrian witness
Vorlicek, who was tried for “preparation of high treason” in 1939 and
sentenced to four years in a penitentiary, was transferred to Dachau in
March 1944 and acted as an assistant nurse in the experimental station
during the course of the sea-water experiments. (_Tr. pp. 9383-5._) One
of the inmate guards who fell asleep was transferred to a penal company.
(_Tr. p. 9386._) At least one of the subjects suffered a violent attack
of cramps. (_Tr. p. 9386._) On one occasion Vorlicek spilled some fresh
water on the floor and forgot the rag which he used to mop it up. The
experimental subjects seized the dirty rag and sucked the water out of
it. Beiglboeck threatened to put him in the experiments if it ever
happened again. (_Tr. p. 9387._) The experimental subjects were not
volunteers. Vorlicek talked to some of the Czech subjects who told him
they had been asked in another camp to volunteer for a good outside
assignment and only when they got to Dachau did they find out that they
were to undergo the experiments. (_Tr. pp. 9388, 9392._) He testified
that the subjects were of Czech, Polish, Hungarian, Austrian, and German
nationalities. (_Tr. p. 9388._) Some of the subjects were quite ill and
he was under the impression that they would not live much longer. About
three months after the experiments he met Franz, one of the subjects,
and he told him that one of the victims of the experiments had already
died. (_Tr. p. 9390._)

The witness Laubinger, who was subject number 7, testified that he was
arrested by the Gestapo in March 1943 because he was a gypsy. He was
sent to Auschwitz in the spring of 1943 without having been tried for
any crime. (_Tr. p. 10199._) He was later transferred to Buchenwald for
a few weeks and while there, together with other inmates, was asked to
volunteer for a cleaning-up work detail in Dachau. The inmates were
under the impression that conditions were better in Dachau, so they
agreed to go. Upon their arrival at Dachau they were given a physical
examination and X-rayed and then taken to the experimental station.
(_Tr. p. 10200._) Beiglboeck told them that they were to participate in
the sea-water experiment and that was the first they knew of it. (_Tr.
p. 10201._) Laubinger identified Beiglboeck in the dock. (_Tr. p.
10202._) He told Beiglboeck that he had had two stomach operations, but
Beiglboeck did not permit him to withdraw. Beiglboeck did not ask
whether the subjects wished to volunteer, and they did not volunteer.
(_Tr. p. 10203._) Laubinger, who was in the Schaefer group, was given
Schaefer water for 12 days and fasted for at least nine days. He got so
weak he could hardly stand up. The experimental subjects received
special food for only one day after the experiment. Beiglboeck had
promised them extra rations and an easy work detail but these promises
were not kept. (_Tr. p. 10205._) One of the subjects tried to persuade
the others to refuse to drink the sea-water. Beiglboeck threatened to
have him hanged for sabotage. The subject later vomited after drinking
sea-water whereupon Beiglboeck had the water administered through a
stomach tube. (_Tr. p. 10207._) Another subject was tied to his bed and
adhesive tape was plastered over his mouth, because he had obtained some
fresh water and bread. Most of the subjects were Czech, Polish, and
Russian nationalities, with approximately eight Germans. (_Tr. p.
10208._). A number of subjects suffered attacks of delirium and two were
transferred to the hospital. Laubinger did not see them again. (_Tr. p.
10209._)

The witness Hoellenrainer corroborated the testimony of Laubinger on all
important points. He testified that the experimental subjects did not
volunteer (_Tr. p. 10509_) and that the majority of them were non-German
nationals. (_Tr. p. 10513._) Hoellenrainer testified further that
Beiglboeck showed no concern for the experimental subjects, but, on the
contrary, threatened to shoot them when they became excited. (It hardly
seems appropriate to wear a gun when experimenting on volunteers.) He
had no pity for them when they became delirious from thirst and hunger.
(_Tr. p. 10510._) The witness Hoellenrainer unfortunately assaulted
Beiglboeck in open Court. This impulsive act of the witness, however,
speaks more forcibly than volumes of testimony as to the inhuman
treatment of the experimental subjects and the suffering which was
inflicted on them as a result of these experiments. We may rest assured
that Hoellenrainer was no volunteer. When explaining his behavior to the
Tribunal, Hoellenrainer characterized Beiglboeck a “murderer”. (_Tr. pp.
10233-4._)

The witness Tschofenig was committed to Dachau in November 1940 where he
remained until April 1945. He was a political prisoner. (_Tr. p.
9331._). He is at present a member of the Carinthian Land Diet in
Austria. (_Tr. p. 9332._) From the summer of 1942 until the end, he was
in charge of the X-ray station in Dachau. (_Tr. p. 9334._) He examined
the transport of gypsies in the summer of 1944 before the experiments
began and excluded a number of them as being unfit. (_Tr. pp. 9334-5._)
He saw Beiglboeck several times in the camp and in the X-ray station.
(_Tr. p. 9335._) During the experiments a number of those who got sick
were brought to the X-ray station for examination. Their physical
condition had deteriorated considerably as a result of the experiments.
He heard that one of the subjects had a maniac attack. (_Tr. p. 9336._)
At the conclusion of the experiments, three of the subjects were brought
to the station for internal diseases. One was on a stretcher and unable
to walk. All of them were X-rayed by Tschofenig. (_Tr. p. 9338._) It was
customary to send the results of the X-ray examinations to the hospital
ward where the inmates were kept. Tschofenig received an official order
from the station for internal diseases that it was not necessary to
report on the stretcher case as he had died two days after his transfer.
The station physician reported that the death resulted from the
sea-water experiments. Tschofenig examined the death records himself.
(_Tr. p. 9339._)

Even Dr. Steinbauer, defense counsel for Beiglboeck, has apparently
convinced himself that these experiments involved torture. He said, in
explaining his conduct in withholding part of a document the Tribunal
had ordered to be produced, that: “I do not want to say anything about
the experimental subjects, who suffered terribly.” (_Tr. p. 9378._)

          c. Selections from the Argumentation of the Defense

       _EXTRACT FROM THE FINAL PLEA FOR DEFENDANT SCHROEDER_[47]

                 *        *        *        *        *

I now come to the count of the indictment “Participation of the
defendant Professor Dr. Schroeder in the sea-water experiments which
were carried out in the Dachau concentration camp.”

In the case of these experiments, Professor Schroeder’s participation
has been established, and he has accepted the responsibility as far as
the preparation and the planning of these experiments are concerned.
Professor Schroeder has mainly been accused by the prosecution of having
permitted these experiments to be carried out in a concentration camp.
The prosecution in its case against Professor Schroeder further stated
that these experiments were not necessary at all, and it drew the
conclusion that the experiments had only been ordered in order to
torture people and in order to subject them to unnecessary cruelties; it
also stated that it was clear that in no case had the experimental
subjects been volunteers.

Therefore it is the task of the defense to show in the following
paragraphs why from the point of view of Professor Schroeder, as Chief
of the Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe, these experiments had to
be considered necessary, and just what reasons motivated him to give his
approval for the carrying out of the experiments in a concentration
camp.

The first question therefore is—why and from what considerations were
there experiments ordered at all? It must be stated in advance here,
that as far as Chief of the Medical Inspectorate Professor Schroeder was
concerned, he did not have to examine the question whether one or the
other method for making sea-water drinkable was more suitable; the
problem for him existed in its entirety and it could not be divided. It
was to rescue shipwrecked persons from death from lack of water and find
the best method of protection against this danger. This problem had
already been handled by various interested agencies for quite some time,
and various individual questions for the solution of this problem had
arisen. No method for making sea-water drinkable had been found and it
was not clear what procedure should be advocated.

In the course of the year 1943 two methods for making sea-water
drinkable were offered almost simultaneously. One of them, the so-called
Wofatit method, had been developed by Dr. Schaefer in collaboration with
I. G. Farben. Another, the Berkatit method, represented the invention of
Stabsingenieur Berka.

It was quite clearly recognized that Schaefer’s Wofatit represented the
ideal solution, because this method removed all the salt from the
sea-water and changed it into drinking water, while the Berka method let
the salt remain in the sea-water and only improved the taste of the
sea-water through the addition of various sugar and vitamin drugs. We
agree with the prosecution and the expert Professor Dr. Ivy when they
state that a chemist in the course of one afternoon could have decided
by means of a short experiment whether Wofatit or Berkatit was better.
The participating agencies of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe,
Professor Schroeder and Dr. Becker-Freyseng, realized that quite
clearly. From the chemical point of view this problem could also have
been solved in a simple manner.

The difficulty which existed for Professor Schroeder with regard to this
problem, however, lay in another field; this was the shortage of raw
materials prevailing at the time, which had arisen in Germany because of
the war. This circumstance made it possible for the Technical Office of
the Luftwaffe to oppose the introduction of the Wofatit and to consider
the Berkatit method, because the raw materials for the latter method
could be procured without any difficulty and production could be started
right away, since production facilities for the appropriate amounts were
already in existence. It was different in the case of Wofatit.
Considerable amounts of silver were required for its production, which
could not be set aside for the production of Wofatit without damaging
other production branches which also needed this metal. The Technical
Office of the Luftwaffe, therefore, had already decided in favor of the
introduction of Berkatit on 1 July 1944. Professor Schroeder, in his
capacity as Chief of the Medical Inspectorate, however, could not have
assumed the responsibility for having the units which were entrusted to
his professional medical care equipped with the Berka method, because
the danger existed that shipwrecked aviators, deceived by the
improvement in the taste of sea-water, would drink it in larger amounts
and thus increase the danger of their dying of thirst. The question also
had to be clarified whether the shipwrecked crew of an airplane
completely adrift at sea should go without any food or water whatsoever
or whether they should consume a certain amount of sea-water rather than
no water at all. This last question could only be clarified by carrying
out an experiment on human beings. An experiment on animals would not
suffice in this respect, because the distribution of water in the body
of animals differs from that in a human being. By proving its medical
objections, the Medical Inspectorate would also have been able to make
its point of view heard by the Technical Office, if the medical expert,
Professor Dr. Eppinger, one of the best known specialists for internal
diseases not only in Germany, but in Europe, had not sided with the
Technical Office. Professor Eppinger, in the conference at the Technical
Office on 25 May 1944, expressly voiced the opinion that the Berka
method was suitable, because for a certain time the human kidney could
concentrate salt up to 3 percent, and because the vitamins which had
been added to the Berka method would be suitable for speeding up the
excretion of the salt from the human organism. This opinion was also
shared at the same conference by the pharmacologist Professor Heubner,
who is still one of the leading specialists in the field today.

Professor Schroeder would not have been able to turn down both methods.
He would then have been reproached with the fact that he had not done
everything within his power in order to make the position of shipwrecked
German soldiers more bearable and to save them from dying of lack of
water. It, therefore, becomes evident that these considerations on the
part of Schroeder give us proof of his great feeling of responsibility;
it was not easy for him to give his approval for the carrying out of
such experiments.

Further developments also show clearly that Schroeder, in spite of the
fact that he was extremely busy with official matters, devoted the
greatest care and conscientiousness to this matter. He did not just
decide to select Dachau as the place where the experiments were to be
carried out. Originally he did not even harbor such a thought, but he
intended to have the experiments carried out as a troop experiment in
institutes which were owned by the Luftwaffe. He was primarily
considering the Luftwaffe hospital at Brunswick for this purpose. On 1
July 1944 he turned to the chief medical officer of this hospital, who
was competent in the matter, who, however, disapproved of it. This
becomes evident from the certificate of Dr. Harriehausen, who was a
Generalarzt at the time. Now Professor Schroeder began to consider the
Military Medical Academy of the Luftwaffe in Berlin, where he intended
to use the young cadets in this academy as experimental subjects. An
inquiry which he made there was also unsuccessful. The reason why his
requests were turned down in each case was that just at this particular
time the OKW had issued a strict order to the effect that all
convalescents were to be returned immediately from the hospitals to
their units, and that the cadets of the academy were to be given a
combat assignment. For the same reason, the suggestion of Professor
Beiglboeck to carry out the experiments at the Tarvis Field Hospital
also remained unsuccessful.

The further possibility of perhaps using German civilians for the
experiments was completely out of question because at this time it was
not possible to find young men in the age groups necessary in this case
among the German civilian population, because all of them had either
been conscripted for military service or for labor service. Professor
Schroeder, therefore, had no choice but to follow the suggestion of
considering Dachau concentration camp for his experimental station.

Professor Schroeder was not informed at all about conditions in a
concentration camp. He thought the circumstances in such a camp were no
different from those prevailing in a military camp, and only the names
Dachau and Oranienburg were known to him as concentration camps. In this
connection, it may be pointed out that the SS surrounded events in the
concentration camps with an almost impenetrable veil of secrecy.
Schroeder never listened to foreign radio stations. In the circles of
his medical officers such events were never discussed. I may point out
here that an express opponent of National Socialism, no less than the
former Prussian Minister of the Interior, Severing, testified as a
witness in the IMT trial that he had had no knowledge of the events in
the concentration camps, and he had different sources of information at
his disposal from Professor Schroeder. If Professor Schroeder had had
any idea of what happened in concentration camps while he was away from
Germany, then in view of his ideology as a faithful Christian, he would
have refused such contact with concentration camps arising out of
ordering these experiments. The decisive point in Schroeder’s favor is
that the experiments were not to be carried out under the supervision
and command of the SS camp leadership but completely separate, under the
special leadership of a Luftwaffe medical officer and recognized
specialist. As a further consideration, Professor Schroeder had to take
into account that a useful result could be achieved in these experiments
only if they could be carried out without interruption or hindrance.
Because of the then prevalent almost daily air raids over the whole of
Germany, no guarantee for an uninterrupted execution of these
experiments could be given in any spot in Germany. However, it was known
that air raids on concentration camps did not take place. Moreover, the
charge cannot be brought against Professor Schroeder that he chose a
concentration camp because he then had available defenseless tools who
perforce had to subject themselves to the experiments. The very opposite
is true. It was clear to Professor Schroeder that if he wanted to be
successful he could carry out these experiments only with voluntary
experimental subjects, for the director of the experiments was dependent
on the willing cooperation of the experimental subjects, since in no
other way could usable clinical data be achieved. Every involuntary
experimental subject would have had the power to drop out of the
experiment prematurely by feigning indisposition or pain, and, in this
way, would have caused the director of the experiment to terminate it
prematurely.

For the further evaluation of Professor Schroeder’s conduct, his
conversation with the Reich Physician SS Grawitz must be considered
especially. Professor Schroeder expressed the opinion to Grawitz that he
could only work with healthy and voluntary experimental persons, whose
age corresponded to that of the pilots under his command, and he made
the further condition that the experimental persons should have the same
physiological and racial requisites as the members of the German
Wehrmacht in question. On direct examination, Professor Schroeder
testified under oath that in this connection he talked to Grawitz about
dishonorably discharged former members of the German Wehrmacht who, he
knew, had been transferred to concentration camps because of the
seriousness of their offenses.

Professor Schroeder could not assume, nor was any report on the part of
Grawitz or the SS leadership made to him, that the SS leadership did not
accept this suggestion and that instead of former members of the German
Wehrmacht, gypsies had been decided upon for experimental purposes.
Professor Schroeder, from his point of view, could rely on Grawitz to
make arrangements according to his suggestions; he had no reason to
expect that the SS would decide upon experimental subjects, against his
well-founded wish, who, racially and physiologically did not have the
prerequisites demanded by Professor Schroeder.

Because of the extremely heavy official duties caused for Professor
Schroeder in his capacity as chief medical officer by the imminent
collapse of German military resistance, this affair was only a small
segment of his official duties and it must be admitted that he could not
concern himself further with this affair.

A further consideration which Professor Schroeder had to bear in mind
was whether such experiments were dangerous and possibly damaging to the
health of the experimental subjects. Professor Schroeder had thoroughly
studied this question and contemplated all possible aspects of the
problem. Professor Schroeder also knew that sea-water is used by doctors
for drinking cures and that the criterion of harmfulness depends on the
doses. If there was medical supervision then there would be no danger to
health. Therefore, the prosecution’s charge that he failed to take the
possible hazards sufficiently into account is not justified.

Nothing shows the high degree of responsibility which characterized
Professor Schroeder more than the instructions which the medical
inspector issued to the man carrying out the experiments.

Professor Schroeder was convinced that the experiments held no danger to
the experimental subjects and he expressed this opinion to Reich
Physician SS Grawitz. Such danger was excluded particularly if and when
the quantity of sea-water to be taken was regulated in accordance with
the best medical experiences, and when it was definitely ordered that
the experiments should be stopped at a certain time; and, furthermore,
if the selection of the man in charge of the experiments guaranteed, on
the basis of professional and ethical standards, that the experiments
would be carried out in a humane manner, taking into account all medical
and clinical considerations.

Therefore, it is fully justified if Professor Schroeder claims that he,
from his position as a physician and a leading medical officer,
considered all possible situations and attempted to avert all possible
sources of danger as far as humanly possible. His direction to the man
in charge to discontinue the experiments as soon as the experimental
subject refused to take in further water, and if dangerous injury to the
body were recognizable, must be mentioned in Schroeder’s favor. The
person carrying out the experiments was furnished with all necessary
assistants and a number of special co-workers from medical circles as
well as all machinery to carry out his work in an orderly fashion.

The contention that both the planning and preparation of the experiments
by Schroeder can stand any examination, that that planning was with full
moral responsibility and with a true feeling of duty and humanity was
reaffirmed, too, before this Tribunal by Professor Dr. Vollhardt, as
well as by the American expert, Professor Ivy. It is simply unthinkable
that instructions to one conducting experiments could be more correct
from a medical point of view than those which Professor Schroeder worked
out.

By this plea and the evidence, all charges against Professor Schroeder
in the sea-water complex are refuted.

                 *        *        *        *        *

       _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF FOR DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK_

                 *        *        *        *        *

               _The Persons Subjected to the Experiments_

As regards this subject [sea-water experiments] I want to put the
defendant’s statements first (_Tr. pp. 8703-4_):

    “DR. STEINBAUER: Did you have influence on the selection of the
    experimental subjects?

    “DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK: No. I was told at the Medical
    Inspectorate that arrangements had been made with the SS, and
    the SS in accordance with these arrangements would supply the
    experimental subjects. I did not have to worry about that.

    “Q. Did you have orders to find out where the experimental
    subjects came from and what the specified circumstances and
    conditions were?

    “A. No. That too was not a decision that I could have made, nor
    could the Luftwaffe.

    “Q. Did you know before that gypsies had been used?

    “A. I only found out that gypsies were coming into Dachau from
    the camp commandant. * * * I, therefore, do not feel that I am
    responsible either for the selection of the place where the
    experiments were carried out nor for the selection of those
    persons who were used.”

    Defendant Professor Dr. Schroeder states regarding this (_Tr.
    pp. 3676-7_): [Transcriber Note: The text ends here. No further
    statement printed in the original text.]

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

    “MR. MCHANEY: Did you say anything to Beiglboeck about the
    experimental subjects?

    “DEFENDANT SCHROEDER: No. We only spoke about the matter as
    such. I am not quite sure whether the question ‘concentration
    camp’ was already established at that time. Please, why don’t
    you ask Beiglboeck himself? I don’t know if it was before or
    after 1 June.

    “Q. You didn’t say anything to Beiglboeck about making sure that
    only German volunteers were used in the experiments?

    “A. That was a matter of course. There was no discussion about
    it. It was no subject of discussion. There wasn’t anything to be
    discussed.

    “Q. Well, you didn’t tell him that then?

    “A. I don’t know. I can’t tell you that under oath. I know that
    there were volunteers; and I certainly did not say that they had
    to be German because I didn’t take any other possibility into
    consideration at all and couldn’t have said it. These are all
    reconstructions which came up later, but at that time weren’t
    subjects of discussion at all.”

These were gypsies wearing the black badge of the asocials. The
defendant states that the Sturmbannfuehrer in charge of the shipment
told him that these persons were all asocials, who were interned on
account of punishable offenses and not for social reasons. As we read in
Kogon’s book “The SS State”[48] the black badge was in fact the
designation of the asocials. We see from Document NO-179, Prosecution
Exhibit 135, that SS Gruppenfuehrer Nebe suggested as persons to be used
for the experiments asocial persons of mixed gypsy blood in Auschwitz
concentration camp, who were in good health but at the same time
unsuitable for labor. In the book on gypsies of the Royal Police
Directorate Munich 1905, (_Beiglboeck 28, Beiglboeck Ex. 11_), we read:

    “The greatest difficulty arises in securing a census of gypsies.
    The majority of them make every effort to obscure their identity
    through false statements or through a pretense of ignorance * *
    *.”

Their asocial character led to a series of police regulations, of which
the most important are the following, as far as Germany is concerned:

    Decree of 16 May 1938, RMB1.i.V. (_Bulletin of the Reich
    Ministry of the Interior_) pages 883-4, concerning measures
    against the gypsy nuisance.

    Decree of 8 December 1938, RMB1.i.V., page 2105, concerning
    measures against the gypsy nuisance.

    Decree of 10 November 1939, RMB1.i.V., page 2339, concerning
    employment records for gypsies.

    Decree of 2 September 1939, Reich Law Gazette, I, page 1578.
    Prohibition of wandering of gypsies in the frontier zone[49]
    (_Sec. 4 of the ordinance concerning frontier protection_).

The witness Dorn states (_Tr. p. 8618_):

    “As far as I know, the brown sign was done away with in
    Buchenwald in 1940 and all gypsies arrested for racial reasons
    were asocial. In other words, from 1940 on, there were no
    gypsies in the camp who were not designated in the filing system
    as asocial, as unwilling to work.”

The same witness states (_Tr. pp. 8661-2_):

    “I can merely say that initially all gypsies were arrested for
    racial reasons. Later on this was changed. Some of the gypsies
    who were not declared asocial elements were removed from Dachau
    to the Labor House in the Rebdorf Bavarian penitentiary.”[50]

The famous Swiss Psychiatrist E. Bleuler, Zuerich, writes in his
Textbook on Psychiatry, Berlin, Springer, 1937 on pages 397-400 about:

                  _Constitutional ethnical deviations_

    “* * * A large number of asocials show what type of character
    they are while still young. Most of them are backward at school,
    even if their intelligence is good, because they adjust
    themselves too little and show too little industry and
    attention. Extraordinary achievements in any single direction
    are rare. Many of them are lazy, thieving, lying, cruel to
    animals and people, exacting, often deliberately and negligently
    damaging their own and others property, vain, unreliable, and
    egotistical. They cannot submit to authority, run away if they
    do not like anything; punishments are not respected, altogether
    neither sugar plums nor the whip have any visible effects. When
    carrying out mean tricks they develop cunning and energy, soon
    learn from others what is bad, with difficulty or not at all
    what is good, have an instinctive inclination for bad company.”

I have not made any special reference to asocial character to point out
that we must be particularly careful when estimating their
trustworthiness, on account of their tendency to mendacity and because
of a certain psychotic cupidity concerning claims for compensation. This
is not necessary where the judges are so experienced; I am referring to
this fact for _legal_ reasons. It is well known that there is no legal
definition of crimes against humanity. According to legal authors, such
crimes can only be committed against persons who are persecuted for
political, religious, and racial reasons.

To complete this chapter in its legal aspects, I would also like to
mention the racial regulation of the gypsy question as far as it can be
seen from German legislation. According to the 12th decree implementing
the Reich Citizenship Law, dated 25 April 1943 (_Reich Law Gazette I, p.
268_), gypsies who are not yet German citizens cannot acquire
citizenship. Section 4 of this decree reads:

    “Jews and gypsies cannot become citizens. They cannot become
    citizens either subject to revocation, or protected persons * *
    *.”

According to the first decree implementing the Law for the Protection of
German Blood and German Honor of 14 November 1935 (_Reich Law Gazette I,
p. 1334_), marriage between gypsies and Germans is prohibited. Section 6
of this decree reads:

    “A marriage shall furthermore not be contracted if the progeny
    to be expected from it would endanger the purity of German
    blood.”

In all fairness, however, one must admit in this connection that in the
practice of the Third Reich no strict distinction seems to have been
made when gypsies were put in a concentration camp, so that we should
need the criminal record and family history of each person subjected to
the experiments to be able to ascertain accurately the asocial character
of each individual. It is a fact that in the gypsy book mentioned by me,
11 names of persons subjected to experiments are to be found, who must
no doubt be characterized as asocial.

               _Origin of the gypsies as to nationality_

As I have already mentioned, the gypsies themselves like to leave this
point vague. Therefore no point of the evidence contains so many
conflicting statements as this particular one. Beiglboeck himself cannot
make any definite statements as to this matter, but as he used to speak
to all of them, they must all have understood German. Among the names we
also find plenty of Slav names, having a Polish, Ukrainian, or Southern
Slav sound. In the old Austrian Monarchy, these people were jumbled
together a good deal and in their wanderings they also entered German
Reich territory. After the break-up of the Monarchy, some of the
so-called Carpatho-Russians became citizens of Hungary or Slovakia. In
the eastern provinces of the German Reich, there were many Poles or
Germanized persons with Polish names. The mere name, therefore, admits
of no conclusion as to nationality. The fact, however, that most of them
could make themselves understood in the German language allows the
conclusion that none of the persons subjected to experiments were
imported from the _Allied_ countries.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The witness Fritz Pillwein states in his affidavit (_Beiglboeck 32,
Beiglboeck Ex. 21_):

    “The experimental subjects in most cases spoke their gypsy
    dialect. Many of them were obviously of Slav origin. I did not
    see identification papers, however, as this was quite impossible
    in a concentration camp and as I did not ask them anything of
    the kind, I cannot make any exact statement regarding the
    _nationality_ of the individual gypsies. I did not ask them
    because the gypsies were very primitive people, and some of them
    did not even know their own birthdays.”

The witness Mettbach stated when questioned by Dr. Steinbauer (_Tr. p.
9729_):

    “DR. STEINBAUER: What language did you speak among yourselves?

    “WITNESS METTBACH: Mostly gypsy language.

    “Q. What was the citizenship of the individual experimental
    subjects?

    “A. Mostly they were Germans. There were a lot of Austrians and
    a lot of them came from East Prussia and Upper Silesia and the
    Burgenland [Province bordering Austria-Hungary].”

When questioned by counsel for the prosecution the witness Mettbach
stated (_Tr. pp. 9737-8_):

    “MR. HARDY: Were there any foreign nationals—that is, men other
    than Germans—used in these experiments?

    “WITNESS METTBACH: Austrians and Burgenlaender and some from
    Upper Silesia and East Prussia.

    “Q. No Czechs?

    “A. No.

    “Q. No Russians?

    “A. No.

    “Q. No Poles?

    “A. A couple of them talked Polish but I think they came from
    Upper Silesia or East Prussia. That very often happens. Lots of
    Upper Silesians can talk Polish.”

When questioned by counsel for the prosecution the witness Joseph
Vorlicek stated (_Tr. p. 9388_):

    “MR. HARDY: Do you know the nationality of the various subjects?

    “WITNESS VORLICEK: For the most part I do.

    “Q. Can you tell the Tribunal the nationality of the various
    subjects, as near as you can recollect?

    “A. There were Czechs, Poles, Hungarians, Austrians, and
    Germans.”

During direct examination the witness Vorlicek stated (_Tr. p. 9388_):

    “MR. HARDY: Well, did they ever volunteer for any special
    detachment or some such thing?

    “WITNESS VORLICEK: Well, this is how it happened. Since I know
    the Slavonic language, and there were some Czechs among them, I
    spoke to them.”

Therefore, the defendant’s statement, that the persons concerned were
Slovaks from the Bratislava area (Bratislava is the capital of Slovakia)
is not without foundation.

                      _The Rations of the Gypsies_

The defendant states that the persons subjected to the experiments got
the Luftwaffe flight rations before the experiments, and the same
rations after the experiments, and that there was a hitch only once due
to the bombing of the provisions warehouse. During the experiments, the
persons got shipwreck rations. The Englishman, Ladell also says that he
gave his soldiers shipwreck rations during the experiments. On this
point, see extract from Beiglboeck 20, Beiglboeck Exhibit 8:

    “* * * In all the experiments the food given was the ‘shipwreck
    diet’; this comprises 1 ounce each per day of biscuits;
    sweetened condensed milk; butter, fat, or margarine; and
    chocolate.”

That food was provided is evident from two documents. (_Beiglboeck 26,
Beiglboeck Ex. 13_; _Beiglboeck 27, Beiglboeck Ex. 14_.)

The witness Massion states in his affidavit (_Beiglboeck 31, Beiglboeck
Ex. 12_):

    “Before beginning the experiment, the experimental subjects were
    given the same food as that supplied to the flying personnel of
    the Luftwaffe, that is to say, a very nutritious diet of
    sardines, butter, cheese, milk, meat, etc. During the
    experiment, 4 persons assigned to the thirst group received no
    food whatsoever, the others received sea-emergency rations, with
    chocolate, etc. I know that on one occasion difficulties arose
    in the food supply which possibly were connected with an air
    raid. I was sent to Frankfurt with the urgent order to obtain
    sea-emergency rations there.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

                       _The Treatment of Gypsies_

Beiglboeck treated the experimental subjects in a humane manner. It is
natural that he insisted the strict observance of the whole experiment
was not to be a farce. The whole experiment was a constant struggle
against the understandable attitude of the experimental subjects who
wanted to save themselves by cheating the director of the experiment (by
secretly drinking water and pouring away the urine), and by obtaining
special favors, in particular cigarettes, which in 1944 were hard to
get—and that not only in the concentration camps.

In regard to this point I refer to a document in which Professor Dr.
Dennig writes (_Beiglboeck 29, Beiglboeck Ex. 15_):

    “While the people are able for the first few days successfully
    to fight their thirst with good grace, their strength of will is
    insufficient during the later stage; they devise extremely
    subtle means of obtaining water, e. g., the case of Juergensen.”

Witness Ernst Mettbach states in regard to this point when questioned by
Dr. Steinbauer (_Tr. p 9722_):

    “DR. STEINBAUER: The professor forbade your bringing them water.
    Did you nevertheless bring them water? Now, be honest.

    “WITNESS METTBACH: Several times I brought my relative,
    Mettbach, water to drink.

    “Q. Where did you give it to him?

    “A. Sometimes I smuggled it in to the experimental station
    myself. Sometimes I stuck it through the fly screen on the
    window which was a little bit loose.”

Later we shall speak in detail about the secret drinking of water. At
this point I just want to say in general that every drop of water which
was consumed in secret not only diminished the scientific value of the
experiments, but is also of greatest significance from the point of view
of criminal law, because it decreased the feeling of thirst. As I said
before, the treatment of the experimental subjects was a humane one. In
regard to this point compare the statement of Dr. Lesse (_Bieglboeck 14,
Bieglboeck Ex. 20_):

    “Q. What was his attitude to the prisoners in general?

    “A. Very humane and benevolent.”

Witness Massion states in his affidavit (_Beiglboeck 31, Beiglboeck Ex.
12_):

    “Dr. Beiglboeck treated the prisoners as humanly as ordinary
    patients. He was rough to them only when they obtained drinking
    water contrary to orders. I know definitely that none of the
    experimental subjects were turned over to the SS for punishment
    because of any offenses.”

Witness Pillwein states in his affidavit (_Beiglboeck 32, Beiglboeck Ex.
21_):

    “Q. How did Beiglboeck treat the inmates?

    “A. Beiglboeck treated the patients well, which was a striking
    contrast to the treatment which we inmates received from the SS.
    Beiglboeck only became very angry when the gypsies lied to him
    regarding the drinking of water, and when he found out about it
    from the blood test.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
             Pros.
 Doc. No.   Ex. No.              Description of Document             Page
  NO-184      132     Letter from the Technical Office of the Reich    447
                        Minister of Aviation (Goering) to Himmler’s
                        office, 15 May 1944, concerning methods to
                        render sea-water potable.
  NO-177      133     Minutes of conference at the Reich Ministry of   448
                        Aviation, 20 May 1944, concerning methods
                        for making sea-water potable.
  NO-185      134     Letter from Schroeder to Himmler and Grawitz,    452
                        7 June 1944, requesting subjects for
                        sea-water experiments.
  NO-183      136     Teletype from Rudolf Brandt to Grawitz,          453
                        undated, concerning experimental subjects.
  NO-182      137     Letter from Sievers to Grawitz, 24 July 1944,    454
                        concerning experiments on the potability of
                        sea-water.

                           _Defense Documents_

    Doc. No.       Def. Ex. No.        Description of Document
Becker-Freyseng  Becker-Freyseng  Affidavit of Dr. Ludwig              455
  42               Ex. 29           Harriehausen, 9 January 1947,
                                    regarding use of patients in
                                    sea-water experiments.

                               _Testimony_

Extracts from the testimony of prosecution witness Karl                456
  Hoellenrainer
Extracts from the testimony of defendant Beiglboeck                    468
Extracts from the testimony of defense expert witness Dr. Franz        474
  Vollhardt

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-184
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 132

   LETTER FROM THE TECHNICAL OFFICE OF THE REICH MINISTER OF AVIATION
(GOERING) TO HIMMLER’S OFFICE, 15 MAY 1944, CONCERNING METHODS TO RENDER
                           SEA WATER POTABLE

                            [Stamped] Secret

[Letterhead]
Reich Minister of Aviation
and Commander in Chief of the Luftwaffe
Technical Office
Ref. Nrs. 91a, 0016 GL/C-E (51V)
_No: 26 773 secret_
(In your answer to the above
reference, please give date and
short summary.)

                                                 Berlin W 8, 15 May 1944
                                                     Leipziger Strasse 7
                                        Cable address: Reichsluft Berlin
                                                   Phones: Local: 520024
                                                                  218241
                                                                  120047
                                                   Long distance: 218011
                                                         Extension: 4335

Re: Rendering sea-water potable.
Reference:   Letter of the Reich Leader SS
             No. 39/4/44 secret of 17 January 1944.
To: Reich Leader SS and Chief of the German Police,
Personal Staff.
Berlin

With reference to the interoffice conference between Oberstingenieur
Christensen and Haupsturmfuehrer Engineer Dohle regarding the
above-mentioned matter, it is announced that two processes have been
worked out by the office to render sea-water potable:

1. The I. G. method, using mainly silver nitrate. For this process quite
a large plant needs to be set up, which would require about 200 tons of
iron and cost about 250,000 RM. The amount of the product needed by the
Luftwaffe and Navy requires 2.5 to 3 tons of pure silver a month.
Besides, the water which is rendered potable by this preparation has to
be sucked through a filter in order to avoid absorption of precipitated
chemicals. These facts make the application of this process practically
impossible.

2. The second process which was worked out is the so-called Berka
method. According to this method, the salts present in the sea-water are
not precipitated, but are so treated that they are not disagreeable to
the taste. They pass through the body without oversaturating it with
salts and without causing an undue thirst. No special plants are
necessary for producing preparations needed for this process; nor do the
preparations themselves consist of scarce materials.

It can be presumed that this method will be introduced in the Luftwaffe
and the navy in a short time. Now that German technical science has
actually succeeded in rendering sea-water potable for people in distress
at sea, in accordance with the above, the knowledge as to how foreign
countries intend to solve this problem is no longer of prime importance.
Naturally the office is very much interested in ascertaining how, above
all, the United States has solved this problem, and it is requested that
this information be sought, without, however, compromising any person or
any office too much.

Should the office there be interested in the Berka method, let us know.
Samples can then be delivered.

The cube dispensed is not a preparation to render sea-water potable, but
a milk cube such as is already familiar to the offices.

                                                  [Signature illegible]

Enclosure: [Notation: both crossed out]

 1 Milk cube

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-177
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 133

 MINUTES OF CONFERENCE AT THE REICH MINISTRY OF AVIATION, 20 MAY 1944,
            CONCERNING METHODS FOR MAKING SEA WATER POTABLE

                                                   Personal Staff RF-SS.
                                       Filing Department, File No./220/5

Technical Office
    GL/C-E 5 IV No. 26860/44 secret

                                                     Berlin, 23 May 1944
                                                 [Handwritten] W 29.6

[Handwritten]:

    Just received
    for reading given
    to RF [Himmler]

                   [Signature] R. Br. [Rudolf Brandt]
Reichsarzt SS                                                     4/July
Minutes of the conference on 20 May 1944 re methods for making sea-water
                               drinkable

Present:

                 *        *        *        *        *

10.   Oberstingenieur  Christensen          German Air Ministry—
                                            GL/C-E 5 IV      120047/28
11.   Stabsingenieur   Dr. Schickler        dto.             120047/4335
12.   Stabsingenieur   Berka                E-Tra            Vienna
                                                             B 23566
13.   Stabsarzt        Dr. Becker-Freyseng  Chief Medical    278313
                                            Service
14.   Unterarzt        Dr. Schaefer         Luftwaffe Medical
                                            Research         27 83 13
                                            Institute

I. On 19 May 1944 a preliminary discussion was held at the Reich Air
Ministry—GL/C-E 5 IV. Present were the following persons:

GL/C-E 5 IV                          Obersting. Christensen
dto.                                 Stabsing. Dr. Schickler
E-Tra.                               Stabsing. Berka
L. In. 14                            Major Jeworrek
Chief of the Medical Service         Stabsarzt Dr. Becker-Freyseng
  [Office]
dto.                                 Unterarzt Dr. Schaefer
                                     Herr Pahl.

At this meeting Captain (med.) Dr. Becker-Freyseng reported on the
clinical experiments conducted by Colonel (med.) Dr. von Sirany and came
to the final conclusion that he did not consider them as being
unobjectionable and conclusive enough for a final decision. The Chief of
the Medical Service is convinced that, if the Berka method is used,
damage to health has to be expected not later than 6 days after taking
Berkatit, which damage will result in permanent injuries to health
and—according to the opinion of N. C. O. (med.) Dr. Schaefer—will
finally result in death after not later than 12 days.

External symptoms are to be expected such as drainage, diarrhea,
convulsions, hallucinations, and finally death. As a result of the
preliminary discussion it was agreed to arrange a new series of
experiments of short duration. A commission was to be set up for the
arrangement of these series of experiments. This commission should be
set up together with the High Command of the Navy at the conference on
20 May 1944.

The series of experiments should include the following:

 1. _a._ Persons to be given sea-water processed with Berka method.
    _b._ Persons to be given ordinary drinking   [Shorthand notation]:
           water.
                                                 One copy to be submitted
                                                 to the ministry.
    _c._ Persons without any drinking water at all.
    _d._ Persons given water treated according to the present method. (0.7
           liters of drinking water for 4 persons and 4 days.)

For the duration of the experiments all persons will receive only an
emergency sea diet such as is provided for persons in distress at sea.

               _Duration of experiments_: Maximum 6 days

In addition to these experiments a further experiment should be
conducted as follows:

2. Persons nourished with sea-water and Berkatit, and as diet also the
emergency sea rations.

                   _Duration of experiments_: 12 days

Since in the opinion of the Chief of the Medical Service permanent
injuries to health—that is, the death of the experimental
subjects—have to be expected, as experimental subjects such persons
should be used as will be put at the disposal by the Reichsfuehrer SS.

Herr Pahl reports that due to the latest improvements in the I. G.
Farben method, smaller quantities of iron are needed for the
construction of the manufacturing equipment than were originally
provided for and estimated by I. G. Herr Pahl reports further that if
the Wofatit equipment which has to be constructed could not be used
later for the manufacturing of the sea-water preparation another use
would be quite possible. As to the silver problem GL/C-E 5 IV will check
whether the necessary quantities of silver are available.

With GL/C-B 5 it is to be determined whether the same quantities of the
preparations will be required as heretofore.

II. At the main conference on 20 May 1944, Stabsingenieur Dr. Schickler
will report on work done since the last conference, especially re the
results of the preliminary discussion described in part I.

The navy emphasizes that it is considered to be of great importance to
obtain a method which under the given conditions could be introduced at
once without undue delay. In the opinion of the navy the results
obtained at the clinical experiments are sufficient, since they are
mainly interested in being able to nourish their men 3 to 5 days with
the preparation. A longer nourishing period up to 12 days would probably
only be necessary in very few cases. But in spite of this the High
Command of the Navy agrees that the series of experiments, as proposed
by the Chief of the Medical Service in paragraph 1, should still be
carried out.

These series of experiments should be finished and reported on not later
than the end of June. During this period all preparations are to be made
for the commencement of production according to the Berka method at a
date not later than July 1st 1944, and also, if the I. G. method should
be introduced, for the start of the construction of the necessary
manufacturing equipment by the I. G.

The commission which has to determine the conditions for the series of
experiments still to be conducted is composed as follows:

    Professor Eppinger, Vienna, Representative of the Chief of the
    Medical Service of the Air Force

    Representative of the German Air Ministry GL/C

    Representative of the High Command of the Navy

Stabsarzt Dr. Becker-Freyseng is being contemplated as representative of
the Chief of the Medical Service. Stabsingenieur Dr. Schickler and
Stabsingenieur Berka as representatives of GL; and Professor Orzichowski
as representative of the High Command of the Navy.

It was decided that Berlin, Reich Air Ministry GL/C-E 5 IV should be the
meeting place of the commission. (The originally proposed meeting place
was changed from Munich to Berlin after a telephone call from Dr.
Becker-Freyseng); and that the meeting should be on 25 May 1944 at 10:00
a. m.

It was decided that Dachau was to be the place where the experiments
should be conducted.

Stabsarzt Dr. Becker-Freyseng would invite Professor Eppinger and would
get in touch with the Reich Leader SS. The High Command of the Navy
would invite Professor Orzichowski.

_Distribution_:

High Command of the Navy—Medical Department

High Command of the Navy, Department for Research, Inventions and
Patents

Research Operation of the Reich Ministry for Aviation and High Command
of the Luftwaffe

For information of:

Medical Experimentation and Instruction Division of the Air Force
Jueterbog

E-Office Rechlin (E med)

Institute for Aviation Medicine,

D. V. L., Berlin-Adlershof

L. In. 14. 1. Abt. 2 Abt., Gruppe 3, KTB

Reich Leader SS

Technical Academy, Vienna

                                           [Signature] C. CHRISTENSEN
                                           [Handwritten]
                                           _A—_
                                           RSHA. Through asocial gypsies
                                                     GERHABDT.

    [Stamp]
Personal Staff RFSS—enclosures received on: 12 June 1944
Journal No. 39/4/44g.
to:

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-185
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 134

 LETTER FROM SCHROEDER TO HIMMLER AND GRAWITZ, 7 JUNE 1944, REQUESTING
                   SUBJECTS FOR SEA-WATER EXPERIMENTS

                        [handwritten] Top Secret

Chief Medical Service of the Luftwaffe
File: 55 Nr. 510/44 top secret (2F).

                                                     Saalow, 7 June 1944
                                                       ueber Zossen/Land
                                                       2 Copies—1st copy

To the Reich Minister of the Interior and Reich Leader SS _through_
Reich Physician SS and Police

Berlin W, Knesebeckstr. 51

Highly respected Reich Minister!

Earlier already you made it possible for the Luftwaffe to settle urgent
medical matters through experiments on human beings. Today again I stand
before a decision which, after numerous experiments on animals as well
as human experiments on voluntary experimental subjects, demands a final
solution. The Luftwaffe has simultaneously developed two methods for
making sea-water potable. The one method, developed by a medical
officer, removes the salt from the sea-water and transforms it into real
drinking water; the second method, suggested by an engineer, leaves the
salt content unchanged, and only removes the unpleasant taste from the
sea-water. The latter method, in contrast to the first, requires no
critical raw material. From the medical point of view this method must
be viewed critically, as the administration of concentrated salt
solutions can produce severe symptoms of poisoning.

As the experiments on human beings could thus far only be carried out
for a period of 4 days, and as practical demands require a remedy for
those who are in distress at sea up to 12 days, appropriate experiments
are necessary.

Required are 40 healthy test subjects, who must be available for 4 whole
weeks. As it is known from previous experiments that necessary
laboratories exist in the concentration camp Dachau, this camp would be
very suitable.

Direction of the experiments is to be taken over by Stabsarzt Dr.
Beiglboeck, civilian; Chief Physician of the Medical University Clinic
in Vienna, Professor Dr. Eppinger. After receipt of your basic approval,
I shall list by name the other physicians who are to participate, in the
experiments.

Due to the enormous importance which a solution of this problem has for
shipwrecked men of the Luftwaffe and navy, I would be greatly obliged to
you, my dear Reich Minister, if you would decide to comply with my
request.

                                                         Heil Hitler!
                                                  [Signature] SCHROEDER

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-183
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 136

TELETYPE FROM RUDOLF BRANDT TO GRAWITZ, UNDATED, CONCERNING EXPERIMENTAL
                                SUBJECTS

                           [stamp] Top Secret

_Teletype_:

To the Reich Physician SS and Police SS Obergruppenfuehrer Dr. Grawitz,
Berlin

Subject: Experiments by the Chief of the Medical Service of the
Luftwaffe.

Reference: Your letter of 28 June 1944—Journal Number 13/44 secret

Obergruppenfuehrer!

The Reich Leader SS has decided that in accordance with the suggestion
of SS Gruppenfuehrer Nebe, gypsies should be used for the experiments.
In addition, three other prisoners will be made available.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                      [Signed] BRANDT
                                                   SS Standartenfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-182
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 137

LETTER FROM SIEVERS TO GRAWITZ, 24 JULY 1944, CONCERNING EXPERIMENTS ON
                      THE POTABILITY OF SEA WATER

Reich Leader SS
Personal Staff “Office-A”

                                                 (13a) Waischenfeld/Ofr.
                                                 No. 135, Tel. No. 2
                                                 24 July 1944

                                 Secret

SS Standardtenfuehrer Ministerialrat Dr. Brandt, for Information.

To SS Obergruppenfuehrer Reich Physician SS and Police Dr. Grawitz

Berlin W 15, Knesbeckstr. 51

                                                    [Handwritten remark]
                                                                Gbl 29.7

Subject: Experiments on the potability _of sea-water_.

Refer: Your letter of 11 July 1944, Journal No. 13/SS top secret

Dear Obergruppenfuehrer!

I want to inform you about my talks with SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr.
Ploetner and Chief Physician Beiglboeck in Dachau on 20 July. There will
be employed: 1 person in charge, 3 medical chemists, 1 female assistant,
3 ranks for supervision. Prospective time: 3 weeks. In our research
station only the 40 experimental persons can be accommodated, otherwise
there is absolutely insufficient room since the Ploetner section is
fully occupied and work cannot be interrupted. Our laboratory is
insufficiently equipped, since some essential equipment is wanting. In
spite of serious difficulties, the following agreement was arrived at:
1. In the Ploetner section a desk will be reserved (in the laboratory).
2. The remaining rooms will be placed at our disposal in our
Entomological Institute for a period of 3 weeks. Equipment needed must
be provided by the Luftwaffe. Thus it will be assured that the female
assistants can work in Dachau too, because the Entomological Institute
is located outside the concentration camp. 3. Billet must be arranged
between Chief Physician Dr. Beiglboeck and the commandant’s office,
since we have no billets at our disposal. 4. SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr.
Ploetner will give his assistance, help, and advice. He was, however,
not selected for internal guidance, because this is being done by the
Luftwaffe physicians themselves.

The experiments are to begin on July 23 if experimental persons are
available by then and the camp commandant is in possession of the
required order of the Reich Leader SS. Dr. Beiglboeck himself wanted to
get in touch with SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Frowein, Adjutant of the Reich
Physician SS, on this subject.

I hope that this arrangement may permit a successful conduct of the
experiments. When the results are reported at the proper time, please
arrange to point out the participation and assistance of the Reich
Leader SS.

   With best regards and
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                  [Signature] SIEVERS
                                                   SS Standartenfuehrer
   PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF BECKER-FREYSENG DOCUMENT 42 BECKER-FREYSENG
                           DEFENSE EXHIBIT 29

 AFFIDAVIT OF DR. LUDWIG HARRIEHAUSEN, 9 JANUARY 1947, REGARDING USE OF
                   PATIENTS IN SEA-WATER EXPERIMENTS

                 *        *        *        *        *

Dr. Schroeder, as my superior, often visited the hospitals in my charge,
especially the Luftwaffe hospital in Brunswick of which I had been
medical superintendent since 1942.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I recall very well that I was once asked whether it would be possible to
carry out control experiments with sea-water, made drinkable by various
methods, on patients suffering from minor complaints and the slightly
wounded in the Luftwaffe hospital in Brunswick which was under my
supervision. Whether Professor Dr. Schroeder or one of his
representatives put this question to me, and at what exact time, I
cannot recall exactly. It could have been in June 1944. I had to refuse
the undertaking of such experiments, as I had strict orders to send all
patients and wounded who could be released back to the troops; thus I
did not have at my disposal hospital inmates suitable for these
experiments. Furthermore, the hospital was overcrowded at this time and
was, therefore, not suitable for scientific experiments. I can also
recall clearly that, at a later time, I again spoke to Professor Dr.
Schroeder about this matter, and that he expressed his regret on this
occasion that these experiments could not be carried out in the
Luftwaffe hospital in Brunswick which was under my direction.

                 *        *        *        *        *

        EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF PROSECUTION WITNESS KARL
                           HOELLENRAINER[51]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. HARDY: Now, Witness, for what reasons were you arrested by the
Gestapo on 29 May 1944?

WITNESS HOELLENRAINER: Because I am a gypsy of mixed blood.

Q. And after your arrest you were sent to the Auschwitz concentration
camp?

A. Yes.

Q. How long did you remain in Auschwitz?

A. About 4 weeks.

Q. And then where were you placed?

A. I was sent to Buchenwald.

Q. How long did you stay in Buchenwald?

A. I only stayed there for a few days.

Q. And then what happened to you?

A. I was in Buchenwald, and suddenly our numbers were called. Forty men
were called out, including me, and we were told that we were going to
Dachau to work. As soon as we arrived at Dachau we were put in a
quarantine block. One day an SS man came and wrote down our numbers, and
then we were X-rayed. Afterwards they sent us to the surgical department
of a certain Luftwaffe doctor. I am afraid I can’t remember the
physician’s name. I know that he was in the Luftwaffe and that he was an
Austrian. He examined all of us, and then we were divided into groups
for a sea-water experiment.

Q. Just a moment, Witness. I now want to ask you some brief questions
concerning what you have just told us. You state that you went to Dachau
to work. Did you consider going to Dachau to be good fortune?

A. Yes; a friend of mine, a gypsy, had already been to Dachau, and he
told me that the situation was much better and that we would get better
food. But that was not the case.

Q. Well, did you understand what you were to do when you went to Dachau,
what type of work was it, bomb disposal or removal?

A. Yes. We went there to work.

Q. Did you understand that you were going to Dachau to volunteer for
sea-water experiments?

A. No, never.

Q. Now, upon arrival in Dachau you then went to the quarantine block, is
that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. You stayed there for a day or two and were given a physical
examination?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you also get an X-ray examination?

A. Yes.

Q. And then you were transferred to the experimental block?

A. Yes.

Q. And there you met a professor or a doctor?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you think you would be able to recognize that doctor if you saw
him today?

A. Yes, immediately. I would recognize him at once.

Q. Would you kindly stand up from your witness chair, take your
earphones off, and proceed over to the defendants’ dock, and see if you
can recognize the professor that you met at Dachau?

(Witness leaves the stand.)

Q. Walk right over, please.

(Witness attempts assault on the defendant Beiglboeck.)

MR. HARDY: The prosecution apologizes for the conduct of the witness,
your Honors. Due to the manner of this examination, the prosecution will
have no further questions, your Honors.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: The marshal will keep the witness guarded before
the Tribunal.

DR. STEINBAUER (counsel for the defendant Beiglboeck): I have no
questions to put to the witness.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Will the marshal bring the witness before the bar
of this Court? Will an interpreter come up here who can translate to the
witness?

Witness, you were summoned before this Tribunal as a witness to give
evidence.

WITNESS HOELLENRAINER: Yes.

Q. This is a court of justice.

A. Yes.

Q. And by your conduct in attempting to assault the defendant Beiglboeck
in the dock, you have committed a contempt of this Court.

A. Your Honors, please excuse my conduct. I am very excited.

Q. Ask the witness if he has anything else to say in extenuation of his
conduct.

A. Your Honors, please excuse me. I am so worked up. That man is a
murderer. He has ruined my whole life.

Q. Your statements afford no extenuation of your conduct. You have
committed a contempt in the presence of the Court, and it is the
judgment of this Tribunal that you be confined in the Nuernberg prison
for the period of 90 days as punishment for the contempt which you have
exhibited before this Tribunal.

A. Would the Tribunal please forgive me. I am married and I have a small
son. This man is a murderer. He gave me salt water and he performed a
liver puncture on me. I am still under medical treatment. Please do not
send me to prison.

Q. That is no extenuation. The contempt before this Court must be
punished. People must understand that a court is not to be treated in
that manner. Will the marshal call a guard and remove the prisoner to
serve the sentence which this Court has inflicted for contempt? It is
understood that the defendant is not to be confined at labor. He is
simply to be confined in the prison, having committed a contempt in open
court by attempting to assault one of the defendants in the dock.

MR. HARDY: At this time, your Honor, the prosecution will request a
brief recess, if your Honors please.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Very well, the Tribunal will be in recess for a
moment.

(A recess was taken.)

                 *        *        *        *        *

THE MARSHAL: The Tribunal is again in session. [1 July 1947.]

MR. HARDY: The prosecution wishes to recall the witness Karl
Hoellenrainer to the witness stand, your Honors.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: The marshal will summon the witness
Hoellenrainer.

(The witness Karl Hoellenrainer took the stand.)

JUDGE SEBRING: You will raise your right hand and be sworn. I swear by
God, the Almighty and Omniscient, that I will speak the pure truth and
will withhold and add nothing.

(Witness repeated the oath.)

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Counsel may proceed.

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

MR. HARDY: Witness, your name again is Karl Hoellenrainer?

WITNESS HOELLENRAINER: Yes.

Q. Witness, at the close of your testimony the other day, you were
proceeding to tell the Tribunal about your activities after your arrival
at the Dachau concentration camp?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, when did you arrive for the first time at the Dachau
concentration camp?

A. That was about the middle of July.

Q. And then you stayed at the camp hospital for a period of 1 or 2 days?

A. In Auschwitz?

Q. No, in Dachau, after your arrival?

A. Yes, yes, in Dachau.

Q. And then you were examined physically and also X-rayed?

A. Yes.

Q. After you had been physically examined and X-rayed, what happened to
you?

A. Then, we came into the so-called surgical department. We were 40 men.
Then a Luftwaffe doctor came and examined us. We had to take our clothes
off and stand in line. Then he said, “Well, you will be given good food,
such as you have never had, and then you won’t get anything to eat at
all, and you will have to drink sea-water.” One of the prisoners whose
name was Rudi Taubmann jumped up and refused. He was in an experiment, a
cold-water experiment, and he didn’t want to be in any more experiments.
The doctor from the Luftwaffe said, “If you are not quiet, and want to
rebel, I will shoot you on the spot.” The doctor from the Luftwaffe
always had a pistol, and then we were all quiet. For about one week we
got cookies, rusks, and brown sugar. There were about 21 little cookies,
and three or four little pieces of dextrose. Otherwise, we got nothing.
The 8 days—

Q. Just a moment. Did you at any time volunteer for these experiments?

A. No.

Q. Were you asked whether or not you wished to volunteer for the
experiments?

A. No.

Q. Were any of the other inmates asked if they would like to volunteer?

A. No.

Q. Was the young Mettbach a volunteer, the youngest Mettbach?

A. I know only one Ernst Mettbach from Fuerth, but I don’t know whether
he volunteered.

Q. Was Ernst Mettbach in the experiments throughout; that is, did he
complete the experiments?

A. No, he was only there a short time, 2 or 3 days maybe. Then, the
doctor from the Luftwaffe put him out, and where he went I don’t know.

Q. Now, did the professor ask anyone for his approval before he was
subjected to the sea-water experiments?

A. No.

Q. Did the professor or any of the other Luftwaffe physicians talk to
the inmates and advise them as to the hazards of the experiment prior to
the commencement of the actual experiments?

A. No.

Q. Now, will you, in detail, tell the Tribunal just what food the
experimental subjects received prior to the experiments, during the
course of the experiments, and after the experiments, and in doing so,
Witness, kindly talk very slowly and distinctly so that the interpreters
will be able to translate you more efficiently.

A. Yes. At first we got potatoes, milk, and then we got these cookies
and dextrose and rusks. That lasted about 1 week. Then we got nothing at
all. Then the doctor from the Luftwaffe said, “Now, you have to drink
sea-water on an empty stomach.” That lasted about 1 or 2 weeks. This
Rudi Taubmann, as I already said, got excited and didn’t want to
participate; and the doctor from the Luftwaffe said, “If you get excited
and mutiny, I will shoot you,” and then we were all quiet. Then we began
to drink sea-water. I drank the worst kind, that was yellowish. We drank
two or three times a day, and then in the evening we drank the yellow
kind. There were three kinds of water, white water, and yellow water
[two kinds]; and I drank the yellow kind. After a few days the people
became raving mad; they foamed at the mouth. The doctor from the
Luftwaffe came with a cynical laugh and said, “Now it is time to make
the liver punctures.” I remember one very well.

Q. Talk more slowly, Witness. Thank you.

A. Yes. The first row on the left when you came in, the second bed, that
was the first one. He went crazy and barked like a dog. He foamed at the
mouth. The doctor from the Luftwaffe took him down on a stretcher with a
white sheet over him, and then he stuck a needle about this long
(indicating) into his right side, and there was a hypodermic needle on
it, and it bled, and it was very painful. We were all quiet and excited.
When that was over, the other inmates took their turn. The people were
crazy from thirst and hunger, we were so hungry—but the doctor had no
pity on us. He was as cold as ice. He didn’t take any interest in us.
Then, one gypsy—I don’t know his name any more—ate a little piece of
bread once, or drank some water; I don’t remember just what he did. The
doctor from the Luftwaffe got very angry and mad. He took the gypsy and
tied him to a bed post and sealed his mouth.

Q. Witness, do you mean that he put adhesive tape over this gypsy’s
mouth?

A. Yes.

Q. Go ahead, continue.

A. Then a gypsy, he was lying on the right, a big strong, husky fellow,
he refused to drink the water. He asked the doctor from the Luftwaffe to
let him go. He said he couldn’t stand the water. He was sick. The doctor
from the Luftwaffe had no pity, and he said, “No, you have to drink it.”
The doctor from the Luftwaffe told one of his assistants to go and get a
sun. Naturally, we didn’t know what a sun was. Then one of his
assistants came with a red tube about this long (indicating) and thrust
this tube first into the gypsy’s mouth and then into his stomach.

Q. Just a moment. That tube was how long? How long would that be, a half
a meter long?

A. About this long (indicating).

Q. That will be about a half a meter?

A. Yes, about a half a meter. And then the doctor from the Luftwaffe
took this red tube and put it in the gypsy’s mouth and into his stomach.
And then he pumped water down the tube. The gypsy kneeled in front of
him and beseeched him for mercy but that doctor had none.

Q. Witness, during the experiments was your temperature taken?

A. Yes.

Q. Who took your temperatures?

A. There were two Frenchmen, one tall thin and one short blond one; and
they took the temperatures and the doctor from the Luftwaffe took the
temperatures, too.

Q. When you say “the doctor from the Luftwaffe” you mean the man you
referred to as the “professor.” The professor and the doctor from the
Luftwaffe are the same or are they two different people?

A. Yes.

Q. I see. Thank you. Now, who performed the liver punctures?

A. The doctor from the Luftwaffe carried out the liver punctures
himself. Some people were given liver punctures and at the same time a
puncture in the spinal cord. The doctor from the Luftwaffe did that
himself. It was very painful. Something ran out at the same time at the
back. It was water or something—I don’t know what it was.

Q. Well, did you receive a liver puncture?

A. Yes.

Q. Did the professor tell you for what reason he gave you that liver
puncture?

A. The doctor from the Luftwaffe came to me and said, “Now,
Hoellenrainer, it’s your turn.” I was lying on the bed. I was very weak
from this water and from not having anything to eat. He said, “Now, lie
on your left side and take the clothes off your right side.” I held on
to the bedstead on top of me and the doctor from the Luftwaffe sat down
next to me and pushed a long needle into me. It was very painful. I
said, “Doctor, what are you doing?” The doctor said, “I have to make a
liver puncture so that the salt comes out of your liver.”

Q. Now, Witness, can you tell us whether or not the subjects used in the
experiments were gypsies of purely German nationality or were there some
Polish gypsies, some Russian gypsies, Czechoslovak gypsies, and so
forth?

A. Yes, there were about seven or eight Germans and the rest of them
were all Poles and Czechs, Czech gypsies and Polish gypsies.

Q. Were any of the experimental subjects ever taken out of the station
room to the yard outside the experimental barracks?

A. Yes, at the end when the experiments were all finished; and three
people were carried out with white sheets over them on a stretcher. They
were covered with sheets but I don’t know whether they were dead or not.
But we, my colleagues and I, talked about it. We never saw these three
again, neither at work nor anywhere in the camp. We often talked about
it and wondered where they were. We never saw them again. We thought
that they were dead.

Q. Do you know where they were taken?

A. No, I don’t know.

Q. Well, during the course of the experiments were you weighed every
day?

A. Yes. We were weighed, too.

Q. Was that every day or every other day?

A. I don’t remember exactly.

Q. Well, now, after the completion of the experiments in early September
what happened to you?

A. When we had finished the experiments?

Q. Yes.

A. I told you that already. We were sent to the hospital and the doctor
from the Luftwaffe came and said we were to take our clothes off and we
lined up and were divided into three groups. The doctor from the
Luftwaffe said, “Now you will be given good food. You have never had
such good food.” We were given potatoes, dextrose, cookies, milk—

Q. Just a minute, Witness. I am referring to the end of the experiments,
after the experiments were all completed. Could you tell us what date
your experiments were completed and you were transferred from the
experimental station?

A. The experiment lasted, maybe, 4 or 5 weeks altogether. I don’t know
the date.

Q. Well, then, they were completed in early September. Is that correct?
You arrived—

A. Yes.

Q. Now, after the experiments were completed did you then return to the
camp proper or to the camp hospital?

A. No, to the camp, into Block 22. We couldn’t walk. We all had to
support each other. We were exhausted. I forgot to tell you one thing.
Before we began the experiments and we had this good food for about one
week, the doctor took us out into the courtyard near the hospital. The
doctor from the Luftwaffe came. He had a little bottle in his hand and
we all had to line up. There was some liquid in the bottle and he put a
number on our chest. I had number “23.” It burned a lot. Then we went
back into the block. On every bed there was a number, the same number we
had on our chests. One man—but I don’t remember who it was—one of the
inmates, said: “That is what they call the death number.” I was pretty
scared and the inmates said, “Yes, that is the death number so that the
doctor of the Luftwaffe will know right away who is dead.”

We didn’t want to go on with the experiments but what choice did we
have? We were just poor prisoners. Nobody bothered about us. We had to
let them do with us what they wanted. We couldn’t resist. I haven’t got
the power to relate everything as it—

Q. All right. Just a moment. Was your bed number “23”?

A. Yes.

Q. Then you were considered to be experimental subject number 23?

A. Yes.

Q. Were you sick during the course of the experiments, Witness?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, Witness, after the completion of the experiments in early
September were you then called in and weighed to determine your weight
about 2 weeks later?

A. No, not after 2 weeks.

Q. Were you called in and weighed 1 week after you had completed the
experiments? Do you remember?

A. I don’t remember. But we were weighed.

Q. You were weighed every day during the experiments?

A. Yes.

Q. What I want to know is, were you weighed after the completion of the
experiments? For instance, you were weighed every day during the
experiments; then the experiments were completed; then you were not
weighed again for a period of 1 or 2 weeks. Did you get weighed 1 or 2
weeks after the completion of the experiments?

A. When the experiment was all finished? No.

Q. Well, now after you left the experimental block and went to the camp
how long was it before you were able to resume work?

A. A few days. Then we were sent in a detachment to a farm in
Feldmochingen. We had to work hard and the food was better than in the
camp but, you know, if you are a prisoner, what did the farmers give
you? A little bread, some soup—but, in any case it was better than in
the camp; and then every evening we came back to our block and then we
got the regular camp food.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. STEINBAUER: When you were examined the first time you said that you
had no previous convictions. Do you maintain this assertion?

WITNESS HOELLENRAINER: No, I have been convicted.

Q. Then why did you lie?

A. I did not lie. I meant from the experiments.

Q. The question was whether before you came to the Gestapo you had ever
been convicted and punished by the police. Nothing was mentioned about
experiments at that time. That’s an excuse. Do you admit that you lied?
It’s much better for you.

A. No. I did not lie.

Q. Well, you have been convicted?

A. Yes.

Q. For theft?

A. Yes.

Q. For fraud?

A. Yes.

Q. For assault?

A. Yes.

Q. For blackmail?

A. What do you mean by that?

Q. Well, coercion.

A. No.

Q. For using a false name?

A. No. I never used a false name.

Q. You have to speak more slowly. We will come back to that. You were
arrested then for desertion?

A. Yes.

Q. You were prosecuted for desertion?

A. Yes.

Q. You refused to obey your draft order?

A. Yes.

Q. Isn’t that why you were sent to the concentration camp?

A. No, I was sent to the concentration camp merely because I am a gypsy.
My brothers were in the war and they came back from Russia and were sent
to Sachsenhausen and were murdered there, because there weren’t supposed
to be any more gypsies in the German Army.

Q. What kind of a badge did you wear in the camp?

A. A black one.

Q. You and your wife, too, have stated that you participated in malaria,
phlegmon, typhoid, and sea-water experiments?

A. No, only this one experiment, no malaria.

Q. Do you admit that you lied to the young doctor who talked to you?

A. No, I didn’t lie to the doctor. I just told him the exact truth. My
wife and I weren’t allowed to marry. My wife had a child from me and it
was cremated in Birkenau. My sister was cremated and both her children.

Q. Don’t get excited. I asked you whether you told the young doctor that
you were in four different experiments. All you have to say is yes or
no.

A. I told the doctor I drank salt water.

Q. Listen, Herr Hoellenrainer, don’t be evasive as gypsies usually are.
Give me a clear answer as a witness under oath. Did you tell the doctor
that you participated in other experiments, yes or no?

A. No. I just drank salt water.

MR. HARDY: Your Honor, the testimony of this doctor is not in evidence
before this Tribunal. I don’t understand what Dr. Steinbauer is
referring to.

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. STEINBAUER: You said you were in Auschwitz?

WITNESS HOELLENRAINER: Yes.

Q. Were you in the Birkenau extermination camp?

A. Yes.

Q. Were the gypsies in a big camp there?

A. Yes.

Q. Were there women and children there?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you have a wife there?

A. Yes, my fiancee, Ida Schmidt. She was gassed. She was burned to
death. I never saw her again.

Q. Didn’t you once beat your wife until the blood spurted out on to the
wall?

A. No.

Q. Did you ever beat her?

A. No.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. I asked you whether what I have just read to you is true, that you
were divided up and your numbers were called out, etc.?

A. We weren’t asked at all. Forty of us were collected together and we
were sent to Dachau.

Q. Now, I have to tell you that your countryman—he is from Fuerth too,
called Mettbach—said that he talked to you and particularly said that
he wanted to go to Dachau because it was nearer Fuerth than Buchenwald;
is that true?

A. That might be. I didn’t mind going to Dachau either because my
brother lived in Munich.

Q. Then you did go voluntarily?

A. No, I did not.

Q. How does it happen that Laubinger said something else? Laubinger said
you were deceived, that is why you volunteered?

A. No, I never volunteered. I certainly wouldn’t volunteer for these
death experiments.

Q. Well, you went to Dachau?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know the old Herzberg?

A. No.

Q. You don’t remember the gypsy from Bratislava?

A. No.

Q. Who was the oldest gypsy?

A. I don’t remember.

Q. You were with your comrades for weeks and don’t know their names?

A. No.

Q. It is possible that Mettbach did not know all the names then, isn’t
it?

A. How should I know? I did not have time to ask everybody what his name
was.

Q. When the experiments were to begin, did the professor explain the
purpose? That it was for rescuing people from shipwrecks, and that it
was a sea-water experiment?

A. Yes, of course.

Q. Did he explain that you would be very thirsty?

A. Yes, he did first.

Q. And that thirst was very unpleasant?

A. Yes.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, the thirst dried out the mouth?

A. Yes.

Q. How can you explain that these people foamed at the mouth?

A. They had fits and foamed at the mouth, they had fits of raving
madness.

Q. I am just asking you how there can be foam on a mouth which is
completely dried out?

A. I don’t know.

Q. You don’t know. Then some became mad?

A. Yes.

Q. You gypsies stick together, don’t you?

A. Yes, of course.

Q. Then you must be able to tell me who became mad?

A. I don’t remember.

Q. You must know. If a friend of mine—I was a soldier twice—and if a
friend of mine had gone mad then I would have noticed it.

A. It was a tall man who was in the first row. He was the first one to
start. He became raving mad and had fits and thrashed around with his
hands and feet. He was a tall slim gypsy.

Q. You said that you were weighed?

A. Yes.

Q. Isn’t it possible that after the experiment, when you received good
food again and plenty of water, you were re-weighed?

A. No.

Q. But then they had a chart showing where you were weighed every day?

A. I don’t know.

Q. Were you weighed standing up or lying down?

A. Standing up.

Q. Were some of the people weighed lying down?

A. I don’t remember.

Q. Were the scales ones on which people could be weighed lying down?

A. I don’t know.

Q. What did these scales look like?

A. Well, they were big scales. You had to stand on it. There was an
indicator which showed the weight.

Q. The man who had his mouth sealed, did he have a tube in his stomach
too?

A. I don’t remember.

Q. Your liver was punctured?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you have a scar?

A. A scar? I don’t know.

Q. Don’t you ever look at your body?

A. Yes. You want to see it?

Q. No. I am just asking you if you have a scar?

A. You mean a little mark?

Q. Have you a little round scar there?

A. I did not look as carefully as that.

Q. Well, do you think you have one or not?

A. I don’t know. I didn’t bother with these camp matters any more,
otherwise I would go crazy. I don’t want to hear anything more about the
camp. We suffered long enough.

Q. Witness, do you think you are mad or mentally retarded?

A. No. I don’t think I am mad. I said, I’d very soon go mad if I thought
about these things at the camp.

Q. Do you think there is something wrong with you mentally?

A. No.

Q. You say you are going crazy?

A. Well, if I keep thinking of that camp.

MR. HARDY: I object to this line of questioning, your Honor.

DR. STEINBAUER: Well, your liver was punctured?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know whether you have a scar, yes or no?

A. I don’t know.

Q. What was the nationality of the people in the camp who were
experimental subjects?

A. Poles and Czechs.

Q. How many Germans were there?

A. Seven or eight, who spoke German.

Q. Were there some Hungarians and Burgenlaender?

A. No. I don’t know.

                 *        *        *        *        *

        EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK[52]

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. HARDY: Do you have any ability to write shorthand, Doctor?

DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK: Yes, I know shorthand.

Q. Are these your stenographic notes on the back of Document C-23?

A. Yes.

Q. Would you kindly read those to the Tribunal—transcribe them? Would
that be too difficult, or would you like to have me give you my
transcription of them to aid you?

A. It says: “The thirst acquires forms which are difficult to bear. The
patient is apathetic.”

Q. Pardon me, Doctor. It might be helpful if you used this
transcription. I have had experts transcribe the notes; and then the
interpreters can follow us more readily. I have the English copies also
for the Tribunal to follow you, and if you have any discrepancy to point
out with transcription as set out in the English—

JUDGE SEBRING: Are you offering this, Mr. Hardy?

MR. HARDY: That is a problem, your Honor. I want to have him transcribe
the notes, and when the Tribunal settles who will offer this document
into evidence, either the defense or prosecution, at that time, if
necessary, I will give this a document number. I think we will have to
wait to clarify that point later.

Q. Would you check that transcription, Professor?

A. That is correct, except in the first line it says—

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: You have read your own stenographic notes, have
you not?

DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK: Yes, and I have compared them with this
transcription.

Q. What you should now read is your own version of these shorthand notes
as you say they are correctly read. You understand that? You can read
them from that, as you corrected it. You can read them from shorthand
direct or from the typewritten transcription, as you please. Read
slowly, too, please.

MR. HARDY: While he is reading that, your Honor, I suggest that he stop
at the correction he wishes to make and we can correct our English copy
and the interpreters can correct the German copy.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: He will call attention to the corrections which
you make.

DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK: “The thirst assumes forms difficult to endure.”
The second version reads: “already unendurable”. My notes do not read
like that.

“The thirst assumes forms difficult to endure. The patient lies there
quite motionless with half-closed eyes. The patient lies apathetically.
He takes little notice of his surroundings. He asks for water only when
he awakes from his somnolent condition.

“The appearance is very bad and shows signs of a decline. The general
condition gives no cause for alarm.

“Respiration somewhat flatter, moderately frequent.

“Respirations 25 per minute.

“The eyes are deeply hollowed”, it should read “deeply”. Here it says
“often”.

“The turgor of the skin greatly reduced.

“Skin dry, tongue completely dry, whitish coating in the middle fairly
free.

“The mucous membranes of the mouth and the lips dry, latter covered with
crusts. Lungs show slight very dry bronchitis, lower border VI-XI.” It
is supposed to read “XI”. Originally it said “XII” and apparently I
corrected it to read “XI.”

“Sharpened vesicular”, the word “breathing” is omitted here, of course.

“Sharpened vesicular breathing”—that is a medical expression.

“Heart beats very low, barely audible. Pulse weak. Filled. Palpability
of the pulse worse.” Here it says that the pulse is “felt” and it should
be “filled”. The pulse is less full.

Then this which is described here as undecipherable reads: “The cell
walls are somewhat thickened.” Here I probably said “more strongly
thickened”.

“Liver 2½-3 fingers below sternal margin, rather soft, moderately
sensitive to pressure.”

“Spleen soft” is wrong. It says: “Spleen reutoric, enlarged in a ring
form, slightly enlarged.”

“Musculature hypotonic. Joints can be extended excessively. Calves
slightly sensitive to pressure.” Then what is described here as
illegible reads: “Indication of horizontal welt formation strong welt
vertical formation.” That refers to the reaction of the muscle upon
knocking, the so-called ideo-muscular welt.

Q. Would you kindly start that paragraph again and read it as it is
written?

A. It reads here: “Musculature hypotonic. Joints can be extended
excessively. Calves slightly sensitive to pressure. Indication of
horizontal welt formations. Strong vertical welt formations.” Up to this
point, that is how it reads in the text; then in order to explain it, I
added that we were concerned with the so-called ideo-muscular welt.

Further the text continues: “Reflexes” with two little crosses, that is,
they react strongly. “Abdominal reflexes”, also two little crosses.
“Romberg” as it says here. “Babinski negative”.

“Left”—here it says “Leif” “phenomenon”. Here on the left, “phenomenon
of Becher”. “Oppenheim negative”. “Rosselimo negative”. “Bulbous reflex
bad”. “Tonus of the bulb of the eye bad”. “Bulbous reflex” with a little
cross—that is positive.

[Interruption.]

Q. Now, Professor Beiglboeck, looking over these stenographic notes in
the sentence in the first paragraph, which will be the third sentence,
which states: “He takes little notice of his surroundings”, has an
erasure been made in the stenographic notes in that sentence?

A. No. I can’t see any.

Q. In place of the word “little” which appears in the present text on
the back of C-23, was there originally a symbol, stenographic symbol for
the word “no” and then the word “no” was erased and replaced by the word
“little”?

A. I see here that actually something else had been written there;
probably at the time I wrote over it. I don’t see anything erased.

Q. Now, in the sentence in the same paragraph, the first paragraph, the
fourth sentence where it states: “He asks for water only when he awakes
from his somnolent condition”, did another word appear in the same place
as the character for “somnolent condition”? Did another word appear in
the same place as the character for “somnolent” now appears, and can you
make out whether or not that other character that has been erased was
the word “semiconscious” and has now been replaced by “somnolent”? I
think the original character can be well recognized to read
“semiconscious”.

A. What is legible under here says: “Numb”.

Q. After the sentence that I have just read: “He asks for water—”

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: I did not understand the witness’ explanation of
that last double reading of the shorthand. What was your explanation,
Witness?

DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK: The German word “benommen”, numb.

Q. Numb? Not unconscious?

A. Numb.

MR. HARDY: In the first instance, in the sentence: “He takes little
notice of his surroundings”, is an erasure noticeable there, in that the
word “no” has been replaced by the word “little”?

DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK: Something has been written over.

Q. Will you show that to the Tribunal, please, that character that has
been written over? Would you point that out to them, Doctor? Point out
the character in that sentence: “He takes little notice of his
surroundings”, and point that out, this character here (indicating) on
the second line of characters.

MR. HARDY: Here it is, your Honor, the last character on the page.

Q. Now, would you show the Tribunal also where the word “semiconscious”
or “numb” appeared and that has also been written over? That is the last
character on the third line.

A. Yes, here (indicating).

Q. Now, after the sentence: “He asks for water only when he awakes from
his somnolent condition,” which is the fourth stenographic line on the
back of chart C-23, we notice that an entire line or half line has been
erased. This half line had previously contained stenographic symbols but
they are now no longer identifiable. Is that correct?

A. Yes. Something has been erased here.

MR. HARDY: Your Honors can see the red erasure that has been used to
erase that half line of characters; the impression of the eraser is
still obvious there.

Q. Now, Professor, in the sentence in the next paragraph of stenographic
notes, the second sentence reads: “The general condition gives no cause
for alarm.” Is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, throughout your writing of these characters, between each word
you usually leave a space to indicate another word, do you not? That is
very clear throughout your transcription. You have left spaces between
each character signifying words. Is that correct?

A. No. It varies. Sometimes the words are written closer together, quite
closely, for example here (indicating).

Q. Well now, here in this sentence where it says, “The general condition
gives no cause for alarm”, the word “no”—that is, this character
here—does not have the spaces between it that all the other characters
on the sheet have, does it? In fact, the symbol for “no” touches the
previous symbol for “general condition”, leaving no spacing. Did you add
the word “no” at a later date in a different pencil?

A. No. I do that quite frequently. When something is written above the
line in shorthand I raise the adjoining sign as well.

Q. Now, if you will turn to the sentence in the third paragraph which
reads: “Respiration somewhat flatter, moderately frequent”. The word
“is” appeared instead of “somewhat” originally, did it not, before an
erasure was made? Didn’t it read originally “Respiration is flatter,
moderately frequent”?

A. It still says so: “somewhat frequent; moderately frequent.” I wrote
that twice.

Q. Well, now, how does that sentence read?

A. “Respiration somewhat flatter, moderately frequent; respiration 25
per minute.”

Q. Did the word “is”, the character for the word “is”, appear in that
sentence before a change was made?

A. Which word?

Q. “Is”—“i-s”.

A. No.

Q. Can’t you clearly see in that sentence that the word “is” has been
erased and in its place the word “somewhat” has been written, the
character “somewhat”?

A. No.

Q. You can’t see that. Did you look at it through the glass, Doctor?

A. In shorthand I write the word “is”—

Q. Now, later in this same sentence, Dr. Beiglboeck, after the word
“flatter”, didn’t the word “hardly” appear originally in place of the
word “moderately”? The word “hardly” was erased and replaced by
“moderately” and then crossed out twice.

A. Here it said “troublesome”.

Q. It says, “respiration flatter”. It could say “hardly frequent” before
the changes, couldn’t it?

A. “Hardly moderately” it says here. That means: “Hardly moderately
frequent”.

Q. Has the character been changed at all?

A. I said already originally it read “troublesome”.

Q. Have any erasures been made in that sentence?

A. It was written over.

Q. And then crossed out?

A. Yes.

Q. What word was written over? Is that word there that is written over,
that is now legible, the word “moderately” or is that the word “hardly”?

A. It didn’t read “hardly”. It read: “troublesome”.

Q. Well, which character said “troublesome”, the one that is legible now
or the one that has been written over?

A. It is legible; it was “troublesome”.

Q. Well now, in the sentence which starts out in the eighth paragraph
with the words: “Heartbeats very low, poorly audible,” in that sentence
has a character been erased and another one written over? Has the
character “scarcely” been erased and replaced by “poorly”? I believe the
marks of the original symbol for “scarcely” can still be clearly
distinguished, can they not?

A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Who made these changes, Doctor? Did you make them yourself?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. When did you make them?

A. I am no longer able to tell you exactly when I made them.

Q. Did you make them at Dachau?

A. No.

Q. Did you make them in Nuernberg?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you erase these shorthand characters that appear on the fourth
line here in Nuernberg?

A. Yes, I did that too.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Now, Doctor, you have had the opportunity to think over during the
course of last evening your examination yesterday, and you have told
this Tribunal that these stenographic notes were altered by yourself
here in Nuernberg; are you prepared to tell this Tribunal now just why
it became necessary for you to alter these stenographic notes?

A. I ask permission to be allowed to make the following explanation. I
changed these notes before these sheets were handed in, that is, after
they had been returned from Professor Vollhardt. I only made some
changes in these stenographic notes, and then I told my defense counsel,
whom I had not informed about this—this I want to emphasize—I said to
him we should withdraw the weight chart, because I was immediately sorry
that I had changed something. I originally intended to submit the weight
charts of these persons, because I believe from the changed weights
alone one can see on the whole how this experiment developed. And then,
when I had committed this thoughtless action, my conscience immediately
bothered me, and I told my defense counsel that I should not submit it.
But I want to state that I did not make any changes in the rest of the
report on the course of the experiments; that in the urine amounts, as
well as in the temperatures, and especially in the case of the weights,
they are definitely the original values, as also in the case of the
blood pressure. So in what you see here, on the front pages of the
chart, nothing has been changed since these charts arrived here.

Q. Could you tell us just what was your reason for changing some of the
stenographic notes?

A. Because a person who does not know the condition of thirst would
receive a stronger impression of the condition from the description as
it was here than the actual condition really was.

Q. Do you have anything further to say about those alterations, Doctor?
You may at this time explain to the Tribunal anything else in connection
with those alterations if you wish.

A. Well, I want to state again that I am very sorry that I did it. As I
said, I only intended to submit the charts to show the weights, and not
because of the other results of the medical examinations, because I am
of the opinion that from the weight charts one can definitely recognize,
first, how much weight the experimental subject lost; secondly, they
reveal unequivocally on which days water was drunk; thirdly, they reveal
clearly that immediately after the conclusion of the experiment there
was a gain in weight in the case of all the experimental subjects; and,
fourthly, one sees that when the persons were discharged in most cases
they had again reached their original weight.

JUDGE SEBRING: Well, Doctor, how do you explain the fact that names have
been erased from many of these charts?

DEFENDANT BEIGLBOECK: This erasing of names must have been done before.
I did not do that here. I did not change anything on the front pages of
these charts. It is possible that this already happened in Dachau. I
can’t tell you that. It is possible that I erased them later on in
Tarvis. I did not erase them here.

                 *        *        *        *        *

    EXTRACTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENSE EXPERT WITNESS DR. FRANZ
                             VOLLHARDT[53]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. MARX: Please, would you briefly tell the Tribunal what your
scientific activities have been and in what special field you have taken
a particularly great interest, and since when?

WITNESS VOLLHARDT: I am Professor of Internal Medicine at Frankfurt and
predominantly I have dealt with the questions of circulation,
metabolism, blood pressure, and kidney diseases.

Q. Which are the German universities where you have been a lecturer?

A. Halle and Frankfurt.

Q. Are you an author of scientific works regarding this special field of
activity?

A. Yes.

Q. Have they been circulated and translated in foreign countries and in
foreign languages?

A. Yes, they have been translated into Russian, behind my back.

Q. Considering the facts you have just stated, it would be right to say
that you have had honors allotted to you in this country and abroad; so
would you please tell the Tribunal what types of decoration you have
received abroad?

A. I really have to?

Q. Which foreign academies and foreign societies have you been a member
of? Professor, I really want you to answer my questions because my
questions pursue certain purposes.

A. I am Honorary Doctor of the Sorbonne, Paris, of Goettingen and
Freiburg; and, as far as societies are concerned, there are a lot of
them, Medical Society at Edinburgh, at Geneva, at Luxembourg. I am an
Honorary Member of the University at Santiago, and so on and so forth.

Q. Thank you very much. Then I would be interested to hear from you
whether you had connections with the NSDAP and what sort of connections
they were and whether the Party persecuted you in any way. Perhaps you
might answer the last question first.

A. When I was lecturing in Spanish in South America, and when I was
giving a lecture in Cordoba, Argentina, before a medical congress, I
received a telegram to the effect that I had been relieved from my
office and the reason given was lack of anti-Semitic attitude.

Q. When was that?

A. 1938.

Q. And since when have you been reinstated and active again?

A. Since 1945.

Q. As a full professor?

A. Yes, as full professor for internal medicine at the University of
Frankfurt.

Q. Now, Professor, a few questions regarding your own research work. You
have dealt particularly with hunger and thirst treatment in the case of
kidney diseases. Is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. So that you have personal medical and scientific experience regarding
the observation of human beings when they undergo hunger and thirst
treatment?

A. Yes.

DR. MARX: Mr. President, before continuing with the examination of this
expert witness, I should like to permit myself to make a suggestion.
There are two types of possibilities for the examination of Professor
Vollhardt regarding questions which interest us here. One possibility,
the one which I myself consider the correct one, is that Professor
Vollhardt should give us a continuous expert opinion regarding the
entire complex of questions which are of interest here, and that at the
end I would then permit myself to put a few concluding questions to the
expert here as, of course, any defense counsel and prosecutor is
entitled to do, too. The other possibility would be that I put a number
of individual questions to the expert which would deal with the subject
chronologically and technically from a medical point of view. But, that
would distort the context and would not give as clear a picture of the
situation as would the first possibility. I should like therefore, Mr.
President, for you to make a decision whether the expert is to give an
opinion in the form of a lecture first.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: If counsel would propound to the witness a
hypothetical question covering the basic facts which here are at issue,
and if the witness would answer that hypothetical question without
further question from counsel and make his response brief and to the
point, and without enlarging too much upon the fact that salt water is
not fit to drink and is injurious, which the Tribunal very well knows,
we might proceed as suggested by counsel. The hypothetical question
should cover the facts here at issue, that experiments were tried upon a
group of people, a control group, a noncontrol group, and others, then
the witness may answer that question without further interruption by
counsel if his answer is, as I said, brief and not enlarging too much on
generalities.

DR. MARX: Very well, Mr. President.

Q. Now, Professor, have you sufficient insight into the planning and
carrying out of the so-called sea-water experiments to give an expert
opinion on that subject?

WITNESS VOLLHARDT: Yes.

Q. What documentary evidence did you have?

A. I had the original records prepared by Beiglboeck.

Q. I shall first of all deal with the character and type of the
experiments. Are there differences between the character of these
sea-water experiments and experiments with artificial infection with
malaria and cholera and if there are differences, what are they?

A. You can’t compare the two at all, because in the case of the
sea-water experiments you have things so perfectly under control and can
interrupt so instantaneously, and because the experiments take such a
short time that the danger of injury could be excluded with absolute
certainty. In the case of artificial infection you cannot do that.

Q. You are saying that in the case of sea-water experiments, providing
they are interrupted in time, danger to health and body can be avoided
with certainty or bordering on certainty.

A. Not the latter. I said with absolute certainty.

Q. I shall now come to the planning of these experiments. I suppose you
know of the meeting of 25 May 1944, which was decisive for the planning
of the experiments. Did the presence of Professors Eppinger and Heubner
guarantee the purely scientific and medically proper treatment of the
problem?

A. Undoubtedly it did. Professor Heubner is a leading scientist and an
extremely critical person, and Professor Eppinger was one of the leading
clinicians in the world and a most outstanding expert, and I assume both
of these gentlemen had reasons for allowing these experiments to be
carried out, presumably in order to strengthen the medical men,
vis-a-vis, the technicians. Secondly, Eppinger’s idea apparently was
that under such stringent experimental conditions, the kidney would
suffer to an unusual degree and that Berkatit, which contains vitamins,
might assist the work of the kidney.

Q. Professor, what is your opinion about the individual experimental
groups?

A. I think that scientifically speaking the planning was excellent and I
have no objection to the entire plan. It was good to add a
hunger-and-thirst group because we know by experience that thirst can be
borne less well than hunger, and if people are suffering from hunger and
thirst too, they do not suffer from hunger, but do suffer from thirst;
and that resembles what shipwrecked persons would be subjected to
because they only suffer from thirst. It was excellent that Wofatit was
to be introduced into the experiments too, although it was expected from
the beginning that this wonderful discovery would show its value. It
turned out that groups given sea-water treated according to the Schaefer
method reacted similarly to a group that was subjected to a reasonable
hunger treatment and did not suffer any great discomfort. In the hunger
treatment of 12, or, we should say 8 days, because the people still ate
during the first 4 days, that is a minor affair, and we carry that out
innumerable times for medical reasons. There exists a sanitarium where
people are made to go without food for 4 weeks, and as long as they get
water in the shape of fruit juice, they still carry on well and often
with enthusiasm. Group 2 was Schaefer’s group, groups 3 and 4 were the
groups that received 500 cc. of sea-water, once without and once with
Wofatit. Group 3 was the one which drank 1,000 cc. of sea-water. That
one could only use volunteers for this group is an obvious fact, since
the cooperation of the experimental subject is indispensable; without
his good will such an experimental arrangement is impossible. That
sufficient volunteers could be found for a case was a matter of course,
since a period of 10 days of excellent food before and after the
experiment was before them, and since one could assure them with the
best of confidence that there would not and could not be any danger.

Q. We will come to that, Professor. You have just started to speak about
food, nourishment. What is your opinion about the food before, during,
and after the actual experiments?

A. Well, before the experiments it was splendid. During the experiments
it was meager, corresponding to that of shipwrecked persons and
afterwards quite excellent. In my opinion during such brief experiments
nourishment doesn’t play any part.

MR. HARDY: May it please the Tribunal, might I inquire whether the
witness is now testifying to facts as he has ascertained them from
studying graphs and charts made by Professor Beiglboeck or is he
testifying from hearsay that food was given to these inmates, or what is
the basis of his knowledge that he is eliciting here?

A. I was giving my testimony based on the records which I have studied.

MR. HARDY: Thank you.

A. But I don’t attach any importance to the meager food served during
the experiments because that is an insignificant point which as I have
said we have allotted to others many times.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Witness, when you referred to this examination of
the records, state briefly just what records you examined.

A. The original records.

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. MARX: Professor, how do you judge the individual examinations
carried out by Professor Beiglboeck? Were they adequate for the solution
of the practical question whether Berkatit was sufficiently useful and
preferable to thirst treatment, and was it sufficient to judge the daily
condition of the experimental subjects so that the right time to
interrupt the experiments could be ascertained?

Did you get my question?

A. Yes. I got it. I thought that the arrangement of these experiments
was splendid from the scientific point of view, and Beiglboeck
apparently devoted himself with tremendous industry and great
responsibility to carrying out of these experiments which he had been
ordered to do.

Q. Would it be right to say that a personality such as Beiglboeck, as a
professor of internal medicine and chief medical officer at a clinic for
many years on the basis of daily examinations and through his personal
consideration and examination of the experimental subject, would be in a
position to recognize any threat to the health of the person before such
a threat could actually become serious?

A. That was a matter of course. Beiglboeck is an excellent internal
medical man and the great care with which he carried out these
experiments shows that he was fully conscious of his responsibility.
Only, it’s hard to imagine that, during such brief experiments, serious
damage could have occurred at all.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Professor, a little earlier you briefly dealt with the question of
starving, of hunger or of thirst for the purpose of treatment, and I now
want to ask you whether the administration of hunger and thirst cures of
several days is a medically recognized fact, and also how long would you
consider that hunger and thirst with complete refusal of food and liquid
could take place without putting someone’s health in jeopardy?

A. It depends who it is. Initially, I recommended hunger and thirst
treatment in the case of acute inflammation of the kidneys, but there
people have a great deal of water in their system and the water is
absorbed during such a cure. Astonishing as it may seem, a cure is
effected very rapidly. In such cases, three, five, seven, and even more
days of hunger are employed. In other cases, where no water surplus is
in existence, we would only apply 6 days of hunger treatment. During the
time when I had to be interested in these particular experiments, there
were four women in my clinic, all of whom were there because of high
blood pressure. They were aged 50, 51, 53, and 63 years. One had a blood
pressure of 210/100, and 6 days later it had been reduced to 170/100.
The third had a blood pressure of 280/160 and 6 days later it dropped to
180/100. The loss of weight amounted to 3 or 4 kilograms and the
patients naturally, during those days, suffered from thirst and felt
weak at the end of the sixth day, but they were so happy about the
improved condition that they considered the unpleasantness of the recent
days as being worth forgetting.

Q. Is it correct that when water is withdrawn, nourishment should also
be withdrawn?

A. It’s easier to suffer thirst when you are also hungry because the
supply of nourishment makes claims upon the kidneys and, if you exclude
salt in the nourishment, the water loses further humidity. Thus,
appetite disappears when you are thirsty. Therefore, it is definitely
better to be hungry and thirsty simultaneously.

Q. Professor, is it right to observe the individual doses in order to
prevent diarrhea, and, if individual quantities of less than 300 cc. are
admitted, can you prevent diarrhea?

A. In the case of sea and bitter water you only suffer from diarrhea if
you drink a large quantity at once. If you distribute it over a day you
suffer from constipation.

Q. Yes, but you didn’t quite answer my question. I inquired about the
individual doses.

A. Yes, well, I’m trying to say that if you spread it out over a day,
giving smaller individual doses instead of giving it all at once, then
there isn’t any danger of diarrhea.

Q. Can you describe sea-water as poisonous at all?

A. Absolutely not. There is a trend towards treatment with sea-water
which is increasing, and people drink half a liter of sea-water every
day for weeks. There can’t be any question of any poisonous quality. In
fact, people say they feel splendid. The only difference is that in the
case of such cures fresh water is administered, too, in the manner of
tea, coffee, and soup, so that the dehydrating effect of the sea-water
is counteracted.

Q. Professor, I wonder if you would speak a little more slowly and make
a pause after individual answers in order to enable the interpreters to
follow.

Has there been an experiment during which a dose of 500 to 1,000 cc. of
sea-water daily was taken and is it to be described as dangerous,
providing the experiment is discontinued as soon as there is a threat of
danger to health?

A. There can’t be any question of there being any danger to health
during the first few days. The only question is, how long can the body
stand up to this continued deprivation of humidity? Sea-water has a
three-percent salt water content. Generally speaking, at least so far,
we have assumed that the kidneys cannot deal with such a salt
concentration. This means that salt will remain in the system,
collecting water from the tissues. In the beginning, this is of no
importance, but after 6 or 7 or 8 days, this becomes unpleasant and it
is to be expected that after the twelfth day there is some danger. There
have been cases of sea rescue when even 17 or more days afterwards
recovery was achieved, but I would say that I would never dare to
continue such an experiment beyond the twelfth day, and in this case
with which we are concerned, all experiments were discontinued after the
sixth day, so that danger to health during that period was out of the
question.

Q. Could the aim of these experiments have been achieved with a
semipermeable membrane?

A. I don’t understand how one can imagine this. What we are concerned
with is the question of how long the human body can survive without
water and under the excess quantity of salt. Now, that is subject to the
water content of the body and it depends first of all, upon whether
water is only used by the intermediary tissues or whether the cell
liquid too is being used up. In the latter case, there is a danger which
becomes apparent through excess potassium quantities, and this was also
continuously observed and checked during such experiments, and there
were no excess potassium quantities such as can be expected after 6
days.

Q. Nor would it be right to say that these experiments were not planned
scientifically and medically, is that correct?

A. Absolutely not.

Q. Could they have been planned differently?

A. I couldn’t imagine how.

Q. Were these experiments in the interests of active warfare, or in the
interests of the care of shipwrecked sailors or soldiers?

A. The latter.

Q. In other words, for aviators and sailors who were shipwrecked or
might be shipwrecked?

A. Towards the end of the war there was an increase in the number of
pilots shot down as well as of shipwrecked personnel, and it was,
therefore, the duty of the hygiene department concerned to consider the
question of how one could best deal with such cases of shipwrecked
personnel; that was the reason for this conference. Previously Schaefer,
as we heard yesterday, had recommended that no liquid should be taken.
When, together with I. G. Farben, he succeeded in eliminating salt and
bitter salt from sea-water through Wofatit, the problem was really
solved scientifically. There were, however, considerable technical
difficulties, and it isn’t exactly simple to equip each flier with so
much Wofatit in addition to everything else he has to carry in order to
protect him against the danger of shipwreck. That is no doubt why
Eppinger and Heubner were in favor of the experiment, and it was
unfortunate that Mr. Berka appeared with Berkatit at the same time, and
impressed the technicians because his method was more simple and
cheaper.

Q. Professor, was there any reason to expect symptoms of injury which
might appear later than 10 days after the end of the experiment?

A. It was entirely out of the question, even after the seventh day.
Later injury is out of the question, because the duration of the
experiments is too short.

Q. To what do you attribute the loss of weight during such experiments?

A. That is almost entirely the loss of water. As I have already told
you, the excess salt supply in the body deprived the body of water. The
body must have a supply of water if it is to supply salt. In other
words, if the body is not receiving any other water than sea-water, an
attack on the water held by the body must take place, and therefore loss
of weight is bound to occur which, however, can be made up very quickly.

Q. What would you say was to be expected in the way of the loss of
substance of the body and how much loss of water?

A. I would say the bulk is the loss of water, but to split this up is
something I consider impossible to do with certainty. You might possibly
compare just how much was lost during the time applied by Schaefer when
there was considerable hunger and how much was lost in the case of
Berka.

Q. Does the speed with which the loss of water takes place play an
important part?

A. Yes, of course, a tremendous part. The colored nostras is a
well-known example, during which disease the most tremendous loss of
water and salt takes place during 24 hours. I knew a case where 10
liters of water and 150 grams of salt had to be added intravenously
through the veins, the skin, and through the stomach in order to save
the life of a person suffering from such an acute loss of water. If, on
the other hand, this is spread out over a period of days and if you do
not have to expect such a dangerous loss of salt, then the body can
stand up to it for a much longer period. I might perhaps add that the
loss of salt is just as dangerous as excess quantities of salt, and also
in the event of the loss of salt which is always connected with loss of
water, considerable losses of weight are suffered. It is well known that
an expedition on the mountain Monte Rose lost 5 kilograms of salt and
water in weight, and that the weight could not be replaced in spite of
the addition of water when salt was also added.

Q. Professor, according to the documents at your disposal were these
experiments sufficiently well prepared?

A. It was my impression that they were extremely well prepared, and I
was particularly impressed by the fact that Beiglboeck had sufficiently
examined the participants carefully and had considered the use of three
of them to be unsuitable since he found a defect of the lungs.

Q. I also want to deal with such preparations—

MR. MCHANEY: I do not think by any stretch of the imagination this
witness can testify from the records that Beiglboeck conducted an
examination or rejected three experimental subjects. In my opinion it
does not appear from the records, and he can only testify what
Beiglboeck told him. Unless he can say it does appear in the records, I
think it should be stricken.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Counsel has an opportunity of cross-examining the
witness at the close of his testimony.

DR. MARX: Professor, would you not say that regulations for these
experiments also mean that certain experiments, such as experiments on
one’s self and animal experiments, printed regulations, if you like,
must have been in existence or was that true of this case?

A. Yes, a report from Beiglboeck about an experiment carried out upon
himself is in existence which describes most efficiently the condition
in which he found himself during a sea-water experiment, and this
description tallies to the highest possible degree with what my
volunteers who submitted themselves to these experiments described. I
might deal with that later.

Q. What opinion do you have regarding the experiments which were carried
out by Sirany in Vienna?

A. There appeared to me to be a lack of critical attitude. I think
Schaefer had the same impression yesterday.

Q. Are symptoms recognizable regarding the planning of these experiments
which would go beyond the absolutely essential practical purposes and
which would lead to considerable pains or painful feelings or might have
led to that?

A. Of course it isn’t fun to be thirsty, and that is the major complaint
in these cases. These people are increasingly thirsty, and they are
disappointed to find that drinking sea-water doesn’t decrease but
increases their thirst, and towards the end of the experiments there are
disturbances of the muscles, and the temper doesn’t exactly improve. It
is the same in the salt water experiments where there are cramps of the
calf because of the lack of water, but the characteristics of that are
that these symptoms disappear instantaneously at the very moment when
the first glass of water is drunk.

Q. Would you consider it possible that disturbances of the nerve end
might appear? Temperature?

A. Temperature doesn’t happen at all, and I can’t imagine there being
disturbances of the nervous system at all.

Q. How about fits?

A. In the case of insane people there may appear insane fits, maybe, but
not in the case of normal human beings.

Q. If you yourself had been placed in this position, and considering
your attitude toward medical ethics, would you have objected to carrying
out the same type of experiment as was carried out here, if healthy,
strong, young men had been at your disposal?

A. I actually did it. Since I was interested in connection with
sea-water experiments, I called for volunteers among my young doctors,
and five of them volunteered, among them my youngest son, and they drank
synthetic sea-water, having the exact salt content of real sea-water,
drinking up to 500 cc.; they got a little food, because they were to
continue on duty during the experiment. The loss of weight varied and
was around one kilogram a day. At the end of the experiment, my son was
pretty thin, but after having a cup of tea was fine. Two days later he
had regained his lost weight fully. All five participants described the
experiment in the same way as Beiglboeck described the experiment
carried out on himself. Four of these subjects interrupted the
experiment after 5 days. One carried it out for 6 days, and apart from
continuous thirst, he had no complaints. Any serious disturbance or
damage is out of the question, and the extraordinary fact was the speed
with which all symptoms of thirst disappeared after water had been
taken.

Q. Now, Professor, the experiments we were talking about; did they have
a practical valuable aim and did they show a corresponding result?

A. Yes, that is correct. For instance an important observation was made
which Eppinger had expected; he wanted to see if the kidneys did
concentrate salt under such extreme conditions to an even higher extent
than one expected previously. One thought that it would be something
like 2.0 percent but 2.6 or 2.7 percent and record figures of 3.0, 3.5,
3.6, and 4 percent are shown, so that the fortunate man who is in a
position to concentrate 3.6 percent or 4 percent of salt would be able
to live on sea-water for quite a long period.

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Witness, after a question is propounded to you by
your counsel, would you pause a moment before giving your answer so that
the question may be translated and conveyed and when you begin to make
your answer, would you speak a little more slowly?

A. Finally, one unsuspected fact was shown which may be connected with
this, and that is that the drinking of small quantities of sea-water up
to 500 cc. given over a lengthy period turned out to be better than
unalleviated thirst.

DR. MARX: What do you think of Wofatit generally?

A. It is a wonderful thing.

Q. Is it correct to say that sea-water really assumes the character of
drinking water through it?

A. Yes, the only difficulty would appear to be to obtain the drug in
sufficiently large quantities for a man who is shipwrecked and did not
have his luggage; but it is a wonderful discovery.

Q. So, you think that the result of these experiments is not only of
importance in wartime, but is also of importance for the problems of
seafaring nations?

A. Quite right, it is a wonderful thing for all sea-faring nations.

Q. So that both the experiments with Wofatit, as well as the experiments
made regarding the symptoms when such a drink was not available, were
important to show, for instance, the result of the consumption of
sea-water in certain given doses.

A. That is quite correct.

Q. That was only discovered by these experiments?

A. Quite correct.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. HARDY: On what precisely is your testimony with respect to the
experiments by Beiglboeck based?

WITNESS VOLLHARDT: On the records and the descriptions that Beiglboeck
gave of the experiments.

Q. Precisely what records have you seen of these experiments?

A. The records that the defense counsel had in his hand yesterday or
today.

Q. Doctor, I will have passed up to you a set of records which are
numbered from 1 to 44 in red pencil, and I ask you, did you have those
records before you and did you make a study of them?

A. Yes, I had these records, and I asked one of my collaborators who
took part in these experiments to read through these records and to make
excerpts from them. He happens to be here also.

Q. Who was this collaborator?

A. One of my assistants by the name of Werner. He is in the audience at
the moment.

Q. You said something about his having participated in experiments; you
don’t mean the Dachau experiments, do you?

A. No. In experiments that I carried out with my students.

Q. Did you personally examine these records at all?

A. I saw them, but I didn’t study every one of them. I left that up to
the young man.

Q. And what did the young man do?

A. He gave me a very exhaustive report on them.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Your testimony, then, is based upon a summary made by your assistant,
is that correct?

A. Yes. That is so.

Q. Now what other records were made available to you upon which your
testimony is based here?

A. The charts that were filled out in pencil with figures.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Now, were there any other records that you got which we have not
heard about, on which your testimony here is based?

A. I cannot say at the moment. I would have to confer with—

Q. I believe that the defense had reports by Becker-Freyseng and by
Beiglboeck?

A. These were reports on the whole development of the question.

Q. Well, Professor, what sort of reports were they? We have not seen
them, you know, and we would like to know on what you are basing your
opinion before this Tribunal.

A. Descriptions of the whole course that the matter took regarding the
conference, how the decision was reached, how the experiments were
planned, and then Beiglboeck’s report on his own experiments on himself,
which is a very careful description and corresponds exactly to what my
subjects experienced when they carried out experiments on themselves.

Q. Did you read and study these experiments carried out by
Becker-Freyseng and Beiglboeck?

A. Of course.

Q. And they influenced your testimony before this Tribunal; you relied
on them in making your testimony here?

A. From these I had an idea of the situation as a whole; in order to
form my own opinion I performed experiments myself.

Q. And your testimony here is based in part upon the reports made by
Becker-Freyseng and Beiglboeck; that is true, isn’t it, Doctor?

A. Yes.

Q. And these records made by Becker-Freyseng and Beiglboeck were not
contemporaneous records of these experiments, were they, Professor?

A. I don’t believe so.

Q. They were, rather, essays or reports which they have written up since
their arrest and incarceration; isn’t that true, Professor?

A. That is very possible.

Q. How old a man is this assistant of yours, Professor?

A. Twenty-six.

Q. Twenty-six years old?

A. Twenty-seven.

Q. Twenty-seven years old; has he studied medicine?

A. Of course.

Q. Where did he study?

A. Heidelberg.

Q. Herr Professor, I will ask you to testify from your own memory, and
if the defense counsel wishes to put your assistant on the stand, they
are privileged to do so; but I am interested primarily in knowing what
you know about your assistant. Now, you did not know he studied at
Heidelberg until he told you just now?

A. I have 40 to 50 young men at the clinic, and it is impossible for me
to know of each one where he studied, but I made his acquaintance at the
clinic. He is a very industrious and intelligent person and for that
reason I asked him to do this work and take some work off my shoulders.

Q. How long has he been working with you?

A. More than a year.

Q. Working with you about a year, and since that time you have conducted
these sea-water experiments yourself?

A. We carried them out shortly before Shrove Tuesday.

Q. Of 1947?

A. Yes, this year.

Q. How did you happen to carry out these experiments; were you requested
to do so by defense counsel?

A. No. I had been asked very often to interest myself in this matter,
and I was interested to see for myself the effect of sea-water on the
experimental subjects. This was interesting to me because I already had
considerable experience in the field of hunger and thirst.

Q. Were you approached at all with respect to this case before the time
you started these sea-water experiments?

A. Yes, that is why I started to interest myself in the matter, because
I was asked to appear here as a witness, but I carried out these
experiments entirely spontaneously, without outside interference and for
my own interest.

Q. But the fact that you were approached to come here and testify
influenced your decision to carry out these experiments, is that right?

A. Of course, of course.

Q. And did you make any effort to have these experiments coincide with
the conditions which you were told existed in the Dachau experiments?

A. Yes, we made only one distinction in this, namely, that the
experimental subjects received roughly 1,600 calories a day, because
they were not to interrupt their work. To be sure, as the experiment
went on they ate less and less of the 1,600 calories, because thirst
made them lose their appetite.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Now how many experimental subjects did you use in your experiments?

A. Five of them.

Q. And you say that they were volunteers, your assistants, is that
right?

A. Yes, they were all doctors, volunteers, and, as I said, also included
my youngest son who also happens to be here.

Q. And precisely what happened during these experiments?

A. These persons were assembled in one room, received the same amount of
salt each and more or less continued their work. They drank 500 cc. of
sea-water, and one of them drank 1,000, and they stuck pretty closely to
the provisions set down for the experiment.

Q. You say four of them drank 500 cc. of sea-water per day and the fifth
one drank 1,000 cubic centimeters of sea-water?

A. The fifth drank on one day, on the last day I think, an additional
500 cc. because he was very thirsty.

Q. When did you start the experiments?

A. On the Monday before the beginning of Lent.

Q. And how long did they run?

A. As I said, four broke off the experiment after four days because of
the carnival season and one of them stuck it out for six.

Q. Well, you spoke of four days, do you know how many hours they were
under the experiments?

A. Five times twenty-four in general and the other one six times
twenty-four.

Q. Well, I misunderstood you, or else your testimony has changed; you
said four of the students stayed on the experiments for four days and
one went on for six days. Is that right?

A. No, four did it for five days, four broke off at the end of the fifth
day, and one stayed until the end of the sixth day.

Q. And you are prepared to testify it was five times twenty-four, is
that right, 60 hours [sic]?

A. I would have to check on that for sure in the record, whether it was
five times twenty-four or four times twenty-four, or sixteen or
eighteen. Those things didn’t seem very important to me. I was
interested primarily in seeing how greatly the persons suffered under
the experiments, but the man who did it for six days did do it for six
times twenty-four hours. However, I don’t want to make a statement for
certain under oath regarding the number of hours.

Q. Well this little experiment conducted by you, as I take it, had as
its purpose to find out how much a man suffers, is that right?

A. Yes.

Q. You didn’t know that before you conducted this experiment, is that
right?

A. I assumed that they would be very thirsty, but I wanted to see what
the subjective sensations or feelings of the experimental subjects were.
What was most important to me was to know whether these experiments
could be characterized as cruel or inhumane or brutal, and if they were
experiments which led to a pretty strong sense of discomfort, namely,
thirst, but did not do any damage to health, that is what I wanted to
know.

Q. And your testimony before this Tribunal is based upon those
experiments; is that right?

A. No, on both, of course, both on those carried out by Beiglboeck and
on my own.

Q. Well, your judgment was also influenced by what Beiglboeck told you
about how much the experimental subjects suffered, is that right?

A. Beiglboeck drew up his own report on his own experiment on himself
and a general report on whatever complaints the subjects uttered.

Q. What is the experiment that Beiglboeck conducted by himself? You mean
he has been undergoing an experiment back in the prison?

A. No, before the experiments began, he carried out a sea-water
experiment on himself.

Q. Where did these experimental subjects of yours stay during this
experiment? I seem to recall you said they continued their work or
something of that sort.

A. They all stayed in one room where they ate and slept, and this was
done to make the conduct of the experiment easier, as they were to
receive special rations.

Q. Well, now all five experimental subjects were in one room during the
whole course of the experiment, is that right?

A. Yes.

Q. And what did they do?

A. They went from this room to wherever they had to work, but they
returned to the room for sleeping and eating.

Q. Well, Doctor, we are having great difficulty in really getting a
clear picture about how this experiment went on. Now you mean to say
they carried on their work about the clinic? They didn’t stay in this
room the whole time, is that right?

A. Yes.

Q. They actually only ate in the room and slept in the room; is that
right?

A. That is correct.

Q. Did they leave the clinic at all?

A. I believe that they did not during those days.

Q. But you don’t know?

A. I can’t swear to it.

Q. You can’t swear that they didn’t go to a local cinema during the
course of the experiments for example?

A. No, I can’t swear to that. I just don’t know.

Q. In other words, they had their normal daily life available to them
during these experiments?

A. They carried on their daily work and in this case it is perfectly
certain that they did not drink any fresh water. They knew perfectly
well what the point of the experiment was.

Q. How much food did they get, again?

A. 1,600 calories.

Q. And do you know what the food was?

A. Yes, that is also in the record. It was meat, fat, and what not, but
I can’t tell you that from memory. However, I could give you the record
in writing.

Q. In what record? Have we any record on these experiments?

A. Yes. There was a record.

Q. Now, they got absolutely no fresh water during the course of the
experiments, is that right?

A. No.

Q. Did they get any other water or fluid other than salt water?

A. No, that was the whole purpose, that they should receive no other
fluid and that is why they lost their appetite later.

Q. They got no milk and no fruit juices?

A. No, no, that would have violated the whole experiment, and then they
would not have lost so much weight.

Q. I can appreciate that, Professor. Where did you get the sea-water
that these experimental subjects drank?

A. We manufactured it carefully in the chemical laboratory according to
a chemical analysis of sea-water that can be found in many text books. I
have a chemist who was in charge of the laboratory and he made this
sea-water according to the formula. We couldn’t get any natural
sea-water for this experiment.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Now, you didn’t keep any of your experimental subjects without any
water whatever, did you?

A. Five hundred cc. of sea-water was the liquid they received.

Q. Well, were there not some experimental subjects at Dachau who did not
get any water at all, sea-water or otherwise?

A. Yes, the first group fasted and thirsted. I have already spoken about
that and said that thirst can more easily be tolerated if one is fasting
at the same time, so that the kidney has as little as possible to do;
thus the body is able to retain more water.

Q. But you can’t testify to the Tribunal about what pain and suffering
those experimental subjects were subjected to, can you? You didn’t run
any similar experiments yourself?

A. I do not understand you. I carried out these experiments to know what
sort of suffering the experimental subjects went through.

Q. But you didn’t carry out one where a man fasted for 5 or 6 days
without either food or water. They did carry out such an experiment in
Dachau. So you have no basis to testify about pain and suffering to
which that group of experimental subjects were subjected, do you?

A. I mentioned that at the same time I was having four women fast and
thirst who had come to the clinic with very high blood pressure and for
six whole days these women fasted and thirsted. This so improved their
condition that they consequently forgot the unpleasantness involved in
the fasting and thirsting. I also mentioned among them one woman who
weighed only 51.7 kilo, and who lost 3. However, her blood pressure went
down from 245/125 to 185/100. I carried out such experiments almost
daily in the clinic. That is done by the hundred. And, in the case of
persons with kidney disease, that is the accepted method so that during
the war people from the fronts went through thousands of such hunger and
thirst cures. I didn’t have to have any control experiment in this; that
was furnished daily by the clinic.

Q. And these women went without food and water for 4 days?

A. Six days without food and water.

Q. And what was the result on them aside from their blood pressure? Did
they suffer much pain?

A. There is no question of pain in such cases. They simply felt thirst.
Strangely enough they do not complain of being hungry. The body water
that still remains is enough to keep the body metabolism supplied with
the necessary chemicals. However, there is a lack of sodium nitrate in
the body which, however, can be overcome by giving sodium nitrate. They
never complain about hunger, only thirst. Sometimes they complain of a
feeling of weakness but fasting for 6 days is nothing very special. As I
said, some people carry out hunger cures for 4 weeks. To be sure, they
drink fruit juice during such a long cure. We also make use of it for
therapeutic purposes. They will receive fruit juice but that is by no
means so unpleasant as an 8-day long hunger and thirst cure.

Q. And you gave them no compensation for going without food and water
whatever? You gave them no injections of any sort?

A. No, no. My whole purpose is to eliminate from the body all the
unnecessary fluids in the blood so that the blood pressure will drop. I
gradually bring these people over to a form of nourishment without any
salt.

Q. Now you say that four out of five of your experimental subjects broke
off on the fifth day?

A. Yes. For external reasons only, not because they could no longer
tolerate it. It just happened that four of the men had dates on the 5th
day, but the 5th one stayed on until the sixth day and I asked him
specifically whether he felt particularly tortured or in pain and he
said no. He said that with the first drink of water he took all
unpleasantness and discomfort vanished. I observed my son myself. As
soon as he drank a cup of tea, he was perfectly all right and 2 days
after the experiment he had recovered all the weight he had lost. He had
lost roughly one kilo a day.

Q. You say these four men had a date on the 5th. You mean they had an
engagement with a young lady?

A. I do not know what details were planned for the carnival celebration.
I could simply draw the regrettable conclusion that their interest in
the carnival was a little greater than their interest in the experiment.
But this does indicate that the experiments did not have a very
deleterious effect on them, otherwise they could not have gone to the
carnival and enjoyed it.

Q. Well, it might also indicate that they didn’t regard the experiments
as being very serious and that, even though several men in this dock are
quite interested in the results of this particular experiment, your four
young assistants didn’t regard it as serious enough to refrain from
going out on a date. Isn’t that about the size of it?

A. I can’t deny that. I wasn’t too pleased by their behavior.

Q. Were these men informed of the seriousness of this undertaking?

A. No.

Q. And what reason did you advance to them for undergoing the
experiments?

A. Of course, I told them, and they knew, that such sea-water
experiments were an issue, but I was perfectly convinced that these
experiments could by no means be called inhumane or brutal and
consequently we didn’t approach the experiments in too tragic a manner.
All we wanted to know was how unpleasant such an experiment was.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_EXAMINATION BY THE TRIBUNAL_

PRESIDING JUDGE BEALS: Professor, these subjects upon whom you conducted
an experiment in your institute were very excellent subjects for such an
experiment, were they not?

WITNESS VOLLHARDT: They were characterized by the fact that they were
medical men who understood the meaning of the experiment and that I
could rely on them. Physically, they certainly were no
better-conditioned, according to the photographs at least, than those
rather well nourished experimental subjects.

Q. I was not thinking so much of their physical condition, but they were
men who were interested in this work, were they not?

A. Yes.

Q. The results of the experiment—each upon himself and upon each of his
associates—would be interesting to each one, would it not? Is that not
true?

A. I would assume so, yes.

Q. Each one was entirely controlling his own participation in the
experiment, was he not?

A. Yes.

Q. If, at any time, any one of the subjects felt that the conditions
which he was undergoing in the experiment were becoming too heavy for
him, he would have been released from further participation upon his
request, would he not?

A. No doubt he would have reported and he would have said, “I want to
step out. This is too much for me.”

Q. That’s what I meant. He would have asked to be released and he would
have been immediately released? Well, is it or is it not a fact that a
human being will voluntarily undergo hunger, thirst, pain, discomfort,
and stand it better when he knows that he is doing it under his own
volition with a scientific objective, than a person of equal physical
condition will stand such an experiment when, insofar as he is
concerned, he has no personal interest whatsoever?

A. No doubt that is correct, and I am perfectly convinced that Professor
Eppinger tried everything he could in order to obtain such volunteers.
He was most uncomfortable about the fact that these experiments were
carried out in Dachau. He would much rather have seen them carried out
in Vienna on his own students but, at that time, there weren’t any
students any more. They had all been called up, and medical officers
were very scarce so that there was no question of obtaining volunteers.
Hence, in this very tense and difficult time, no subjects could be
found, to carry out such a series of experiments as was planned here, in
a hospital or clinic of any kind. It would have been better, more
practical and more sensible, by all means, if the experiments had been
carried out at that time upon medical students, but, unfortunately, that
was impossible.

Q. You prefaced your statement, Doctor, by saying that Dr. Eppinger had
this sentiment. How do you know that?

A. Because, during the conference, it was mostly Professor Eppinger who
was in favor of these experiments being made and, since Professor
Eppinger had earmarked his favorite pupil, Beiglboeck, for the carrying
out of these experiments, it is a matter of course that Eppinger would
have liked nothing better than that these experiments should be carried
out under his own control in Vienna.

Q. You are assuming that Eppinger would have felt as you would have felt
under similar circumstances, is that correct?

A. I know that all those who were interested in these experiments were
making efforts to find places where these experiments could be carried
out in a military hospital on soldiers or convalescent patients or other
persons, but, unfortunately, everything turned out to be impossible. You
can only imagine the situation if you know how every hospital bed and
every doctor was being utilized in this time. That was the final period
of the war.

Q. You prefaced this last statement by saying, “I know.” Now, how do you
know? By any other method than assuming that these gentlemen would have
felt as you felt?

A. No. I recollect that I read that in one of the reports, that an
attempt had been made to carry out the experiments elsewhere and that
one had come across locked doors everywhere. For instance, one had
Brunswick in mind, I know that by chance, the Luftwaffe hospital at
Brunswick, and that was impossible. Thus, all inquiries had negative
answers.

Q. I gathered from your answer to one of my questions a short time
ago—I would like to return to that subject—that a person of
intelligence will endure more discomfort, pain, and suffering, pursuing
a voluntary experiment which he knows he can terminate at any moment
than a person, probably of less intelligence, would display upon
undergoing an experiment which he could not stop at his own volition. Is
that correct?

A. Well, there is no question but that, for those persons in Dachau, the
only bait was the good food before and afterwards and the cigarettes
that they had been promised. That was not possible in the case of my
doctors. They did it because they were interested and, of course, that
would have been by far the best solution if it had been possible.

Q. And, insofar as the subjects at Dachau, if any of them, at any time
during the course of the experiments, believed that the pain or
discomfort or whatever it might be called, which they were suffering
would not be compensated by cigarettes, or other promises which had been
made to them, they would be very anxious then to be released from
prosecution of that experiment. Is that true?

A. Certainly. That’s why quite a number of experimental subjects
secretly drank water, because the strict course didn’t please them too
much.

Q. Well, unlike the experimental subjects in your institute, those
subjects would not be particularly interested in the result, would they?
They had no scientific interest in the result, did they?

A. No, no. None at all. None whatever.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[47] Final plea is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 16 July 1947,
pp. 10942-10971.

[48] Eugen Kogon: Der SS Staat; published 1946, Verlag der Frankfurter
Hefte, Frankfurt-Main.

[49] Counsel for the defendant Beiglboeck quoted the testimony of the
prosecution witnesses Stoehr, Pillwein, and Tschofenig and the testimony
of the defense witness Mettbach who stated that approximately 40 to 50
_gypsies_ were used for the sea-water experiments and that they wore
either black or green triangles. Black triangles had to be worn by those
concentration camp inmates who were considered asocial and green
triangles by those who were considered criminal.

[50] Same as Footnote 49 above.

[51] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 27 June,
1 July 1947, pp. 10229-10235, 10508-10545.

[52] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 6, 9,
10, 11, 12, 17 June 1947, pp. 8666-9028, 9326-9329.

[53] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 3 June
1947, pp. 8400-8493.

                    8. EPIDEMIC JAUNDICE EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser, Rostock, Schroeder, Gebhardt,
Rudolf Brandt, Mrugowsky, Poppendick, Sievers, Rose, and Becker-Freyseng
were charged with special responsibility for and participation in
criminal conduct involving epidemic jaundice experiments (par. 6 (H) of
the indictment). During the trial the prosecution withdrew this charge
in the case of Sievers, Rose, and Becker-Freyseng. On this charge only
the defendant Karl Brandt was convicted, and the defendants Handloser,
Rostock, Schroeder, Gebhardt, Rudolf Brandt, Mrugowsky, and Poppendick
were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the epidemic jaundice
experiments is contained in its final briefs against defendants
Handloser and Schroeder. Extracts from these briefs are set forth below
on pages 494 to 498. A corresponding summation of the evidence by the
defense on these experiments has been selected from the final plea for
the defendant Handloser. It appears below on pages 499 to 503. This
argumentation is followed by selections from the evidence on pages 503
to 508.

        b. Selections from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

      _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT HANDLOSER_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                          _Epidemic Jaundice_

Following the attack on Russia, epidemic jaundice (hepatitis epidemica)
became a disease of major proportions for the German Wehrmacht. (_Tr. p.
2707._) In some units, casualties up to 60 percent were reported from
this disease. (_NO-010, Pros. Ex. 187._) Accordingly, an intensive
effort was made to discover the causes of and vaccinations against
epidemic jaundice. Dohmen and Gutzeit of the Army Medical Inspectorate
and Haagen of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe were among the
doctors working on this subject.

Dohmen and Gutzeit were attached to the Military Medical Academy and
directly subordinated to Schreiber. (_Tr. p. 2752._) The Military
Medical Academy was, of course, subordinated to Handloser as Army
Medical Inspector. (_Tr. p. 2740._) Gutzeit was also consulting
internist to Handloser. (_Tr. p. 2700._) Dohmen was one of the first to
isolate a virus which was claimed to be the cause of jaundice. This was
accomplished by inoculating animals with germs taken from human beings
suffering from the disease. (_Tr. p. 2695._) However, considerable
divergence of opinion still existed as to whether jaundice was caused by
bacteria or a virus. (_Tr. p. 3045._) On 1 June 1943, Grawitz, Reich
Physician of the SS, requested Himmler to make concentration camp
inmates available for infection by Dohmen with his virus. He stated that
cases of death among the experimental subjects were to be anticipated.
(_NO-010, Pros. Ex. 187._) It was not stated whether the deaths were to
be brought about for the purpose of performing autopsies (as in the
cases of the high-altitude experiments), or whether they were to be
expected from the disease itself (as in the cases of the typhus
experiments).

Himmler consented to the use of eight Polish Jews, who had been
condemned to death in the Auschwitz concentration camp, and to Dohmen’s
conducting the experiments. (_NO-011, Pros. Ex. 188._) The experiments
were carried out by Dohmen in the Sachsenhausen concentration camp, and
according to the affidavit of the defendant Rudolf Brandt, some of the
experimental subjects died as a result. (_NO-371, Pros. Ex. 186._) Even
the defense witness Gutzeit, who collaborated closely with Dohmen,
admits that Dohmen worked in Sachsenhausen, but stated that this was
merely a ruse to avoid turning over the jaundice virus to Grawitz, and
in reality no infection experiments were performed. (_Tr. p. 2722._)
Gutzeit did not explain, however, why Dohmen, who was in no way
subordinated to Grawitz, should have engaged in such ridiculous
scientific “horseplay.” (_Tr. p. 2758._)

In weighing the credibility of the testimony of Gutzeit, consideration
should be given to the fact that he was a member of the SS himself and
that he was closely associated with Dohmen in his work. (_Tr. p. 2760._)

In June 1944, a conference of experts was called by Handloser for the
purpose of coordinating jaundice research. This conference took place at
Breslau and was presided over by Schreiber. (_Tr. p. 7252._) Handloser,
Gutzeit, and Haagen, a consulting hygienist of the Air Fleet, were all
present at this conference. (_Tr. p. 2717._) Schreiber assigned groups
of physicians to work together on jaundice problems. Dohmen, Gutzeit,
and Haagen were assigned to one of these groups. (_Tr. p. 2717._) On 12
June 1944, Haagen himself requested Schreiber to assign Dohmen to work
with him. Generalarzt Schreiber at that time was commander of the
Military Medical Academy. (_NO-299, Pros. Ex. 190._) Schreiber complied
with this request. (_NO-300, Pros. Ex. 191._)

On 24 June 1944, Gutzeit wrote to Haagen that he was also requesting
Schreiber to assign Dohmen to Haagen. He went on to state that he was
making preparations for experiments on human beings and he wanted Haagen
to supply him with his virus material. (_NO-124, Pros. Ex. 193._) Haagen
replied to Gutzeit’s letter on 27 June 1944 stating that he was glad
that Dohmen would be assigned to him as of 15 July. He further stated
that he was working with Kalk, Buechner, and Zuckschwert, all officers
of the Luftwaffe, on jaundice problems and that he had arranged with
Kalk to conduct human experiments with his material. (_NO-125, Pros. Ex.
194._) On the same date Haagen wrote to his collaborator Kalk, who was
attached to the staff of the defendant Schroeder, stating as follows:

    “In the enclosure I send you a copy of a letter from Gutzeit and
    my reply. We must proceed as soon as possible with the
    experiments on human beings. These experiments, of course,
    should be carried out at Strasbourg or in its vicinity. Could
    you in your official position take the necessary steps to obtain
    the required experimental subjects? I don’t know what sort of
    subjects Gutzeit has at his disposal, whether they are soldiers
    or other people.” (_NO-126, Pros. Ex. 195._)

The remark about “other people” is an obvious reference to concentration
camp inmates, upon whom Haagen had long since been experimenting with
virulent typhus virus, while the reference to “Strasbourg or in its
vicinity”, indicates the concentration camp Natzweiler. (See typhus
experiments _supra_.) Herr Kalk and his chief, the defendant Schroeder,
were well advised on how to procure concentration camp inmates for
medical experiments because only a few weeks before Schroeder himself
had requested inmates from Himmler for the sea-water experiments.
(_NO-185, Pros. Ex. 134._)

The record shows that Dohmen did in fact go to Strasbourg to work with
Haagen on the direct orders of Schreiber. (_Tr. p. 2752._) Handloser was
advised of this collaboration of Dohmen and Haagen. (_Tr. p. 2757._)

Still another series of jaundice experiments was planned with which
Handloser was connected. On 29 January 1945 Mrugowsky wrote to Grawitz
as follows:

    “Hauptsturmfuehrer Professor Dr. Dresel, Director of the
    Hygienic Institute of the University of Leipzig, has cultivated
    a virus from persons suffering from hepatitis and succeeded in
    transplanting it on animals.

    “It is necessary to make experiments on human beings in order to
    determine the fact that this virus is indeed the effective virus
    hepatitis epidemica. The plenipotentiary for research on
    epidemics in the Reich Research Council therefore addressed
    himself to me with the request to carry out the above
    experiments.

    “I am asking you to obtain authorization from the Reich Leader
    SS to carry out the necessary experiments on 20 suitable
    prisoners who have hitherto never suffered from hepatitis
    epidemica, at the typhus experimental station of the
    concentration camp in Buchenwald.” (_NO-1303, Pros. Ex. 467._)

The plenipotentiary for research on epidemics in the Reich Research
Council who requested these experiments on concentration camp inmates
was Generalarzt Schreiber, at the same time commander of Lehrgruppe C of
the Military Medical Academy under Handloser. (_Tr. p. 5402._) Schreiber
had been designated by Handloser for the very purpose of coordinating
jaundice research, and the meeting in Breslau was called to that end.

In view of this evidence outlined above, it can only be concluded that
the jaundice experiments were carried out by subordinates of the
defendant Handloser with his knowledge and approval.

                 *        *        *        *        *

           _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT
                               SCHROEDER_

                 *        *        *        *        *

                    _EPIDEMIC JAUNDICE EXPERIMENTS_

In June 1944 a conference of experts was called for the purpose of
coordinating jaundice research. This conference took place at Breslau
and was presided over by Schreiber. (_Tr. p. 2752._) Handloser, Gutzeit,
and Haagen were all present at this conference. (_Tr. p. 2717._) Haagen
admitted during cross-examination that experiments on human beings were
discussed. That criminal experiments on concentration camp inmates were
discussed is clear from the fact that Schreiber in January 1945
personally requested Mrugowsky to make available inmates for hepatitis
experiments by Dr. Dresel. (_NO-1303, Pros. Ex. 467._) Schreiber
assigned groups of physicians to work together on jaundice problems.
Dohmen, Gutzeit, and Haagen were assigned to one of these groups. (_Tr.
p. 2717._) On 12 June 1944 Haagen himself requested Schreiber to assign
Dohmen to work with him. Generalarzt Schreiber at that time was
commander of the Military Medical Academy under Handloser. (_NO-229,
Pros. Ex. 190._) Schreiber complied with this request. (_NO-300, Pros.
Ex. 191._)

On 24 June 1944 Gutzeit wrote to Haagen that he was also requesting
Schreiber to assign Dohmen to Haagen. He went on to state that he was
making preparations for experiments on human beings and he wanted Haagen
to supply him with his virus material. (_NO-124, Pros. Ex. 193._) Haagen
replied to Gutzeit’s letter on 27 June 1944 stating that he was glad
that Dohmen would be assigned to him as of 15 July. He further stated
that he was working with Kalk, Buechner, and Zuckschwert, all officers
of the Luftwaffe, on jaundice problems and that he had arranged with
Kalk to conduct human experiments with his material. (_NO-125, Pros. Ex.
194._) On the same date Haagen wrote to his collaborator Kalk, who was a
consultant to defendant Schroeder and a specialist on hepatitis (_Tr. p.
3632_), stating as follows:

    “In the enclosure I send you a copy of a letter from Gutzeit and
    my reply. We must proceed as soon as possible with the
    experiments on human beings. These experiments, of course,
    should be carried out at Strasbourg or in its vicinity. Could
    you in your official position take the necessary steps to obtain
    the required experimental subjects. I don’t know what sort of
    subjects Gutzeit has at his disposal, whether they are soldiers
    or other people.” (_NO-126, Pros. Ex. 195._)

The remark about “other people” is an obvious reference to concentration
camp inmates, upon whom Haagen had long since been experimenting with
virulent typhus virus, while the reference to “Strasbourg or in its
vicinity”, indicates the concentration camp Natzweiler. The witness Olga
Eyer, secretary to Haagen, testified that prisoners were requested for
the epidemic jaundice experiments. (_Tr. p. 1759._) Haagen would have
the Tribunal believe that he referred to Freiburg and Heidelberg which
are 60 and 100 kilometers respectively from Strasbourg, while Natzweiler
was only a few kilometers away. (_Tr. p. 9579._)

Herr Kalk and his chief, the defendant Schroeder, were well advised on
how to procure concentration camp inmates for medical experiments
because only a few weeks before Schroeder himself had requested inmates
from Himmler for the sea-water experiments. (_NO-185, Pros. Ex. 134._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

           c. Selection from the Argumentation of the Defense

               _EXTRACT FROM THE FINAL PLEA FOR DEFENDANT
                             HANDLOSER_[54]

                 *        *        *        *        *

                   _Epidemic Jaundice_ (_Hepatitis_)

The problem of experiments in the field of hepatitis research consists
in finding the most efficient treatment of the disease and identifying
the virus in order to evolve a vaccine.

Discussions of this problem were extensive during this trial. The
indictment on this point applies only when experiments on human beings,
as understood by the prosecution, such as infection with jaundice germs,
could have effects detrimental to health. On this the experts,
Professors Gutzeit and Rose, have expressed their opinions. Professor
Gutzeit, as one of the foremost specialists for problems connected with
epidemic jaundice, on the basis of his extensive practical clinical
experience and experiments on his own person, has described the effects
as follows:

    “As far as I, as clinical physician, can judge, the development
    of vaccines, and of experiments to gain these vaccines, is
    harmless. This harmlessness is shown by the fact that
    spontaneous outbreaks of jaundice are not dangerous in
    themselves. Like every other vaccine, a potential vaccine which
    is being developed for or against hepatitis may cause harmless
    local reactions on the place of vaccination.”

Furthermore he said, “it (epidemic jaundice) is a harmless disease”
(_German Tr. p. 2761_); “it has no damaging after-effect on the liver.”
(_German Tr. p. 2763._) Professor Rose has expressed his expert opinion
in the following words: “Hepatitis epidemica as such is not considered a
dangerous disease by hygienists.” (_German Tr. pp. 5433, 5434._) Then he
continues that naturally, just as in the case of a nasal cold, so in the
case of hepatitis, complications may arise as after-effects, “but no one
would consider hepatitis as a dangerous disease for that reason.”
(_German Tr. p. 6454._) As to the experiments, Professor Rose says:

    “In Germany, experiments with hepatitis virus have been carried
    out by Eppinger, Vogt, Esser, and Lembel and no incidents
    occurred. All experiments took place without ill effects. This
    is, of course, very limited experimental material, but material
    concerning hundreds of cases which permit a more accurate
    judgment has been published in England and America. Up to date I
    have knowledge of about 60 experiments on human beings for
    hepatitis and no single incident has been reported yet.”

The prosecuting counsel furnished no proof in this trial that infection
experiments with jaundice organisms on unwilling persons took place at
all in the concentration camps. Whereas in the case of the other facts
the prosecution produced medical records or a witness to prove that such
experiments had been carried out, this was not possible with regard to
epidemic jaundice. Proof was limited to the presentation of documents
which one must admit might have given any layman, or even a doctor who
was not a hygienist or a clinical physician, the impression that the
experiments in question must have been dangerous. The letter of Dr.
Grawitz dated 1 June 1943 to Himmler (_NO-010, Pros. Ex. 187_) contains
the sentence, “We must expect deaths.”

According to the expert opinions expressed by Rose, Gutzeit, and Hoering
this view is incorrect and incomprehensible. The experts exclude in
practice all possibility of death. Rose declares (_German Tr. p. 6455_):

    “Grawitz, who had only concerned himself for years with the
    business of administration, did not have sufficient
    understanding of the matter,” or “that he was cautious to an
    exaggerated degree * * *.”

Professor Gutzeit (_German Tr. p. 2764_) says of Document NO-010,
Prosecution Exhibit 187:

    “The only way I can explain it to myself is that Grawitz himself
    was not sufficiently informed about this jaundice, the course of
    the disease, and its danger. Certainly Grawitz was no specialist
    on this matter, this jaundice, and has for a considerable time
    been out of touch with practical medicine.”

Professor Gutzeit gives the mortality figure for jaundice as less than
0.1 percent; finally he declares (_German Tr. p. 2762_) that severe pain
and suffering, such as mentioned in the indictment, do not occur when a
patient is injected with jaundice organisms. A layman can also
understand that over-injection can only produce at the most the disease
itself, the effects of which have already been represented as harmless.

As already stated, the prosecution furnished no concrete assertions that
the intended experiments were made in Sachsenhausen. Here we are
speaking of the time from June 1942. At this time Stabsarzt Dr. Dohmen
was allowed to work in the concentration camp at Sachsenhausen in
accordance with permission given by Himmler. Professor Gutzeit worked
together with Stabsarzt Dr. Dohmen insofar as he conducted the hepatitis
research work from the clinical side, while Dr. Dohmen was occupied with
basic bacteriological research, in the Robert Koch Institute where he
was stationed at the time in question and worked under Professor
Gildemeister. Evidence was given by Professor Rose (_German Tr. p.
6468_) and Dr. Lentz. (_Rose 16, Rose Ex. 12._)

As a result of the mutual exchange of experience which took place, we
must assume that Professor Gutzeit was informed about Dohmen’s research
work in this field. Gutzeit also testified upon oath what Dohmen had
reported to him about his activity in Sachsenhausen. According to this,
Dohmen was only able to escape pressure from Himmler and Grawitz to
leave him his breeding stocks by apparently acceding to the offer that
he should conduct experiments in Sachsenhausen, but in actual fact
undertaking experiments only on prisoners of concentration camps which
could be carried out without any risk of bodily harm or loss of life.

In like manner the prosecution was obliged to furnish proof with regard
to the experiments asserted to have been made on concentration camp
prisoners in Natzweiler. The only witness provided by the prosecution
for this, a woman by the name of Eyer, did _not_ confirm what the
prosecution affirmed, namely that experiments intended by Professor
Haagen in the research into hepatitis had been carried out in the
concentration camp at Natzweiler. (_German Tr. p. 1765._)

Dr. Cording testified in an affidavit submitted by Professor Rose:

    “For my training in the study of hygiene and bacteriology I was
    detailed in February 1944 to the Hygiene Institute of Strasbourg
    University where I was engaged, until the military occupation of
    the town on 23 November 1944, almost exclusively on work
    connected with hepatitis (series of inoculations of mice and
    proof of virus in the organs of mice) under Professor Haagen.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

    “It did not come to my ears that during the time I was in
    Strasbourg experiments with hepatitis were made on human beings
    within the framework of this cooperation. In the middle of July
    1944 Stabsarzt Dr. Dohmen went from Giessen to visit Professor
    Haagen in Strasbourg for about 2-3 days. During this time he saw
    for himself in the Institute the results obtained from our
    research work in hepatitis. He confirmed that the results of his
    experiments had been similar but that all his research material
    had been destroyed in an air raid on Berlin. At present he was
    busy in Giessen making a fresh start with his own experiments.

    “I know for a fact that Dr. Dohmen was not in Natzweiler during
    the time of his visit to Strasbourg. I know nothing of any
    further cooperation between Professor Haagen and Dr. Dohmen.”

Thus it is proved that Dr. Dohmen was not at the Natzweiler
concentration camp and did not take part in any experiments on human
beings there in this particular branch of medicine. In correcting his
affidavit (_NO-371, Pros. Ex. 186_) the defendant Rudolf Brandt declared
upon oath that he had no knowledge that these experiments had been
carried out in Sachsenhausen and that some of the prisoners died. In
like manner he revoked his evidence concerning the cooperation of Dr.
Dohmen and Dr. Haagen in the Natzweiler concentration camp and declared
that no facts were known to him about this. (_German Tr. pp.
1990-1993._) Finally Rudolf Brandt declared in his affidavit (_Handloser
11, Handloser Ex. 35_) that no facts were known to him from which could
be deduced that the defendant Handloser had any knowledge of the
experiments in Sachsenhausen and Natzweiler.

If one also takes into consideration Professor Gutzeit’s testimony that
Professor Handloser had reported nothing about Dohmen working in the
concentration camp in Sachsenhausen or of his activity there, the
following emerges: Professor Handloser’s answer is correct that he had
no knowledge that experiments with epidemic jaundice were conducted on
human beings in the concentration camps of Sachsenhausen and Natzweiler.

On the other hand Professor Handloser declares that he had a
considerable interest in the hepatitis research work, as it is also
established that not only his consulting physician Gutzeit but also
numerous other offices had concerned themselves with hepatitis research.
Professor Handloser gave reasons, confirmed by Professor Gutzeit, why
he, as medical officer responsible for the management of health matters
in the army, had the duty to give importance to the research in order to
find out what caused epidemic jaundice. As far as Handloser knew, this
research was carried out in accordance with recognized medical practice,
i. e., by experiments on animals and on the persons of the experimenters
themselves; likewise by unobjectionable clinical examinations of human
beings.

This also emerges from the hepatitis meeting of June 1944 in Breslau.
Professor Gutzeit also reported about this meeting and declared upon
oath that six or seven different hepatitis research workers had given
reports on their experiments and the results obtained. Nothing was said
about experiments on human beings. From this Professor Handloser, who
took part in the meeting which included the military and civilian
sector, must have gained the impression that research into hepatitis was
conducted in a generally recognized medical fashion.

As it could not be established at this meeting whether the organisms
bred by the various offices were identical, or whether it was a question
of different viruses (_German Tr. p. 2737_), the suggestion made by
Generalarzt Dr. Schreiber, who as the delegate of the Reich Research
Council for the combat of epidemics was the chairman of the meeting, was
to the point and served the purpose. His suggestion was that various
working groups for hepatitis research be formed in order that results
obtained on each side might be compared. On both direct and
cross-examination, Professor Gutzeit gave a convincing explanation for
his letter of 24 June 1944 (_NO-124, Pros. Ex. 193_), in which he speaks
of the experiments “_crucis ad hominem_.” He declared that he had
prepared with his students and candidates a vaccination with the virus
material placed at his disposal in Breslau. (_German Tr. pp.
2739-2740._)

Dr. Dohmen’s visit to Strasbourg, which was requested by Haagen, was to
have been made in compliance with the suggestion of Dr. Schreiber to
form a circle of research groups.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                              d. Evidence

                         _Prosecution Documents_
            Pros. Ex.
 Doc. No.      No.                Description of Document            Page
  NO-371       186      Affidavit of defendant Rudolf Brandt, 14       503
                          October 1946, concerning experiments to
                          determine the cause of epidemic jaundice.
  NO-011       188      Note from Himmler to Grawitz, 16 June 1943,    504
                          concerning epidemic jaundice experiments
                          at concentration camp Sachsenhausen.
  NO-299       190      Letter from Haagen to Schreiber, 12 June       505
                          1944, concerning epidemic jaundice
                          experiments.
  NO-125       194      Copy of letter from Haagen to Gutzeit, 27      506
                          June 1944, concerning epidemic jaundice
                          experiments on human beings.

                               _Testimony_

Extract from the testimony of defendant Karl Brandt                    506

                                  PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-371
                                  PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 186

   AFFIDAVIT OF DEFENDANT RUDOLF BRANDT, 14 OCTOBER 1946, CONCERNING
        EXPERIMENTS TO DETERMINE THE CAUSE OF EPIDEMIC JAUNDICE

I, Rudolf Brandt, being duly sworn, depose and state:

                 *        *        *        *        *

 _Experiments to Determine the Cause of Epidemic Jaundice_ (_Hepatitis
                              Epidemica_)

3. About the middle of 1943, Dr. Grawitz, Reichsarzt SS, wrote to
Himmler that Dr. Karl Brandt wished to obtain prisoners for
experimentation on the causes of a jaundice epidemic. He had been doing
research on this problem with the assistance of Dr. Dohmen, a medical
officer attached to the Army Medical Corps and the Robert Koch
Institute. Experiments had thus far disclosed that contagious jaundice
is transferred by a virus and human beings were desired for inoculation
with germs which had been cultivated in animals. Grawitz advised that
death of some of the experimental subjects must be expected. He wanted
to know if Dr. Dohmen could be permitted to carry out the experiments at
the Sachsenhausen concentration camp, as desired by Dr. Karl Brandt.

4. Himmler wrote Grawitz that Dr. Dohmen had his permission to conduct
the experiments at Sachsenhausen, and for that purpose he had Oswald
Pohl of the WVHA allocate a number of prisoners to be used as
experimental subjects. I know that these experiments were carried out
and that some of the prisoners died as a result.

5. Dr. Eugen Haagen, Oberstabsarzt and consultant in hygiene for the
Luftwaffe, had also been doing research work at the Natzweiler
concentration camp in an effort to discover an effective inoculation
against epidemic jaundice. As I recall, Dr. Dohmen collaborated with
Haagen in 1944 at Natzweiler and experiments on involuntary human beings
were conducted which resulted in deaths.

6. These experiments were of course well known to Karl Brandt as he was
personally furthering them. Handloser and Schroeder must also have known
of them because Dohmen and Haagen were doctors in the Medical Services
of the Army and the Luftwaffe respectively. Generalarzt Paul Rostock was
also well informed on all research work of this nature.

I have read the above statement in German, consisting of two (2) pages,
and it is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. I
have had the opportunity to make any changes and corrections in the
foregoing statement. This statement was given by me freely and
voluntarily, without promise of reward and I was subjected to no duress
or threat of any kind.

                                                   [Signed] R. BRANDT

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-011
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 188

NOTE FROM HIMMLER TO GRAWITZ, 16 JUNE 1943, CONCERNING EPIDEMIC JAUNDICE
            EXPERIMENTS AT CONCENTRATION CAMP SACHSENHAUSEN

The Reich Leader SS
Day Book No 1652/43, RF/BN

                                XIa-/-43
                                               Field H. Q., 16 June 1943

Subject: Investigation of the cause of the infectious jaundice
(hepatitis epidemica)

Reference: Yours of 1 June 1943—Az.: 420/IV/43—Diary No. 6/43 g.Kdos.

                               Top Secret

Reich Physician SS and Police                                    4 Copies
Berlin                                                            3d Copy

I acknowledge the receipt of your letter of 1 June 1943.

1. I approve that eight criminals condemned in Auschwitz (eight Jews of
the Polish resistance movement condemned to death) should be used for
experiments.

2. I agree that Dr. Dohmen should make these experiments in
Sachsenhausen.

3. I agree with your opinion that a real fight against infectious
jaundice would be of unheard [of] value.

                                                 [Signed] H. HIMMLER.

2. SS Obergruppenfuehrer Pohl,[55] Berlin

Carbon copy forwarded with request that you will duly note.

                                  [Signature] SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-299
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 190

   LETTER FROM HAAGEN TO SCHREIBER, 12 JUNE 1944, CONCERNING EPIDEMIC
                          JAUNDICE EXPERIMENTS

                                                           12 June 1944

Generalarzt Professor Dr. Schreiber
Academy of Military Medicine
Berlin NW

Dear Generalarzt:

Enclosed I am sending you my hepatitis report for further use. At the
same time I would like to use this opportunity to renew my invitation to
Stabsarzt Dohmen. Since I do not know his present address, may I direct
this invitation to you and suggest that Dr. Dohmen be assigned to me for
several weeks so that we may discover and possibly work on questions we
have in common. This would probably be the quickest way to determine
whether we have the same virus or not. A satisfactory date for Dohmen’s
visit to begin would be 15 July.

At the same time I should like to approach the subject of your
negotiations for mice. My supplies, and particularly my cultures, are so
depleted that they absolutely must be rejuvenated and refilled. You told
me in Hohenlychen that it is possible for you to secure mice, even in
large numbers. May I ask you to endeavor to secure for me several
thousand mice of both sexes, preferably only young animals.

Thirdly I would like to ask whether the hepatitis research will be
carried on in future out of funds of the Reich Research Council? My
funds for this branch are now exhausted and I am faced with the question
as to whether to apply for further funds to my Medical Chief of the
Luftwaffe or to you. I would be grateful to you to be informed about
this shortly.

   With kindest greetings and compliments,
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                Very devotedly yours,
                                                        [Signed] HAAGEN

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-125
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 194

COPY OF LETTER FROM HAAGEN TO GUTZEIT, 27 JUNE 1944, CONCERNING EPIDEMIC
                  JAUNDICE EXPERIMENTS ON HUMAN BEINGS

Oberstabsarzt Professor Dr. E. Haagen,
Consulting Hygienist to the Air Fleet Physician Reich

                                                Strasbourg, 27 June 1944

To: Oberstarzt Professor Dr. Gutzeit
Consulting Physician to the Army Medical Inspector,
Medical Clinic of University of Breslau, Hobrechtufer 4

My dear colleague Gutzeit,

Many thanks for your letter of 24/6/44. I am glad that Herr Dohmen will
come here on 15 July. We shall then review all common hepatitis
questions and perhaps also set up the experiments together.

I cannot at present definitely answer your inquiry about human
experiments. As you know, I am working with Herr Kalk, Herr Buechner,
and Herr Zuckschwert. Naturally, I have already arranged with Herr Kalk
that we shall undertake that type of experiment with our material. I
must therefore first determine the point of view of the others
concerned.

I shall be very glad to begin work on the nephritis material from your
Oberstarzt K (?) [sic].

   With best greetings,
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                  Yours
        EXTRACT FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT KARL BRANDT[56]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. SERVATIUS: The indictment mentions experiments with hepatitis. A
letter from Grawitz to Himmler says that you furthered these
experiments. Did you yourself do any clinical work on this question?

DEFENDANT KARL BRANDT: I never did any work in connection with hepatitis
epidemica, for that would have been during the war, as before the war
this disease was not given much importance in Germany. During the war I
did not deal with this question because I was too busy with other
things, and also because such a purely internal disease, although
perhaps of interest to the hygienist, was relatively uninteresting to me
as a surgeon.

Q. Did you allocate research assignments on this subject? How about Dr.
Dohmen?

A. I do not know why I should have given a research assignment to Dr.
Dohmen. Of course the question of hepatitis was a question which
interested everyone, for it was encountered everywhere in the East. But,
for that reason I would not have given special attention to that
disease. It had no relation to other things which were of more interest
to me as a surgeon. I know the letter. I was told about it last year. I
saw it here again for the first time this year. It says that I had asked
Grawitz to have special hepatitis work carried out by Dr. Dohmen. Dr.
Dohmen, the letter goes on, was to obtain seven or eight prisoners for
that purpose and the lives of these prisoners would be endangered. It is
not clear to me in what connection, and for what reason, my name was
mentioned as the instigator of hepatitis research, for in all the rest
of the correspondence, and in all the other documents, there is not even
the slightest hint that I had any particular interest in this question,
or that I was so interested that I would have started the research. I
never really knew that the experiments were actually carried out, and I
never received any report of results. There are indications contrary to
the sense of this letter, especially when it says these experiments are
to be carried out on persons condemned to death. Hepatitis epidemica is
not a disease as dangerous as all that. I have inquired meanwhile, and
know that compared with malaria, for example, it is only about a fifth
or a tenth as dangerous. I have already discussed today my relationship
with Himmler and with Grawitz. I did not invent that; that was actually
the truth. On the other hand, it is interesting to note that in all the
correspondence concerning hepatitis, one year later, after the first
letter failed to have the desired effect, Professor Schreiber sought a
way to approach Himmler in order to have hepatitis research work
continued.

Schreiber was the deputy for epidemic control in the Reich Research
Council, so that I may assume that, for some reason which is not quite
dear to me, Grawitz possibly confused Schreiber and me in the first
letter. That is conceivable. The letter is dated 1 June 1943. A short
time before that there was a meeting of the Military Medical Academy,
and probably Grawitz, who was present, talked to Schreiber as well. In
any case I am not able to give any information about this question of
hepatitis, and certainly not about any experiments which actually took
place. I have no information; I received no report; and I have not heard
from any other source even now that these experiments were really
conducted. It seems to me significant that the witness Schmidt, who was
heard here, testified that the experiments were certainly not conducted
in Strasbourg, as Dohmen, who wanted to conduct them, was there for only
two or three days himself.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[54] Final plea is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 14-15 July 1947,
pp. 10818-10849.

[55] Defendant in Case of United States _vs._ Oswald Pohl, et al. See
Vol. V.

[56] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7 Feb. 1947, pp. 2301-2661.

                9. TYPHUS AND OTHER VACCINE EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser, Rostock, Schroeder, Genzken,
Gebhardt, Rudolf Brandt, Mrugowsky, Poppendick, Sievers, Rose,
Becker-Freyseng and Hoven were charged with special responsibility for
and participation in criminal conduct involving typhus experiments (par.
6 (J) of the indictment). In the indictment, “spotted fever” was used
for the German word “Fleckfieber”, but later this was translated as
“typhus”. (_See also judgment, Vol. II._) On this charge the defendants
Handloser, Schroeder, Genzken, Rudolf Brandt, Mrugowsky, Sievers, Rose,
and Hoven were convicted, and the defendants Karl Brandt, Rostock,
Gebhardt, Poppendick, and Becker-Freyseng were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the typhus experiments is
contained in the final briefs against the defendants Mrugowsky and
Schroeder. Extracts from them are set forth below on pages 508 to 528.
The extract of the prosecution brief against Mrugowsky summarizes
evidence concerning experiments with old blood plasma, blood
transfusions, and withdrawal of blood from inmates of the Buchenwald
concentration camp for the purpose of manufacturing a typhus
convalescent serum. A corresponding summation of the evidence by the
defense on these experiments has been selected from the closing brief
for the defendant Rose and the final plea and closing brief for the
defendant Mrugowsky. These appear below on pages 528 to 554. This
argumentation is followed by selections from the evidence on pages 555
to 631.

        b. Selections from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

     _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT MRUGOWSKY_

                 _Typhus and Other Vaccine Experiments_

The attack against Russia in 1941 gave rise to many military medical
problems, not the least of which was typhus. The disease reached serious
proportions in the fall of 1941, and typhus vaccines were so scarce that
only doctors, nurses, and other medical personnel in exposed positions
could be given inoculations. (_Tr. pp. 3160-3161._)

One of the most important problems with respect to the increased
production of typhus vaccines was the effectiveness of the so-called
Cox-Haagen-Gildemeister vaccine, which was produced from egg-yolk
cultures. The effective Weigl vaccine, produced from the intestines of
lice, was available, but its manufacture was expensive and complicated.
The egg-yolk vaccine was relatively simple to produce but its protective
qualities were not regarded as having been sufficiently proved.
(_NO-732, Pros. Ex. 451._)

The entry for 29 December 1941 in the Ding diary proves that a
conference was held on that date between Handloser, as Army Medical
Inspector; Conti, of the Ministry of Interior; Reiter, of the Public
Health Department; Gildemeister, of the Robert Koch Institute; and
Mrugowsky, of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS. (_NO-265, Pros.
Ex. 287._)

At the conference it was decided that the typhus vaccine from egg yolks
was to be tested on human beings to determine its efficacy. On the same
day an earlier conference was held which discussed the same problem. It
took place at the Reich Ministry of the Interior, and was attended by
Bieber of the Interior; Gildemeister; representatives of the General
Government in Occupied Poland; officials of the Behring Works of I. G.
Farben, and Oberstabsarzt Scholz, of the Army Medical Inspectorate. The
minutes of this conference state that:

    “The vaccine which is presently being produced by the Behring
    Works from chicken eggs shall be tested for its effectiveness in
    an experiment. For this purpose Dr. Bieber will contact
    Obersturmfuehrer Dr. Mrugowsky.”

Since Mrugowsky was not present at this conference, it is obvious that
other conferences took place in which this matter was discussed with
him, which is corroborated in the entry of the Ding diary referred to
above.

As a result of the decision reached at these conferences, the
experimental station in the Buchenwald concentration camp under SS
Sturmfuehrer, later Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Ding-Schuler (hereinafter
referred to as “Ding”) was established. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287; Tr. p.
1154._) The charts drawn by the defendant Mrugowsky, among other proof,
show that the experimental station in Buchenwald was subordinated to the
Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS under Mrugowsky from the date of its
establishment until the end of the war. (_NO-416, Pros. Ex. 22_;
_NO-417, Pros. Ex. 23_.)

In the beginning of 1943, the research station in Buchenwald was
officially called the “Department of Typhus and Virus Research” of the
Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS. The experiments were carried out in
Block 46, the so-called Clinical Block, with the exception of a few
experiments early in 1942. In the autumn of 1943 a vaccine production
department was established in Block 50. Both Blocks 46 and 50 were part
of the Division for Typhus and Virus Research. The defendant Hoven was
the deputy to Ding in both blocks. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287; Tr. pp.
1155-1156._)

Criminal experiments on concentration camp inmates without their consent
were carried out in Block 46 to test typhus, yellow fever, smallpox,
typhoid, para-typhoid A and B, cholera, and diphtheria vaccines.

The typhus experiments in Buchenwald were carried out on a very large
scale and resulted in many deaths. The manner of execution and the
results of the experiments are proved in great detail by the Ding diary
and the testimony of Kogon as well as other evidence. The first
experiment began on 6 January 1942 with the vaccination of 135 inmates
with the Weigl, Cox-Haagen-Gildemeister, Behring Normal, or Behring
Strong vaccines. All vaccinations were completed by 1 February. On 3
March 1942, all of the vaccinated subjects and 10 inmates who had not
been vaccinated (known as the “control group”) were artificially
infected with virulent virus of Rickettsia-Prowazeki furnished by the
Robert Koch Institute. The experiment was concluded on 19 April 1942.
Five deaths occurred, three in the control group and two among the
vaccinated subjects. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287_; _Mrugowsky 10, Mrugowsky
Ex. 20_.)

In later experiments the number of experimental subjects usually varied
between 40 and 60, but the proportion of control subjects was increased.
Approximately two-thirds of the experimental subjects were vaccinated
while one-third remained without protection. A few weeks after
vaccination, all experimental subjects were artificially infected with
typhus. The course of the disease was then observed in the protected and
control groups and the effectiveness of the vaccine was determined.
(_Tr. p. 1168._) Therapeutic experiments were conducted in the same
manner with various drugs. For example, between 24 April and 1 June
1943, experiments were performed to test the effect of acridine
granulate and rutenol on typhus. Of a total of 39 inmates used, 21 died.
(_NO-582, Pros. Ex. 286._)

Artificial infection was accomplished in various ways. In the beginning
the skin was lacerated and infected with a typhus culture. Contagious
lice were used to a limited extent. For the most part, however,
infection was brought about by the intravenous or intramuscular
injection of fresh blood containing the typhus virus. For the sole
purpose of maintaining a constant source of infected fresh blood, 3 to 5
inmates per month were artificially infected with typhus. The use of
these so-called “passage persons” began at least as early as April 1943
and continued until March 1945. Substantially all of them died. These
victims were so much “a matter of course” that their fatalities were not
included by Ding in his diary. (_Tr. pp. 1168-1171._)

An analysis of the Ding diary proves that a total of 729 inmates were
experimented on with typhus, of whom 154 died. To these figures must be
added the passage persons, of whom between 90 and 120 died.

So much for the cold statistics of the experiments. Block 46, where the
experiments were carried out, was a horror for every inmate of the
Buchenwald concentration camp. Everyone selected for the experiments
expected to die a slow and frightful death. The man-to-man passage of
the typhus virus created a form of “super” typhus. (_Tr. p. 1168._)
While typhus normally has a mortality of about 30 percent in unprotected
cases, in an experiment on 13 April 1943 five out of six persons
infected died. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287._) Many of the experimental
subjects became delirious. (_Tr. pp. 1172, 1173._) In the experiments
with acridine and rutenol, the subjects vomited up to seven times a day.
Bronchial pneumonia, nephritis, intestinal bleeding, subcutaneous
phlegmones below the larynx, parotitis, gangrene of the shank,
furunculosis, bronchitis, and decubital sores developed as a result of
this treatment. (_NO-582, Pros. Ex. 286._) Experimental subjects who
survived and had a lighter course of the disease because the vaccine
with which they were vaccinated was effective were forced to watch the
death struggle of their fellow inmates. There was an iron discipline in
Block 46, the cat-o’-nine-tails ruled supreme, and the experimental
subjects were completely deprived of the last vestige of personal
freedom which they had in the camp. (_Tr. pp. 1172, 1173._)

It is hardly necessary to state that the experimental subjects used in
the typhus, as well as all other experiments in Buchenwald, were not
volunteers. One does not normally volunteer to be killed. In the first
series of typhus experiments, a number of inmates were duped into
submitting after being told it was a harmless affair and that they would
get additional food. They were not informed that they would be
artificially infected with typhus nor that they might die. (_Tr. p.
1162_; _see also the testimony of Kogon in Case 4,[57] Tr. pp. 731, 732;
NO-3680, Pros. Ex. 536_.) These subjects cannot be described as
volunteers. After the first few experiments, it was no longer possible
to deceive inmates into offering themselves for the experiments.
Thereafter, up until about the fall of 1943, experimental subjects were
chosen arbitrarily from among the inmates, whether criminals, political
prisoners, or homosexuals. Intrigue among the prisoners themselves
sometimes played a role in the selection. In the fall of 1943, the camp
administration no longer desired to take the responsibility for the
selection of the experimental subjects. Ding no longer was satisfied
with verbal orders from Mrugowsky to carry out the experiments and he
asked for written orders. He approached Mrugowsky with the request that
the Reich Leader SS should appoint the experimental subjects. According
to a directive from Himmler to Nebe of the Reich criminal police, only
those inmates were to be used who had been confined for 10 years or
more. Thereafter, most of the experimental subjects were habitual
criminals, many of whom were transported to Buchenwald from other camps.
But political prisoners were still included because they were in
disfavor with the camp administration or because of camp intrigues. None
of the experimental inmates had been condemned to death, except a few
Russian prisoners of war who had not been tried or sentenced. They were
from some 9,500 Russian prisoners of war who were killed in Buchenwald.
The experimental subjects were generally in good physical condition.
(_Tr. pp. 1162, 1163._) The experimental subjects included not only
Germans, but also Poles, Russians, and Frenchmen, as well as prisoners
of war. The testimony of Kogon is applicable not only to the typhus
experiments but to the other experiments in Buchenwald as well. (_Tr. p.
1167._)

This testimony of Kogon is corroborated by the letter from Himmler to
the Chief of the Security Police dated 27 February 1944. He said:

    “I agree that professional prisoners be taken for experiments
    with the typhus vaccine. But only those professional criminals
    should be chosen who have served more than ten years in prison;
    that is, not with ten prior convictions but with a total penalty
    of ten years.

    “SS Gruppenfuehrer Nebe is to supervise the disposal of these
    inmates. I don’t wish the physician to pick out inmates without
    my counter-control.” (_NO-1189, Pros. Ex. 471._)

The same document shows that Mrugowsky received a copy of this decision
on change in procedure and that it had been arrived at after a
conference between Mrugowsky and Nebe.

The testimony of Kogon is further corroborated by the witness
Kirchheimer (_Tr. pp. 1321-1332_) and the affidavit of Hoven. (_NO-429,
Pros. Ex. 281._)

The defense has contested the authenticity of the Ding diary. It is
impossible to determine from the record precisely what their position is
in that regard. That the diary does not consist of entries made day by
day is obvious from the face of the document itself. It is rather a
document which periodically summarizes the experiments which in many
cases lasted several months. Ding also kept a daily diary and work
reports. (_Tr. p. 1226._) These obviously form the basis of the diary in
evidence. The defense lays great stress on the fact that page one of the
diary was typed with an older ribbon than pages two et seq., and hence
was probably typed later. The prosecution has no quarrel with that.
Kogon gave the very obvious explanation that the page was probably
re-typed when the name of the experimental station was designated as the
“Department for Typhus and Virus Research”. (_Tr. p. 1228._) At best,
the reasons for re-typing pages are now a matter of sheer speculation.
No valid inference can be drawn from that fact alone. The Ding diary was
taken by Kogon from Buchenwald. It was in his exclusive possession until
delivered to the Office of Chief of Counsel for War Crimes. He testified
that he did not alter the document in any respect and that the
signatures of Ding, and later Schuler, are genuine. (_Tr. pp.
1164-1166._) He had no motive for changing the diary. The document was
authenticated by the prosecution as being in the same condition as when
received.

The experts of the defense established that the document was written on
the same typewriter with the same kind of paper. Mrugowsky admitted that
Ding’s signature is on substantially all of the pages of the diary.
(_Tr. p. 5410._) There is no contention they have been forged. A
comparison of the admittedly genuine signature of Ding on a vaccination
chart (_NO-578, Pros. Ex. 284_), and of Schuler on an affidavit signed
by him after the war (_NO-257, Pros. Ex. 283_), with the signatures of
Ding-Schuler in the diary prove beyond any doubt that the signatures are
authentic.

The defense has not established a single inaccuracy in the Ding diary.
The prosecution, on the other hand, has proved the detailed accuracy of
the diary time and again by the introduction of independent documents.
It will suffice to cite a few examples. The work report of the “Division
for Typhus and Virus Research” for the year 1943, which was sent to
Mrugowsky, substantiates the corresponding entries in the diary in every
detail. (_NO-571, Pros. Ex. 285._) The paper written by Ding on the
treatment of typhus with acridine derivatives, approved by Mrugowsky,
checks to the last detail with the experiment reported by the entries in
the diary for 24 April and 1 June 1943. (_NO-582, Pros. Ex. 286._)
Mrugowsky’s letter of 5 May 1942 to Conti, Grawitz, Genzken,
Gildemeister, Eyer, and Demnitz reporting on a typhus vaccine experiment
is in fact a description of the first experimental series in Buchenwald
as given in the diary. This was a document submitted by the defense.
(_Mrugowsky 10, Mrugowsky Ex. 20._) Mrugowsky admitted he was reporting
on that experiment. (_Tr. p. 5414._) The entry in the diary for 19
August 1942 concerning the testing of the Bucharest [Cantacuzino]
vaccine made available by Rose, is corroborated by Mrugowsky’s letter to
Rose, dated 16 May 1942, asking for the vaccines. (_NO-1754, Pros. Ex.
491._) The entry for 8 March 1944 concerning the experiments with the
Ipsen [Copenhagen] vaccine, which the diary shows were suggested by
Rose, is substantiated by Rose’s letter to Mrugowsky of 2 December 1943
(_NO-1186, Pros. Ex. 492_), and by Lolling’s letter to Grawitz of 14
February 1944. (_NO-1188, Pros. Ex. 470_; _see also, NO-1189, Pros. Ex.
471_.) The yellow fever vaccine experiments reported in the diary on 10
January 1943 are dealt with in a letter from the Behring Works to
Mrugowsky dated 5 January 1943. (_NO-1305, Pros. Ex. 469._) The
phosphorus bomb experiments are noted in the Ding diary under the dates
of 19 to 25 November 1943. The report on these experiments dated 2
January 1944 shows the burning of inmates began on 19 November and ended
on 25 November 1943. (_NO-579, Pros. Ex. 288._) As to the conference
held on 29 December 1941 reported in the Ding diary, Mrugowsky made the
following statement in a pre-trial interrogation: “I remember that
meeting and it occurred to me that there were present Schreiber,
Gildemeister, Ding, and myself.” Mrugowsky admitted in open court having
made such a statement. (_Tr. p. 5380._)

The above analysis of the authenticity and accuracy of the Ding diary,
while not exhaustive, suffices to show that the defense objection to
this document is completely without merit. There is scarcely a line in
the whole diary which has not been substantiated either by documents or
testimony. The diary must be accepted as accurate in its entirety. There
is no basis whatever for accepting some entries and rejecting others.
The defense has presented no credible evidence of _any_ inaccuracies.
The living record of the deceased Ding is the best evidence of what
actually happened.

Other vaccine experiments were carried out in the experimental station
in Buchenwald. On request of the Medical Inspectorate of the Army,
yellow fever vaccine containing a live virus was tested in a large-scale
experiment on inmates which began on 10 January 1943. The arrangements
were made by Schreiber through the defendant Mrugowsky. (_NO-1305, Pros.
Ex. 469._) A very large number of inmates were vaccinated between 13
January and 17 May 1943 at which time production of the yellow fever
vaccine was abandoned because of the military situation in North Africa.
The results of these experiments were sent to Amt XVI in the SS
Operational Headquarters, which was the hygiene office under Mrugowsky,
and to the Army Medical Inspectorate. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287._)

In the first part of 1943, Mrugowsky conferred with Handloser concerning
multiple vaccinations. (_Tr. p. 3064._) There can be no doubt that this
was the motivation for the large scale vaccination experiments on 45
inmates of Buchenwald between 24 March and 20 April 1943, as set forth
in the Ding diary. Each person was vaccinated on eight different days
within four weeks against smallpox, typhoid, typhus, para-typhoid A and
B, cholera, and diphtheria. The report on these experiments was sent to
Mrugowsky’s office. Kogon testified that the experimental subjects were
given para-typhoid bacilli in potato salad. He also stated that the
experiments in Buchenwald with diseases other than typhus resulted in
deaths, although relatively fewer. (_Tr. pp. 1182, 1183._)

Mrugowsky would have the Tribunal believe that he is in no way
responsible for the experiments carried out by Ding and Hoven in the
Buchenwald concentration camp. He testified, in effect, that Ding was
directly subordinated to Grawitz as far as the experiments were
concerned. (_Tr. p. 5067._) While he did admit that Ding was
subordinated to him for purposes of vaccine production in Block 50 in
Buchenwald, he said he had nothing whatever to do with the experiments
carried out in Block 46. The same contention was made by the defendant
Genzken. Mrugowsky testified that he was outraged by the idea of
experimenting on human beings since he was of the opinion that human
life is sacred. (_Tr. p. 5066._)

The proof, however, is overwhelming that Mrugowsky ordered the
experiments carried out by Ding in Buchenwald. In his own pre-trial
affidavit Mrugowsky stated that the Division for Typhus and Virus
Research of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS in Buchenwald was
established in the beginning of 1942 by Genzken. He admitted that as
Chief of Amt XVI (hygiene) in the SS Operational Headquarters and as
Chief of the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS, he was the immediate
superior of Ding. He stated further that experiments on inmates were
carried out by Ding in order to determine the effect of various typhus
vaccines. He admitted he obtained full knowledge of the work of Ding;
that he received reports from him on the experiments, including the
death rates, and that he informed Genzken. (_NO-423, Pros. Ex. 282._)
The two charts drawn by the defendant Mrugowsky clearly show that the
experimental station in Buchenwald under Ding was directly subordinated
to Mrugowsky from the time of its establishment until the collapse of
Germany. (_NO-416, Pros. Ex. 22_; _NO-417, Pros. Ex. 23_.) Mrugowsky
admitted Ding’s connection with the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS
on cross-examination. (_Tr. p. 5371._)

The pre-trial affidavit of the defendant Hoven who was deputy to Ding
and certainly in a position to know the facts, states that the Hygiene
Institute of the Waffen SS under Mrugowsky received all the reports on
the experiments in Block 46 and that Ding received orders directly from
Mrugowsky. Hoven outlined the chain of command as: Grawitz, Genzken,
Mrugowsky, and Ding. Ding went to Berlin for discussions with Mrugowsky
nearly every second week. Mrugowsky visited the home of Ding on one of
his trips to Buchenwald. (_NO-429, Pros. Ex. 281._)

Kogon testified that Ding reported personally to Mrugowsky on the
experiments, and when he did not go to Berlin himself, he reported
regularly every three months in writing. (_Tr. pp. 1155-1186._) The
reports on the experiments carried out in Block 46 were sent to
Mrugowsky in Berlin. (_Tr. p. 1160._) Ding’s official correspondence was
primarily with Mrugowsky. (_Tr. p. 1157._) The instructions for the
execution of the experiments came from Mrugowsky. (_Tr. pp. 1163,
1219._) In the late summer of 1943 Mrugowsky became the sole chief of
Ding and issued all orders to him. (_Tr. p. 1202._) Mrugowsky occupied
such an important position that it would have been dangerous for Ding to
contact Grawitz over his head. (_Tr. p. 1241._) Mrugowsky visited the
experimental block in Buchenwald on several occasions. (_Tr. pp. 1244,
1245_; _Tr. p. 1329_.)

The proof outlined above as to Mrugowsky’s responsibility is repeatedly
supported by documentary evidence. Ding’s work report for the year 1943,
which lists the experiments carried out in Block 46, was sent to
Mrugowsky and carried the letterhead “Hygiene Institute of the Waffen
SS, Division for Typhus and Virus Research, Weimar-Buchenwald.”
(_NO-571, Pros. Ex. 285._) This work report covers the experiments in
Block 46 and the production of vaccines in Block 50, which conclusively
proves that Mrugowsky’s assertion that his responsibility was limited to
Block 50 is completely false. The same report shows that Mrugowsky
inspected the Division for Typhus and Virus Research in Buchenwald on 3
September 1943, and that Ding had several conferences with Mrugowsky.
Mrugowsky’s own secretary admitted that Ding’s reports about his
experiments on inmates went via the Hygiene Institute of the Waffen SS
to Grawitz. (_Mrugowsky 38, Mrugowsky Ex. 13._)

Mrugowsky received Ding’s report on the treatment of typhus with
acridine derivatives. (_NO-582, Pros. Ex. 286._) This report speaks of
clinical tests on human beings who were afflicted with typhus, but
Mrugowsky knew that Ding experimented by artificially infecting the
subjects. (_Tr. p. 5066._) The report shows on its face that 21 of the
experimental subjects died and that the inmates who survived had to
fight severe complications of the disease. This same experimental series
is reported in the Ding diary under the entries for 24 April and 1 June
1943.

The first experimental series on typhus carried out in Buchenwald
between 6 January and 19 April 1942 in which 145 inmates were used as
experimental subjects was the basis of a report by Mrugowsky to Conti,
Grawitz, Genzken, Eyer, and Demnitz, dated 5 May 1942. (_Mrugowsky 10,
Mrugowsky Ex. 20._) Five of the subjects died as a result of these
experiments. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287._)

The experiments with the Cantacuzino vaccine from Bucharest, reported in
the Ding diary under the entry for 19 August 1942, were ordered by
Mrugowsky. This vaccine was furnished by the defendant Rose, who
requested Mrugowsky to arrange for the experiments. On 16 May 1942
Mrugowsky wrote to Rose stating that Grawitz had consented to the
execution of the experiments and that the vaccine should be sent to him
(Mrugowsky). He also agreed to conduct experiments to determine whether
the louse could be infected by a vaccinated typhus patient. This, of
course, necessitated the infection of the experimental subject with
typhus. (_NO-1754, Pros. Ex. 491._) As a result of these experiments,
four of the subjects died. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287._)

The typhus experimental series No. VIII, during which the Ipsen vaccine
from Copenhagen was tested, was also ordered by the defendant Mrugowsky.
On 2 December 1943 Rose asked Mrugowsky to have the Ipsen vaccine tested
in Ding’s experimental station in Buchenwald. (_NO-1186, Pros. Ex.
492._) Mrugowsky expressly denied, during cross-examination, that he was
ever approached by Rose to have the Copenhagen [Ipsen] vaccine tested in
Buchenwald. He stated that: “If he had come to me I would have sent him
on to someone else. I would have said: ‘My dear man, that does not have
anything to do with me.’” (_Tr. pp. 5434, 5435._) On 21 February 1944
Mrugowsky was notified that 30 “appropriate gypsies” would be made
available for testing the Ipsen vaccine. (_NO-1188, Pros. Ex. 470._)
Mrugowsky was further advised on 29 February 1944 that the experimental
subjects would be designated by the office of Nebe of the Reich criminal
police. (_NO-1189, Pros. Ex. 471._) The Ding diary proves that the
experiments with the Ipsen vaccine began on 8 March 1944 with 30
experimental subjects, of whom six died as a result of the experiments.

On 12 August 1944 the defendant Mrugowsky ordered Ding to carry out
experiments to determine the infectious character of blood of slight
cases of typhus compared with that of serious cases. (_NO-1197, Pros.
Ex. 472._)

Mrugowsky ordered a series of experiments to determine whether the
course of typhus could be tempered by intravenous or intramuscular
injection of typhus vaccine. Of the 25 experimental subjects used, 19
died. This experiment was carried out between 11 November and 22
December 1944. (_NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

_Experiments with Old Blood Plasma and the Production of Blood Plasma and
                           the Typhus Serum_

Experiments with old blood plasma were conducted on inmates in
Buchenwald by order of Mrugowsky at the request of the Military Medical
Academy. Blood transfusions were carried out in order to determine
whether old blood plasma could be used without danger, especially
without danger of shock. Several series of experiments were performed,
each with 10 to 20 experimental subjects. Some of the victims died,
probably due to the combined effect of shock and poor physical
condition. Mrugowsky received reports on these experiments. (_Tr. pp.
1190-1192_; _NO-265, Pros. Ex. 287_.)

The entries for 26 May and 13 October 1944 in the Ding diary show that
blood was withdrawn from inmates recovering from typhus for the purpose
of making a typhus convalescent serum. The witness Kogon testified that
this work was done by SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Dr. Ellenbeck on order from
Mrugowsky. Ellenbeck obtained the blood from typhus convalescents in
Block 46 from the summer of 1944 until the spring of 1945. Blood was
taken from these experimental subjects regularly, usually in amounts
between 250 and 350 cubic centimeters. Taking the blood from the
convalescent patients meant an extraordinary burden on them and a number
died. While the precise cause of death could not be definitely
ascertained under the circumstances, there is no doubt that the
withdrawal of blood was a contributing factor. (_Tr. pp. 1192, 1193._)

Kogon further testified that Ellenbeck, on orders from Mrugowsky,
systematically selected invalids and old persons, especially Frenchmen,
who were in the so-called “little camp” of Buchenwald, for the purpose
of withdrawing blood to be used in making blood plasma. The horrible
conditions in the “little camp” were vividly described. The blood was
demanded from the victims and was taken from them. Sometimes extra food
was given to these starving patients. (_Tr. pp. 1194-1196._) Upon being
asked whether any of these blood donors in the “little camp” in
Buchenwald died from this blood-letting, Kogon replied:

    “The question shows that it is very difficult to gain a real
    concept of the ‘little camp’ at Buchenwald. The people died
    there in masses. During the night corpses were lying in the
    blocks naked because they were thrown out of the bunks by the
    other prisoners so that they would have a little more space.
    Even the smallest pieces of clothing were torn off by those who
    wanted to survive. It is impossible to determine if anybody died
    as the direct and immediate result of the taking of blood,
    because many people fell and died while walking around in the
    ‘little camp’.

    “But it is beyond doubt to anyone who knew the conditions there,
    that the taking of blood—even if a small measure of strength
    was given to these people as far as food was concerned—was a
    considerable contributing factor in the death of very many of
    them.” (_Tr. p. 1196._)

Ellenbeck also conducted research concerning the oxygen content of the
blood of human beings in various stages of exhaustion and artificially
produced starvation oedema. Mrugowsky gave his approval to these
experiments. (_Tr. pp. 1257-1266._)

                _EXTRACTS FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST
                          DEFENDANT SCHROEDER_

                 *        *        *        *        *

 _Typhus and Other Vaccine Experiments in the Natzweiler Concentration
                                 Camp_

The appearance of Haagen as a defense witness requires consideration of
his testimony on these experiments.

Haagen testified that in the summer of 1943 the defendant Rose, as
consulting hygienist to the Chief of the Medical Service of the
Luftwaffe, prevailed upon him to resume active status as consulting
hygienist to the Air Fleet Physician Reich. Haagen also accepted a
typhus research commission from the Luftwaffe and as a result of this
commission and his position in the Luftwaffe, he carried out certain
typhus experiments. (_Tr. pp. 9564, 9565._)

Haagen stated that Stabsarzt Graefe was assigned to him at the Hygiene
Institute of the University of Strasbourg in 1942 by the Luftwaffe and
that Graefe acted as his assistant. Graefe was militarily subordinated
to Luftgau Physician 7 but technically subordinated to Haagen. (_Tr. p.
9582._) Haagen was also militarily subordinated to Luftgau Physician 7.
(_Tr. p. 9563._)

Haagen had developed a murine typhus (rat typhus) vaccine which
contained an attentuated virulent (living) virus. (_Tr. pp. 9596,
9597._) Haagen testified that he performed compatability tests with this
vaccine on 28 inmates of Schirmeck concentration camp, which was a
sub-camp of Natzweiler. Eight inmates were vaccinated with .5 cc. of
this virulent vaccine, ten with .5 cc. [of virulent vaccine], and ten
with a dead vaccine plus .5 cc. of the virulent vaccine. Three
additional inmates were vaccinated with a dead vaccine for purposes of
comparison. He stated that no serious reactions occurred as a result of
these vaccines. (_Tr. p. 9603._) All of these vaccinations were carried
out in the month of May 1943 and no vaccinations occurred after that
date, according to Haagen. (_Tr. p. 9636._) In the fall of 1943 Haagen
transferred his activities to Natzweiler on the alleged ground that he
felt a typhus epidemic was more likely there than in Schirmeck. (_Tr. p.
9603._) He requested through Hirt that 100 concentration camp inmates be
put at his disposal in Natzweiler for purposes of these experiments.
These inmates were transferred from Auschwitz to Natzweiler during the
month of November 1943, 18 of whom died on the way. Haagen found the
remainder unsuitable for his purposes and requested an additional 100
which were made available during December 1943. He testified that of
these, 40 inmates were subjected to a series of two vaccinations by
injection to bring about immunity and a third vaccination by
scarification to test the immunity. For purposes of comparison, a second
group of 40 inmates designated as “controls” was given only the third
scarification vaccination. The same vaccine was used for all of these
alleged vaccinations and was a new vaccine containing an attenuated
virulent Rickettsia-Prowazeki virus (louse typhus). The scarification
vaccine applied to both groups of subjects contained a smaller quantity
of vaccine than the first two injection vaccinations given to the group
immunized. In the first group the injected vaccine produced what Haagen
described as the normal vaccine reaction. Substantially the same
reaction occurred in the control group which received only the third
scarification vaccine. The reaction was no more serious than in those
who were vaccinated by injection. (_Tr. pp. 9615-7._)

Haagen admitted that the subjects used by him both in Schirmeck and
Natzweiler were of many different nationalities, among whom were gypsies
and Poles. (_Tr. p. 9607._) He further testified that these inmates were
not volunteers because, as he said, he was only carrying out protective
vaccinations. (_Tr. pp. 9541-2._)

Haagen stated that the only reason he performed these vaccinations in
Schirmeck and Natzweiler was because he was asked to do so by Kramer,
camp commandant in Natzweiler. He and Kramer were disturbed about the
possibility of a typhus epidemic in the middle of 1943, although he
testified that in fact no typhus cases actually occurred until March
1944. (_Tr. pp. 9594-5._) He went to Schmireck only because he and
Kramer feared an epidemic. (_Tr. p. 9600._)

Haagen’s testimony, as outlined above, is completely incredible on its
face as well as in view of the documents which were submitted by the
prosecution and available to Haagen at the time he testified. Firstly,
it is utterly ridiculous to credit his statement that he went to
Schirmeck and Natzweiler only because he feared an epidemic. It is
ridiculous to suppose that a concentration camp commander, on his own
initiative, sought medical assistance from doctors in the towns
surrounding a concentration camp. The WVHA, to which all concentration
camps were subordinated, had a very elaborate medical system and it is
unthinkable that a local camp commander would ask aid from an outsider.
Secondly, it is ridiculous to suppose that Haagen, out of the kindness
of his heart and the fear of an epidemic spreading beyond the confines
of the camp, would use his precious typhus vaccine to protect the
miserable wretches who were imprisoned in the concentration camps.
Haagen himself stated that he had very little typhus vaccine. (_Tr. p.
9613._) It has been repeatedly testified to during the course of this
trial that typhus vaccines were critically short in Germany during the
war and that there were not even sufficient quantities to vaccinate
doctors, nurses, and other personnel exposed to special danger. That
this vaccine would be used to protect concentration camp inmates is
unthinkable. Thirdly, it is ridiculous to suppose that any scientist
could have possibly thought that vaccinating 28 inmates in Schirmeck and
80 in Natzweiler could have had any possible effect on the likelihood of
a typhus epidemic.

That Haagen perjured himself with respect to what he was really doing in
Natzweiler during the course of his typhus experiments is clearly
evident from his own letter of 27 June 1944 to Hirt. In a letter of 9
May 1944 to Hirt, Haagen requested that an additional 200 persons be
furnished to him for his experiments. (_NO-123, Pros. Ex. 303._)
Supplementary to this request, he stated in his letter of 27 June 1944
that, “in the subsequent inoculations with virulent typhus which are to
be made for the purpose of testing the protective vaccine, one must
count on sickness particularly in the control group which has not
received the protective vaccines. These after-inoculations are desirable
in order to establish unequivocally the effectiveness of the protective
vaccines. This time 150 persons will be used for the protective vaccine
and 50 for the control inoculations.” (_NO-127, Pros. Ex. 306._)

It should be noted specifically that in the letter quoted above, Haagen
pointed out to Hirt that sickness was to be expected in the control
group which had not received the protective vaccine. Haagen testified
that this additional group of 200 inmates requested by him was merely
for the purpose of vaccination, just as he had done in December 1943 and
January 1944 on the 80 experimental subjects. He added that in May he
had enough vaccine for 200 more persons and he was merely trying to
increase the protection in the camp. (_Tr. p. 9613._) The falsity of
Haagen’s testimony is clearly apparent from the statement in the letter
that sickness was expected in the _control group_. He had previously
testified that there was no reason whatever to expect any more serious
reaction to the scarification vaccination in the control group than to
the injected vaccine in the immunized group. (_Tr. p. 9618._) Indeed,
there was every reason to expect that the vaccine injected in the
immunized group would bring about a more serious reaction since more
vaccine was given by injection than by scarification. Haagen applied a
much larger quantity of the vaccine in the first two injections of the
immunized group than in the scarification vaccination of both the
immunized and the control group. The same vaccine was used throughout.
(_Tr. p. 9710._) The method of vaccination, whether by injection or
scarification, has no effect on reaction to the vaccine. Haagen
specifically testified that “if we vaccinate by scarification we can
expect that the effect of the vaccine will be the same as if we inject
subcutaneously or intramuscularly.” (_Tr. p. 9710._)

Haagen was quite unable to reconcile his statement in his letter to Hirt
of 27 June 1944 that “one must count on sickness, particularly in the
control group” with his testimony that there was no difference in the
reaction to the vaccine as between the immunized and control groups.
Indeed, the only possible interpretation of his letter is that instead
of vaccinating the immunized and control groups by scarification, he, in
fact, infected them with typhus. Haagen knew that the unprotected
control subjects would become ill with typhus. Haagen also had no
explanation for the letter of Kahnt, Chief of Staff to Schroeder, of 29
August 1944, in which he was asked “whether it may be assumed that the
typhus epidemic prevailing at Natzweiler at present is connected with
the vaccine research.” (_NO-131, Pros. Ex. 309._) He testified that he
had completed his vaccinations of the 80 experimental subjects during
January 1944 and that all of his serological examinations were finished
no later than February 1944 and that the experimental subjects were
released from confinement. Haagen submitted a report to the Luftwaffe no
later than May or June 1944 to the effect that the vaccine had been a
success. (_Tr. pp. 9627-9._) There was no reason whatever for Kahnt and
Rose to address such an inquiry to Haagen when he had long since
completed his experiments, according to his testimony, and submitted a
success report to the Luftwaffe at least two months before the inquiry.
It is quite impossible that vaccine tests which caused no typhus in the
vaccinated persons could cause typhus in other persons, as suggested by
Rose during his examination. Moreover, it should be noted that Kahnt’s
