CHAPTER VIII.
They Meet The Pilgrims At The Temple Of Oro


Deep, deep, in deep groves, we found the great temple of Oro,
Spreader-of-the-Sky, and deity supreme.

While here we silently stood eyeing this Mardi-renowned image, there
entered the fane a great multitude of its attendants, holding pearl-
shells on their heads, filled with a burning incense. And ranging
themselves in a crowd round Oro, they began a long-rolling chant, a sea
of sounds; and the thick smoke of their incense went up to the roof.

And now approached Pani and the pilgrims; followed, at a distance, by
the willful boy.

“Behold great Oro,” said the guide.

“We see naught but a cloud,” said the chief Divino.

“My ears are stunned by the chanting,” said the blind pilgrim.

“Receive more gifts, oh guide!” cried Fanna the matron. “Oh Oro!
invisible Oro! I kneel,” slow murmured the sad-eyed maid.

But now, a current of air swept aside the eddying incense; and the
willful boy, all eagerness to behold the image, went hither and
thither; but the gathering of attendants was great; and at last he
exclaimed, “Oh Oro! I can not see thee, for the crowd that stands
between thee and me.”

“Who is this babbler?” cried they with the censers, one and all turning
upon the pilgrims; “let him speak no more; but bow down, and grind the
dust where he stands; and declare himself the vilest creature that
crawls. So Oro and Alma command.”

“I feel nothing in me so utterly vile,” said the boy, “and I cringe to
none. But I would as lief _adore_ your image, as that in my heart, for
both mean the same; but more, how can I? I love great Oro, though I
comprehend him not. I marvel at his works, and feel as nothing in his
sight; but because he is thus omnipotent, and I a mortal, it follows
not that I am vile. Nor so doth he regard me. We do ourselves degrade
ourselves, not Oro us. Hath not Oro made me? And therefore am I not
worthy to stand erect before him? Oro is almighty, but no despot. I
wonder; I hope; I love; I weep; I have in me a feeling nigh to fear,
that is not fear; but wholly vile I am not; nor can we love and cringe.
But Oro knows my heart, which I can not speak.”

“Impious boy,” cried they with the censers, “we will offer thee up,
before the very image thou contemnest. In the name of Alma, seize him.”

And they bore him away unresisting.

“Thus perish the ungodly,” said Pani to the shuddering pilgrims.

And they quitted the temple, to journey toward the Peak of Ofo.

“My soul bursts!” cried Yoomy. “My lord, my lord, let us save the boy.”

“Speak not,” said Media. “His fate is fixed. Let Mardi stand.”

“Then let us away from hence, my lord; and join the pilgrims; for, in
these inland vales, the lost one may be found, perhaps at the very base
of Ofo.”

“Not there; not there;” cried Babbalanja, “Yillah may have touched
these shores; but long since she must have fled.”




CHAPTER IX.
They Discourse Of Alma


Sailing to and fro in the lake, to view its scenery, much discourse
took place concerning the things we had seen; and far removed from the
censer-bearers, the sad fate that awaited the boy was now the theme of
all.

A good deal was then said of Alma, to whom the guide, the pilgrims, and
the censer-bearers had frequently alluded, as to some paramount
authority.

Called upon to reveal what his chronicles said on this theme,
Braid-Beard complied; at great length narrating, what now follows
condensed.

Alma, it seems, was an illustrious prophet, and teacher divine; who,
ages ago, at long intervals, and in various islands, had appeared to
the Mardians under the different titles of Brami, Manko, and Alma. Many
thousands of moons had elasped since his last and most memorable
avatar, as Alma on the isle of Maramma. Each of his advents had taken
place in a comparatively dark and benighted age. Hence, it was devoutly
believed, that he came to redeem the Mardians from their heathenish
thrall; to instruct them in the ways of truth, virtue, and happiness;
to allure them to good by promises of beatitude hereafter; and to
restrain them from evil by denunciations of woe. Separated from the
impurities and corruptions, which in a long series of centuries had
become attached to every thing originally uttered by the prophet, the
maxims, which as Brami he had taught, seemed similar to those
inculcated by Manko. But as Alma, adapting his lessons to the improved
condition of humanity, the divine prophet had more completely unfolded
his scheme; as Alma, he had made his last revelation.

This narration concluded, Babbalanja mildly observed, “Mohi: without
seeking to accuse you of uttering falsehoods; since what you relate
rests not upon testimony of your own; permit me, to question the
fidelity of your account of Alma. The prophet came to dissipate errors,
you say; but superadded to many that have survived the past, ten
thousand others have originated in various constructions of the
principles of Alma himself. The prophet came to do away all gods but
one; but since the days of Alma, the idols of Maramma have more than
quadrupled. The prophet came to make us Mardians more virtuous and
happy; but along with all previous good, the same wars, crimes, and
miseries, which existed in Alma’s day, under various modifications are
yet extant. Nay: take from your chronicles, Mohi, the history of those
horrors, one way or other, resulting from the doings of Alma’s nominal
followers, and your chronicles would not so frequently make mention of
blood. The prophet came to guarantee our eternal felicity; but
according to what is held in Maramma, that felicity rests on so hard a
proviso, that to a thinking mind, but very few of our sinful race may
secure it. For one, then, I wholly reject your Alma; not so much,
because of all that is hard to be understood in his histories; as
because of obvious and undeniable things all round us; which, to me,
seem at war with an unreserved faith in his doctrines as promulgated
here in Maramma. Besides; every thing in this isle strengthens my
incredulity; I never was so thorough a disbeliever as now.”

“Let the winds be laid,” cried Mohi, “while your rash confession is
being made in this sacred lake.”

Said Media, “Philosopher; remember the boy, and they that seized him.”

“Ah! I do indeed remember him. Poor youth! in his agony, how my heart
yearned toward his. But that very prudence which you deny me, my lord,
prevented me from saying aught in his behalf. Have you not observed,
that until now, when we are completely by ourselves, I have refrained
from freely discoursing of what we have seen in this island? Trust me,
my lord, there is no man, that bears more in mind the necessity of
being either a believer or a hypocrite in Maramma, and the imminent
peril of being honest here, than I, Babbalanja. And have I not reason
to be wary, when in my boyhood, my own sire was burnt for his temerity;
and in this very isle? Just Oro! it was done in the name of Alma,—what
wonder then, that, at times, I almost hate that sound. And from those
flames, they devoutly swore he went to others,—horrible fable!”

Said Mohi: “Do you deny, then, the everlasting torments?”

“’Tis not worth a denial. Nor by formally denying it, will I run the
risk of shaking the faith of, thousands, who in that pious belief find
infinite consolation for all they suffer in Mardi.”

“How?” said Media; “are there those who soothe themselves with the
thought of everlasting flames?”

“One would think so, my lord, since they defend that dogma more
resolutely than any other. Sooner will they yield you the isles of
Paradise, than it. And in truth, as liege followers of Alma, they would
seem but right in clinging to it as they do; for, according to all one
hears in Maramma, the great end of the prophet’s mission seems to have
been the revealing to us Mardians the existence of horrors, most hard
to escape. But better we were all annihilated, than that one man should
be damned.”

Rejoined Media: “But think you not, that possibly, Alma may have been
misconceived? Are you certain that doctrine is his?”

“I know nothing more than that such is the belief in this land. And in
these matters, I know not where else to go for information. But, my
lord, had I been living in those days when certain men are said to have
been actually possessed by spirits from hell, I had not let slip the
opportunity—as our forefathers did—to cross-question them concerning
the place they came from.”

“Well, well,” said Media, “your Alma’s faith concerns not me: I am a
king, and a demi-god; and leave vulgar torments to the commonality.”

“But it concerns me,” muttered Mohi; “yet I know not what to think.”

“For me,” said Yoomy, “I reject it. Could I, I would not believe it. It
is at variance with the dictates of my heart instinctively my heart
turns from it, as a thirsty man from gall.”

“Hush; say no more,” said Mohi; “again we approach the shore.”




