CHAPTER LXI.
They Round The Stormy Cape Of Capes


Long leagues, for weary days, we voyaged along that coast, till we came
to regions where we multiplied our mantles.

The sky grew overcast. Each a night, black storm-clouds swept the
wintry sea; and like Sahara caravans, which leave their sandy wakes—
so, thick and fleet, slanted the scud behind. Through all this rack and
mist, ten thousand foam-flaked dromedary-humps uprose.

Deep among those panting, moaning fugitives, the three canoes raced on.

And now, the air grew nipping cold. The clouds shed off their fleeces;
a snow-hillock, each canoe; our beards, white-frosted.

And so, as seated in our shrouds, we sailed in among great mountain
passes of ice-isles; from icy ledges scaring shivering seals, and white
bears, musical with icicles, jingling from their shaggy ermine.

Far and near, in towering ridges, stretched the glassy Andes; with
their own frost, shuddering through all their domes and pinnacles.
Ice-splinters rattled down the cliffs, and seethed into the sea.

Broad away, in amphitheaters undermined by currents, whole cities of
ice-towers, in crashes, toward one center, fell.—In their earthquakes,
Lisbon and Lima never saw the like. Churned and broken in the boiling
tide, they swept off amain;—over and over rolling; like porpoises to
vessels tranced in calms, bringing down the gale.

At last, rounding an antlered headland, that seemed a moose at bay—ere
long, we launched upon blue lake-like waters, serene as Windermere, or
Horicon. Thus, from the boisterous storms of youth, we glide upon
senility.

But as we northward voyaged, another aspect wore the sea.

In far-off, endless vistas, colonnades of water-spouts were seen: all
heaven’s dome upholding on their shafts: and bright forms gliding up
and down within. So at Luz, in his strange vision, Jacob saw the
angels.

A boundless cave of stalactites, it seemed; the cloud-born vapors
downward spiraling, till they met the whirlpool-column from the sea;
then, uniting, over the waters stalked, like ghosts of gods. Or midway
sundered—down, sullen, sunk the watery half; and far up into heaven,
was drawn the vapory. As, at death, we mortals part in twain; our
earthy half still here abiding; but our spirits flying whence they
came.

In good time, we gained the thither side of great Kolumbo of the South;
and sailing on, long waited for the day; and wondered at the darkness.

“What steadfast clouds!” cried Yoomy, “yonder! far aloft: that ridge,
with many points; it fades below, but shows a faint white crest.”

“Not clouds, but mountains,” said Babbalanja, “the vast spine, that
traverses Kolumbo; spurring off in ribs, that nestle loamy valleys,
veined with silver streams, and silver ores.”

It was a long, embattled line of pinnacles. And high posted in the
East, those thousand bucklered peaks stood forth, and breasted back the
Dawn. Before their purple bastions bold, Aurora long arrayed her
spears, and clashed her golden shells. The summons dies away. But now,
her lancers charge the steep, and gain its crest a-glow;—their
glittering spears and blazoned shields triumphant in the morn.

But ere that sight, we glided on for hours in twilight; when, on those
mountains’ farther side, the hunters must have been abroad, morning-
glories all astir.




CHAPTER LXII.
They Encounter Gold-Hunters


Now, northward coasting along Kolumbo’s Western shore, whence came the
same wild forest-sounds, as from the Eastern; and where we landed not,
to seek among those wrangling tribes;—after many, many days, we spied
prow after prow, before the wind all northward bound: sails
wide-spread, and paddles plying: scaring the fish from before them.

Their inmates answered not our earnest hail.

But as they sped, with frantic glee, in one long chorus thus they
sang:—

                        We rovers bold,
                    To the land of Gold,
                Over bowling billows are gliding:
                    Eager to toil,
                    For the golden spoil,
                And every hardship biding.
                        See! See!
                Before our prows’ resistless dashes,
                The gold-fish fly in golden flashes!
                    ’Neath a sun of gold,
                    We rovers bold,
                On the golden land are gaining;
                And every night,
                We steer aright,
            By golden stars unwaning!
        All fires burn a golden glare:
        No locks so bright as golden hair!
    All orange groves have golden gushings:
    All mornings dawn with golden flushings!
In a shower of gold, say fables old,
A maiden was won by the god of gold!
    In golden goblets wine is beaming:
    On golden couches kings are dreaming!
    The Golden Rule dries many tears!
    The Golden Number rules the spheres!
Gold, gold it is, that sways the nations:
Gold! gold! the center of all rotations!
    On golden axles worlds are turning:
    With phosphorescence seas are burning!
    All fire-flies flame with golden gleamings:
    Gold-hunters’ hearts with golden dreamings!
    With golden arrows kings are slain:
    With gold we’ll buy a freeman’s name!
In toilsome trades, for scanty earnings,
At home we’ve slaved, with stifled yearnings:
No light! no hope! Oh, heavy woe!
When nights fled fast, and days dragged slow.
            But joyful now, with eager eye,
            Fast to the Promised Land we fly:
                Where in deep mines,
                The treasure shines;
            Or down in beds of golden streams,
            The gold-flakes glance in golden gleams!
                How we long to sift,
                That yellow drift!
            Rivers! Rivers! cease your going!
                Sand-bars! rise, and stay the tide!
            ’Till we’ve gained the golden flowing;
                And in the golden haven ride!


“Quick, quick, my lord,” cried Yoomy, “let us follow them; and from the
golden waters where she lies, our Yillah may emerge.”

“No, no,” said Babbalanja,—“no Yillah there!—from yonder promised-land,
fewer seekers will return, than go. Under a gilded guise, happiness is
still their instinctive aim. But vain, Yoomy, to snatch at Happiness.
Of that we may not pluck and eat. It is the fruit of our own toilsome
planting; slow it grows, nourished by many teats, and all our earnest
tendings. Yet ere it ripen, frosts may nip;—and then, we plant again;
and yet again. Deep, Yoomy, deep, true treasure lies; deeper than all
Mardi’s gold, rooted to Mardi’s axis. But unlike gold, it lurks in
every soil,—all Mardi over. With golden pills and potions is sickness
warded off?—the shrunken veins of age, dilated with new wine of youth?
Will gold the heart-ache cure? turn toward us hearts estranged? will
gold, on solid centers empires fix? ’Tis toil world-wasted to toil in
mines. Were all the isles gold globes, set in a quicksilver sea, all
Mardi were then a desert. Gold is the only poverty; of all glittering
ills the direst. And that man might not impoverish himself thereby, Oro
hath hidden it, with all other banes,—saltpeter and explosives, deep in
mountain bowels, and river-beds. But man still will mine for it; and
mining, dig his doom.— Yoomy, Yoomy!—she we seek, lurks not in the
Golden Hills!”

“Lo, a vision!” cried Yoomy, his hands wildly passed across his eyes.
“A vast and silent bay, belted by silent villages:—gaunt dogs howling
over grassy thresholds at stark corpses of old age and infancy; gray
hairs mingling with sweet flaxen curls; fields, with turned furrows,
choked with briers; arbor-floors strown over with hatchet-helves,
rotting in the iron; a thousand paths, marked with foot-prints, all
inland leading, none villageward; and strown with traces, as of a
flying host. On: over forest—hill, and dale—and lo! the golden region!
After the glittering spoil, by strange river-margins, and beneath
impending cliffs, thousands delve in quicksands; and, sudden, sink in
graves of their own making: with gold dust mingling their own ashes.
Still deeper, in more solid ground, other thousands slave; and pile
their earth so high, they gasp for air, and die; their comrades
mounting on them, and delving still, and dying—grave pile on grave!
Here, one haggard hunter murders another in his pit; and murdering,
himself is murdered by a third. Shrieks and groans! cries and curses!
It seems a golden Hell! With many camels, a sleek stranger comes—
pauses before the shining heaps, and shows _his_ treasures: yams and
bread-fruit. ‘Give, give,’ the famished hunters cry—, ‘a thousand
shekels for a yam!—a prince’s ransom for a meal!—Oh, stranger! on our
knees we worship thee:—take, take our gold; but let us live!’ Yams are
thrown them and they fight. Then he who toiled not, dug not, slaved
not, straight loads his caravans with gold; regains the beach, and
swift embarks for home. ‘Home! home!’ the hunters cry, with bursting
eyes. ‘With this bright gold, could we but join our waiting wives, who
wring their hands on distant shores, all then were well. But we can not
fly; our prows lie rotting on the beach. Ah! home! thou only
happiness!—better thy silver earnings than all these golden findings.
Oh, bitter end to all our hopes—we die in golden graves.”




