CHAPTER LII.
The Charming Yoomy Sings


The morrow came; and three abreast, with snorting prows, we raced
along; our mat-sails panting to the breeze. All present partook of the
life of the air; and unanimously Yoomy was called upon for a song. The
canoes were passing a long, white reef, sparkling with shells, like a
jeweler’s case: and thus Yoomy sang in the same old strain as of yore;
beginning aloud, where he had left off in his soul:—

        Her sweet, sweet mouth!
    The peach-pearl shell:—
Red edged its lips,
    That softly swell,
Just oped to speak,
With blushing cheek,
    That fisherman
With lonely spear
    On the reef ken,
And lift to ear
Its voice to hear,—
    Soft sighing South!
Like this, like this,—
The rosy kiss!—
    That maiden’s mouth.
A shell! a shell!
A vocal shell!
    Song-dreaming,
In its inmost dell!

Her bosom! Two buds half blown, they tell;
A little valley between perfuming;
            That roves away,
            Deserting the day,—
    The day of her eyes illuming;—
That roves away, o’er slope and fell,
Till a soft, soft meadow becomes the dell.


Thus far, old Mohi had been wriggling about in his seat, twitching his
beard, and at every couplet looking up expectantly, as if he desired
the company to think, that he was counting upon that line as the last;
But now, starting to his feet, he exclaimed, “Hold, minstrel! thy
muse’s drapery is becoming disordered: no more!”

“Then no more it shall be,” said Yoomy, “But you have lost a glorious
sequel.”




CHAPTER LIII.
They Draw Nigh Unto Land


In good time, after many days sailing, we snuffed the land from afar,
and came to a great country, full of inland mountains, north and south
stretching far out of sight. “All hail, Kolumbo!” cried Yoomy.

Coasting by a portion of it, which Mohi called Kanneeda, a province of
King Bello’s, we perceived the groves rocking in the wind; their
flexible boughs bending like bows; and the leaves flying forth, and
darkening the landscape, like flocks of pigeons.

“Those groves must soon fall,” said Mohi.

“Not so,” said Babbalanja. “My lord, as these violent gusts are formed
by the hostile meeting of two currents, one from over the lagoon, the
other from land; they may be taken as significant of the occasional
variances between Kanneeda and Dominora.”

“Ay,” said Media, “and as Mohi hints, the breeze from Dominora must
soon overthrow the groves of Kanneeda.”

“Not if the land-breeze holds, my lord;—one breeze oft blows another
home.—Stand up, and gaze! From cape to cape, this whole main we see, is
young and froward. And far southward, past this Kanneeda and Vivenza,
are haughty, overbearing streams, which at their mouths dam back the
ocean, and long refuse to mix their freshness with the foreign
brine:—so bold, so strong, so bent on hurling off aggression is this
brave main, Kolumbo;—last sought, last found, Mardi’s estate, so long
kept back;—pray Oro, it be not squandered foolishly. Here lie
plantations, held in fee by stout hearts and arms; and boundless
fields, that may be had for seeing. Here, your foes are forests, struck
down with bloodless maces.—Ho! Mardi’s Poor, and Mardi’s Strong! ye,
who starve or beg; seventh-sons who slave for earth’s first-born—here
is your home; predestinated yours; Come over, Empire-founders! fathers
of the wedded tribes to come!—abject now, illustrious evermore:—Ho:
Sinew, Brawn, and Thigh!”

“A very fine invocation,” said Media, “now Babbalanja, be seated; and
tell us whether Dominora and the kings of Porpheero do not own some
small portion of this great continent, which just now you poetically
pronounced as the spoil of any vagabonds who may choose to settle
therein? Is not Kanneeda, Dominora’s?”

“And was not Vivenza once Dominora’s also? And what Vivenza now is,
Kanneeda soon must be. I speak not, my lord, as wishful of what I say,
but simply as foreknowing it. The thing must come. Vain for Dominora to
claim allegiance from all the progeny she spawns. As well might the old
patriarch of the flood reappear, and claim the right of rule over all
mankind, as descended from the loins of his three roving sons.

“’Tis the old law:—the East peoples the West, the West the East; flux
and reflux. And time may come, after the rise and fall of nations yet
unborn, that, risen from its future ashes, Porpheero shall be the
promised land, and from her surplus hordes Kolumbo people it.”

Still coasting on, next day, we came to Vivenza; and as Media desired
to land first at a point midway between its extremities, in order to
behold the convocation of chiefs supposed to be assembled at this
season, we held on our way, till we gained a lofty ridge, jutting out
into the lagoon, a bastion to the neighboring land. It terminated in a
lofty natural arch of solid trap. Billows beat against its base. But
above, waved an inviting copse, wherein was revealed an open temple of
canes, containing one only image, that of a helmeted female, the
tutelar deity of Vivenza.

The canoes drew near.

“Lo! what inscription is that?” cried Media, “there, chiseled over the
arch?”

Studying those immense hieroglyphics awhile, antiquarian Mohi still
eyeing them, said slowly:—“In-this-re-publi-can-land-all-men-are-
born-free-and-equal.”

“False!” said Media.

“And how long stay they so?” said Babbalanja.

“But look lower, old man,” cried Media, “methinks there’s a small
hieroglyphic or two hidden away in yonder angle.—Interpret them, old
man.”

After much screwing of his eyes, for those characters were very minute,
Champollion Mohi thus spoke—” Except-the-tribe-of-Hamo.”

“That nullifies the other,” cried Media. “Ah, ye republicans!”

“It seems to have been added for a postscript,” rejoined Braid-Beard,
screwing his eyes again.

“Perhaps so,” said Babbalanja, “but some wag must have done it.”

Shooting through the arch, we rapidly gained the beach.




