CHAPTER LXV.
Sailing On


Morning dawned upon the same mild, blue Lagoon as erst; and all the
lands that we had passed, since leaving Piko’s shore of spears, were
faded from the sight.

Part and parcel of the Mardian isles, they formed a cluster by
themselves; like the Pleiades, that shine in Taurus, and are eclipsed
by the red splendor of his fiery eye, and the thick clusterings of the
constellations round.

And as in Orion, to some old king-astronomer,—say, King of Rigel, or
Betelguese,—this Earth’s four quarters show but four points afar; so,
seem they to terrestrial eyes, that broadly sweep the spheres.

And, as the sun, by influence divine, wheels through the Ecliptic;
threading Cancer, Leo, Pisces, and Aquarius; so, by some mystic impulse
am I moved, to this fleet progress, through the groups in white-reefed
Mardi’s zone.

Oh, reader, list! I’ve chartless voyaged. With compass and the lead, we
had not found these Mardian Isles. Those who boldly launch, cast off
all cables; and turning from the common breeze, that’s fair for all,
with their own breath, fill their own sails. Hug the shore, naught new
is seen; and “Land ho!” at last was sung, when a new world was sought.

That voyager steered his bark through seas, untracked before; ploughed
his own path mid jeers; though with a heart that oft was heavy with the
thought, that he might only be too bold, and grope where land was none.

So I.

And though essaying but a sportive sail, I was driven from my course,
by a blast resistless; and ill-provided, young, and bowed to the brunt
of things before my prime, still fly before the gale;—hard have I
striven to keep stout heart.

And if it harder be, than e’er before, to find new climes, when now our
seas have oft been circled by ten thousand prows,—much more the glory!

But this new world here sought, is stranger far than his, who stretched
his vans from Palos. It is the world of mind; wherein the wanderer may
gaze round, with more of wonder than Balboa’s band roving through the
golden Aztec glades.

But fiery yearnings their own phantom-future make, and deem it present.
So, if after all these fearful, fainting trances, the verdict be, the
golden haven was not gained;—yet, in bold quest thereof, better to sink
in boundless deeps, than float on vulgar shoals; and give me, ye gods,
an utter wreck, if wreck I do.




CHAPTER LXVI.
A Flight Of Nightingales From Yoomy’s Mouth


By noon, down came a calm.

“Oh Neeva! good Neeva! kind Neeva! thy sweet breath, dear Neeva!”

So from his shark’s-mouth prayed little Vee-Vee to the god of Fair
Breezes. And along they swept; till the three prows neighed to the
blast; and pranced on their path, like steeds of Crusaders.

Now, that this fine wind had sprung up; the sun riding joyously in the
heavens; and the Lagoon all tossed with white, flying manes; Media
called upon Yoomy to ransack his whole assortment of songs:—warlike,
amorous, and sentimental,—and regale us with something inspiring for
too long the company had been gloomy.

“Thy best,” he cried.

Then will I e’en sing you a song, my lord, which is a song-full of
songs. I composed it long, long since, when Yillah yet bowered in Odo.
Ere now, some fragments have been heard. Ah, Taji! in this my lay, live
over again your happy hours. Some joys have thousand lives; can never
die; for when they droop, sweet memories bind them up.—My lord, I deem
these verses good; they came bubbling out of me, like live waters from
a spring in a silver mine. And by your good leave, my lord, I have much
faith in inspiration. Whoso sings is a seer.”

“Tingling is the test,” said Babbalanja, “Yoomy, did you tingle, when
that song was composing?”

“All over, Babbalanja.”

“From sole to crown?”

“From finger to finger.”

“My life for it! true poetry, then, my lord! For this self-same
tingling, I say, is the test.”

“And infused into a song,” cried Yoomy, “it evermore causes it so to
sparkle, vivify, and irradiate, that no son of man can repeat it
without tingling himself. This very song of mine may prove what I say.”

“Modest youth!” sighed Media.

“Not more so, than sincere,” said Babbalanja. “He who is frank, will
often appear vain, my lord. Having no guile, he speaks as freely of
himself, as of another; and is just as ready to honor his own merits,
even if imaginary, as to lament over undeniable deficiencies. Besides,
such men are prone to moods, which to shallow-minded, unsympathizing
mortals, make their occasional distrust of themselves, appear but as a
phase of self-conceit. Whereas, the man who, in the presence of his
very friends, parades a barred and bolted front,—that man so highly
prizes his sweet self, that he cares not to profane the shrine he
worships, by throwing open its portals. He is locked up; and Ego is the
key. Reserve alone is vanity. But all mankind are egotists. The world
revolves upon an I; and we upon ourselves; for we are our own
worlds:—all other men as strangers, from outlandish, distant climes,
going clad in furs. Then, whate’er they be, let us show our worlds; and
not seek to hide from men, what Oro knows.”

“Truth, my lord,” said Yoomy, “but all this applies to men in mass; not
specially, to my poor craft. Of all mortals, we poets are most subject
to contrary moods. Now, heaven over heaven in the skies; now layer
under layer in the dust. This, the penalty we pay for being what we
are. But Mardi only sees, or thinks it sees, the tokens of our
self-complacency: whereas, all our agonies operate unseen. Poets are
only seen when they soar.”

“The song! the song!” cried Media. “Never mind the metaphysics of
genius.”

And Yoomy, thus clamorously invoked, hemmed thrice, tuning his voice
for the air.

But here, be it said, that the minstrel was miraculously gifted with
three voices; and, upon occasions, like a mocking-bird, was a concert
of sweet sounds in himself. Had kind friends died, and bequeathed him
their voices? But hark! in a low, mild tenor, he begins:—

        Half-railed above the hills, yet rosy bright,
    Stands fresh, and fair, the meek and blushing morn!
So Yillah looks! her pensive eyes the stars,
    That mildly beam from out her cheek’s young dawn!

                But the still meek Dawn,
                Is not aye the form
                Of Yillah nor Morn!
                    Soon rises the sun,
                    Day’s race to run:
                His rays abroad,
                Flash each a sword,—
                    And merrily forth they flare!
                    Sun-music in the air!
                So Yillah now rises and flashes!
                Rays shooting from ont her long lashes,—
                    Sun-music in the air!

                    Her laugh! How it bounds!
                    Bright cascade of sounds!
                Peal after peal, and ringing afar,—
                Ringing of waters, that silvery jar,
                    From basin to basin fast falling!
                    Fast falling, and shining, and streaming:—
                Yillah’s bosom, the soft, heaving lake,
                Where her laughs at last dimple, and flake!

Oh beautiful Yillah! Thy step so free!—
    Fast fly the sea-ripples,
Revealing their dimples,
    When forth, thou hi’st to the frolicsome sea!

                 All the stars laugh,
                     When upward she looks:
                All the trees chat
                     In their woody nooks:
                All the brooks sing;
                All the caves ring;
                All the buds blossom;
                    All the boughs bound;
                All the birds carol;
                    And leaves turn round,
                    Where Yillah looks!

Light wells from her soul’s deep sun
Causing many toward her to run!
Vines to climb, and flowers to spring;
And youths their love by hundreds bring!


“Proceed, gentle Yoomy,” said Babbalanja.

“The meaning,” said Mohi.

“The sequel,” said Media.

“My lord, I have ceased in the middle; the end is not yet.”

“Mysticism!” cried Babbalanja. “What, minstrel; must nothing ultimate
come of all that melody? no final and inexhaustible meaning? nothing
that strikes down into the soul’s depths; till, intent upon itself, it
pierces in upon its own essence, and is resolved into its pervading
original; becoming a thing constituent of the all embracing deific;
whereby we mortals become part and parcel of the gods; our souls to
them as thoughts; and we privy to all things occult, ineffable, and
sublime? Then, Yoomy, is thy song nothing worth. Alla Mollolla saith,
‘That is no true, vital breath, which leaves no moisture behind.’ I
mistrust thee, minstrel! that thou hast not yet been impregnated by the
arcane mysteries; that thou dost not sufficiently ponder on the Adyta,
the Monads, and the Hyparxes; the Dianoias, the Unical Hypostases, the
Gnostic powers of the Psychical Essence, and the Supermundane and
Pleromatic Triads; to say nothing of the Abstract Noumenons.”

“Oro forbid!” cried Yoomy; “the very sound of thy words affrights me.”
Then, whispering to Mohi—“Is he daft again?”

“My brain is battered,” said Media. “Azzageddi! you must diet, and be
bled.”

“Ah!” sighed Babbalanja, turning; “how little they ween of the
Rudimental Quincunxes, and the Hecatic Spherula!”




