CHAPTER VI.
They Discourse Of The Gods Of Mardi, And Braid-Beard Tells Of One Foni


Walking from the sacred inclosure, Mohi discoursed of the plurality of
gods in the land, a subject suggested by the multitudinous idols we had
just been beholding.

Said Mohi, “These gods of wood and of stone are nothing in number to
the gods in the air. You breathe not a breath without inhaling, you
touch not a leaf without ruffling a spirit. There are gods of heaven,
and gods of earth; gods of sea and of land; gods of peace and of war;
gods of rook and of fell; gods of ghosts and of thieves; of singers and
dancers; of lean men and of house-thatchers. Gods glance in the eyes of
birds, and sparkle in the crests of the waves; gods merrily swing in
the boughs of the trees, and merrily sing in the brook. Gods are here,
and there, and every where; you are never alone for them.”

“If this be so, Braid-Beard,” said Babbalanja, “our inmost thoughts are
overheard; but not by eaves-droppers. However, my lord, these gods to
whom he alludes, merely belong to the semi-intelligibles, the divided
unities in unity, thin side of the First Adyta.”

“Indeed?” said Media.

“Semi-intelligible, say you, philosopher?” cried Mohi. “Then, prithee,
make it appear so; for what you say, seems gibberish to me.”

“Babbalanja,” said Media, “no more of your abstrusities; what know you
mortals of us gods and demi-gods? But tell me, Mohi, how many of your
deities of rock and fen think you there are? Have you no statistical
table?”

“My lord, at the lowest computation, there must be at least three
billion trillion of quintillions.”

“A mere unit!” said Babbalanja. “Old man, would you express an infinite
number? Then take the sum of the follies of Mardi for your
multiplicand; and for your multiplier, the totality of sublunarians,
that never have been heard of since they became no more; and the
product shall exceed your quintillions, even though all their units
were nonillions.”

“Have done, Babbalanja!” cried Media; “you are showing the sinister
vein in your marble. Have done. Take a warm bath, and make tepid your
cold blood. But come, Mohi, tell us of the ways of this Maramma;
something of the Morai and its idols, if you please.”

And straightway Braid-Beard proceeded with a narration, in substance as
follows:—

It seems, there was a particular family upon the island, whose members,
for many generations, had been set apart as sacrifices for the deity
called Doleema. They were marked by a sad and melancholy aspect, and a
certain involuntary shrinking, when passing the Morai. And, though,
when it came to the last, some of these unfortunates went joyfully to
their doom, declaring that they gloried to die in the service of holy
Doleema; still, were there others, who audaciously endeavored to shun
their fate; upon the approach of a festival, fleeing to the innermost
wilderness of the island. But little availed their flight. For swift on
their track sped the hereditary butler of the insulted god, one Xiki,
whose duty it was to provide the sacrifices. And when crouching in some
covert, the fugitive spied Xiki’s approach, so fearful did he become of
the vengeance of the deity he sought to evade, that renouncing all hope
of escape, he would burst from his lair, exclaiming, “Come on, and
kill!” baring his breast for the javelin that slew him.

The chronicles of Maramma were full of horrors.

In the wild heart of the island, was said still to lurk the remnant of
a band of warriors, who, in the days of the sire of the present
pontiff, had risen in arms to dethrone him, headed by Foni, an upstart
prophet, a personage distinguished for the uncommon beauty of his
person. With terrible carnage, these warriors had been defeated; and
the survivors, fleeing into the interior, for thirty days were pursued
by the victors. But though many were overtaken and speared, a number
survived; who, at last, wandering forlorn and in despair, like
demoniacs, ran wild in the woods. And the islanders, who at times
penetrated into the wilderness, for the purpose of procuring rare
herbs, often scared from their path some specter, glaring through the
foliage. Thrice had these demoniacs been discovered prowling about the
inhabited portions of the isle; and at day-break, an attendant of the
holy Morai once came upon a frightful figure, doubled with age, helping
itself to the offerings in the image of Doleema. The demoniac was
slain; and from his ineffaceable tatooing, it was proved that this was
no other than Foni, the false prophet; the splendid form he had carried
into the rebel fight, now squalid with age and misery.




CHAPTER VII.
They Visit The Lake Of Yammo


From the Morai, we bent our steps toward an unoccupied arbor; and here,
refreshing ourselves with the viands presented by Borabolla, we passed
the night. And next morning proceeded to voyage round to the opposite
quarter of the island; where, in the sacred lake of Yammo, stood the
famous temple of Oro, also the great gallery of the inferior deities.

The lake was but a portion of the smooth lagoon, made separate by an
arm of wooded reef, extending from the high western shore of the
island, and curving round toward a promontory, leaving a narrow channel
to the sea, almost invisible, however, from the land-locked interior.

In this lake were many islets, all green with groves. Its main-shore
was a steep acclivity, with jutting points, each crowned with mossy old
altars of stone, or ruinous temples, darkly reflected in the green,
glassy water; while, from its long line of stately trees, the low
reef-side of the lake looked one verdant bluff.

Gliding in upon Yammo, its many islets greeted us like a little Mardi;
but ever and anon we started at long lines of phantoms in the water,
reflections of the long line of images on the shore.

Toward the islet of Dolzono we first directed our way; and there we
beheld the great gallery of the gods; a mighty temple, resting on one
hundred tall pillars of palm, each based, below the surface, on the
buried body of a man; its nave one vista of idols; names carved on
their foreheads: Ogre, Tripoo, Indrimarvoki, Parzillo, Vivivi,
Jojijojorora, Jorkraki, and innumerable others.

Crowds of attendants were new-grouping the images.

“My lord, you behold one of their principal occupations,” said Mohi.

Said Media: “I have heard much of the famed image of Mujo, the Nursing
Mother;—can you point it out, Braid-Beard?”

“My lord, when last here, I saw Mujo at the head of this file; but they
must have removed it; I see it not now.”

“Do these attendants, then,” said Babbalanja, “so continually
new-marshal the idols, that visiting the gallery to-day, you are at a
loss to-morrow?”

“Even so,” said Braid-Beard. “But behold, my lord, this image is Mujo.”

We stood before an obelisk-idol, so towering, that gazing at it, we
were fain to throw back our heads. According to Mohi, winding stairs
led up through its legs; its abdomen a cellar, thick-stored with gourds
of old wine; its head, a hollow dome; in rude alto-relievo, its scores
of hillock-breasts were carved over with legions of baby deities,
frog-like sprawling; while, within, were secreted whole litters of
infant idols, there placed, to imbibe divinity from the knots of the
wood.

As we stood, a strange subterranean sound was heard, mingled with a
gurgling as of wine being poured. Looking up, we beheld, through
arrow-slits and port-holes, three masks, cross-legged seated in the
abdomen, and holding stout wassail. But instantly upon descrying us,
they vanished deeper into the interior; and presently was heard a
sepulchral chant, and many groans and grievous tribulations.

Passing on, we came to an image, with a long anaconda-like posterior
development, wound round and round its own neck.

“This must be Oloo, the god of Suicides,” said Babbalanja.

“Yes,” said Mohi, “you perceive, my lord, how he lays violent tail upon
himself.”

At length, the attendants having, in due order, new-deposed the long
lines of sphinxes and griffins, and many limbed images, a band of them,
in long flowing robes, began their morning chant.

“Awake Rarni! awake Foloona!
Awake unnumbered deities!”


With many similar invocations, to which the images made not the
slightest rejoinder. Not discouraged, however, the attendants now
separately proceeded to offer up petitions on behalf of various tribes,
retaining them for that purpose.

One prayed for abundance of rain, that the yams of Valapee might not
wilt in the ground; another for dry sunshine, as most favorable for the
present state of the Bread-fruit crop in Mondoldo.

Hearing all this, Babbalanja thus spoke:—“Doubtless, my lord Media,
besides these petitions we hear, there are ten thousand contradictory
prayers ascending to these idols. But methinks the gods will not jar
the eternal progression of things, by any hints from below; even were
it possible to satisfy conflicting desires.”

Said Yoomy, “But I would pray, nevertheless, Babbalanja; for prayer
draws us near to our own souls, and purifies our thoughts. Nor will I
grant that our supplications are altogether in vain.”

Still wandering among the images, Mohi had much to say, concerning
their respective claims to the reverence of the devout.

For though, in one way or other, all Mardians bowed to the supremacy of
Oro, they were not so unanimous concerning the inferior deities; those
supposed to be intermediately concerned in sublunary things. Some
nations sacrificed to one god; some to another; each maintaining, that
their own god was the most potential.

Observing that all the images were more or less defaced, Babbalanja
sought the reason.

To which, Braid-Beard made answer, that they had been thus defaced by
hostile devotees; who quarreling in the great gallery of the gods, and
getting beside themselves with rage, often sought to pull down, and
demolish each other’s favorite idols.

“But behold,” cried Babbalanja, “there seems not a single image
unmutilated. How is this, old man?”

“It is thus. While one faction defaces the images of its adversaries,
its own images are in like manner assailed; whence it comes that no
idol escapes.”

“No more, no more, Braid-Beard,” said Media. “Let us depart, and visit
the islet, where the god of all these gods is enshrined.”




