CHAPTER XI.
A Nursery-Tale Of Babbalanja’s


Having taken to our canoes once again, we were silently sailing along,
when Media observed, “Babbalanja; though I seldom trouble myself with
such thoughts, I have just been thinking, how difficult it must be, for
the more ignorant sort of people, to decide upon what particular image
to worship as a guardian deity, when in Maramma, it seems, there exists
such a multitude of idols, and a thousand more are to be heard of.”

“Not at all, your highness. The more ignorant the better. The multitude
of images distracts them not. But I am in no mood for serious
discourse; let me tell you a story.”

“A story! hear him: the solemn philosopher is desirous of regaling us
with a tale! But pray, begin.”

“Once upon a time, then,” said Babbalanja, indifferently adjusting his
girdle, “nine blind men, with uncommonly long noses, set out on their
travels to see the great island on which they were born.”

“A precious beginning,” muttered Mohi. “Nine blind men setting out to
see sights.”

Continued Babbalanja, “Staff in hand, they traveled; one in advance of
the other; each man with his palm upon the shoulder next him; and he
with the longest nose took the lead of the file. Journeying on in this
manner, they came to a valley, in which reigned a king called Tammaro.
Now, in a certain inclosure toward the head of the valley, there stood
an immense wild banian tree; all over moss, and many centuries old, and
forming quite a wood in itself: its thousand boughs striking into the
earth, and fixing there as many gigantic trunks. With Tammaro, it had
long been a question, which of those many trunks was the original and
true one; a matter that had puzzled the wisest heads among his
subjects; and in vain had a reward been offered for the solution of the
perplexity. But the tree was so vast, and its fabric so complex; and
its rooted branches so similar in appearance; and so numerous, from the
circumstance that every year had added to them, that it was quite
impossible to determine the point. Nevertheless, no sooner did the nine
blind men hear that there was a reward offered for discovering the
trunk of a tree, standing all by itself, than, one and all, they
assured Tammaro, that they would quickly settle that little difficulty
of his; and loudly inveighed against the stupidity of his sages, who
had been so easily posed. So, being conducted into the inclosure, and
assured that the tree was somewhere within, they separated their
forces, so as at wide intervals to surround it at a distance; when
feeling their way, with their staves and their noses, they advanced to
the search, crying out—‘Pshaw! make room there; let us wise men feel of
the mystery.’ Presently, striking with his nose one of the rooted
branches, the foremost blind man quickly knelt down; and feeling that
it struck into the earth, gleefully shouted: Here it is! here it is!’
But almost in the same breath, his companions, also, each striking a
branch with his staff or his nose, cried out in like manner, ‘Here it
is! here it is!’ Whereupon they were all confounded: but directly, the
man who first cried out, thus addressed the rest: Good friends, surely
you’re mistaken. There is but one tree in the place, and here it is.’
‘Very true,’ said the others, ‘all together; there is only _one_ tree;
but _here_ it is.’ ‘Nay,’ said the others, ‘it is _here!_’ and so
saying, each blind man triumphantly felt of the branch, where it
penetrated into the earth. Then again said the first speaker: Good
friends, if you will not believe what I say, come hither, and feel for
yourselves.’ ‘Nay, nay,’ replied they, why seek further? _here_ it is;
and nowhere else can it be.’ ‘You blind fools, you, you contradict
yourselves,’ continued the first speaker, waxing wroth; ‘how can you
each have hold of a separate trunk, when there is but one in the
place?’ Whereupon, they redoubled their cries, calling each other all
manner of opprobrious names, and presently they fell to beating each
other with their staves, and charging upon each other with their noses.
But soon after, being loudly called upon by Tammaro and his people; who
all this while had been looking on; being loudly called upon, I say, to
clap their hands on the trunk, they again rushed for their respective
branches; and it so happened, that, one and all, they changed places;
but still cried out, ‘_Here_ it is; _here_ it is!’ ‘Peace! peace! ye
silly blind men,’ said Tammaro. ‘Will ye without eyes presume to see
more sharply than those who have them? The tree is too much for us all.
Hence! depart from the valley.’”

“An admirable story,” cried Media. “I had no idea that a mere mortal,
least of all a philosopher, could acquit himself so well. By my
scepter, but it is well done! Ha, ha! blind men round a banian! Why,
Babbalanja, no demi-god could surpass it. Taji, could you?”

“But, Babbalanja, what under the sun, mean you by your blind story!”
cried Mohi. “Obverse, or reverse, I can make nothing out of it.”

“Others may,” said Babbalanja. “It is a polysensuum, old man.”

“A pollywog!” said Mohi.




CHAPTER XII.
Landing To Visit Hivohitee The Pontiff, They Encounter An Extraordinary
Old Hermit; With Whom Yoomy Has A Confidential Interview, But Learns
Little


Gliding on, suddenly we spied a solitary Islander putting out in his
canoe from a neighboring cove.

Drawing near, the stranger informed us, that he was just from the face
of the great Pontiff, Hivohitee, who, having dismissed his celestial
guests, had retired to his private sanctuary. Upon this, Media resolved
to land forthwith, and under the guidance of Mohi, proceed inland, and
pay a visit to his Holiness.

Quitting the beach, our path penetrated into the solitudes of the
groves. Skirting the way were tall Casaurinas, a species of cypress,
standing motionless in the shadows, as files of mutes at a funeral. But
here and there, they were overrun with the adventurous vines of the
Convolvulus, the Morning-glory of the Tropics, whose tendrils, bruised
by the twigs, dropped milk upon the dragon-like scales of the trees.

This vine is of many varieties. Lying perdu, and shunning the garish
sun through the day, one species rises at night with the stars;
bursting forth in dazzling constellations of blossoms, which close at
dawn. Others, slumbering through the darkness, are up and abroad with
their petals, by peep of morn; and after inhaling its breath, again
drop their lids in repose. While a third species, more capricious,
refuse to expand at all, unless in the most brilliant sunshine, and
upon the very tops of the loftiest trees. Ambitious flowers! that will
not blow, unless in high places, with the bright day looking on and
admiring.

Here and there, we passed open glades in the woods, delicious with the
incense of violets. Balsamic ferns, stirred by the breeze, fanned all
the air with aromas. These glades were delightful.

Journeying on, we at length came to a dark glen so deftly hidden by the
surrounding copses, that were it not for the miasma thence wafted, an
ignorant wayfarer might pass and repass it, time and again, never
dreaming of its vicinity.

Down into the gloom of this glen we descended. Its sides were mantled
with noxious shrubs, whose exhalations, half way down, unpleasantly
blended with the piny breeze from the uplands. Through its bed ran a
brook, whose incrusted margin had a strange metallic luster, from the
polluted waters here flowing; their source a sulphur spring, of vile
flavor and odor, where many invalid pilgrims resorted.

The woods all round were haunted by the dismal cawings of crows; tap,
tap, the black hawk whetted his bill on the boughs; each trunk stalked
a ghost; and from those trunks, Hevaneva procured the wood for his
idols.

Rapidly crossing this place, Yoomy’s hands to his ears, old Mohi’s to
his nostrils, and Babbalanja vainly trying to walk with closed eyes, we
toiled among steep, flinty rocks, along a wild, zigzag pathway; like a
mule-track in the Andes, not so much onward as upward; Yoomy above
Babbalanja, my lord Media above him, and Braid-Beard, our guide, in the
air, above all.

Strown over with cinders, the vitreous marl seemed tumbled together, as
if belched from a volcano’s throat.

Presently, we came to a tall, slender structure, hidden among the
scenic projections of the cliffs, like a monument in the dark, vaulted
ways of an abbey. Surrounding it, were five extinct craters. The air
was sultry and still, as if full of spent thunderbolts.

Like a Hindoo pagoda, this bamboo edifice rose story above story; its
many angles and points decorated with pearl-shells suspended by cords.
But the uppermost story, some ten toises in the air, was closely
thatched from apex to floor; which summit was gained by a series of
ascents.

What eremite dwelleth here, like St. Stylites at the top of his
column?—a question which Mohi seemed all eagerness to have answered.

Dropping upon his knees, he gave a peculiar low call: no response.
Another: all was silent. Marching up to the pagoda, and again dropping
upon his knees, he shook the bamboos till the edifice rocked, and its
pearl-shells jingled, as if a troop of Andalusian mules, with bells
round their necks, were galloping along the defile.

At length the thatch aloft was thrown open, and a head was thrust
forth. It was that of an old, old man; with steel-gray eyes, hair and
beard, and a horrible necklace of jaw-bones.

Now, issuing from the pagoda, Mohi turned about to gain a view of the
ghost he had raised; and no sooner did he behold it, than with King
Media and the rest, he made a marked salutation.

Presently, the eremite pointed to where Yoomy was standing; and waved
his hand upward; when Mohi informed the minstrel, that it was St.
Stylites’ pleasure, that he should pay him a visit.

Wondering what was to come, Yoomy proceeded to mount; and at last
arriving toward the top of the pagoda, was met by an opening, from
which an encouraging arm assisted him to gain the ultimate landing.

Here, all was murky enough; for the aperture from which the head of the
apparition had been thrust, was now closed; and what little twilight
there was, came up through the opening in the floor.

In this dismal seclusion, silently the hermit confronted the minstrel;
his gray hair, eyes, and beard all gleaming, as if streaked with
phosphorus; while his ghastly gorget grinned hideously, with all its
jaws.

Mutely Yoomy waited to be addressed; but hearing no sound, and becoming
alive to the strangeness of his situation, he meditated whether it
would not be well to subside out of sight, even as he had come—through
the floor. An intention which the eremite must have anticipated; for of
a sudden, something was slid over the opening; and the apparition
seating itself thereupon, the twain were in darkness complete.

Shut up thus, with an inscrutable stranger posted at the only aperture
of escape, poor Yoomy fell into something like a panic; hardly knowing
what step to take next. As for endeavoring to force his way out, it was
alarming to think of; for aught he knew, the eremite, availing himself
of the gloom, might be bristling all over with javelin points.

At last, the silence was broken.

“What see you, mortal?”

“Chiefly darkness,” said Yoomy, wondering at the audacity of the
question.

“I dwell in it. But what else see you, mortal?”

“The dim gleaming of thy gorget.”

“But that is not me. What else dost thou see?”

“Nothing.”

“Then thou hast found me out, and seen all! Descend.”

And with that, the passage-way opened, and groping through the
twilight, Yoomy obeyed the mandate, and retreated; full of vexation at
his enigmatical reception.

On his alighting, Mohi inquired whether the hermit was not a wonderful
personage.

But thinking some sage waggery lurked in the question; and at present
too indignant to enter into details, the minstrel made some impatient
reply; and winding through a defile, the party resumed its journey.

Straggling behind, to survey the strange plants and flowers in his
path, Yoomy became so absorbed, as almost to forget the scene in the
pagoda; yet every moment expected to be nearing the stately abode of
the Pontiff.

But suddenly, the scene around grew familiar; the path seemed that
which had been followed just after leaving the canoes; and at length,
the place of debarkation was in sight.

Surprised that the object of our visit should have been thus abandoned,
the minstrel ran forward, and sought an explanation.

Whereupon, Mohi lifted his hands in amazement; exclaiming at the
blindness of the eyes, which had beheld the supreme Pontiff of Maramma,
without knowing it.

The old hermit was no other than the dread Hivohitee; the pagoda, the
inmost oracle of the isle.




