CHAPTER XLIV.
Through Dominora, They Wander After Yillah


At last, withdrawing from the presence of King Bello, we went forth,
still intent on our search.

Many brave sights we saw. Fair fields; the whole island a garden; green
hedges all round; neat lodges, thick as white mice in the landscape;
old oak woods, hale and hearty as ever; old temples buried in ivy; old
shrines of old heroes, deep buried in broad groves of bay trees; old
rivers laden down with heavy-freighted canoes; humped hills, like
droves of camels, piled up with harvests; every sign and token of a
glorious abundance, every sign and token of generations of renown. Rare
sight! fine sight! none rarer, none finer in Mardi.

But roving on through this ravishing region, we passed through a corn-
field in full beard, where a haggard old reaper laid down his hook,
beseeching charity for the sake of the gods.—“Bread, bread! or I die
mid these sheaves!”

“Thrash out your grain, and want not.”

“Alas, masters, this grain is not mine; I plough, I sow, I reap, I
bind, I stack,—Lord Primo garners.”

Rambling on, we came to a hamlet, hidden in a hollow; and beneath
weeping willows saw many mournful maidens seated on a bank; beside
each, a wheel that was broken. “Lo, we starve,” they cried, “our
distaffs are snapped; no more may we weave and spin!”

Then forth issued from vaults clamorous crowds of men, hands tied to
their backs.—“Bread! Bread!” they cried. “The magician hath turned us
out from our glen, where we labored of yore in the days of the merry
Green Queen. He has pinioned us hip and arm that we starve. Like sheep
we die off with the rot.—Curse on the magician. A curse on his spell.”

Bending our steps toward the glen, roaring down the rocks we descried a
stream from the mountains. But ere those waters gained the sea, vassal
tribute they rendered. Conducted through culverts and moats, they
turned great wheels, giving life to ten thousand fangs and fingers,
whose gripe no power could withstand, yet whose touch was soft as the
velvet paw of a kitten. With brute force, they heaved down great
weights, then daintily wove and spun; like the trunk of the elephant,
which lays lifeless a river-horse, and counts the pulses of a moth. On
all sides, the place seemed alive with its spindles. Round and round,
round and round; throwing off wondrous births at every revolving;
ceaseless as the cycles that circle in heaven. Loud hummed the loom,
flew the shuttle like lightning, red roared the grim forge, rung anvil
and sledge; yet no mortal was seen.

“What ho, magician! Come forth from thy cave!”

But all deaf were the spindles, as the mutes, that mutely wait on the
Sultan.

“Since we are born, we will live!” so we read on a crimson banner,
flouting the crimson clouds, in the van of a riotous red-bonneted mob,
racing by us as we came from the glen. Many more followed: black, or
blood-stained:—.

“Mardi is man’s!”

“Down with landholders!”

“Our turn now!”

“Up rights! Down wrongs!”

“Bread! Bread!”

“Take the tide, ere it turns!”

Waving their banners, and flourishing aloft clubs, hammers, and
sickles, with fierce yells the crowd ran on toward the palace of Bello.
Foremost, and inciting the rest by mad outcries and gestures, were six
masks; “This way! This way!” they cried,—“by the wood; by the dark
wood!” Whereupon all darted into the groves; when of a sudden, the
masks leaped forward, clearing a long covered trench, into which fell
many of those they led. But on raced the masks; and gaining Bello’s
palace, and raising the alarm, there sallied from thence a woodland of
spears, which charged upon the disordered ranks in the grove. A crash
as of icicles against icebergs round Zembla, and down went the hammers
and sickles. The host fled, hotly pursued. Meanwhile brave heralds from
Bello advanced, and with chaplets crowned the six masks.—“Welcome,
heroes! worthy and valiant!” they cried. “Thus our lord Bello rewards
all those, who to do him a service, for hire betray their kith and
their kin.”

Still pursuing our quest, wide we wandered through all the sun and
shade of Dominora; but nowhere was Yillah found.




CHAPTER XLV.
They Behold King Bello’s State Canoe


At last, bidding adieu to King Bello; and in the midst of the lowing of
oxen, breaking away from his many hospitalities, we departed for the
beach. But ere embarking, we paused to gaze at an object, which long
fixed our attention.

Now, as all bold cavaliers have ever delighted in special chargers,
gayly caparisoned, whereon upon grand occasions to sally forth upon the
plains: even so have maritime potentates ever prided themselves upon
some holiday galley, splendidly equipped, wherein to sail over the sea.

When of old, glory-seeking Jason, attended by his promising young
lieutenants, Castor and Pollux, embarked on that hardy adventure to
Colchis, the brave planks of the good ship Argos he trod, its model a
swan to behold.

And when Trojan Aeneas wandered West, and discovered the pleasant land
of Latium, it was in the fine craft Bis Taurus that he sailed: its
stern gloriously emblazoned, its prow a leveled spear.

And to the sound of sackbut and psaltery, gliding down the Nile, in the
pleasant shade of its pyramids to welcome mad Mark, Cleopatra was
throned on the cedar quarter-deck of a glorious gondola, silk and satin
hung; its silver plated oars, musical as flutes. So, too, Queen Bess
was wont to disport on old Thames.

And tough Torf-Egill, the Danish Sea-king, reckoned in his stud, a
slender yacht; its masts young Zetland firs; its prow a seal, dog-like
holding a sword-fish blade. He called it the Grayhound, so swift was
its keel; the Sea-hawk, so blood-stained its beak.

And groping down his palace stairs, the blind old Doge Dandolo, oft
embarked in his gilded barge, like the lord mayor setting forth in
civic state from Guildhall in his chariot. But from another sort of
prow leaped Dandolo, when at Constantinople, he foremost sprang ashore,
and with a right arm ninety years old, planted the standard of St. Mark
full among the long chin-pennons of the long-bearded Turks.

And Kumbo Sama, Emperor of Japan, had a dragon-beaked junk, a floating
Juggernaut, wherein he burnt incense to the sea-gods.

And Kannakoko, King of New Zealand; and the first Tahitian Pomaree; and
the Pelew potentate, each possessed long state canoes; sea-snakes, all;
carved over like Chinese card-cases, and manned with such scores of
warriors, that dipping their paddles in the sea, they made a commotion
like shoals of herring.

What wonder then, that Bello of the Hump, the old sea-king of Mardi,
should sport a brave ocean-chariot?

In a broad arbor by the water-side, it was housed like Alp Arsian’s
war-horse, or the charger Caligula deified; upon its stern a wilderness
of sculpture:—shell-work, medal-lions, masques, griffins, gulls, ogres,
finned-lions, winged walruses; all manner of sea-cavalry, crusading
centaurs, crocodiles, and sharks; and mermen, and mermaids, and Neptune
only knows all.

And in this craft, Doge-like, yearly did King Bello stand up and wed
with the Lagoon. But the custom originated not in the manner of the
Doge’s, which was as follows; so, at least, saith Ghibelli, who tells
all about it:—

When, in a stout sea-fight, Ziani defeated Barbarossa’s son Otho,
sending his feluccas all flying, like frightened water-fowl from a
lake, then did his Holiness, the Pope, present unto him a ring; saying,
“Take this, oh Ziani, and with it, the sea for thy bride; and every
year wed her again.”

So the Doge’s tradition; thus Bello’s:—

Ages ago, Dominora was circled by a reef, which expanding in proportion
to the extension of the isle’s naval dominion, in due time embraced the
entire lagoon; and this marriage ring zoned all the world.

But if the sea was King Bello’s bride, an Adriatic Tartar he wedded;
who, in her mad gales of passions, often boxed about his canoes, and
led his navies a very boisterous life indeed.

And hostile prognosticators opined, that ere long she would desert her
old lord, and marry again. Already, they held, she had made advances in
the direction of Vivenza.

But truly, should she abandon old Bello, he would straight-way after
her with all his fleets; and never rest till his queen was regained.

Now, old sea-king! look well to thy barge of state: for, peradventure,
the dry-rot may be eating into its keel; and the wood-worms exploring
into its spars.

Without heedful tending, any craft will decay; yet, for ever may its
first, fine model be preserved, though its prow be renewed every
spring, like the horns of the deer, if, in repairing, plank be put for
plank, rib for rib, in exactest similitude. Even so, then, oh Bello! do
thou with thy barge.




