CHAPTER XXXV.
They Visit The Lords Piko And Hello


In good time, we landed at Diranda. And that landing was like landing
at Greenwich among the Waterloo pensioners. The people were docked
right and left; some without arms; some without legs; not one with a
tail; but to a man, all had heads, though rather the worse for wear;
covered with lumps and contusions.

Now, those very magnificent and illustrious lord seigniors, the lord
seigniors Hello and Piko, lived in a palace, round which was a fence of
the cane called Malacca, each picket helmed with a skull, of which
there were fifty, one to each cane. Over the door was the blended arms
of the high and mighty houses of Hello and Piko: a Clavicle crossed
over an Ulna.

Escorted to the sign of the Skull-and-Cross-Bones, we received the very
best entertainment which that royal inn could afford. We found our
hosts Hello and Piko seated together on a dais or throne, and now and
then drinking some claret-red wine from an ivory bowl, too large to
have been wrought from an elephant’s tusk. They were in glorious good
spirits, shaking ivory coins in a skull.

“What says your majesty?” said Piko. “Heads or tails?”

“Oh, heads, your majesty,” said Hello.

“And heads say I,” said Piko.

And heads it was. But it was heads on both sides, so both were sure to
win.

And thus they were used to play merrily all day long; beheading the
gourds of claret by one slicing blow with their sickle-shaped scepters.
Wide round them lay empty calabashes, all feathered, red dyed, and
betasseled, trickling red wine from their necks, like the decapitated
pullets in the old baronial barn yard at Kenilworth, the night before
Queen Bess dined with my lord Leicester.

The first compliments over; and Media and Taji having met with a
reception suitable to their rank, the kings inquired, whether there
were any good javelin-flingers among us: for if that were the case,
they could furnish them plenty of sport. Informed, however, that none
of the party were professional warriors, their majesties looked rather
glum, and by way of chasing away the blues, called for some good old
stuff, that was red.

It seems, this soliciting guests, to keep their spears from decaying,
by cut and thrust play with their subjects, was a very common thing
with their illustrious majesties.

But if their visitors could not be prevailed upon to spear a subject or
so, our hospitable hosts resolved to have a few speared, and otherwise
served up for our special entertainment. In a word, our arrival
furnished a fine pretext for renewing their games; though, we learned,
that only ten days previous, upward of fifty combatants had been slain
at one of these festivals.

Be that as it might, their joint majesties determined upon another one;
and also upon our tarrying to behold it. We objected, saying we must
depart.

But we were kindly assured, that our canoes had been dragged out of the
water, and buried in a wood; there to remain till the games were over.

The day fixed upon, was the third subsequent to our arrival; the
interval being devoted to preparations; summoning from their villages
and valleys the warriors of the land; and publishing the royal
proclamations, whereby the unbounded hospitality of the kings’
household was freely offered to all heroes whatsoever, who for the love
of arms, and the honor of broken heads, desired to cross battle-clubs,
hurl spears, or die game in the royal valley of Deddo.

Meantime, the whole island was in a state of uproarious commotion, and
strangers were daily arriving.

The spot set apart for the festival, was a spacious down, mantled with
white asters; which, waving in windrows, lay upon the land, like the
cream-surf surging the milk of young heifers. But that whiteness, here
and there, was spotted with strawberries; tracking the plain, as if
wounded creatures had been dragging themselves bleeding from some
deadly encounter. All round the down, waved scarlet thickets of sumach,
moaning in the wind, like the gory ghosts environing Pharsalia the
night after the battle; scaring away the peasants, who with
bushel-baskets came to the jewel-harvest of the rings of Pompey’s
knights.

Beneath the heaped turf of this down, lay thousands of glorious corpses
of anonymous heroes, who here had died glorious deaths.

Whence, in the florid language of Diranda, they called this field “The
Field of Glory.”




CHAPTER XXXVI.
They Attend The Games


At last the third day dawned; and facing us upon entering the plain,
was a throne of red log-wood, canopied by the foliage of a red-dyed
Pandannus. Upon this throne, purple-robed, reclined those very
magnificent and illustrious lords seigniors, the lord seigniors Hello
and Piko. Before them, were many gourds of wine; and crosswise, staked
in the sod, their own royal spears.

In the middle of the down, as if by a furrow, a long, oval space was
margined of about which, a crowd of spectators were seated. Opposite
the throne, was reserved a clear passage to the arena, defined by
air-lines, indefinitely produced from the leveled points of two spears,
so poised by a brace of warriors.

Drawing near, our party was courteously received, and assigned a
commodious lounge.

The first encounter was a club-fight between two warriors. Nor casque
of steel, nor skull of Congo could have resisted their blows, had they
fallen upon the mark; for they seemed bent upon driving each other, as
stakes, into the earth. Presently, one of them faltered; but his
adversary rushing in to cleave him down, slipped against a guavarind;
when the falterer, with one lucky blow, high into the air sent the
stumbler’s club, which descended upon the crown of a spectator, who was
borne from the plain.

“All one,” muttered Pike.

“As good dead as another,” muttered Hello.

The second encounter was a hugging-match; wherein two warriors, masked
in Grisly-bear skins, hugged each other to death.

The third encounter was a bumping-match between a fat warrior and a
dwarf. Standing erect, his paunch like a bass-drum before a drummer,
the fat man was run at, head-a-tilt by the dwarf, and sent spinning
round on his axis.

The fourth encounter was a tussle between two-score warriors, who all
in a mass, writhed like the limbs in Sebastioni’s painting of Hades.
After obscuring themselves in a cloud of dust, these combatants,
uninjured, but hugely blowing, drew off; and separately going among the
spectators, rehearsed their experience of the fray.

“Braggarts!” mumbled Piko.

“Poltroons!” growled Hello.

While the crowd were applauding, a sober-sided observer, trying to rub
the dust out of his eyes, inquired of an enthusiastic neighbor, “Pray,
what was all that about?”

“Fool! saw you not the dust?”

“That I did,” said Sober-Sides, again rubbing his eyes, “But I can
raise a dust myself.”

The fifth encounter was a fight of single sticks between one hundred
warriors, fifty on a side.

In a line, the first fifty emerged from the sumachs, their weapons
interlocked in a sort of wicker-work. In advance marched a priest,
bearing an idol with a cracked cocoanut for a head,—Krako, the god of
Trepans. Preceded by damsels flinging flowers, now came on the second
fifty, gayly appareled, weapons poised, and their feet nimbly moving in
a martial measure.

Midway meeting, both parties touched poles, then retreated. Very
courteous, this; but tantamount to bowing each other out of Mardi; for
upon Pike’s tossing a javelin, they rushed in, and each striking his
man, all fell to the ground.

“Well done!” cried Piko.

“Brave fellows!” cried Hello.

“But up and at it again, my heroes!” joined both. “Lo! we kings look
on, and there stand the bards!”

These bards were a row of lean, sallow, old men, in thread-bare robes,
and chaplets of dead leaves.

“Strike up!” cried Piko.

“A stave!” cried Hello.

Whereupon, the old croakers, each with a quinsy, sang thus in cracked
strains:—

Quack! Quack! Quack!
With a toorooloo whack;
Hack away, merry men, hack away.
Who would not die brave,
His ear smote by a stave?
Thwack away, merry men, thwack away!
’Tis glory that calls,
To each hero that falls,
Hack away, merry men, hack away!
Quack! Quack! Quack!
Quack! Quack!
Quack!


Thus it tapered away.

“Ha, ha!” cried Piko, “how they prick their ears at that!”

“Hark ye, my invincibles!” cried Hello. “That pean is for the slain. So
all ye who have lives left, spring to it! Die and be glorified! Now’s
the time!—Strike up again, my ducklings!”

Thus incited, the survivors staggered to their feet; and hammering away
at each others’ sconces, till they rung like a chime of bells going off
with a triple-bob-major, they finally succeeded in immortalizing
themselves by quenching their mortalities all round; the bards still
singing.

“Never mind your music now,” cried Piko.

“It’s all over,” said Hello.

“What valiant fellows we have for subjects,” cried Piko.

“Ho! grave-diggers, clear the field,” cried Hello.

“Who else is for glory?” cried Piko.

“There stand the bards!” cried Hello.

But now there rushed among the crowd a haggard figure, trickling with
blood, and wearing a robe, whose edges were burned and blacked by fire.
Wielding a club, it ran to and fro, with loud yells menacing all.

A noted warrior this; who, distracted at the death of five sons slain
in recent games, wandered from valley to valley, wrestling and
fighting.

With wild cries of “The Despairer! The Despairer!” the appalled
multitude fled; leaving the two kings frozen on their throne, quaking
and quailing, their teeth rattling like dice.

The Despairer strode toward them; when, recovering their senses, they
ran; for a time pursued through the woods by the phantom.




