CHAPTER XXI.
They Visit A Wealthy Old Pauper


Continuing our route to Jiji’s, we presently came to a miserable hovel.
Half projecting from the low, open entrance, was a bald overgrown head,
intent upon an upright row of dark-colored bags:— pelican
pouches—prepared by dropping a stone within, and suspending them, when
moist.

Ever and anon, the great head shook with a tremulous motion, as one by
one, to a clicking sound from the old man’s mouth, the strings of teeth
were slowly drawn forth, and let fall, again and again, with a rattle.

But perceiving our approach, the old miser suddenly swooped his pouches
out of sight; and, like a turtle into its shell, retreated into his
den. But soon he decrepitly emerged upon his knees, asking what brought
us thither?—to steal the teeth, which lying rumor averred he possessed
in abundance? And opening his mouth, he averred he had none; not even a
sentry in his head.

But Babbalanja declared, that long since he must have drawn his own
dentals, and bagged them with the rest.

Now this miserable old miser must have been idiotic; for soon
forgetting what he had but just told us of his utter toothlessness, he
was so smitten with the pearly mouth of Hohora, one of our attendants
(the same for whose pearls, little King Peepi had taken such a fancy),
that he made the following overture to purchase its contents: namely:
one tooth of the buyer’s, for every three of the seller’s. A
proposition promptly rejected, as involving a mercantile absurdity.

“Why?” said Babbalanja. “Doubtless, because that proposed to be given,
is less than that proposed to be received. Yet, says a philosopher,
this is the very principle which regulates all barterings. For where
the sense of a simple exchange of quantities, alike in value?”

“Where, indeed?” said Hohora with open eyes, “though I never heard it
before, that’s a staggering question. I beseech you, who was the sage
that asked it?”

“Vivo, the Sophist,” said Babbalanja, turning aside.

In the hearing of Jiji, allusion was made to Oh-Oh, as a neighbor of
his. Whereupon he vented much slavering opprobrium upon that miserable
old hump-back; who accumulated useless monstrosities; throwing away the
precious teeth, which otherwise might have sensibly rattled in his own
pelican pouches.

When we quitted the hovel, Jiji, marking little Vee-Vee, from whose
shoulder hung a calabash of edibles, seized the hem of his garment and
besought him for one mouthful of food; for nothing had he tasted that
day.

The boy tossed him a yam.




CHAPTER XXII.
Yoomy Sings Some Odd Verses, And Babbalanja Quotes From The Old Authors
Right And Left


Sailing from Padulla, after many pleasant things had been said
concerning the sights there beheld; Babbalanja thus addressed Yoomy—
“Warbler, the last song you sung was about moonlight, and paradise, and
fabulous pleasures evermore: now, have you any hymns about earthly
felicity?”

“If so, minstrel,” said Media, “jet it forth, my fountain, forthwith.”

“Just now, my lord,” replied Yoomy, “I was singing to myself, as I
often do, and by your leave, I will continue aloud.”

“Better begin at the beginning, I should think,” said the chronicler,
both hands to his chin, beginning at the top to new braid his beard.

“No: like the roots of your beard, old Mohi, all beginnings are stiff,”
cried Babbalanja. “We are lucky in living midway in eternity. So sing
away, Yoomy, where you left off,” and thus saying he unloosed his
girdle for the song, as Apicius would for a banquet.

“Shall I continue aloud, then, my lord?”

My lord nodded, and Yoomy sang:—

“Full round, full soft, her dewy arms,—
Sweet shelter from all Mardi’s harms!”


“Whose arms?” cried Mohi.

Sang Yoomy:—

Diving deep in the sea,
    She takes sunshine along:
Down flames in the sea,
    As of dolphins a throng.


“What mermaid is this?” cried Mohi.

Sang Yoomy:—

Her foot, a falling sound,
That all day long might bound.
    Over the beach,
    The soft sand beach,
    And none would find
    A trace behind.


“And why not?” demanded Media, “why could no trace be found?”

Said Braid-Beard, “Perhaps owing, my lord, to the flatness of the
mermaid’s foot. But no; that can not be; for mermaids are all vertebrae
below the waist.”

“Your fragment is pretty good, I dare say, Yoomy,” observed Media, “but
as Braid-Beard hints, rather flat.”

“Flat as the foot of a man with his mind made up,” cried Braid-Beard.
“Yoomy, did you sup on flounders last night?”

But Yoomy vouchsafed no reply, he was ten thousand leagues off in a
reverie: somewhere in the Hyades perhaps.

Conversation proceeding, Braid-Beard happened to make allusion to one
Rotato, a portly personage, who, though a sagacious philosopher, and
very ambitious to be celebrated as such, was only famous in Mardi as
the fattest man of his tribe.

Said Media, “Then, Mohi, Rotato could not pick a quarrel with Fame,
since she did not belie him. Fat he was, and fat she published him.”

“Right, my lord,” said Babbalanja, “for Fame is not always so honest.
Not seldom to be famous, is to be widely known for what you are not,
says Alla-Malolla. Whence it comes, as old Bardianna has it, that for
years a man may move unnoticed among his fellows; but all at once, by
some chance attitude, foreign to his habit, become a trumpet-full for
fools; though, in himself, the same as ever. Nor has he shown himself
yet; for the entire merit of a man can never be made known; nor the sum
of his demerits, if he have them. We are only known by our names; as
letters sealed up, we but read each other’s superscriptions.

“So with the commonalty of us Mardians. How then with those beings who
every way are but too apt to be riddles. In many points the works of
our great poet Vavona, now dead a thousand moons, still remain a
mystery. Some call him a mystic; but wherein he seems obscure, it is,
perhaps, we that are in fault; not by premeditation spoke he those
archangel thoughts, which made many declare, that Vavona, after all,
was but a crack-pated god, not a mortal of sound mind. But had he been
less, my lord, he had seemed more. Saith Fulvi, ‘Of the highest order
of genius, it may be truly asserted, that to gain the reputation of
superior power, it must partially disguise itself; it must come down,
and then it will be applauded for soaring.’ And furthermore, that there
are those who falter in the common tongue, because they think in
another; and these are accounted stutterers and stammerers.’”

“Ah! how true!” cried the Warbler.

“And what says the archangel Vavona, Yoomy, in that wonderful drama of
his, ‘The Souls of the Sages?’—‘Beyond most barren hills, there are
landscapes ravishing; with but one eye to behold; which no pencil can
portray.’ What wonder then, my lord, that Mardi itself is so blind.
‘Mardi is a monster,’ says old Bardianna, ‘whose eyes are fixed in its
head, like a whale’s; it can see but two ways, and those comprising but
a small arc of a perfect vision. Poets, heroes, and men of might, are
all around this monster Mardi. But stand before me on stilts, or I will
behold you not, says the monster; brush back your hair; inhale the wind
largely; lucky are all men with dome-like foreheads; luckless those
with pippin-heads; loud lungs are a blessing; a lion is no lion that
can not roar.’ Says Aldina, ‘There are those looking on, who know
themselves to be swifter of foot than the racers, but are confounded
with the simpletons that stare.’”

“The mere carping of a disappointed cripple,” cried Mold. His
biographer states, that Aldina had only one leg.”

“Braid-Beard, you are witty,” said Babbbalanja, adjusting his robe. “My
lord, there are heroes without armies, who hear martial music in their
souls.”

“Why not blow their trumpets louder, then,” cried Media, that all Mardi
may hear?”

“My lord Media, too, is witty, Babbalanja,” said Mohi.

Breathed Yoomy, “There are birds of divinest plumage, and most glorious
song, yet singing their lyrics to themselves.”

Said Media, “The lark soars high, cares for no auditor, yet its sweet
notes are heard here below. It sings, too, in company with myriads of
mates. Your soliloquists, Yoomy, are mostly herons and owls.”

Said Babbalanja, “Very clever, my lord; but think you not, there are
men eloquent, who never babble in the marketplace?”

“Ay, and arrant babblers at home. In few words, Babbalanja, you espouse
a bad cause. Most of you mortals are peacocks; some having tails, and
some not; those who have them will be sure to thrust their plumes in
your face; for the rest, they will display their bald cruppers, and
still screech for admiration. But when a great genius is born into
Mardi, he nods, and is known.”

“More wit, but, with deference, perhaps less truth, my lord. Say what
you will, Fame is an accident; merit a thing absolute. But what matter?
Of what available value reputation, unless wedded to power, dentals, or
place? To those who render him applause, a poet’s may seem a thing
tangible; but to the recipient, ’tis a fantasy; the poet never so
stretches his imagination, as when striving to comprehend what it is;
often, he is famous without knowing it.”

“At the sacred games of Lazella,” said Yoomy, “slyly crowned from
behind with a laurel fillet, for many hours, the minstrel Jarmi
wandered about ignorant of the honors he bore. But enlightened at last,
he doffed the wreath; then, holding it at arm’s length, sighed
forth—Oh, ye laurels! to be visible to me, ye must be removed from my
brow!”

“And what said Botargo,” cried Babbalanja, “hearing that his poems had
been translated into the language of the remote island of Bertranda?—
‘It stirs me little; already, in merry fancies, have I dreamed of their
being trilled by the blessed houris in paradise; I can only imagine the
same of the damsels of Bertranda.’ Says Boldo, the
Materialist,—‘Substances alone are satisfactory.’”

“And so thought the mercenary poet, Zenzi,” said Yoomy. “Upon receiving
fourteen ripe yams for a sonnet, one for every line, he said to me,
Yoomy, I shall make a better meal upon these, than upon so many
compliments.”

“Ay,” cried Babbalanja, “‘Bravos,’ saith old Bardianna, but induce
flatulency.’”

Said Media, “And do you famous mortals, then, take no pleasure in
hearing your bravos?”

“Much, my good lord; at least such famous mortals, so enamored of a
clamorous notoriety, as to bravo for themselves, when none else will
huzza; whose whole existence is an unintermitting consciousness of
self; whose very persons stand erect and self-sufficient as their
infallible index, the capital letter I; who relish and comprehend no
reputation but what attaches to the carcass; who would as lief be
renowned for a splendid mustache, as for a splendid drama: who know not
how it was that a personage, to posterity so universally celebrated as
the poet Vavona, ever passed through the crowd unobserved; who deride
the very thunder for making such a noise in Mardi, and yet disdain to
manifest itself to the eye.”

“Wax not so warm, Babbalanja; but tell us, if to his contemporaries
Vavona’s person was almost unknown, what satisfaction did he derive
from his genius?”

“Had he not its consciousness?—an empire boundless as the West. What to
him were huzzas? Why, my lord, from his privacy, the great and good
Logodora sent liniment to the hoarse throats without. But what said
Bardianna, when they dunned him for autographs?—‘Who keeps the register
of great men? who decides upon noble actions? and how long may ink
last? Alas! Fame has dropped more rolls than she displays; and there
are more lost chronicles, than the perished books of the historian
Livella.’ But what is lost forever, my lord, is nothing to what is now
unseen. There are more treasures in the bowels of the earth, than on
its surface.”

“Ah! no gold,” cried Yoomy, “but that comes from dark mines.”

Said Babbalanja, “Bear witness, ye gods! cries fervent old Bardianna,
that besides disclosures of good and evil undreamed of now, there will
be other, and more astounding revelations hereafter, of what has passed
in Mardi unbeheld.”

“A truce to your everlasting pratings of old Bardianna,” said King
Media; why not speak your own thoughts, Babbalanja? then would your
discourse possess more completeness; whereas, its warp and woof are of
all sorts,—Bardianna, Alla-Malolla, Vavona, and all the writers that
ever have written. Speak for yourself, mortal!”

“May you not possibly mistake, my lord? for I do not so much quote
Bardianna, as Bardianna quoted me, though he flourished before me; and
no vanity, but honesty to say so. The catalogue of true thoughts is but
small; they are ubiquitous; no man’s property; and unspoken, or
bruited, are the same. When we hear them, why seem they so natural,
receiving our spontaneous approval? why do we think we have heard them
before? Because they but reiterate ourselves; they were in us, before
we were born. The truest poets are but mouth-pieces; and some men are
duplicates of each other; I see myself in Bardianna.”

“And there, for Oro’s sake, let it rest, Babbalanja; Bardianna in you,
and you in Bardianna forever!”




