CHAPTER LXXVIII.
They Embark


Next morning, King Abrazza sent frigid word to Media that the day was
very fine for yachting; but he much regretted that indisposition would
prevent his making one of the party, who that morning doubtless would
depart his isle.

“My compliments to your king,” said Media to the chamberlains, “and say
the royal notice to quit was duly received.”

“Take Azzageddi’s also,” said Babbalanja; “and say, I hope his Highness
will not fail in his appointment with me:—the first midnight after he
dies; at the grave-yard corner;—there I’ll be, and grin again!”

Sailing on, the next land we saw was thickly wooded: hedged round about
by mangrove trees; which growing in the water, yet lifted high their
boughs. Here and there were shady nooks, half verdure and half water.
Fishes rippled, and canaries sung.

“Let us break through, my lord,” said Yoomy, “and seek the shore. Its
solitudes must prove reviving.” “Solitudes they are,” cried Mohi.

“Peopled but not enlivened,” said Babbalanja. “Hard landing here,
minstrel! see you not the isle is hedged?”

“Why, break through, then,” said Media. “Yillah is not here.”

“I mistrusted it,” sighed Yoomy; “an imprisoned island! full of
uncomplaining woes: like many others we must have glided by,
unheedingly. Yet of them have I heard. This isle many pass, marking its
outward brightness, but dreaming not of the sad secrets here embowered.
Haunt of the hopeless! In those inland woods brood Mardians who have
tasted Mardi, and found it bitter—the draught so sweet to
others!—maidens whose unimparted bloom has cankered in the bud; and
children, with eyes averted from life’s dawn—like those new-oped
morning blossoms which, foreseeing storms, turn and close.”

“Yoomy’s rendering of the truth,” said Mohi.

“Why land, then?” said Media. “No merry man of sense—no demi-god like
me, will do it. Let’s away; let’s see all that’s pleasant, or that
seems so, in our circuit, and, if possible, shun the sad.”

“Then we have circled not the round reef wholly,” said Babbalanja, “but
made of it a segment. For this is far from being the first sad land, my
lord, that we have slighted at your instance.”

“No more. I will have no gloom. A chorus! there, ye paddlers! spread
all your sails; ply paddles; breeze up, merry winds!”

And so, in the saffron sunset, we neared another shore.

A gloomy-looking land! black, beetling crags, rent by volcanic clefts;
ploughed up with water-courses, and dusky with charred woods. The beach
was strewn with scoria and cinders; in dolorous soughs, a chill wind
blew; wails issued from the caves; and yellow, spooming surges, lashed
the moaning strand.

“Shall we land?” said Babbalanja.

“Not here,” cried Yoomy; “no Yillah here.”

“No,” said Media. “This is another of those lands far better to avoid.”

“Know ye not,” said Mohi, “that here are the mines of King Klanko,
whose scourged slaves, toiling in their pits, so nigh approach the
volcano’s bowels, they hear its rumblings? ‘Yet they must work on,’
cries Klanko, ‘the mines still yield!’ And daily his slaves’ bones are
brought above ground, mixed with the metal masses.”

“Set all sail there, men! away!”

“My lord,” said Babbalanja; “still must we shun the unmitigated evil;
and only view the good; or evil so mixed therewith, the mixture’s
both?”

Half vailed in misty clouds, the harvest-moon now rose; and in that
pale and haggard light, all sat silent; each man in his own secret
mood: best knowing his own thoughts.




CHAPTER LXXIX.
Babbalanja At The Full Of The Moon


“Ho, mortals! Go we to a funeral, that our paddles seem thus muffled?
Up heart, Taji! or does that witch Hautia haunt thee? Be a demi-god
once more, and laugh. Her flowers are not barbs; and the avengers’
arrows are too blunt to slay. Babbalanja! Mohi! Yoomy! up heart! up
heart!—By Oro! I will debark the whole company on the next land we
meet. No tears for me. Ha, ha! let us laugh. Ho, Vee-Vee! awake; quick,
boy,—some wine! and let us make glad, beneath the glad moon. Look! it
is stealing forth from its clouds. Perdition to Hautia! Long lives, and
merry ones to ourselves! Taji, my charming fellow, here’s to you:—May
your heart be a stone! Ha, ha!—will nobody join me? My laugh is lonely
as his who laughed in his tomb. Come, laugh; will no one quaff wine, I
say? See! the round moon is abroad.”

“Say you so, my lord? then for one, I am with you;” cried Babbalanja.
“Fill me a brimmer. Ah! but this wine leaps through me like a panther.
Ay, let us laugh: let us roar: let us yell! What, if I was sad but just
now? Life is an April day, that both laughs and weeps in a breath. But
whoso is wise, laughs when he can. Men fly from a groan; but run to a
laugh. Vee-Vee! your gourd. My lord, let me help you. Ah, how it
sparkles! Cups, cups, Vee-Vee, more cups! Here, Taji, take that: Mohi,
take that: Yoomy, take that. And now let us drown away grief. Ha! ha!
the house of mourning, is deserted, though of old good cheer kept the
funeral guests; and so keep I mine; here I sit by my dead, and
replenish your wine cups. Old Mohi, your cup: Yoomy, yours: ha! ha! let
us laugh, let us scream! Weeds are put off at a fair; no heart bursts
but in secret; it is good to laugh, though the laugh be hollow; and
wise to make merry, now and for aye. Laugh, and make friends: weep, and
they go. Women sob, and are rid of their grief: men laugh, and retain
it. There is laughter in heaven, and laughter in hell. And a deep
thought whose language is laughter. Though wisdom be wedded to woe,
though the way thereto is by tears, yet all ends in a shout. But wisdom
wears no weeds; woe is more merry than mirth; ’tis a shallow grief that
is sad. Ha! ha! how demoniacs shout; how all skeletons grin; we all die
with a rattle. Laugh! laugh! Are the cherubim grave? Humor, thy laugh
is divine; whence, mirth-making idiots have been revered; and therefore
may I. Ho! let us be gay, if it be only for an hour, and Death hand us
the goblet. Vee-Vee! bring on your gourds! Let us pledge each other in
bumpers!—let us laugh, laugh, laugh it out to the last. All sages have
laughed,—let us; Bardianna laughed, let us; Demorkriti laughed,—let us:
Amoree laughed,—let us; Rabeelee roared,—let us; the hyenas grin, the
jackals yell,—let us.—But you don’t laugh, my lord? laugh away!”

“No, thank you, Azzageddi, not after that infernal fashion; better
weep.”

“He makes me crawl all over, as if I were an ant-hill,” said Mohi.

“He’s mad, mad, mad!” cried Yoomy.

“Ay, mad, mad, mad!—mad as the mad fiend that rides me!—But come, sweet
minstrel, wilt list to a song?—We madmen are all poets, you know:—Ha!
ha!—

Stars laugh in the sky:
    Oh fugle-fi I
The waves dimple below:
    Oh fugle-fo!


“The wind strikes her dulcimers; the groves give a shout; the hurricane
is only an hysterical laugh; and the lightning that blasts, blasts only
in play. We must laugh or we die; to laugh is to live. Not to laugh is
to have the tetanus. Will you weep? then laugh while you weep. For
mirth and sorrow are kin; are published by identical nerves. Go, Yoomy:
go study anatomy: there is much to be learned from the dead, more than
you may learn from the living and I am dead though I live; and as soon
dissect myself as another; I curiously look into my secrets: and grope
under my ribs. I have found that the heart is not whole, but divided;
that it seeks a soft cushion whereon to repose; that it vitalizes the
blood; which else were weaker than water: I have found that we can not
live without hearts; though the heartless live longest. Yet hug your
hearts, ye handful that have them; ’tis a blessed inheritance! Thus,
thus, my lord, I run on; from one pole to the other; from this thing to
that. But so the great world goes round, and in one Somerset, shows the
sun twenty-five thousand miles of a landscape!”

At that instant, down went the fiery full-moon, and the Dog-Star; and
far down into Media, a Tivoli of wine.




