CHAPTER XIII.
Babbalanja Endeavors To Explain The Mystery


This Great Mogul of a personage, then; this woundy Aliasuerus; this man
of men; this same Hivohitee, whose name rumbled among the mountains
like a peal of thunder, had been seen face to face, and taken for
naught, but a bearded old hermit, or at best, some equivocal conjuror.

So great was his wonderment at the time, that Yoomy could not avoid
expressing it in words.

Whereupon thus discoursed Babbalanja:

“Gentle Yoomy, be not astounded, that Hivohitee is so far behind your
previous conceptions. The shadows of things are greater than
themselves; and the more exaggerated the shadow, the more unlike to the
substance.”

“But knowing now, what manner of person Hivohitee is,” said Yoomy,
“much do I long to behold him again.”

But Mohi assured him it was out of the question; that the Pontiff
always acted toward strangers as toward him (Yoomy); and that but one
dim blink at the eremite was all that mortal could obtain.

Debarred thus from a second and more satisfactory interview with one,
concerning whom his curiosity had been violently aroused, the minstrel
again turned to Mohi for enlightenment; especially touching that
magnate’s Egyptian reception of him in his aerial den.

Whereto, the chronicler made answer, that the Pontiff affected darkness
because he liked it: that he was a ruler of few words, but many deeds;
and that, had Yoomy been permitted to tarry longer with him in the
pagoda, he would have been privy to many strange attestations of the
divinity imputed to him. Voices would have been heard in the air,
gossiping with Hivohitee; noises inexplicable proceeding from him; in
brief, light would have flashed out of his darkness.

“But who has seen these things, Mohi?” said Babbalanja, “have you?”

“Nay.”

“Who then?—Media?—Any one you know?”

“Nay: but the whole Archipelago has.”

“Thus,” exclaimed Babbalanja, “does Mardi, blind though it be in many
things, collectively behold the marvels, which one pair of eyes sees
not.”




CHAPTER XIV.
Taji Receives Tidings And Omens


Slowly sailing on, we were overtaken by a shallop; whose inmates
grappling to the side of Media’s, said they came from Borabolla.

Dismal tidings!—My faithful follower’s death.

Absent over night, that morning early, he had been discovered lifeless
in the woods, three arrows in his heart. And the three pale strangers
were nowhere to be found. But a fleet canoe was missing from the beach.

Slain for me! my soul sobbed out. Nor yet appeased Aleema’s manes; nor
yet seemed sated the avengers’ malice; who, doubtless, were on my
track.

But I turned; and instantly the three canoes had been reversed; and
full soon, Jarl’s dead hand in mine, had not Media interposed.

“To death, your presence will not bring life back.”

“And we must on,” said Babbalanja. “We seek the living, not the dead.”

Thus they overruled me; and Borabolla’s messengers departed.

Soon evening came, and in its shades, three shadows,—Hautia’s heralds.

Their shallop glided near.

A leaf tri-foiled was first presented; then another, arrow-shaped.

Said Yoomy, “Still I swiftly follow, behind revenge.”

Then were showered faded, pallid daffodils.

Said Yoomy, “Thy hopes are blighted all.”

“Not dead, but living with the life of life. Sirens! I heed ye not.”

They would have showered more flowers; but crowding sail we left them.

Much converse followed. Then, beneath the canopy all sought repose. And
ere long slouched sleep drew nigh, tending dreams innumerable; silent
dotting all the downs a shepherd with his flock.




