CHAPTER LXXIV.
A Death-Cloud Sweeps By Them, As They Sail


Next day, a fearful sight!

As in Sooloo’s seas, one vast water-spout will, sudden, form: and
whirling, chase the flying Malay keels; so, before a swift-winged
cloud, a thousand prows sped by, leaving braided, foaming wakes; their
crowded inmates’ arms, in frenzied supplications wreathed; like tangled
forest-boughs.

“See, see,” cried Yoomy, “how the Death-cloud flies! Let us dive down
in the sea.”

“Nay,” said Babbalanja. “All things come of Oro; if we must drown, let
Oro drown us.”

“Down sails: drop paddles,” said Media: “here we float.”

Like a rushing bison, sweeping by, the Death-cloud grazed us with its
foam; and whirling in upon the thousand prows beyond, sudden burst in
deluges; and scooping out a maelstrom, dragged down every plank and
soul.

Long we rocked upon the circling billows, which expanding from that
center, dashed every isle, till, moons after-ward, faint, they laved
all Mardi’s reef.

“Thanks unto Oro,” murmured Mohi, “this heart still beats.”

That sun-flushed eve, we sailed by many tranquil harbors, whence fled
those thousand prows. Serene, the waves ran up their strands; and
chimed around the unharmed stakes of palm, to which the thousand prows
that morning had been fastened.

“Flying death, they ran to meet it,” said Babbalanja. “But tie not that
they fled, they died; for maelstroms, of these harbors, the Death-cloud
might have made. But they died, because they might not longer live.
Could we gain one glimpse of the great calendar of eternity, all our
names would there be found, glued against their dates of death. We die
by land, and die by sea; we die by earthquakes, famines, plagues, and
wars; by fevers, agues; woe, or mirth excessive. This mortal air is one
wide pestilence, that kills us all at last. Whom the Death-cloud
spares, sleeping, dies in silent watches of the night. He whom the
spears of many battles could not slay, dies of a grape-stone, beneath
the vine-clad bower he built, to shade declining years. We die, because
we live. But none the less does Babbalanja quake. And if he flies not,
’tis because he stands the center of a circle; its every point a
leveled dart; and every bow, bent back:—a twang, and Babbalanja dies.”




CHAPTER LXXV.
They Visit The Palmy King Abrazza


Night and morn departed; and in the afternoon, we drew nigh to an
island, overcast with shadows; a shower was falling; and pining,
plaintive notes forth issued from the groves: half-suppressed, and
sobbing whisperings of leaves. The shore sloped to the water; thither
our prows were pointed.

“Sheer off! no landing here,” cried Media, “let us gain the sunny side;
and like the care-free bachelor Abrazza, who here is king, turn our
back on the isle’s shadowy side, and revel in its morning-meads.”

“And lord Abrazza:—who is he?” asked Yoomy.

“The one hundred and twentieth in lineal descent from Phipora,” said
Mohi; “and connected on the maternal side to the lord seigniors of
Klivonia. His uttermost uncle was nephew to the niece of Queen
Zmiglandi; who flourished so long since, she wedded at the first
Transit of Venus. His pedigree is endless.”

“But who is lord Abrazza?”

“Has he not said?” answered Babbalanja. “Why so dull?—Uttermost nephew
to him, who was nephew to the niece of the peerless Queen Zmiglandi;
and the one hundred and twentieth in descent from the illustrious
Phipora.”

“Will none tell, who Abrazza is?”

“Can not a man then, be described by running off the catalogue of his
ancestors?” said Babbalanja. “Or must we e’en descend to himself. Then,
listen, dull Yoomy! and know that lord Abrazza is six feet two: plump
thighs; blue eyes; and brown hair; likes his bread-fruit baked, not
roasted; sometimes carries filberts in his crown: and has a way of
winking when he speaks. His teeth are good.”

“Are you publishing some decamped burglar,” said Media, “that you speak
thus of my royal friend, the lord Abrazza? Go on, sir! and say he
reigns sole king of Bonovona!”

“My lord, I had not ended. Abrazza, Yoomy, is a fine and florid king:
high-fed, and affluent of heart; of speech, mellifluent. And for a
royalty extremely amiable. He is a sceptered gentleman, who does much
good. Kind king! in person he gives orders for relieving those, who
daily dive for pearls, to grace his royal robe; and gasping hard, with
blood-shot eyes, come up from shark-infested depths, and fainting, lay
their treasure at his feet. Sweet lord Abrazza! how he pities those,
who in his furthest woodlands day-long toil to do his bidding. Yet
king-philosopher, he never weeps; but pities with a placid smile; and
that but seldom.”

“There seems much iron in your blood,” said Media. “But say your say.”

“Say I not truth, my lord? Abrazza, I admire. Save his royal pity all
else is jocund round him. He loves to live for life’s own sake. He vows
he’ll have no cares; and often says, in pleasant reveries,— ‘Sure, my
lord Abrazza, if any one should be care-free, ’tis thou; who strike
down none, but pity all the fallen!’ Yet none he lifteth up.”

At length we gained the sunny side, and shoreward tended. Vee-Vee’s
horn was sonorous; and issuing from his golden groves, my lord Abrazza,
like a host that greets you on the threshold, met us, as we keeled the
beach.

“Welcome! fellow demi-god, and king! Media, my pleasant guest!”

His servitors salamed; his chieftains bowed; his yeoman-guard, in
meadow-green, presented palm-stalks,—royal tokens; and hand in hand,
the nodding, jovial, regal friends, went up a lane of salutations;
dragging behind, a train of envyings.

Much we marked Abrazza’s jeweled crown; that shot no honest blaze of
ruddy rubies; nor looked stern-white like Media’s pearls; but cast a
green and yellow glare; rays from emeralds, crossing rays from many a
topaz. In those beams, so sinister, all present looked cadaverous:
Abrazza’s cheek alone beamed bright, but hectic.

Upon its fragrant mats a spacious hall received the kings; and
gathering courtiers blandly bowed; and gushing with soft flatteries,
breathed idol-incense round them.

The hall was terraced thrice; its elevated end was curtained; and
thence, at every chime of words, there burst a girl, gay scarfed, with
naked bosom, and poured forth wild and hollow laughter, as she raced
down all the terraces, and passed their merry kingships.

Wide round the hall, in avenues, waved almond-woods; their whiteness
frosted into bloom. But every vine-clad trunk was hollow-hearted;
hollow sounds came from the grottos: hollow broke the billows on the
shore: and hollow pauses filled the air, following the hollow laughter.

Guards, with spears, paced the groves, and in the inner shadows, oft
were seen to lift their weapons, and backward press some ugly phantom,
saying, “Subjects! haunt him not; Abrazza would be merry; Abrazza
feasts his guests.”

So, banished from our sight seemed all things uncongenial; and pleasant
times were ours, in these dominions. Not a face passed by, but smiled;
mocking-birds perched on the boughs; and singing, made us vow the woods
were warbling forth thanksgiving, with a thousand throats! The stalwart
yeomen grinned beneath their trenchers, heaped with citrons
pomegrantes, grapes; the pages tittered, pouring out the wine; and all
the lords loud laughed, smote their gilded spears, and swore the isle
was glad.

Such the isle, in which we tarried; but in our rambles, found no
Yillah.




