CHAPTER XLVI.
Wherein Babbalanja Bows Thrice


The next morning’s twilight found us once more afloat; and yielding to
that almost sullen feeling, but too apt to prevail with some mortals at
that hour, all but Media long remained silent.

But now, a bright mustering is seen among the myriad white Tartar tents
in the Orient; like lines of spears defiling upon some upland plain,
the sunbeams thwart the sky. And see! amid the blaze of banners, and
the pawings of ten thousand thousand golden hoofs, day’s mounted
Sultan, Xerxes-like, moves on: the Dawn his standard, East and West his
cymbals.

“Oh, morning life!” cried Yoomy, with a Persian air; “would that all
time were a sunrise, and all life a youth.”

“Ah! but these striplings whimper of youth,” said Mohi, caressing his
braids, “as if they wore this beard.”

“But natural, old man,” said Babbalanja. “We Mardians never seem young
to ourselves; childhood is to youth what manhood is to age:—something
to be looked back upon, with sorrow that it is past. But childhood
reeks of no future, and knows no past; hence, its present passes in a
vapor.”

“Mohi, how’s your appetite this morning?” said Media.

“Thus, thus, ye gods,” sighed Yoomy, “is feeling ever scouted. Yet,
what might seem feeling in me, I can not express.”

“A good commentary on old Bardianna, Yoomy,” said Babbalanja, “who
somewhere says, that no Mardian can out with his heart, for his
unyielding ribs are in the way. And indeed, pride, or something akin
thereto, often holds check on sentiment. My lord, there are those who
like not to be detected in the possession of a heart.”

“Very true, Babbalanja; and I suppose that pride was at the bottom of
your old Ponderer’s heartless, unsentimental, bald-pated style.”

“Craving pardon, my lord is deceived. Bardianna was not at all proud;
though he had a queer way of showing the absence of pride. In his
essay, entitled,—“On the Tendency to curl in Upper Lips,” he thus
discourses. “We hear much of pride and its sinfulness in this Mardi
wherein we dwell: whereas, I glory in being brimmed with it;—my sort of
pride. In the presence of kings, lords, palm-trees, and all those who
deem themselves taller than myself, I stand stiff as a pike, and will
abate not one vertebra of my stature. But accounting no Mardian my
superior, I account none my inferior; hence, with the social, I am ever
ready to be sociable.”

“An agrarian!” said Media; “no doubt he would have made the headsman
the minister of equality.”

“At bottom we are already equal, my honored lord,” said Babbalanja,
profoundly bowing—“One way we all come into Mardi, and one way we
withdraw. Wanting his yams a king will starve, quick as a clown; and
smote on the hip, saith old Bardianna, he will roar as loud as the next
one.”

“Roughly worded, that, Babbalanja.—Vee-Vee! my crown!—So; now,
Babbalanja, try if you can not polish Bardianna’s style in that last
saying you father upon him.”

“I will, my ever honorable lord,” said Babbalanja, salaming. “Thus
we’ll word it, then: In their merely Mardian nature, the sublimest
demi-gods are subject to infirmities; for struck by some keen shaft,
even a king ofttimes dons his crown, fearful of future darts.”

“Ha, ha!—well done, Babbalanja; but I bade you polish, not sharpen the
arrow.”

“All one, my thrice honored lord;—to polish is not to blunt.”




CHAPTER XLVII.
Babbalanja Philosophizes, And My Lord Media Passes Round The Calabashes


An interval of silence passed; when Media cried, “Out upon thee, Yoomy!
curtail that long face of thine.”

“How can he, my lord,” said Mohi, “when he is thinking of furlongs?”

“Fathoms you mean, Mohi; see you not he is musing over the gunwale? And
now, minstrel, a banana for thy thoughts. Come, tell me how you poets
spend so many hours in meditation.”

“My lord, it is because, that when we think, we think so little of
ourselves.”

“I thought as much,” said Mohi, “for no sooner do I undertake to be
sociable with myself, than I am straightway forced to beat a retreat.”

“Ay, old man,” said Babbalanja, “many of us Mardians are but sorry
hosts to ourselves. Some hearts are hermits.”

“If not of yourself, then, Yoomy, of whom else do you think?” asked
Media.

“My lord, I seldom think,” said Yoomy, “I but give ear to the voices in
my calm.”

“Did Babbalanja speak?” said Media. “But no more of your reveries;” and
so saying Media gradually sunk into a reverie himself.

The rest did likewise; and soon, with eyes enchanted, all reclined:
gazing at each other, witless of what we did.

It was Media who broke the spell; calling for Vee-Vee our page, his
calabashes and cups, and nectarines for all.

Eyeing his goblet, Media at length threw himself back, and said:
“Babbalanja, not ten minutes since, we were all absent-minded; now, how
would you like to step out of your body, in reality; and, as a spirit,
haunt some shadowy grove?”

“But our lungs are not wholly superfluous, my lord,” said Babbalanja,
speaking loud.

“No, nor our lips,” said Mohi, smacking his over his wine.

“But could you really be disembodied here in Mardi, Babbalanja, how
would you fancy it?” said Media.

“My lord,” said Babbalanja, speaking through half of a nectarine,
“defer putting that question, I beseech, till after my appetite is
satisfied; for, trust me, no hungry mortal would forfeit his palate, to
be resolved into the impalpable.”

“Yet pure spirits we must all become at last, Babbalanja,” said Yoomy,
“even the most ignoble.”

“Yes, so they say, Yoomy; but if all boors be the immortal sires of
endless dynasties of immortals, how little do our pious patricians bear
in mind their magnificent destiny, when hourly they scorn their
companionship. And if here in Mardi they can not abide an equality with
plebeians, even at the altar; how shall they endure them, side by side,
throughout eternity? But since the prophet Alma asserts, that Paradise
is almost entirely made up of the poor and despised, no wonder that
many aristocrats of our isles pursue a career, which, according to some
theologies, must forever preserve the social distinctions so sedulously
maintained in Mardi. And though some say, that at death every thing
earthy is removed from the spirit, so that clowns and lords both stand
on a footing; yet, according to the popular legends, it has ever been
observed of the ghosts of boors when revisiting Mardi, that invariably
they rise in their smocks. And regarding our intellectual equality
here, how unjust, my lord, that after whole years of days end nights
consecrated to the hard gaining of wisdom, the wisest Mardian of us all
should in the end find the whole sum of his attainments, at one leap
outstripped by the veriest dunce, suddenly inspired by light divine.
And though some hold, that all Mardian lore is vain, and that at death
all mysteries will be revealed; yet, none the less, do they toil and
ponder now. Thus, their tongues have one mind, and their understanding
another.”

“My lord,” said Mohi, “we have come to the lees; your pardon,
Babbalanja.”

“Then, Vee-Vee, another calabash! Fill up, Mohi; wash down wine with
wine. Your cup, Babbalanja; any lees?”

“Plenty, my lord; we philosophers come to the lees very soon.”

“Flood them over, then; but cease not discoursing; thanks be to the
gods, your mortal palates and tongues can both wag together; fill up, I
say, Babbalanja; you are no philosopher, if you stop at the tenth cup;
endurance is the test of philosophy all Mardi over; drink, I say, and
make us wise by precept and example.—Proceed, Yoomy, you look as if you
had something to say.”

“Thanks, my lord. Just now, Babbalanja, you flew from the subject;— you
spoke of boors; but has not the lowliest peasant an eye that can take
in the vast horizon at a sweep: mountains, vales, plains, and oceans?
Is such a being nothing?”

“But can that eye see itself, Yoomy?” said Babbalanja, winking. “Taken
out of its socket, will it see at all? Its connection with the body
imparts to it its virtue.”

“He questions every thing,” cried Mohi. “Philosopher, have you a head?”

“I have,” said Babbalanja, feeling for it; “I am finished off at the
helm very much as other Mardians, Mohi.”

“My lord, the first yea that ever came from him.”

“Ah, Mohi,” said Media, “the discourse waxes heavy. I fear me we have
again come to the lees. Ho, Vee-Vee, a fresh calabash; and with it we
will change the subject. Now, Babbalanja, I have this cup to drink, and
then a question to propound. Ah, Mohi, rare old wine this; it smacks of
the cork. But attention, Philosopher. Supposing you had a wife—which,
by the way, you have not—would you deem it sensible in her to imagine
you no more, because you happened to stroll out of her sight?”

“However that might be,” murmured Yoomy, “young Nina bewailed herself a
widow, whenever Arhinoo, her lord, was absent from her side.”

“My lord Media,” said Babbalanja, “During my absence, my wife would
have more reason to conclude that I was not living, than that I was. To
the former supposition, every thing tangible around her would tend; to
the latter, nothing but her own fond fancies. It is this imagination of
ours, my lord, that is at the bottom of these things. When I am in one
place, there exists no other. Yet am I but too apt to fancy the
reverse. Nevertheless, when I am in Odo, talk not to me of Ohonoo. To
me it is not, except when I am there. If it be, prove it. To prove it,
you carry me thither but you only prove, that to its substantive
existence, as cognizant to me, my presence is indispensable. I say
that, to me, all Mardi exists by virtue of my sovereign pleasure; and
when I die, the universe will perish with me.”

“Come you of a long-lived race,” said Mohi, “one free from apoplexies?
I have many little things to accomplish yet, and would not be left in
the lurch.”

“Heed him not, Babbalanja,” said Media. “Dip your beak again, my eagle,
and soar.”

“Let us be eagles, then, indeed, my lord: eagle-like, let us look at
this red wine without blinking; let us grow solemn, not boisterous,
with good cheer.”

Then, lifting his cup, “My lord, serenely do I pity all who are stirred
one jot from their centers by ever so much drinking of this fluid. Ply
him hard as you will, through the live-long polar night, a wise man can
not be made drunk. Though, toward sunrise, his body may reel, it will
reel round its center; and though he make many tacks in going home, he
reaches it at last; while scores of over-plied fools are foundering by
the way. My lord, when wild with much thought, ’tis to wine I fly, to
sober me; its magic fumes breathe over me like the Indian summer, which
steeps all nature in repose. To me, wine is no vulgar fire, no fosterer
of base passions; my heart, ever open, is opened still wider; and
glorious visions are born in my brain; it is then that I have all Mardi
under my feet, and the constellations of the firmament in my soul.”

“Superb!” cried Yoomy.

“Pooh, pooh!” said Mohi, “who does not see stars at such times? I see
the Great Bear now, and the little one, its cub; and Andromeda, and
Perseus’ chain-armor, and Cassiopea in her golden chair, and the
bright, scaly Dragon, and the glittering Lyre, and all the jewels in
Orion’s sword-hilt.”

“Ay,” cried Media, “the study of astronomy is wonderfully facilitated
by wine. Fill up, old Ptolemy, and tell us should you discover a new
planet. Methinks this fluid needs stirring. Ho, Vee-Vee, my scepter! be
we sociable. But come, Babbalanja, my gold-headed aquila, return to
your theme;—the imagination, if you please.”

“Well, then, my lord, I was about to say, that the imagination is the
Voli-Donzini; or, to speak plainer, the unical, rudimental, and all-
comprehending abstracted essence of the infinite remoteness of things.
Without it, we were grass-hoppers.”

“And with it, you mortals are little else; do you not chirp all over,
Mohi? By my demi-god soul, were I not what I am, this wine would almost
get the better of me.”

“Without it—” continued Babbalanja.

“Without what?” demanded Media, starting to his feet. “This wine?
Traitor, I’ll stand by this to the last gasp, you are inebriated,
Babbalanja.”

“Perhaps so, my lord; but I was treating of the imagination, may it
please you.”

“My lord,” added Mohi, “of the unical, and rudimental fundament of
things, you remember.”

“Ah! there’s none of them sober; proceed, proceed, Azzageddi!”

“My lord waves his hand like a banner,” murmured Yoomy.

“Without imagination, I say, an armless man, born, blind, could not be
made to believe, that he had a head of hair, since he could neither see
it, nor feel it, nor has hair any feeling of itself.”

“Methinks though,” said Mohi, “if the cripple had a Tartar for a wife,
he would not remain skeptical long.”

“You all fly off at tangents,” cried Media, “but no wonder: your mortal
brains can not endure much quaffing. Return to your subject,
Babbalanja. Assume now, Babbalanja,—assume, my dear prince—assume it,
assume it, I say!—Why don’t you?”

“I am willing to assume any thing you please, my lord: what is it?”

“Ah! yes!—Assume that—that upon returning home, you should find your
wife had newly wedded, under the—the—the metaphysical presumption, that
being no longer visible, you—_you_ Azzageddi, had departed this life;
in other words, out of sight, out of mind; what then, my dear prince?”

“Why then, my lord, I would demolish my rival in a trice.”

“Would you?—then—then so much for your metaphysics, Bab—Babbalanja.”

Babbalanja rose to his feet, muttering to himself—“Is this assumed, or
real?—Can a demi-god be mastered by wine? Yet, the old mythologies make
bacchanals of the gods. But he was wondrous keen! He felled me, ere he
fell himself.”

“Yoomy, my lord Media is in a very merry mood to-day,” whispered Mohi,
“but his counterfeit was not well done. No, no, a bacchanal is not used
to be so logical in his cups.”




