CHAPTER LV.
Wherein Babbalanja Comments Upon The Speech Of Alanno


As we lingered in the precincts of the temple after all others had
departed, sundry comments were made upon what we had seen; and having
remarked the hostility of the lunatic orator toward Dominora,
Babbalanja thus addressed Media:—

“My lord, I am constrained to believe, that all Vivenza can not be of
the same mind with the grandiloquent chief from Hio-Hio. Nevertheless,
I imagine, that between Dominora and this land, there exists at bottom
a feeling akin to animosity, which is not yet wholly extinguished;
though but the smoldering embers of a once raging fire. My lord, you
may call it poetry if you will, but there are nations in Mardi, that to
others stand in the relation of sons to sires. Thus with Dominora and
Vivenza. And though, its majority attained, Vivenza is now its own
master, yet should it not fail in a reverential respect for its parent.
In man or nation, old age is honorable; and a boy, however tall, should
never take his sire by the beard. And though Dominora did indeed ill
merit Vivenza’s esteem, yet by abstaining from criminations, Vivenza
should ever merit its own. And if in time to come, which Oro forbid,
Vivenza must needs go to battle with King Bello, let Vivenza first
cross the old veteran’s spear with all possible courtesy. On the other
hand, my lord, King Bello should never forget, that whatever be
glorious in Vivenza, redounds to himself. And as some gallant old lord
proudly measures the brawn and stature of his son; and joys to view in
his noble young lineaments the likeness of his own; bethinking him,
that when at last laid in his tomb, he will yet survive in the long,
strong life of his child, the worthy inheritor of his valor and renown;
even so, should King Bello regard the generous promise of this young
Vivenza of his own lusty begetting. My lord, behold these two states!
Of all nations in the Archipelago, they alone are one in blood.
Dominora is the last and greatest Anak of Old Times; Vivenza, the
foremost and goodliest stripling of the Present. One is full of the
past; the other brims with the future. Ah! did this sire’s old heart
but beat to free thoughts, and back his bold son, all Mardi would go
down before them. And high Oro may have ordained for them a career,
little divined by the mass. Methinks, that as Vivenza will never cause
old Bello to weep for his son; so, Vivenza will not, this many a long
year, be called to weep over the grave of its sire. And though King
Bello may yet lay aside his old-fashioned cocked hat of a crown, and
comply with the plain costume of the times; yet will his, frame remain
sturdy as of yore, and equally grace any habiliments he may don. And
those who say, Dominora is old and worn out, may very possibly err. For
if, as a nation, Dominora be old—her present generation is full as
young as the youths in any land under the sun. Then, Ho! worthy twain!
Each worthy the other, join hands on the instant, and weld them
together. Lo! the past is a prophet. Be the future, its prophecy
fulfilled.”




CHAPTER LVI.
A Scene In The Land Of Warwicks, Or King-Makers


Wending our way from the temple, we were accompanied by a fluent,
obstreperous wight, one Znobbi, a runaway native of Porpheero, but now
an enthusiastic inhabitant of Vivenza.

“Here comes our great chief!” he cried. “Behold him! It was _I_ that
had a hand in making him what he is!”

And so saying, he pointed out a personage, no way distinguished, except
by the tattooing on his forehead—stars, thirty in number; and an
uncommonly long spear in his hand. Freely he mingled with the crowd.

“Behold, how familiar I am with him!” cried Znobbi, approaching, and
pitcher-wise taking him by the handle of his face.

“Friend,” said the dignitary, “thy salute is peculiar, but welcome. I
reverence the enlightened people of this land.”

“Mean-spirited hound!” muttered Media, “were I him, I had impaled that
audacious plebeian.”

“There’s a Head-Chief for you, now, my fine fellow!” cried Znobbi.
“Hurrah! Three cheers! Ay, ay! All kings here—all equal. Every thing’s
in common.”

Here, a bystander, feeling something grazing his side, looked down; and
perceived Znobbi’s hand in clandestine vicinity to the pouch at his
girdle-end.

Whereupon the crowd shouted, “A thief! a thief!” And with a loud voice
the starred chief cried—“Seize him, people, and tie him to yonder
tree.”

And they seized, and tied him on the spot.

“Ah,” said Media, “this chief has something to say, after all; he
pinions a king at a word, though a plebeian takes him by the nose.
Beshrew me, I doubt not, that spear of his, though without a tassel, is
longer and sharper than mine.”

“There’s not so much freedom here as these freemen think,” said
Babbalanja, turning; “I laugh and admire.”




