CHAPTER LXVIII.
King Media Dreams


That afternoon was melting down to eve; all but Media broad awake; yet
all motionless, as the slumberer upon the purple mat. Sailing on, with
open eyes, we slept the wakeful sleep of those, who to the body only
give repose, while the spirit still toils on, threading her mountain
passes.

King Media’s slumbers were like the helmed sentry’s in the saddle. From
them, he started like an antlered deer, bursting from out a copse. Some
said he never slept; that deep within himself he but intensified the
hour; or, leaving his crowned brow in marble quiet, unseen, departed to
far-off councils of the gods. Howbeit, his lids never closed; in the
noonday sun, those crystal eyes, like diamonds, sparkled with a fixed
light.

As motionless we thus reclined, Media turned and muttered:—“Brother
gods, and demi-gods, it is not well. These mortals should have less or
more. Among my subjects is a man, whose genius scorns the common
theories of things; but whose still mortal mind can not fathom the
ocean at his feet. His soul’s a hollow, wherein he raves.”

“List, list,” whispered Yoomy—“our lord is dreaming; and what a royal
dream.”

“A very royal and imperial dream,” said Babbalanja—“he is arraigning me
before high heaven;—ay, ay; in dreams, at least, he deems himself a
demi-god.”

“Hist,” said Mohi—“he speaks again.”

“Gods and demi-gods! With one gesture all abysses we may disclose; and
before this Mardi’s eyes, evoke the shrouded time to come. Were this
well? Like lost children groping in the woods, they falter through
their tangled paths; and at a thousand angles, baffled, start upon each
other. And even when they make an onward move, ’tis but an endless
vestibule, that leads to naught. In my own isle of Odo—Odo! Odo! How
rules my viceroy there?—Down, down, ye madding mobs! Ho, spearmen,
charge! By the firmament, but my halberdiers fly!”

“His dream has changed,” said Babbalanja. “He is in Odo, whither his
anxieties impel him.”

“Hist, hist,” said Yoomy.

“I leap upon the soil! Render thy account, Almanni! Where’s my throne?
Mohi, am I not a king? Do not thy chronicles record me? Yoomy, am I not
the soul of some one glorious song? Babbalanja, speak.—Mohi! Yoomy!”

“What is it, my lord? thou dost but dream.”

Staring wildly; then calmly gazing round, Media smiled. “Ha! how we
royalties ramble in our dreams! I’ve told no secrets?”

“While he seemed to sleep, my lord spoke much,” said Mohi.

“I knew it not, old man; nor would now; but that ye tell me.”

“We dream not ourselves,” said Babbalanja, “but the thing within us.”

“Ay?—good-morrow Azzageddi!—But come; no more dreams: Vee-Vee! wine.”

And straight through that livelong night, immortal Media plied the can.




CHAPTER LXIX.
After A Long Interval, By Night They Are Becalmed


Now suns rose, and set; moons grew, and waned; till, at last, the star
that erewhile heralded the dawn, presaged the eve; to us, sad token!—
while deep within the deepest heart of Mardi’s circle, we sailed from
sea to sea; and isle to isle; and group to group;—vast empires
explored, and inland valleys, to their utmost heads; and for every ray
in heaven, beheld a king.

Needless to recount all that then befell; what tribes and caravans we
saw; what vast horizons; boundless plains: and sierras, in their every
intervale, a nation nestling.

Enough that still we roamed.

It was evening; and as the red sun, magnified, launched into the wave,
once more, from a wild strand, we launched our three canoes.

Soon, from her clouds, hooded Night, like a nun from a convent, drew
nigh. Rustled her train, yet no spangles were there. But high on her
brow, still shone her pale crescent; haloed by bandelets—violet, red,
and yellow. So looked the lone watcher through her rainbow-iris; so
sad, the night without stars.

The winds were laid; the lagoon, still, as a prairie of an August noon.

“Let us dream out the calm,” said Media. “One of ye paddlers, watch: Ho
companions! who’s for Cathay?”

Sleep reigned throughout the canoes, sleeping upon the waters. But
nearer and nearer, low-creeping along, came mists and vapors, a
thousand; spotted with twinklings of Will-o-Wisps from neighboring
shores. Dusky leopards, stealing on by crouches, those vapors seemed.

Hours silently passed. When startled by a cry, Taji sprang to his feet;
against which something rattled; then, a quick splash! and a dark form
bounded into the lagoon.

The dozing watcher had called aloud; and, about to stab, the assassin,
dropping his stiletto, plunged.

Peering hard through those treacherous mists, two figures in a shallop,
were espied; dragging another, dripping, from the brine.

“Foiled again, and foiled forever. No foe’s corpse was I.”

As we gazed, in the gloom quickly vanished the shallop; ere ours could
be reversed to pursue.

Then, from the opposite mists, glided a second canoe; and beneath the
Iris round the moon, shone now another:—Hautia’s flowery flag!

Vain to wave the sirens off; so still they came.

One waved a plant of sickly silver-green.

“The Midnight Tremmella!” cried Yoomy; “the falling-star of flowers!—
Still I come, when least foreseen; then flee.”

The second waved a hemlock top, the spike just tapering its final
point. The third, a convolvulus, half closed. “The end draws nigh, and
all thy hopes are waning.” Then they proffered grapes.

But once more waved off, silently they vanished.

Again the buried barb tore, at my soul; again Yillah was invoked, but
Hautia made reply.

Slowly wore out the night. But when uprose the sun, fled clouds, and
fled sadness.




