PART II

_ÆSTHETIC AND ETHICAL VALUES_




LECTURE III

ÆSTHETIC AND THEISM


I

In this lecture I have undertaken to consider certain beliefs and
emotions relating to beauty, and to inquire how far their value is
affected by our views as to their origin.

The poverty of language, however, makes it rather difficult to
describe with any exactness the scope of such an inquiry. Beauty is
an ill-defined attribute of certain members of an ill-defined class;
and for the class itself there is no very convenient name. We might
describe its members as “objects of æsthetic interest” always bearing
in mind that this description (as I use it) applies to objects of the
most varying degrees of excellence—to the small as well as the great,
the trifling as well as the sublime: to conjuring and dancing; to
literature, art, and natural beauty.

It follows from this description that, while all things of beauty
possess æsthetic interest, not all things of æsthetic interest would in
common parlance be described as beautiful.[3] They might, for example,
display wit, or finish, or skill. They might, therefore, properly
excite admiration. But beauty is a term whose use may well be confined
to the qualities which excite only the highest forms of æsthetic
interest, and it is thus I propose to employ it.

Now what are the characteristics which distinguish objects of æsthetic
interest from interesting objects generally? I will mention two.

In the first place, the value of æsthetic objects depends on the
intrinsic quality of the emotions they arouse, and not upon the
importance of any ulterior purpose which they may happen to subserve.
In the second place, the emotions themselves, whatever be their value,
must be _contemplative_. They must not prompt to action or reach
forward to any end. They must be self-sufficient, and self-contained.

Of course, I do not suggest that works of art are useless. A building
may be beautiful, although it is also convenient. A sword most
delicately damascened may be an admirable engine of destruction. We may
even go further and admit that utility unadorned may have about it an
æsthetic flavour. Nice adjustment and fitness exquisitely accomplished
are without doubt agreeable objects of contemplation. But, in the
first two of these cases, beauty is deliberately added to utility, not
organically connected with it. An ill-proportioned building might have
been equally fitted for its purpose; a plain sword might have been
equally lethal. In the third case the connection between utility and
æsthetic interest is organic, yet undesigned. From the very nature of
the case it forms no part of the purpose for which the mechanism was
contrived.

Again—when I say that æsthetic interest does not prompt to action,
I am, of course, speaking of those who enjoy, not of those who are
laboriously trying to enjoy, still less of those who create what is to
be enjoyed. It commonly requires effort, conscious and unconscious, to
be a good spectator; it always requires effort to become a good artist.
Yet these are no real exceptions to the principle. Æsthetic interests,
once aroused, do not prompt to action; and it is, I conceive, of their
essence that they should not. The most emotional spectator does not
rush to save Desdemona from Othello; and, though tragedy may (or may
not) purify by “pity and terror,” the pity does not suggest a rescue,
nor the terror urge to flight.


II

Now these characteristics of æsthetic emotions and beliefs raise
problems of great interest. How came they to be what they are? To what
causal process are they due? In the case of ethics (to anticipate a
discussion that will occupy us in the next lecture) the earlier stages
at least are seemingly due to selection. They lead to action, and to
action which has survival value. But what survival value have æsthetic
judgments and feelings at any stage of culture? It is true that
actions which are sometimes represented as primitive forms of artistic
creation play their part in the drama of animal courtship. Some animals
dance, some sing, some croak; some flaunt colours, some exhale smells.
Apes (it seems) make inarticulate noises which (according to Spencer)
were the humble beginnings, not only of speech, but of music. I own
that to me this sort of explanation leaves our æsthetic interests quite
unexplained. Grant, for the sake of argument that, were our knowledge
sufficient, we could trace a continuous history of musical emotions
from the simple satisfaction excited in the female ape by the howling
of the male, down to the delicate delights of the modern musician,
should we be nearer an answer to the problem of æsthetic causation?
I doubt it. Certainly we should not have succeeded in coupling the
development of our feelings for beauty to the general process of
organic evolution. Before this can be satisfactorily accomplished it
must be shown, not merely that the tastes of anthropoid apes are useful
to anthropoid apes, but that the tastes of men are useful to men, and
in particular that the tastes of civilised men are useful to civilised
men. Nor would even this be enough unless usefulness be carefully
defined in terms of survival value. It must, in other words, be shown
that communities rich in the genius which creates beauty and in the
sensibility which enjoys it, will _therefore_ breed more freely and
struggle more successfully than their less gifted neighbours. And I am
not aware that any attempt to establish such a doctrine has ever been
seriously undertaken.

But, if so, our æsthetic sensibilities must be regarded (from the
naturalistic standpoint) as the work of chance. They form no part
of the _quasi_ design which we attribute to selection; they are
unexplained accidents of the evolutionary process. This conclusion
harmonises ill with the importance which civilised man assigns to
them in his scheme of values. On this point, at least, there reigns
a singular unanimity. However people may differ as to what we should
admire, all are agreed that we should admire something. However they
may differ about the benefits to be derived from æsthetic, all are
agreed that the benefits are great. The pessimist finds in art the
solitary mitigation of human miseries. A certain type of agnostic
treats it as an undogmatic substitute for religion. He worships
beauty, but nothing else; and expects from it all the consolations of
religious experience without the burdens of religious belief. Even
those who would refuse to art and literature this exalted position, are
prepared to praise them without stint. They regard the contemplative
study of beautiful things as a most potent instrument of civilisation;
in countless perorations they preach its virtues; delicacy of æsthetic
discrimination they deem the surest proof of culture, and the enjoyment
of æsthetic excellence its highest reward.

The case is apparently, but not really, different when we turn
from beauty to the minor æsthetic interests—the popular novel, the
music-hall song, the cricket-match (as spectacle), the cinematograph,
and so forth. Nobody, it is true, greatly praises these things, but
multitudes greatly enjoy them. The space they occupy in the life of
the community has increased beyond computation. As locomotion becomes
easier and leisure greater that space will increase yet more. This
may be good or bad; but none will deny that it is important. What a
paradox this seems! Theories of selection were devised to explain the
complex structures and the marvellous adjustments of the organic world
without needlessly postulating design. We should think but poorly of
them if they accounted for some organs by methods quite inapplicable
to others—if they showed us, for example, how the eye had developed,
but appealed to some wholly different principle (say special creation)
when they set to work on the ear; or taught that the nose must be
regarded as an evolutionary accident not to be explained on any general
principle at all. If what required explanation was of small biological
importance, this last hypothesis would not seem perhaps startling. The
most convinced selectionist is not obliged to suppose that selection
eliminates everything which does not make for survival. Useless
variations may be spared if they be harmless. Even harmful variations
may be spared if they be linked to variations so advantageous that
their joint effect proves beneficial on balance. But is this the case
with æsthetic? Are we to treat as unconsidered trifles our powers
of enjoying beauty and of creating it? Can we be content with a
world-outlook which assigns to these chance products of matter and
motion so vast a value measured on the scale of culture, and no value
worth counting measured on the scale of race survival? If design may
ever be invoked where selection fails and luck seems incredible, surely
it may be invoked here.


III

These observations are applicable, more or less, to the whole body
of our æsthetic interests—whether they be roused by objects we deem
relatively trivial, or by objects which are admittedly rare and
splendid. But while neither fit comfortably into a purely naturalistic
framework, it is only the second which, in virtue of their intrinsic
quality, demand a source beyond and above the world of sense
perception. Here, then, we are face to face with a new question. So far
we have been concerned to ask whether that which is admittedly valuable
can be plausibly attributed to chance. Now we must ask whether that
which is attributed to chance can thereafter retain its value. Of these
questions the first is germane to the ordinary argument from design. It
is the second which chiefly concerns us in these lectures.

Perhaps an affirmative answer may seem to have been already given by
implication. The admission that the second problem only touches the
highest values in the æsthetic scale may be thought to render the whole
inquiry vain. And the admission cannot be avoided. No one supposes
that when we are looking (for example) at an acrobat, it matters in
the least what we think of the universe. Our beliefs and disbeliefs
about the Cosmic order will not modify either in quantity or quality
such satisfaction as we can derive from the contemplation of his grace
and agility. Where, then, it will be asked, do we reach the point in
the æsthetic scale at which values begin to require metaphysical or
theological postulates? Is it the point where beauty begins? If so, who
determine where this lies; and by what authority do they speak?

Evidently we are here on difficult and delicate ground. On questions
of taste there is notoriously the widest divergence of opinion. Nor,
if we regard our æsthetic interests simply as the chance flotsam and
jetsam of the evolutionary tides, could it well be otherwise. If there
be practically no “limits of deviation” imposed by selection; if,
from a survival point of view, one taste be as good as another, it is
not the varieties in taste which should cause surprise so much as the
uniformities.

To be sure, the uniformities have often no deep æsthetic roots. They
represent no strong specific likes and dislikes shared by all men at
a certain stage of culture, but rather tendencies to agreement (as
I have elsewhere called them), which govern our social ritual, and
thereby make social life possible. We rail at “fashion,” which by an
unfelt compulsion drives multitudes simultaneously to approve the same
dresses, the same plays, the same pictures, the same architecture, the
same music, and the same scenery. We smile at the obsequious zeal with
which men strive to admire what the prophets of the moment assure them
is admirable. But admitting, as I think we must, that these prophets
neither possess any inherent authority, nor can point to any standard
of appeal, we must also admit that if in Art there were no orthodoxies,
if the heresies themselves were unorganised, if every man based his
æsthetic practice on a too respectful consideration of his own moods
and fancies, the world we live in would be even more uncomfortable than
it is.

However this may be, it is clear that this second portion of my
argument, which is not based, like the first, on any objective survey
of the part played in human affairs by general æsthetic interests,
has special difficulties to surmount. For it rests on experiences of
high emotion rare for all, unknown to many, roused in different men
by different objects. How can any conclusions be securely based on
foundations at once so slender and so shifting?

I agree that the values dealt with in this part of the argument are
not values for everybody. Yet everybody, I think, would be prepared
to go some way in the direction I desire. They would acknowledge
that, in art, origin and value cannot be treated as independent.
They would agree that those who enjoy poetry and painting must be at
least dimly aware of a poet beyond the poem and a painter beyond the
picture. If by some unimaginable process works of beauty could be
produced by machinery, as a symmetrical colour pattern is produced by a
kaleidoscope, we might think them beautiful till we knew their origin,
after which we should be rather disposed to describe them as ingenious.
And this is not, I think, because we are unable to estimate works of
art as they are _in themselves_, not because we must needs buttress up
our opinions by extraneous and irrelevant considerations; but rather
because a work of art requires an artist, not merely in the order of
natural causation, but as a matter of æsthetic necessity. It conveys a
message which is valueless to the recipient, unless it be understood by
the sender. It must be expressive.

Such phrases are no doubt easily misunderstood. Let me, therefore,
hasten to add that by an “expressive” message I do not mean a message
which can be expressed in words. A work of art can never be transferred
from one medium into another, as from marble to music. Even when words
are the medium employed, perfect translation is impossible. One poet
may paraphrase, in a different language, the work of another; and a
new work of art may thus be produced. But however closely it follows
the original, it will never be the same. On the other hand, if the
medium used be (for example) colour, or sound, or stone, the work of
art cannot be translated into words at all. It may be described; and
the description may better the original. Yet it cannot replace it. For
every work of art is unique; and its meaning cannot be alternatively
rendered. But are we, therefore, to conclude that it has no meaning?
Because its message cannot be translated, has it therefore no message?
To put these questions is to answer them.

Many people, however, who would travel with me so far would refuse to
go further. They would grant that a work of art must be due to genius,
and not, in the first instance, to mechanism or to chance. But whether,
in the last resort, mechanism or chance has produced the genius, they
would regard as, from the æsthetic point of view, quite immaterial.
Music and poetry must have a personal source. But the musician and the
poet may come whence they will.

And perhaps, in very many cases, this is so; but not, I think, in
all, nor in the highest. If any man will test this for himself, let
him recall the too rare moments when beauty gave him a delight which
strained to its extremest limit his powers of feeling; when not only
the small things of life, but the small things of Art—its technical
dexterities, its historical associations—vanished in the splendour of
an unforgettable vision; and let him ask whether the attribution of
an effect like this to unthinking causes, or to an artist created and
wholly controlled by unthinking causes, would not go far to impair its
value.

To such an appeal it is not difficult to raise objections. It may be
said, for example, that, under the stress of emotions like those I
have described, no man troubles his head about problems of cosmology;
thought is merged in feeling; speculation is smothered. But though this
is true, it is not wholly true. As no pain, I suppose, is so intense
as to exclude all reflections on its probable duration, so no rapture
is so absorbing as to exclude all reflections on its probable source.
I grant that at such moments we do not philosophise; we do not analyse
a problem, turning it this way or that, and noting every aspect of it
with a cool curiosity. Nevertheless, for those accustomed to reflect,
reflection is never wholly choked by feeling. Nor can feeling, in the
long run, be wholly unaffected by reflection.

Again, it may be said that such moments too seldom occur in any man’s
experience to justify even the most modest generalisations—let alone
generalisations that embrace the universe. But this objection seems
to rest on a misapprehension. We must remember that the argument
from æsthetic values is not a scientific induction or a logical
inference. There is here no question of truth and falsehood, or even
of good taste and bad taste. We are not striving to isolate what is
essential to beauty by well-devised experiments; nor are we concerned
with psycho-physical determination of the normal relation between
feeling and stimulus. If it be urged that some particular example
of deep æsthetic emotion quite outruns the merits of its object, so
that sound canons of criticism require its value to be lowered, we
need not deny it. We are not dealing with sound canons of criticism;
though I may observe, in passing, that if they lower emotional values
in one direction without raising them in others, good taste becomes a
somewhat costly luxury. My point is different. I am not appealing to
all men, but only to some men—to those and to those only who, when they
explicitly face the problem, become deeply conscious of the incongruity
between our feelings of beauty and a materialistic account of their
origin.

The extreme individualism of this point of view may seem repulsive to
many. Are the feelings (they will ask) of some transient moment to be
treated as authentic guides through the mysteries of the universe,
merely because they are strong enough to overwhelm our cooler judgment?
And, if so, how far is this method of metaphysical investigation to
be pressed? Are we, for example, to attach transcendental value to
the feelings of a man in love? There is evidently a close, though
doubtless not a perfect, parallel between the two cases. It is true
that love is rooted in appetite, and that appetite has a survival value
which I, at least, cannot find in the purely contemplative emotions.
But romantic love goes far beyond race requirements. From this point of
view it is as useless as æsthetic emotion itself. And, like æsthetic
emotion of the profounder sort, it is rarely satisfied with the
definite, the limited, and the immediate. It ever reaches out towards
an unrealised infinity. It cannot rest content with the prose of mere
fact. It sees visions and dreams dreams which to an unsympathetic world
seem no better than amiable follies. Is it from sources like these—the
illusions of love and the enthusiasms of ignorance—that we propose
to supplement the world-outlook provided for us by sober sense and
scientific observation?

Yet why not? Here we have values which by supposition we are reluctant
to lose. Neither scientific observation nor sober sense can preserve
them. It is surely permissible to ask what will. And if Naturalism be
inimical to their maintenance, the fact should at least be noted.

It is true, no doubt, that these high-wrought feelings have worse
enemies even than naturalism. When the impassioned lover has sunk
into a good husband, and the worshipper of beauty has cooled into a
judicious critic, they may look back on their early raptures with
intelligent disdain. In that event there are for them no values to be
maintained. They were young, they were foolish, they made a mistake,
and there is no more to be said. But there is a higher wisdom. Without
ignoring what experience has to teach, they may still believe that
through these emotions they have obtained an authentic glimpse of a
world more resplendent and not less real than that in which they tramp
their daily round. And, if so, they will attribute to them a value
independent of their immediate cause—a value which cannot be maintained
in a merely naturalistic setting.[4]

This may seem a doctrine too mystical to suit the general tenor of
these lectures. Let me, therefore, hasten to add that our ordinary and
repeatable experiences of beauty seem to point in the same direction
as these rarer and more intense emotions. It is, of course, true that
even about these we cannot generalise as we may (for example) about
the external world. We cannot, I mean, assume that there is a great
body of æsthetic experience which all normal persons possess in common.
There is always something about our feeling for beautiful things
which can neither be described nor communicated, which is unshared
and unshareable. Many normal persons have no such feelings, or none
worth talking about. Their æsthetic interests may be great, but they
lie at a lower level of intensity. They do not really care for beauty.
Again, there are many who do care, and care greatly, who would yet
utterly repudiate the doctrine that the highest æsthetic values were
in any sense dependent on a spiritual view of the universe. The fact
that so much of the greatest art has been produced in the service of
religion they would not regard as relevant. They would remind us that
one great poet at least has been a passionate materialist; that many
have been pessimists; that many have been atheists; that many have been
in violent revolt against the religion of their age and country. Of
these we cannot say that their art suffered from their opinions, for we
cannot imagine what their art would have been like had their opinions
been different. Neither can we say that the readers who shared their
opinions, became, thereby, less qualified to enjoy their art. Such a
paradox would be too violent. How, then (the objectors may ask), are
facts like these to be harmonised with the views I am recommending?

Probably they cannot be harmonised. We are confronted with a difference
of temperament which must be accepted as final. Yet the contradiction
may often be less than at first appears. In the case which I brought
forward just now, strong æsthetic emotion was assumed to carry with
it, both at the crisis of immediate experience and yet more in periods
of reflective retrospect, a demand for some cause emotionally adequate
to its effect. In other words, it was assumed that such an experience
suggested the question—whence comes it? of matter? or of spirit? and
required the answer—if it be not born of spirit it is little, or it is
naught.

But in many cases this answer is not given because the question is not
asked; or, if it be asked, is misunderstood. And there are many reasons
why it should not be asked; and many why it should be misunderstood.

For there are two things which must, in this connection, be remembered.
The first is that materialism has never been the prevailing creed
among lovers of beauty. The second is that though (as I contend) a
deep-lying incongruity infects theories which trace the ultimate
genesis of beauty exclusively to causes which neither think, nor feel,
nor will, such theories involve no contradiction, nor can those who
hold them be taxed with inconsistency. There is, therefore, little
in the ordinary routine of artistic criticism which raises the point
which we are now discussing. A critic examining some artistic whole—a
picture, a poem, a symphony—is much occupied in separating out the
elements which contribute to the total effect, and in observing their
character, value, and mutual relations. But it is only when we cease to
analyse, when we contemplate, directly or in retrospect, the whole _as_
a whole, that the problem of origin arises; and even then it need never
become explicit. It may remain in the shape of an unsatisfied longing
for a spiritual reality beyond the sensuous impression, or of a vaguely
felt assurance that the spiritual reality is there. And in neither case
has it developed into a question definitely presented—and pressing for
a definite reply.

While, then, I am quite ready to believe that there are many persons
whose enjoyment of beauty is quite independent of their world outlook,
I am also convinced that there are some who count themselves among
the number only because they have never put the matter to the proof.
It may be that they have given but little thought to questions of
theology or metaphysics. It may be that they are pantheists after the
manner of Shelley, or pessimists after the manner of Schopenhauer.
Perhaps, again, they hold one or other of the theosophies which pass
current in the West as the esoteric wisdom of the East. In any case,
they are averse from orthodoxy, or what they regard as such. A lover of
the beautiful belonging to any type like these, if asked whether his
estimate of æsthetic values depended on his creed, might easily miss
the point of the inquiry, and his negative reply would be worthless.
Let the question, therefore, be put in different terms. Let him be
asked whether beauty would not lose value for him if his world-outlook
required him to regard it as a purposeless accident; whether the
æsthetic delights which he deems most exquisite would not be somewhat
dimmed if reflection showed them to be as vain, as transitory, though
not so useful, as the least considered pleasures of sense. If he
replies in the negative, there is no more to be said. This lecture
is not addressed to him. But I believe there are many to whom such
an answer would be profoundly unsatisfying; and they, at least, can
hardly deny that æsthetic values are in part dependent upon a spiritual
conception of the world we live in.


IV

So far I have been considering art and the beauty expressed by art. But
there are two kinds of æsthetic interest, which, though not artistic in
the ordinary sense of the word, are so important that something must be
said about them before this lecture closes.

The first of these is natural beauty. Hegel, if I rightly understand
him, altogether excluded this from the sphere of æsthetic. For him the
point of importance was Spirit—the Idea—expressing itself in art; and
since nature is not spirit, nor natural beauty art, the exclusion was
logical. For me, on the other hand, the main thing is feeling roused by
contemplation; and particularly feeling at its highest level of quality
and intensity. Natural beauty, therefore, cannot be ignored; since no
feelings of contemplation possess higher quality, or greater intensity,
than those which natural beauty can arouse.

Evidently, however, there is, even from my point of view, a great
difference between beauty in art and beauty in nature. For, in the
case of nature, there is no artist; while, as I observed just now, “a
work of art requires an artist, not merely in the order of natural
causation, but in the order of æsthetic necessity. It conveys a message
which is valueless to the recipient unless it be understood by the
sender. It must be significant.”

Are we, then, to lay down one rule for artistic beauty and another rule
for natural beauty? Must the first be expressive, but not the second?
Is creative mind necessary in one case, and superfluous in the other?
And if in the case of nature it be necessary, where is it to be found?
On the naturalistic hypothesis, it is not to be found at all. The glory
of mountain and of plain, storm and sunshine, must be regarded as
resembling the kaleidoscopic pattern of which I just now spoke; with
this difference only—that the kaleidoscope was designed to give _some_
pattern, though no one pattern more than another; while nature was not
designed with any intention at all, and gives us its patterns only by
accident.

I know not whether you will think that this train of thought is helped
or hindered by bringing it into relation with our scientific knowledge
of natural realities. The world which stirs our æsthetic emotions is
the world of sense, the world as it appears. It is not the world as
science asks us to conceive it. This is very ill-qualified to afford
æsthetic delight of the usual type; although the contemplation of
complicated relations reduced to law may produce an intellectual
pleasure in the nature of æsthetic interest. Yet none, I think, would
maintain that mass and motion abstractly considered, nor any concrete
arrangement of moving atoms or undulating ether, are beautiful as
represented in thought, or would be beautiful could they become objects
of perception. We have a bad habit of saying that science deals with
nothing but “phenomena.” If by phenomena are meant appearances, it
is to æsthetics rather than to science that, on the principle of
Solomon’s judgment, phenomena most properly belong. To get away from
appearances, to read the physical fact behind its sensuous effect, is
one chief aim of science; while to put the physical fact in place of
its sensuous effect would be the total and immediate ruin of beauty
both in nature and in the arts which draw on nature for their material.
Natural beauty, in other words, would perish if physical reality and
physical appearance became one, and we were reduced to the lamentable
predicament of perceiving nature as nature is!

Now, to me, it seems that the feeling for natural beauty cannot, any
more than scientific curiosity, rest satisfied with the world of
sensuous appearance. But the reasons for its discontent are different.
Scientific curiosity hungers for a knowledge of causes; causes which
are physical, and, if possible, measurable. Our admiration for natural
beauty has no such needs. It cares not to understand either the
physical theories which explain what it admires, or the psychological
theories which explain its admiration. It does not deny the truth of
the first, nor (within due limits) the sufficiency of the second. But
it requires more. It feels itself belittled unless conscious purpose
can be found somewhere in its pedigree. Physics and psycho-physics, by
themselves, suffice not. It longs to regard beauty as a revelation—a
revelation from spirit to spirit, not from one kind of atomic agitation
to the “psychic” accompaniment of another. On this condition only can
its highest values be maintained.[5]


V

There is yet one other subject of æsthetic interest on which I desire
to say something before the course of these lectures carries me into
very different regions of speculation. The subject I refer to is
history.

That history has æsthetic value is evident. An age which is both
scientific and utilitarian occasionally pretends to see in it no more
than the raw material of a science called sociology, and a storehouse
of precedents from which statesmen may draw maxims for the guidance of
mankind. It may be all this, but it is certainly more. What has in the
main caused history to be written, and when written to be eagerly read,
is neither its scientific value nor its practical utility, but its
æsthetic interest. Men love to contemplate the performances of their
fellows, and whatever enables them to do so, whether we belittle it as
gossip or exalt it as history, will find admirers in abundance.

Yet the difference between this subject of contemplative interest and
those provided either by beauty in art or beauty in nature are striking.

In the first place, history is not concerned to express beauty. I do
not deny that a great historian, in narrating some heroic incident,
may rival the epic and the saga. He may tell a tale which would be
fascinating even if it were false. But such cases are exceptional,
and ought to be exceptional. Directly it appears that the governing
preoccupation of an historian is to be picturesque, his narrative
becomes intolerable.

This is because the interest—I mean the _æsthetic_ interest—of history
largely depends upon its accuracy; or (more strictly) upon its supposed
accuracy. Fictitious narrative, whether realistic or romantic, may
suggest deeper truths, may tell us more about the heart of man,
than all the histories that ever were written; and may tell it more
agreeably. But fact has an interest, because it is fact; because it
actually happened; because actual people who really lived and really
suffered and really rejoiced caused it to happen, or were affected by
its happening. And on this interest the charm of history essentially
depends.

In this respect there is, I think, a certain analogy between the
æsthetic interest aroused by history and that aroused by natural
beauty. Our pleasure in a landscape is qualified if we discover
ourselves to have been the victims of an optical delusion. If, for
example, purple peaks are seen on a far horizon, the traveller may
exclaim, “What beautiful mountains!” Something thereupon convinces him
that the mountains are but clouds, and his delight suffers an immediate
chill. But why? The mountains, it is true, proved unreal; but they had
as much reality as mountains in a picture. Where lies the essential
difference between a representation accidentally produced by condensed
vapour and a representation deliberately embodied in paint and canvas?
It is not to be found, as might be at first supposed, in the fact
that the one deceives us and the other does not. Were we familiar with
this particular landscape, did we know that nothing but a level plain
stretched before us to the limits of our vision, we might still feel
that, if the clouds on the horizon were what they seemed to be, the
view would gain greatly in magnificence. Here there is no deception and
no shock of disillusionment. If, therefore, we remain dissatisfied, it
is because in this case verisimilitude does not suffice us; we insist
on facts.

It has, perhaps, not been sufficiently noticed that brute fact, truth
as it is apprehended in courts of law, truth as it is given by an
accurate witness speaking on oath, has for some purposes great æsthetic
value. That it is all-important in the dealings between man and man
would be universally conceded; that it has no importance either in fine
art or imaginative literature, and no meaning in music or architecture,
most people would be ready to admit. But that it possesses worth
where no practical issues are involved, and that this worth is of the
contemplative or æsthetic order, is perhaps not so easy of acceptance.
Yet so it is. A tale which would be inexpressibly tedious if we thought
it was (in the “law court” sense) false may become of absorbing
interest if we think it true. And this not because it touches morals
or practice, not because it has theoretic interest or controversial
importance, but in its own right and on its own merits.

Now this æsthetic quality is, it seems to me, required both from
“natural beauty” and historic narrative; but if there is here a
resemblance between them, in other respects they are profoundly
different. Landscape appeals to us directly. I do not mean that our
enjoyment of it, both in quality and quantity, is not largely due to
the work of artists. Our tastes have, no doubt, been formed and our
sensibilities educated by the interpretation of nature which we owe to
painters and poets. But though this is true, it is also true that what
we see and what we enjoy is not art but nature, nature at first hand,
nature seen immediately, if not as she is, at least as she appears. In
the case of history it is otherwise. Except when we happen to have been
ourselves spectators of important events, there is always an artist to
be reckoned with. It may be Thucydides. It may be Dr. Dryasdust. It may
be a mediæval chronicler. It may be Mrs. Candour at the tea-table. But
there is always somebody; and though that somebody might repudiate
the notion that his narrative was a work of art, yet he cannot evade
responsibility for selection, for emphasis, and for colour. We may
think him a bad artist, but, even in his own despite, an artist he
is;—an artist whose material is not marble or sound, but brute fact.

There is another way in which the æsthetic interest of history
characteristically differs from the interest we feel in beauty, whether
of art or of nature. It is massive rather than acute. Particular
episodes may indeed raise the most poignant emotions. But, broadly
speaking, the long-drawn story of man and his fortunes stirs feelings
which (to borrow a metaphor from physics) are great in quantity but of
low intensity. So it comes about that, whereas in the case of art the
emotions stand out prominently above their associated judgments, in the
case of history the positions are commonly reversed.

Yet this need not be so; and in particular it need not be so when we
are contemplating the historical process as a whole. Details are then
merged in a general impression; and the general impression drives us
beyond the limits of history proper into questions of origin and
purpose, into reflections about man and destiny, into problems of
whence and whither. Speculations like these have an emotional as well
as an intellectual value, which must be affected by the answers we give
them.

Let me illustrate and explain. It is possible, indeed it is easy, to
contemplate aspects of history with the coolest intellectual interest.
In this mood we might, for instance, study the development of science
and religion out of primitive magics and superstitions. In this mood
we might observe the characteristics of the city state, or the growth
and decay of feudalism, or the history of the Mongols. On the other
hand, the interest often becomes tinged with stronger feelings when we
sympathetically follow the changing fortunes of particular individuals
or communities. We are then, as it were, spectators of a drama, moved
by dramatic hopes and fears, dramatic likes and dislikes, dramatic
“pity and terror.” And our emotions are not merely those appropriate to
drama; they have, besides, that special quality (already referred to)
which depends on the belief that they are occasioned by real events in
a world of real people.

But there is yet a third case to be considered, in which the two
previous cases are included and partially submerged. This occurs when
the object of our contemplative interest is not episodic but general,
not the fate of this man or that nation, this type of polity or that
stage of civilisation, but the fate of mankind itself, its past and
future, its collective destiny.

Now we may, if we please, treat this as no more than a chapter of
natural history. Compared with the chapter devoted, let us say, to the
Dinosaurs it no doubt has the disadvantage of being as yet unfinished,
for the Dinosaurs are extinct, and man still survives. On the other
hand, though the natural history of “Homo Sapiens” is incomplete, we
may admit that it possesses a peculiar interest for the biologist; but
this interest is scientific, not historical.

For what does historical interest require? Not merely “brute fact,” but
brute fact about beings who are more than animals, who look before and
after, who dream about the past and hope about the future, who plan and
strive and suffer for ends of their own invention; for ideals which
reach far beyond the appetites and fears which rule the lives of their
brother beasts. Such beings have a “natural history,” but it is not
with this that we are concerned. The history which concerns us is the
history of self-conscious personalities, and of communities which are
(in a sense) self-conscious also. Can the contemplative values which
this possesses, especially in its most comprehensive shape, be regarded
as independent of our world-outlook? Surely not.

Observe that history, so conceived, must needs compare faculty with
desire, achievement with expectation, fulfilment with design. And no
moralist has ever found pleasure in the comparison. The vanity of
human wishes and the brevity of human life are immemorial themes of
lamentation; nor do they become less lamentable when we extend our
view from the individual to the race. Indeed, it is much the other
way. Men’s wishes are not always vain, nor is every life too brief
to satisfy its possessor. Only when we attempt, from the point of
view permitted by physics and biology, to sum up the possibilities
of collective human endeavour, do we fully realise the “vanity of
vanities” proclaimed by the Preacher.

I am not, of course, suggesting that history is uninteresting because
men are unhappy: nor yet that naturalism carries pessimism in its
train. It may well be that if mankind could draw up a hedonistic
balance-sheet, the pleasures of mundane existence would turn out to
be greater than its sufferings. But this is not the question. I am not
(for the moment) concerned with the miseries of the race, but with its
futility. Its miseries might be indefinitely diminished, yet leave its
futility unchanged. We might live without care and die without pain;
nature, tamed to our desires, might pour every luxury into our lap;
and, with no material wish unsatisfied, we might contemplate at our
ease the inevitable, if distant, extinction of all the life, feeling,
thought, and effort whose reality is admitted by a naturalistic creed.

But how should we be advanced? What interest would then be left in the
story of the human race from its sordid beginnings to its ineffectual
end? Poets and thinkers of old dimly pictured a controlling Fate
to which even the Olympian gods were subject. The unknown power,
which they ignorantly worshipped, any text-book on physics will now
declare unto you. But no altars are erected in its honour. Its name
is changed. It is no longer called Fate or Destiny, but is known by a
title less august if more precise, the law of energy-degradation, or
(if you please) “the second law of thermo-dynamics.” It has become
the subject of scientific experiment; the physicists have taken it
over from the seers, and its attributes are defined in equations. All
terrestrial life is in revolt against it; but to it, in the end, must
all terrestrial life succumb. Eschatology, the doctrine of the last
things, has lapsed from prophecy to calculation, and has become (at
least potentially) a quantitative science.

And, from a scientific point of view, this is quite satisfactory. But
it is not satisfactory when we are weighing the æsthetic values of
universal history. Shakespeare, in the passionate indictment of life
which he puts into the mouth of Macbeth, declares it to be “a tale
told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,” and (mark well the climax)
“_signifying nothing_.” That is the point with which in this lecture
we are chiefly concerned. It most clearly emerges when, in moments of
reflection, we enlarge the circuit of our thoughts beyond the needs of
action, and, in a mood untouched by personal hopes or fears, endeavour
to survey man’s destiny as a whole. Till a period within the memory
of men now living it was possible to credit terrestrial life with
an infinite future, wherein there was room for an infinite approach
towards some, as yet, unpictured perfection. It could always be hoped
that human efforts would leave behind them some enduring traces, which,
however slowly, might accumulate without end. But hopes like these are
possible no more. The wider is the sweep of our contemplative vision
the more clearly do we see that the rôle of man, if limited to an
earthly stage, is meaningless and futile;—that, however it be played,
in the end it “signifies nothing.” Will any one assert that universal
history can maintain its interest undimmed if steeped in the atmosphere
of a creed like this?

Here, however, we are evidently nearing the frontier which divides
æsthetic from ethic. Before I cross it, and begin a new subject, let me
very briefly touch on a difficulty which may have occurred to some of
my hearers.

The line of thought followed in the last section of this lecture
assumes, or seems to assume, that our only choice lies between history
framed in a naturalistic, and history framed in a theistic, setting. In
the first case we have a world-outlook which forbids the attribution
of permanent value to human effort; in the second case we have a
world-outlook which requires, or, at the least, permits it. But are
these the only alternatives? What are we to say, for example, about
those metaphysical religions which, whether they be described as
theistic, pantheistic, or atheistic, agree in regarding all life as
illusion, all desire as wretchedness, and deem the true end of man to
be absorption in the timeless identity of the real? Such creeds have no
affinity with naturalism. Philosophically they are in sharpest contrast
to it. But even less than naturalism do they provide history with a
suitable setting. For naturalism does, after all, leave untouched the
interest of historical episodes, so long as they are considered out of
relation to the whole of which they form a part. As we are content, in
the realm of fiction, to bid farewell to the hero and heroine on their
marriage, unmoved by anxieties about their children, so, in the realm
of “brute fact,” we may arbitrarily isolate any period we choose, and
treat the story of it without reference to any theories concerning the
future destiny of man. But this process of abstraction must surely be
useless for those who think of the world in terms of the metaphysical
religions to which I have referred. In their eyes all effort is
inherently worthless, all desire inherently vain. Nor would they change
their opinion even were they persuaded that progress was real and
unending; that effort and desire were building up, however slowly, an
imperishable polity of super-men. For those who in this spirit face the
struggling world of common experience the contemplative interest of
universal history must be small indeed.


FOOTNOTES:

[3] I greatly regret having to stretch the ordinary meaning of the word
“æsthetic” to the extent required by the argument of this chapter. I
got into trouble in a previous work by the extension I gave to the word
“Authority.” And as, in that case, no explanation seemed sufficient to
avoid misconception, so I am afraid it will be in the present case.

But what better course is open to me? I require a word to express a
concept which is vital to the doctrines I am preaching. Where am I to
get it? If there is no such word in ordinary use, I must either invent
a new word, or I must modify the familiar meaning of an old word. There
are objections to both courses; yet one of them must be taken. I have
chosen the second; and can do no more than ask for the indulgence of
those readers who think I should have chosen the first.

[4] Cf. Plato in the “Phædrus.”

[5] It is perhaps to this tendency we may (in part) attribute the
eagerness with which poetry and fine art have used and abused the
personifications of natural objects provided for them by primitive
superstition. If not, it is curious that these tedious mythologies
should have been cherished by poets long after they were abandoned by
everybody else; and that we still use every expedient for endowing
material nature with fictitious sympathies and powers. But it is, I
think, an error to see nothing in such metaphors but a trick of style.
They represent the same deep-rooted tendency which finds significance
in such phrases as “Mother Earth,” which has suggested certain
poetic forms of Pantheism; or which gathers a vague, semi-spiritual
consolation from the thought that, when we die, our bodies, resolved
into their elements, may still share in the new manifestations of life
which Nature (half personified) pours out in exhaustless profusion.




LECTURE IV

ETHICS AND THEISM


I

I turn now from contemplation to action; from Æsthetics to Ethics.
And in so doing I must ask permission to stretch the ordinary meaning
of the term which I use to describe the subject-matter of the present
lecture, as I have already stretched the meaning of the term which
described the subject-matter of the last. “Æsthetics” there included
much besides beauty; “Ethics” here will include much besides morality.
As, under the first head, were ranged contemplative interests far lower
in the scale than (for example) those of art, so I shall extend the
use of the word “Ethics” till it embraces the whole range of what used
to be called the “springs of action,” from the loftiest love down to
impulses which in themselves are non-moral, instinctive, even automatic.

The grounds for this procedure are similar in both cases. I am mainly,
almost exclusively, concerned with beliefs and emotions touching
beauty and goodness. Yet it is important to remember that, considered
as natural products, these shade off by insensible gradations into
manifestations of life to which the words “belief” and “emotion” are
quite inapplicable, where “beauty” and “goodness” have little meaning
or none. And as this larger class, when concerned with action, has at
present no better name, I may be permitted to describe it as ethical.

I am mainly concerned, however, with that higher part of the ethical
scale which all would agree to call Moral, and with the debatable
region immediately below it. Of purposive action, or what seems to be
such, of a still lower type, I need say little—but we must never forget
that it is there.

Morals, as I conceive them, are concerned with ends of action: and
principally with _ultimate_ ends of action. An end of action, in so far
as it is ultimate, is one which is pursued for itself alone, and not as
a means to some other end. Of course an end may be, and constantly is,
both ultimate and contributory. It is sought for on its own account,
and also as an instrument for procuring something else. It is mainly
in the first of these capacities, however, that it concerns morality.

For the purposes of this lecture I shall classify ultimate ends as
either egoistic or altruistic—egoistic ends being those that are
immediately connected with, or centred in, the agent; altruistic
ends being those that are not. But I beg you to remember that this
distinction does not correspond to that between right and wrong. Egoism
is not necessarily vicious, nor is altruism necessarily virtuous.
Indeed, as I shall have occasion to point out later, the blackest
vices, such as cruelty and hatred, are often altruistic.

This is an unusual, though not, I think, an unreasonable, use of
language. “Egoism” and “altruism” are terms historically associated
with the moral theories which regard happiness as the only end of
action, but are under the necessity of distinguishing between actions
designed to secure the happiness of the agent and actions designed to
secure the happiness of other people. I do not accept these theories,
though I borrow their phraseology. Happiness may, or may not, be the
highest of all ultimate ends, the one to which all others should give
way. But it seems to me quite misleading to call it the only one.
To describe the sensual man, the vain man, the merely selfish man,
the miser, the ascetic, the man moved by rational self-love, the man
absorbed in the task of “self-realisation,” the man consumed by the
passion for posthumous fame, as all pursuing the same egoistic end
by different means, is surely to confuse distinctions of great moral
importance without any gain of scientific clarity. In like manner,
to suppose that the man who spends himself in the service (say) of
his family, his country, or his church, is only striving for the
“happiness” of the human race, or of certain selected members of the
human race, is (it seems to me) to ignore the plain teaching of daily
experience. As there are many egoistic ends besides our own happiness,
so there are many altruistic ends besides the happiness of others.
The extended sense, therefore, in which I employ these terms seems
justified by facts.


II

I shall not attempt to determine the point at which we can first
clearly discriminate between the “egoistic” and “altruistic” elements
in animal instinct. Evidently, however, it is anterior to and
independent of any conceptual recognition either of an _ego_ or an
_alter_. It might be argued that there is an altruistic element in the
most egoistic instincts. Eating, multiplying, fighting, and running
away—acts plainly directed towards preserving and satisfying the
individual—also conduce to the preservation of the race. But, however
this may be, the converse is certainly untrue. There are altruistic
instincts into which no element of egoism enters. Of these the most
important is parental, especially maternal, love: the most amazing
are the impulses which regulate the complex polity of (for example) a
hive of bees. In these cases one organism will work or fight or endure
for others: it will sacrifice its life for its offspring, or for the
commonwealth of which it is a member. Egoism is wholly lost in altruism.

Now, I suppose that, in the order of causation, all these animal
instincts, be they egoistic or altruistic, must be treated as
contrivances for aiding a species in the struggle for existence.
If _anything_ be due to selection, surely _these_ must be. This is
plainly true of the egoistic appetites and impulses on which depend
the maintenance of life and its propagation. It must also be true of
the altruistic instincts. Take, for instance, the case of parental
devotion. Its survival value is clearly immense. The higher animals, as
at present constituted, could not exist without it; and though, for all
we can say to the contrary, development might have followed a different
course, and a race not less effectively endowed than man might flourish
though parental care played no greater part in the life-history of its
members than it does in the life-history of a herring, yet this is
not what has actually happened. Altruistic effort, in the world as we
know it, is as essential to the higher organisms as the self-regarding
instincts and appetites are to organic life in general; and there seems
no reason for attributing to it a different origin.

Can this be said with a like confidence about the higher portions of
the ethical scale? Are these also due to selection?

Evidently the difference between primitive instincts and developed
morality is immense; and it is as great in the egoistic as in the
non-egoistic region of ethics. Ideals of conduct, the formulation of
ends, judgments of their relative worth, actions based on principles,
deliberate choice between alternative policies, the realised
distinction between the self and other personalities or other centres
of feeling— all these are involved in developed morality, while in
animal ethics they exist not at all, or only in the most rudimentary
forms.

Compare, for instance, a society of bees and a society of men. In both
there is division of labour; in both there is organised effort towards
an end which is other and greater than the individual good of any
single member of the community. But though there are these deep-lying
resemblances between the two cases, how important are the differences
which divide them! In the bee-hive altruism is obeyed, but not chosen.
Alternative ends are not contrasted. No member of the community thinks
that it could do something different from, and more agreeable than, the
inherited task. Nor in truth could it. General interest and individual
interest are never opposed, for they are never distinguished. The agent
never compares, and therefore never selects.

Far different are the ethical conditions requiring consideration
when we turn from bees to men. Here egoism and altruism are not only
distinguished in reflection; they may be, and often are, incompatible
in practice. Nor does this conflict of ends only show itself _between_
these two great ethical divisions; it is not less apparent _within_
them. Here, then, we find ourselves in a world of moral conflict very
faintly foreshadowed in animal ethics. For us, ultimate ends are many.
They may reinforce each other, or they may weaken each other. They may
harmonise, or they may clash. Personal ends may prove incompatible with
group ends: one group end may prove incompatible with another. Loyalty
may be ranged against loyalty, altruism against altruism; nor is there
any court of appeal which can decide between them.

But there are yet other differences between the ethics of instinct
and the ethics of reflection. Instincts are (relatively) definite and
stable; they move in narrow channels; they cannot easily be enlarged
in scope, or changed in character. The animal mother, for example,
cares for its young children, but never for its young grandchildren.
The lifelong fidelity of the parent birds in certain species (a
fidelity seemingly independent of the pairing season, or the care of
particular broods) never becomes the nucleus of a wider association.
Altruistic instincts may lead to actions which equal, or surpass,
man’s highest efforts of abnegation; but the actions are matters of
routine, and the instincts never vary. They emerge in the same form at
the same stage of individual growth, like any other attribute of the
species—its colour, for instance, or its claws. And if they be, like
colour and claws, the products of selection, this is exactly what we
should expect. But then, if the loyalties of man be also the product of
selection, why do they not show a similar fixity?

Plainly they do _not_. Man inherits the capacity for loyalty, but not
the use to which he shall put it. The persons and causes (if any) to
which he shall devote himself are suggested to him, often, indeed,
imposed upon him, by education and environment. Nevertheless, they are
his by choice, not by hereditary compulsion. And his choice may be bad.
He may unselfishly devote himself to what is petty or vile, as he may
to what is generous and noble. But on the possibility of error depends
the possibility of progress; and if (to borrow a phrase from physics)
our loyalty possessed as few “degrees of freedom” as that of ants or
bees, our social organisation would be as rigid.

The most careless glance at the pages of history, or the world of
our own experience, will show how varied are the forms in which this
capacity for loyalty is displayed. The Spartans at Thermopylæ,
the “Blues” and the “Greens” at Byzantium, rival politicians in a
hard-fought election, players and spectators at an Eton and Harrow
Match, supply familiar illustrations of its variety and vigour. And do
not suppose that in thus bringing together the sublime, the familiar,
and the trivial, I am paradoxically associating matters essentially
disparate. This is not so. I am not putting on a moral level the
patriot and the partisan, the martyr to some great cause and the
shouting spectator at a school match. What I am insisting on is that
they all have loyalty in common; a loyalty which often is, and always
may be, pure from egoistic alloy.

Loyalties, then, which are characteristically human differ profoundly
from those which are characteristically animal. The latter are due to
instincts which include both the end to be sought for and the means by
which it is to be attained. The former are rooted in a general capacity
for, or inclination to, loyalty, with little inherited guidance either
as to ends or means. Yet, if we accept selection as the source of
the first, we can hardly reject it as the source of the second. For
the survival value of loyalty is manifest. It lies at the root of
all effective co-operation. Without it the family and tribe would be
impossible; and without the family and the tribe, or some yet higher
organisation, men, if they could exist at all, would be more helpless
than cattle, weak against the alien forces of nature, at the mercy of
human foes more capable of loyalty than themselves. A more powerful aid
in the struggle for existence cannot easily be imagined.

We are indeed apt to forget how important are its consequences, even
when it supplies no more than a faint qualification of other and more
obvious motives. It acts like those alloys which, in doses relatively
minute, add strength and elasticity even to steel. The relation (for
example) between a commercial company and its officials is essentially
a business one. The employer pays the market price for honesty and
competence, and has no claim to more. Yet that company is surely either
unfortunate or undeserving whose servants are wholly indifferent to
its fortunes, feeling no faintest flicker of pride when it succeeds,
no tinge of regret when it fails. Honourable is the tie between those
who exchange honest wage and honest work; yet loyalty can easily better
it. And a like truth is manifest in spheres of action less reputable
than those of commerce. Mercenaries, to be worth hiring, must be partly
moved by forces higher than punishment or pay. Even pirates could not
plunder with profit were their selfishness unredeemed by some slight
tincture of reciprocal loyalty.

There are, however, many who would admit the occasional importance of
loyalty while strenuously denying that social life was wholly based
upon it. For them society is an invention; of all inventions the most
useful, but still only an invention. It was (they think) originally
devised by individuals in their individual interest; and, though
common action was the machinery employed, personal advantage was the
end desired. By enlightened egoism social organisation was created;
by enlightened egoism it is maintained and improved. Contrivance,
therefore, not loyalty, is the master faculty required.

This is a great delusion—quite unsupported by anything we know or can
plausibly conjecture about the history of mankind. No one, indeed,
doubts that deliberate adaptation of means to ends has helped to
create, and is constantly modifying, human societies; nor yet that
egoism has constantly perverted political and social institutions to
merely private uses. But there is something more fundamental to be
borne in mind, namely, that without loyalty there would be no societies
to modify, and no institutions to pervert. If these were merely
well-designed instruments like steam-engines and telegraphs, they would
be worthless. They would perish at the first shock, did they not at
once fall into ruin by their own weight. If they are to be useful as
means, they must first impose themselves as ends; they must possess
a quality beyond the reach of contrivance: the quality of commanding
disinterested service and uncalculating devotion.


III

I should therefore be ready to admit, as a plausible conjecture, that
the capacity for altruistic emotions and beliefs is a direct product
of organic evolution; an attribute preserved and encouraged, because
it is useful to the race, and transmitted from parents to offspring
by physiological inheritance. On this theory loyalty in some shape
or other is as natural to man as maternal affection is natural to
mammals. Doubtless it is more variable in strength, more flexible in
direction, more easily smothered by competing egoisms; but the capacity
for it is not less innate, and not less necessary in the struggle for
existence. But when we ask how far selection has been responsible for
the development of high altruistic ideals out of primitive forms of
loyalty, we touch on problems of much greater complexity. Evidently
there has been a profound moral transformation in the course of ages.
None suppose that ethical values are appraised in the twentieth century
as they were in the first stone age. But what has caused the change is
not so clear.

There are obvious, and, I think, insurmountable difficulties in
attributing it to organic selection. Selection is of the fittest—of
the fittest to survive. But in what consists this particular kind of
fitness? The answer from the biological point of view is quite simple:
almost a matter of definition. That race is “fit” which maintains
its numbers; and that race is fittest which most increases them. The
judge of such “fitness” is not the moralist or the statesman. It is
the Registrar-General. So little is “fitness” inseparably attached to
excellence, that it would be rash to say that there is any quality,
however unattractive, which might not in conceivable circumstances
assist survival. High authorities, I believe, hold that at this moment
in Britain we have so managed matters that congenital idiots increase
faster than any other class of the population. If so, they must be
deemed the “fittest” of our countrymen. No doubt this fact, if it be
a fact, is an accident of our social system. Legislation has produced
this happy adaptation of environment to organism, and legislation might
destroy it. The fittest to-day might become the unfittest to-morrow.
But this is nothing to the purpose. That part of man’s environment
which is due to man does no doubt usually vary more quickly than the
part which is due to nature; none the less is it environment in the
strictest sense of the word. The theory of selection draws no essential
distinction between (say) the secular congelation of a continent in
the ice age, and the workings of the English Poor Law in the twentieth
century. It is enough that each, while it lasts, favours or discourages
particular heritable variations, and modifies the qualities that make
for “survival.”

What is more important, however, than the fact that heritable “fitness”
may be completely divorced from mental and moral excellence, is the
fact that so large a part of man’s mental and moral characteristics are
not heritable at all, and cannot therefore be directly due to organic
selection. Races may accumulate accomplishments, yet remain organically
unchanged. They may learn and they may forget, they may rise from
barbarism to culture, and sink back from culture to barbarism, while
through all these revolutions the raw material of their humanity
varies never a bit. In such cases there can be no question of Natural
Selection in the sense in which biologists use the term.

And there are other considerations which suggest that, as development
proceeds, the forces of organic selection diminish. While man was in
the making we may easily believe that those possessing no congenital
instinct for loyalty failed, and that failure involved elimination.
In such circumstances, the hereditary instinct would become an
inbred characteristic of the race. But in a civilised, or even in
a semi-civilised, world, the success of one competitor has rarely
involved the extinction of the other—at least by mere slaughter. When
extinction has followed defeat, it has been due rather to the gradual
effects of disease and hardship, or to other causes more obscure, but
not less deadly. The endless struggles between tribes, cities, nations,
and races, have in the main been struggles for domination, not for
existence. Slavery, not death, has been the penalty of failure; and
if domination has produced a change in the inherited type, it is not
because the conquered has perished before the conqueror, but because,
conquest having brought them together, the two have intermarried.
There is thus no close or necessary connection between biological
“fitness” and military or political success. The beaten race, whose
institutions or culture perish, may be the race which in fact survives;
while victors who firmly establish their language, religion, and polity
may, after a few centuries, leave scarce a trace behind them of any
heritable characteristics which the anthropologist is able to detect.

This observation, however, suggests a new point. Is there not, you may
ask, a “struggle for existence” between non-heritable acquirements
which faintly resembles the biological struggle between individuals
or species? Religious systems, political organisations, speculative
creeds, industrial inventions, national policies, scientific
generalisations, and (what specially concerns us now) ethical ideals,
are in perpetual competition and conflict. Some maintain themselves
or expand. These are, by definition, the “fit.” Some wane or perish.
These are, by definition, the unfit. Here we find selection, survival,
elimination; and, though we see them at work in quite other regions of
reality than those explored by the student of organic evolution, the
analogy between the two cases is obvious.

But is the analogy more than superficial? Is it relevant to our present
argument? Can it explain either the spread of higher moral ideals or
their development? Let us consider for a moment some examples of this
psychological “struggle for existence.” Take, as a simple case, the
competition between rival inventions—between the spinning-jenny and the
hand-loom, the breech-loader and the muzzle-loader, pre-Listerian and
post-Listerian methods of surgery. Unless the environment be strongly
charged with prejudice, ignorance, or sinister interests, the “fittest”
in such cases is that which best serves its purpose. Measurable
efficiency is the quality which wins. But this supplies us with no
useful analogy when we are dealing with ethics. Morality, as I have
already insisted, is not an invention designed to serve an external
purpose. The “struggle for existence” between higher and lower ethical
ideals has no resemblance to the struggle between the spinning-jenny
and the hand-loom. It is a struggle between ends, not between means.
Efficiency is not in question.

A like observation applies to that quality of our beliefs which might
be described as “argumentative plausibility.” This is to abstract
theorising what efficiency is to practical invention. It has survival
value. Both, of course, are relative terms, whose application varies
with circumstances. An invention is only efficient while the commodity
it produces is in demand. A theory is only plausible while it hits off
the intellectual temper of the day. But if efficiency and plausibility
be thus understood, the more efficient invention and the more plausible
doctrine will oust their less favoured rivals. They are the “fittest.”
But as morality is not a means, so neither is it a conclusion. Whatever
be its relation to Reason, _reasoning_ can never determine the
essential nature of its contents. Plausibility, therefore, is no more
in question than efficiency.

I do not, of course, deny that ethics are always under discussion,
or that the basis of moral rules and their application are themes of
unending controversy. This is plainly true. But it is also true that
there is no argumentative method of shaking any man’s allegiance to
an end which he deems intrinsically worthy, except by showing it to
be inconsistent with some other end which _he_ (not you) deems more
worthy still. Dialectic can bring into clear consciousness the implicit
beliefs which underlie action, but it cannot either prove them or
refute them. It is as untrue to say that there is no disputing about
morals as to say that there is no disputing about tastes. But also it
is as true; and the truth, properly understood, is fundamental.

What pass for opposing arguments are really rival appeals; and it is
interesting to observe that the appeal which, to the unreflecting,
seems the most rational is the appeal to selfishness. I am told[6]
that on any fine Sunday afternoon in some of our big towns you may
find an orator asking why any man should love his country. “What,”
he inquires, “does a man get by it? Will national success bring
either to himself or to any of his hearers more food, more drink, more
amusements? If not, why make personal sacrifices for what will never
confer personal advantage?” To this particular question it might be
replied (though not always with truth) that the antithesis is a false
one, and that on the whole the selfish ideal and the patriotic ideal
are both promoted by the same policy of public service. But there is
another question of the same type to which no such answer is possible.
We have all heard it, either in jest or in earnest. “Why” (it is asked)
“should we do anything for posterity, seeing that posterity will do
nothing for us?” The implication is infamous, but the statement is
true. We cannot extract from posterity an equivalent for the sacrifices
we make on its behalf. These are debts that will never be recovered.
The unborn cannot be sued; the dead cannot be repaid. But what then?
Altruism is not based on egoism; it is not egoism in disguise. The ends
to which it points are ends in themselves; and their value is quite
independent of argument, neither capable of proof nor requiring it.

In what, then, consists the psychological (as distinguished from
the organic) “fitness” of the higher moral ideals? If it cannot be
found in their practical efficiency, nor yet in their argumentative
plausibility, where shall we seek it?

Sometimes, no doubt, the explanation is to be found in their
association with a culture, other elements of which do possess both
these kinds of “fitness.” Thus Western morality—or (to be accurate)
Western notions of morality—find favour with backward races, because
they are associated with Western armaments and Western arts. Again,
they may be diffused, perhaps as part of some militant religion, by the
power of the sword or by its prestige. They reach new regions in the
train of a conqueror, and willingly or unwillingly the conquered accept
them.

But these associations are seemingly quite casual. The prestige of
Western arts and science may assist the diffusion of Western morals,
as it assists the diffusion of Western languages, or Western clothes.
Conquests by Mahommedan or Christian States may substitute a higher
for a lower ethical creed in this or that region of the world. Such
cases, however, leave us still in the realm of accident. The causes
thus assigned for the spread of a particular type of ethical ideal
have nothing to do with the quality of that type. They would promote
bad morals not less effectively than good; as a hose will, with equal
ease, scatter dirty water or clean. Moreover, the growth of the higher
type in its place of origin is left wholly unexplained. Its “fitness”
seems a mere matter of luck due neither to design nor to any natural
imitation of design.

The rigour of this conclusion would be little mitigated even if
we could connect psychological fitness with some quite non-moral
peculiarity habitually associated with the higher morality, but not
with the lower. If, for example, the former were found to lead normally
to worldly success, its repute would need no further explanation. If,
in private life, those endowed with Sir Charles Grandison’s merits
usually possessed Sir Charles Grandison’s estate, if, in political or
national life, victory and virtue went ever hand in hand, morality
might be none the better, but certainly it would be more the fashion.
Heaven would be wearied with prayers for an unselfish spirit, uttered
by suppliants from purely selfish motives. Saints would become the
darlings of society, and the book of Job would be still unwritten.[7]

I can devise no more extravagant hypothesis. But though, if it were
true, the “fitness” of the higher morality might seem to have found an
explanation, it is not the explanation we require. It is too external.
It gives no account of the appeal which the nobler ends of action make
to our judgments of intrinsic value. It suggests the way in which a
higher ideal might increase the number of its possessors at the expense
of a lower, but not the way in which the higher ideal might itself
arise. Indeed, we must go further. Few are the moralists who would
maintain that indifference to worldly triumphs was not, on the whole,
a bar to their attainment. Few are the biologists who would maintain
that care and kindness, lavished on the biologically unfit, will never
tend to diminish the relative number of the biologically fit. But,
if so, we must agree with Nietzsche in thinking that ethical values
have become “denaturalised.” In their primitive forms the products of
selection, they have, by a kind of internal momentum, overpassed their
primitive purpose. Made by nature for a natural object, they have
developed along lines which are certainly independent of selection,
perhaps in opposition to it. And though not as remote from their first
manifestations as is the æsthetic of men from the æsthetic of monkeys,
no evolutionary explanation will bridge the interval. If we treat
the Sermon on the Mount as a naturalistic product, it is as much an
evolutionary accident as _Hamlet_ or the Ninth Symphony.


IV

In what setting, then, are we to place morality so that these
“denaturalised” values may be retained? Can we be content to regard
the highest loyalties, the most devoted love, the most limitless
self-abnegation as the useless excesses of a world-system, which in its
efforts to adapt organism to environment has overshot its mark?

I deem it impossible. The naturalistic setting must be expanded into
one which shall give the higher ethics an origin congruous with their
character. Selection must be treated as an instrument of purpose,
not simply as its mimic. Theistic teleology must be substituted for
Naturalism. Thus, and thus only, can moral values, as it seems to me,
be successfully maintained.

This would not, I suppose, have been denied by Nietzsche and
Nietzsche’s predecessors in revolt. On the contrary, they would admit
the interdependence of morals and religion, as these are commonly
understood in Christendom, and they would condemn both. It would,
however, have been vehemently denied by agnostics like Huxley; for
Huxley accepted, broadly speaking, Christian ethics, while refusing to
accept the Christian, or, indeed, any other form of theology.

In my opinion, this position is not permanently tenable. I do not mean
that it involves a logical contradiction. I do mean that it involves
an emotional and doctrinal incompatibility of a very fundamental
kind. And this is a defect which may be even more fatal than logical
contradiction to the stability of ethical beliefs.

For what was Huxley’s position? His condemnation of evolutionary ethics
was far more violent than my own. He states categorically that “What
is ethically best involves conduct which in all respects is opposed
to that which leads to success in the cosmic struggle for existence.”
On a biological question I differ from him with misgiving; but, as
I have already urged, selection may plausibly be credited with the
earlier stages of the noblest virtues. I cannot think that the mother
who sacrifices herself for her child, the clansman who dies for his
chief, the generation which suffers for the sake of its posterity,
are indulging in “conduct which is in all respects opposed to that
which leads to success in the cosmic struggle for existence.” But,
whether Huxley be right on this point or I, it is surely impossible
for the mass of mankind to maintain, at the cost of much personal
loss, an ideal of conduct which science tells us is not merely an
evolutionary accident, but an evolutionary mistake; something which
was, and is, contrary to the whole trend of the cosmic process which
brought us into being, and made us what we are. It requires but a small
knowledge of history to show how easily mankind idealises nature;
witness such phrases as “the return to nature,” the “state of nature,”
“natural rights,” “natural law,” and so forth. Appeals founded upon
these notions have proved powerful, even when they ran counter to
individualistic selfishness. When the two are in alliance, how can they
be resisted? Is it possible for the ordinary man to maintain undimmed
his altruistic ideals if he thinks Nature is against them?—unless,
indeed he also believes that God is on their side?


V

Here are questions raised to which there is no parallel in the case
of æsthetics. Doubtless differences of æsthetic judgment abound; but
they do not produce difficulties quite matching those due to the
collision of incompatible ends; nor is their solution so important. On
this subject I must say a few words before bringing this lecture to a
conclusion.

Possible collisions between ends are many, for ends themselves
are many. And of these ends some are in their very nature
irreconcilable;—based on essential differences which reflection only
makes more apparent, and moral growth more profound.

Now these collisions are not always between altruism and egoism.
Often they are between different forms of altruism—call them, if you
please, the positive form and the negative. Enmity, hate, cruelty,
tyranny, and all that odious brood whose end and object is the pain
and abasement of others are not intrinsically egoistic. Though they be
the vilest of all passions, yet they do not necessarily involve any
taint of selfish alloy. Often as disinterested as the most devoted
love or the most single-minded loyalty, they may demand no smaller
sacrifices on the part of those whom they inspire, and the demand may
be not less willingly obeyed. It is, perhaps, worth observing that
these altruistic ends, the positive and the negative, the benevolent
and the malevolent, irreconcilably opposed as they are in moral theory,
have often been associated in ethical practice. Family affection has in
many half-civilised communities produced the binding custom of family
vendetta. Political loyalty, which has blossomed into some of the
noblest forms of positive altruism, has also bred cruelty and hatred
against those who are outside the pale of the tribe, the state, the
party, or the creed. The brightest light has cast the deepest shadows.
To torture and enslave, not because it brings profit to the victor, but
because it brings pain to the vanquished, has, through long ages, been
deemed a fitting sequel to victories born of the most heroic courage
and the noblest self-sacrifice; while no small part of moral progress
has consisted in expelling this perverted altruism from the accepted
ideals of civilised mankind.

Egoism is far more reputable. The agent’s own good, considered
in itself, is, what negative altruism can never be, a perfectly
legitimate object of endeavour. When, therefore, there is a collision
between egoism and positive altruism, problems of real difficulty
may arise; the competing ends may both have value, and the need for
a reconciliation, practical as well as speculative, of necessity
impresses both moralists and legislators.

In practice the evils of this conflict arise largely from the fact
that the end which has most worth has too often least power. This
is not surprising if the account of ethical evolution, which I have
provisionally adopted in this lecture, be near the truth. For the
extra-regarding instincts are of later birth than the self-regarding.
All animals look after themselves. Only the more developed look also
after others. The germ of what, in reflection, becomes egoism is of far
earlier growth than the germ of what, in reflection, becomes altruism.
Being more primitive, it is more deeply rooted in our nature; and, even
when recognised as morally lower, it tends, when there is conflict, to
prevail over its rival. “The evil that I would not, that I do.”

Now this result has, as we all know, serious social consequences. Even
the least stable society must be organised on some firm framework
of custom, rule, and law; and these, in their turn, must find their
main support in the willing loyalty of the general community.
But, though loyalty is the great essential, it is not sufficient.
Legislators, lawyers, moralists, all agree that in the collision
between ends—especially between egoistic and altruistic ends—it is
not always the highest end as judged by the agent himself, still less
the highest end as measured by the standards of the community, which
finally prevails. Therefore must law and custom have the support of
sanctions: sanctions being nothing else than devices for bringing a
lower motive to the aid of a higher, and so producing better conduct,
if not[8] better morals. Public approval and disapproval, the jailer
and the hangman, heaven and hell, are familiar examples. Can they in
any true sense effect a reconciliation between discordant ends, and,
in particular, between altruism and egoism? I hardly think so. When
they are effective they doubtless diminish ethical conflict; but it
is by ignoring the intrinsic value of one set of ethical ends. In so
far as we are honest because honesty is the best policy, in so far as
we do not injure lest we should ourselves be injured, in so far as we
benefit that we may be benefited ourselves—just in that proportion we
treat altruistic actions merely as the means of attaining egoistic
ends. The two competitors are not reconciled, but a working arrangement
is reached under which the conduct appropriate to the higher ideal is
pursued from motives characteristic of the lower.

Is any truer reconciliation possible? Scarcely, as I think, without
religion. I do not suggest that _any_ religious theory gets rid of
ethical anomalies, or theoretically lightens by a feather-weight the
heavy problem of evil. But I do suggest that in the love of God by
the individual soul, the collision of ends _for that soul_ loses all
its harshness, and harmony is produced by raising, not lowering, the
ethical ideal.

Kant, by a famous feat of speculative audacity, sought to extract a
proof of God’s existence from the moral law. In his view the moral law
requires us to hold that those who are good will also in the end be
happy; and, since without God this expectation cannot be fulfilled,
the being of God becomes a postulate of morality. Is this (you may
ask), or any variant of this, the argument suggested in the last
paragraph? It is not. In Kant’s argument, as I understand it, God was
external to morality in the sense that He was not Himself a moral
end. It was not our feeling of love and loyalty to Him that was of
moment, but His guidance of the world in the interests of virtue and
the virtuous. My point is different. I find in the love of God a moral
end which reconciles other moral ends, because it includes them. It
is not intolerant of desires for our own good. It demands their due
subordination, not their complete suppression. It implies loyal service
to One who by His essential nature wills the good of all. It requires,
therefore, that the good of all shall be an object of our endeavour;
and it promises that, in striving for this inclusive end, we shall, in
Pauline phrase, be fellow-workers with Him.

I will not further pursue this theme. Its development is plainly
inappropriate to these lectures, which are not directly concerned with
personal religion. In any case, this portion of my argument, though
important, is subsidiary. My main contention rests, not upon the
difficulty of harmonising moral ends in a Godless universe, but upon
the difficulty of maintaining moral values if moral origins are purely
naturalistic. That they never have been so maintained on any large
scale is a matter of historic fact. At no time has the mass of mankind
treated morals and religion as mutually independent. They have left
this to the enlightened; and the enlightened have (as I think) been
wrong.

They have been wrong through their omission to face the full results of
their own theories. If the most we can say for morality on the causal
side is that it is the product of non-moral, and ultimately of material
agents, guided up to a certain point by selection, and thereafter left
the sport of chance, a sense of humour, if nothing else, should prevent
us wasting fine language on the splendour of the moral law and the
reverential obedience owed it by mankind. That debt will not long be
paid if morality comes to be generally regarded as the causal effect
of petty causes; comparable in its lowest manifestations with the
appetites and terrors which rule, for their good, the animal creation;
in its highest phases no more than a personal accomplishment, to be
acquired or neglected at the bidding of individual caprice. More than
this is needful if the noblest ideals are not to lose all power of
appeal. Ethics must have its roots in the divine; and in the divine it
must find its consummation.


FOOTNOTES:

[6] Written in 1913.

[7] Doubtless under such circumstances ideal virtue might also have
survival value in the biological sense.

[8] Indirectly, no doubt, sanctions may perform a most important
educational work in stimulating and guiding the higher loyalties. The
approval or disapproval of our fellows, the “terrors of the law,” the
belief in future rewards and punishments, though their immediate appeal
is only to self-interest, may powerfully aid in the creation of moral
judgments sufficiently free from any “empirical elements of desire” to
have satisfied Kant himself.




