PART IV

_SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION_




LECTURE X

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION


I

Now that we have reached our closing lecture, those who have followed
the course from the beginning may, on looking back, find themselves
somewhat bewildered by the variety of subjects which I have asked
them to consider. Art, History, Morals, the Theory of Probability,
the Logic of Perception, the presuppositions of Science, have all
been touched on. Themes that might fill volumes—nay, that have filled
volumes—are made the text for an hour’s discourse. Introduced one after
the other with breathless rapidity, each for a moment has been shown
under the limelight, and then hurried off the stage to make room for
its successor. It seems hard to believe that with such diversity of
materials there can be continuity of argument. But the critic who would
judge the matter fairly must bear in mind the title of the course,
and the purpose for which it has been delivered. My desire has been
to show that all we think best in human culture, whether associated
with beauty, goodness, or knowledge, requires God for its support,
that Humanism without Theism loses more than half its value. Though,
therefore, the subjects discussed are embarrassing in their variety,
no diminution of their number seems possible. The argument would have
broken down had I confined myself to a narrower scope—had I, for
example, been content to show the importance of Theism for morality,
leaving untouched its importance for science and æsthetic. Such a
limitation would have shattered the whole design. No doubt there are
precedents for such a procedure. Kant, for instance, kept God out of
the critique which dealt with ordinary knowledge, while giving Him a
place of honour in the critique which dealt with the moral law. But
the procedure has always seemed to me singularly artificial, even in a
philosophy which is artificial through and through. In any case, such
a limitation is quite inconsistent with the scheme of these lectures.
This could not be accomplished by setting up a departmental Deity—even
were his department the whole province of ethics. Right conduct is
much, but it is not all. We not only act, but we know, and we admire;
nor could I be quite content with any form of Theism which did not
sustain in every essential part the full circle of human interests.


II

But when all explanations have been given, and all excuses made,
I am well aware that in the actual presentation of my case I have
introduced so much illustrative material, and of this material so much
is disputable, that some of my hearers may feel themselves distracted
rather than enlightened by the number of seemingly subsidiary points
of which they are asked to take account. I trust such persons are in a
minority; and that, on the whole, my main contention will seem enriched
and strengthened, not embarrassed or confused, by the manner of its
exposition. Nevertheless, it may not be amiss, before I bring the
course to an end, to restate the most important points in the general
case I have endeavoured to present.

The root principle which, by its constant recurrence in slightly
different forms, binds together, like an operatic leit-motif, the
most diverse material, is that if we would maintain the value of
our highest beliefs and emotions, we must find for them a congruous
origin. Beauty must be more than an accident. The source of morality
must be moral. The source of knowledge must be rational. If this be
granted, you rule out Mechanism, you rule out Naturalism, you rule out
Agnosticism; and a lofty form of Theism becomes, as I think, inevitable.

It is, I imagine, the application of this method to knowledge which
will be most generally resented by those who refuse to acknowledge its
validity. In the case of beauty, for example, the point will seem of
small importance to those for whom art means little. It may not greatly
impress many of those for whom art means much. For it proclaims no new
canons of taste. It belittles no æsthetic school. It asks no critic to
revise his judgments. It touches the interests neither of artist nor
author. It may well be ignored.

With ethics the case is somewhat different. There are, no doubt,
sceptics in religion who treat scepticism as a luxury which can be
safely enjoyed only by the few. Religion they think good for morals;
morals they think good for society; society they think good for
themselves. Such persons may well treat the opinions expressed in
the lecture on ethics with benevolent disagreement. But there are
more robust thinkers who will not be so lenient. They will reject as
intolerable the idea that the morality they desire to preserve depends
on a religion they desire to destroy; and any doctrine which, like
the present, binds the two more closely together will encounter their
uncompromising hostility.

Nevertheless, it is the lectures dealing with intellectual values that
will rouse, as I suppose, the most serious opposition. The endeavour
to treat our beliefs about the world and our beliefs about God as
interdependent will seem to many extravagant, even unnatural. It will
be urged that, for all reasonable beings, reason must be the supreme
judge in matters of belief. It can neither resign its office nor
delegate its authority. Let it then endorse Science, as it must; and
establish Theism, if it can; but do not require it to commit the folly
of treating truths about which opinions are agreed as dependent on
conjectures about which opinions are divided.

This may be excellent advice; but it is hardly to the point. I ask
for nothing better than the supremacy of reason: not one of its
prerogatives do I desire to curtail. Indeed (as I have already
complained) it is the agnostic empiricists who most obstinately shrink
from following it to conclusions they dislike, who mutiny, like some
old-time mariners, whenever they are required to navigate unfamiliar
seas.

I have no sympathy with the singular combination of intellectual
arrogance and intellectual timidity so often presented by this
particular school of thought. I like it no better than I like the
attitude of those who declare that, since reason is bankrupt, authority
should take over its liabilities, however small be the prospect of
discharging them in full. My point of view is utterly different. And if
I urge that the criticism of common knowledge brings us ultimately to
Theism, this involves no intolerable paradox, nor indeed anything very
new or strange.

Descartes, for example, thought that all knowledge was based on clear
and distinct ideas, and that clear and distinct ideas could be trusted
because, being due to God, they were guaranteed by His truthfulness.
That there is a God possessing every perfection was independently
established by an _a priori_ argument into which I need not enter. But
the point of interest is that, though Descartes conceived himself to
have found a refuge from scepticism in the famous “I think, therefore I
am,” he could only get from this narrow assurance to general knowledge
by the use of “clear and distinct ideas” certified by divine veracity.
If, therefore, belief in one’s self was the first of truths, belief in
God was the second; and on this second truth all subordinate beliefs,
mathematical, physical, and metaphysical, were, in his opinion,
ultimately founded. In one sense, and from one point of view, this
is no doubt an exact inversion of the argument developed in these
lectures. Descartes rests the belief in science on a belief in God. I
rest the belief in God on a belief in science. Nevertheless, beneath
this contrast there is deep-lying agreement. Both views reject the
notion that we possess in the general body of common-sense assumptions
and scientific truths a creed self-sufficing and independent, to
which we may add at our pleasure Theism in such doses as suit our
intellectual palate. Both views, therefore, are profoundly divided, not
merely from all that calls itself agnostic, but from much that calls
itself religious.

I must not, however, press the parallel too far. Descartes did not,
and could not, regard our beliefs as a developing system, which is
not merely increasing by external accretion, like a crystal in its
mother-liquid, but is growing and changing through and through like
a living organism. Such conceptions were not of his age or country,
nor, if they had been, could they have been easily accommodated to
his peculiar genius. His was the mathematical temperament, always
striving for precise definitions and rigorous proof; always tolerant
of any simplification of the concrete complexities of reality, which
would make them amenable to deductive treatment. Of this, as a method,
we need make no complaint. Within due limits it is invaluable. But
Descartes, so to speak, “objectified” it. He assumed that any judgment
which could properly be described as “clear and distinct” was not only
convenient in form, but true in substance. The world, alas! is not so
made. The things which are clear and distinct are usually things of
our own creation. Definitions, abstractions, diagrams, syllogisms,
machines—such and such like are, or may be, “clear and distinct.” But
the great facts which we have not made—these, at our present level of
knowledge, are never clear and never distinct. Life, the organism,
the self, the state, the world, freedom, causality, the flow of time,
the relation between mind and body, between perceiver and perceived,
between consciousness and sub-consciousness, between person and person
(I say nothing of beauty, of virtue, or of God)—who is there will dare
to say that he either finds in these notions, or can put into them
without injury, the qualities which Descartes deemed the inevitable
marks of real and certain knowledge? Truth, for us, is a plant of
a different and of a slower growth. How much indeed of that growth
consists in discovering that what we thought was clear is in fact
obscure; what we thought was simple is in fact complex; what we thought
was distinct is in fact confused; and how helpful are such discoveries
to the augmentation of learning!

However this may be, there is nothing in the doctrine of “congruity”
which should shock those who are jealous for the supremacy of reason
and the dignity of science. It is science itself which assures us that
all premises, all conclusions, and all the logical links by which they
are connected must be regarded as natural products. It is science
itself which assures us that they belong, like all natural products, to
the tissue of causes and effects whose lengthening web is continuously
thrown off by the loom of time. It is science itself which requires us
to harmonise these two aspects of the knowing process—the one logical
and timeless; the other causal and successive.

But how are they to be harmonised if the causal series is fundamentally
non-rational? Suppose yourself able to observe the development
of beliefs in some alien being (say an inhabitant of Mars) as a
bacteriologist observes a growing colony of microbes: suppose, further,
that your observation showed how these beliefs arose from causes which
had in them no tincture of reason, and that, so far as you could see,
they were quite unsupported by any independent evidence which—_for
you_—had weight or even meaning. Would you rate their value high?
Surely not.

Now it is quite true that when we examine our own system of beliefs
we cannot imitate this attitude of complete detachment, since in the
very act of examination some of these beliefs are assumed. But we
_can_ examine the beliefs of other people, and we _do_, as a matter of
common-sense practice, rate low the value of the beliefs whose sources
we perceive to be non-rational. How, then, can we refuse to apply to
ourselves a principle of judgment which we thus apply without scruple
to our neighbours?

Whenever we do so apply it, we shall, I think, be forced to admit
that all creeds which refuse to see an intelligent purpose behind the
unthinking powers of material nature are intrinsically incoherent. In
the order of causation they base reason upon unreason. In the order of
logic they involve conclusions which discredit their own premises. Nor
is there, as far as I can see, any mitigation of this condemnation to
be looked for except by appealing to the principle of Selection. And
how far will this help us out of the difficulty?

Just so far as an imitation of intelligent purpose can be a substitute
for its reality, but no further. And how far is this? At first sight
we might suppose that, at the worst, the cognitive series and the
causal series might be harmonised on the basis of natural selection if
knowledge never aspired to rise above the level which promoted race
survival, if no faculties of knowing were trusted beyond the point
where they ceased effectively to foster the multiplication of the
species. Up to this point it would seem that, if selection be true,
there is congruity between beliefs and their origin. The sequence of
events which brought them into being suggests no doubt about their
value. This scheme of thought, therefore, though narrowly restricted,
is apparently coherent.

Yet even this modest claim must be deemed excessive: for the
speculation on which it rests does violence to its own principles.
Manifestly we cannot indulge ourselves in reflections upon the
limits of the “knowable” without using our intellect for a purpose
never contemplated by selection. I do not allege that our intellect
is therefore unequal to the task. I only say that, if it be indeed
equal to it, we are in the presence of a very surprising coincidence.
Why should faculties, “designed” only to help primitive man, or his
animal progenitors, successfully to breed and feed, be fitted to solve
philosophic problems so useless and so remote? Why, indeed, do such
problems occur to us? Why do we long for their solution?

To such questions Naturalism can neither find an answer nor be content
without one. Wearied with unavailing efforts to penetrate the unknown,
many not ignoble spirits have preached the wisdom of dulling unhealthy
curiosity by the aid of healthy labour. “Let us cultivate our gardens”
(they say), seeking no solution of the insoluble.

But the advice is ambiguous. Will the proposed remedy, in their
opinion, cure the ill, or only help us to forget it? If the latter,
then, in some circumstances and with some patients, it will doubtless
fulfil its promise. Oblivion may be attained by growing vegetables, as
by other less reputable expedients. But if absorption in daily labour
be recommended as the final stage of a rational cure, it cannot be
effectual. No rational cure is, on naturalistic principles, within
our reach. Could we empty ourselves of all that makes us men, could
we lower our intellectual level to the point where the scope of our
mental activities harmonised with their naturalistic source, we should
doubtless free ourselves from the malady of vain speculation. But
though the remedy, if applied, would be effectual, it would not be
rational. Reflective Agnosticism cannot be combined with scientific
Naturalism, because reflective Agnosticism is the product of a
process which Naturalism inevitably discredits. And if Naturalism be
incompatible even with reasoned ignorance, how can we hope to harmonise
it with the claims of reasoned knowledge?[16]

The best imitation of creative purpose, therefore, which Naturalism can
provide breaks down where it is most required—namely, at the highest
levels of value. I have just shown this in connection with our powers
of thought, and the beliefs to which they lead. But the failure is not
confined to them. It is as wide as Humanism itself. Wherever we find
great intrinsic worth, there we are in a region where the direct effect
of selection is negligible. The noblest things in speculation, in art,
in morals, possess small survival value; and, though the geniuses to
whom we owe them have added greatly to the glory of their race, they
have added but little to its animal successes. In the language of these
lectures, they are “accidental”—due neither to purpose nor to any
arrangement of causes by which purpose is successfully copied.


III

You are now in a position to judge how far the hopes held out to you at
the beginning of this course have been fulfilled, and to measure the
merits and the demerits, the claims and the limitations, of the scheme
I have endeavoured to expound.

I disowned, as you remember, any intention of providing you with a
philosophical system—not because I despise philosophical systems or
those who labour to construct them, but in part because I have none to
recommend, and in part because it seems to me doubtful whether at our
present stage of development a satisfactory system is possible.

But how (you may ask) does my point of view differ from a philosophical
system? It may be a bad system, as it certainly is a most imperfect
one. Yet, seeing that it touches on everything in heaven and earth,
seeing that its very title embraces God and man, why should it
repudiate a description which seemingly is not a whit in excess of its
pretensions?

The question thus raised is more than a merely verbal one, and a few
observations upon it may fittingly conclude the course. Note, then,
in the first place, that my scheme of beliefs does not show itself
unworthy to be considered systematic merely because it is incomplete.
All systems are incomplete. All systems, however ambitious, admit
their inability to exhaust reality. Nor is its unworthiness due to any
mere accident of execution, such as inferior workmanship or defective
learning. Its failures are essential and irremediable. They are
inseparable from “the point of view.”

Let me explain. Every system that deserves to be described as a
constructive philosophy—be it dogmatic, critical, empirical, idealist,
what you will—conceives itself not merely to be rooted in reason, but
to be rationalised throughout. The conceptions with which it works
should be sifted, clarified, defined. It should assume nothing which
requires proof. It should rest nothing (in the last resort) on faith or
probability. It should admit no inexplicable residues.

Philosophers seem to me entirely right if they think that this is what
a system ought to be; but not entirely right if they think that this
is what any system is, or has ever been. In any case, no description
could be less applicable to the point of view which I am provisionally
recommending. The philosopher refuses—in theory—to assume anything
which requires proof. I assume (among other things) the common-sense
outlook upon life, and the whole body of the sciences. The philosopher
admits—in theory—no ground of knowledge but reason. I recognise that,
in fact, the whole human race, including the philosopher himself, lives
by faith alone. The philosopher asks what creed reason requires him to
accept. I ask on what terms the creed which is in fact accepted can
most reasonably be held. The philosopher conceives that within the
unchanging limits of his system an appropriate niche can be found for
every new discovery as it arises. My view is that the contents of a
system are always reacting on its fundamental principles, so that no
philosophy can flatter itself that it will not be altered out of all
recognition as knowledge grows.

This last statement may look like a truism; but it is a truism which
few philosophers are, in practice, disposed to accept; and the
generality of mankind are perhaps even less disposed to accept it
even than philosophers. That there are beliefs which can and should
be held, with the same shade of meaning, by all men, in all ages,
and at all stages of culture, is a view to which by nature we easily
incline. But it is, to say the least, most doubtful. Language is here
no true or certain guide. Even when beliefs have not outgrown the
formulas by which they have been traditionally expressed, we must
beware of treating this fixity of form as indicating complete identity
of substance. Men do not necessarily believe exactly the same thing
because they express their convictions in exactly the same phrases. And
most fortunate it is, in the interests of individual liberty, social
co-operation, and institutional continuity that this latitude should
be secured to us, not by the policy of philosophers, statesmen, or
divines, but by the inevitable limitations of language.

This, however, by the way. The point I wish to press is that, speaking
generally, we must not conceive the development of knowledge as a
process of adding new truths to old truths, in the course of which old
truths are supplemented but are not changed. It rather resembles the
increase of some plastic body which, wherever it takes place, involves
a readjustment of every part. Add brick to brick, and you may finish
your house, yet never alter its foundation. Add belief to belief, and
you will set up strains and stresses within your system of knowledge
which will compel it to move towards some new position of equilibrium.

Sometimes, no doubt, the process is more violent and catastrophic than
this metaphor naturally suggests. Then occurs in the moral world the
analogue of the earthquake, the lava flood, and the tidal wave, which
shatter mountains and sweep cities to destruction. Men’s outlook on the
universe suffers sudden revolution: the obvious becomes incredible, and
the incredible obvious; whole societies lose their balance, and stately
systems are tumbled in the dust.

More often, however, the movements of belief are gradual. They resemble
the slow rise or fall of ancient coast-lines, where, by imperceptible
degrees, sea turns into land, or land into sea. So, without shock or
clamour, man smoothly modifies his point of view, till, gazing over the
spaces he has traversed, he greatly marvels at the change.

But we must look forward as well as backward. The spaces still to be
traversed far exceed those that have been traversed already. We can
set no limits to the intellectual voyage which lies before the race.
Even if we arbitrarily limit the life of men to that which is possible
under terrestrial conditions, we must anticipate transformations of
belief comparable in magnitude with those which already divide us
from primitive mankind. How, in circumstances like these, can we hope
to sketch, even in outline, an enduring system of philosophy? Why
should we succeed where under similar conditions the greatest of our
forefathers have already failed?

If, then, we cannot attain to a scheme of belief which, whatever be
its shortcomings, is good (so far as it goes) for all time, we must be
content with something less. We must put up with what I have called in
these lectures “a point of view.” We must recognise that our beliefs
must be provisional, because, till we approach complete knowledge, all
beliefs are provisional. We cannot claim that they are good “so far as
they go”; but only that they are as good as we are at present able to
make them. And we must recognise that the two statements are profoundly
different.

Now, if I were asked what categories or conceptions such a “point of
view” required for its expression, I should answer Providence and
Inspiration—categories for which systematic philosophy has so far
found no great use. These terms, it must be owned, are now a little the
worse for wear. Defaced and battered by centuries of hard usage, they
have suffered the fate which the current coin of popular discussion
cannot easily avoid. But they have merits negative and positive, which
make them peculiarly apt for my present purpose.

In the first place, they do not suggest a philosophy of the universe.
They openly evade the great problems of theological metaphysics. No
one, for example, would employ them in discussing the essential nature
of an Absolute God, or His relation to time, to the act of creation, to
the worlds created. They belong to a different level of speculation.

In the second place, they concentrate attention on the humanistic side
of Theism, on the relation of God to man, and to man’s higher spiritual
needs. Divine “guidance”—the purposeful working of informing Spirit—is
the notion on which emphasis is specially laid. The term “Providence”
suggests this in a broad and general way. The term “Inspiration”
suggests it in the narrower sphere of beliefs and emotions. And do not
complain that no endeavour is made to explain the mode in which divine
guidance works either on matter or on spirit. These are mysteries
as hard of solution as those which surround the action of mind on
matter, and of mind on mind. But the difficulties are difficulties of
theory, not of practice. They never disturb the ordinary man—nor the
extraordinary man in his ordinary moments. Human intercourse is not
embarrassed by the second, nor simple piety by the first. And perhaps
the enlightened lounger, requesting a club-waiter to shut the window,
brushes aside, or ignores, as many philosophic puzzles as a mother
passionately praying for the safety of her child.


IV

To some this conclusion of a long and intricate discussion will seem
curiously trivial in its unambitious simplicity. Especially will
this be true of those who accept empirical Naturalism in any of its
forms. “There is (they may admit) something grandiose about the
great metaphysical systems which appeals even to those who are least
able to accept them. It was no ignoble ambition which inspired their
architects. It was no light labour, or trivial ingenuity, which brought
them into being. On the other hand (they will say), if naturalistic
methods are more modest, naturalistic results are more secure. They aim
lower, but they reach the mark. If the long-drawn “conflict between
religion and science” has robbed us of some illusions which we abandon
with regret, the knowledge it has spared us we may hold with assurance.
But when we turn to the narrow Theism of these lectures, fittingly
couched in the outworn language of the pulpit and the Sunday-school,
can we find in it either the glory of metaphysical speculation or the
security of positive knowledge? It has not the courage to explore the
unknowable, nor the power to add to the known. It dare not fly; it will
not walk. It is neither philosophy nor science; nor does it seek the
modest security of some middle way. How, then, are we to class this
strange amalgam of criticism and credulity? What purpose can it serve?
To whom will it appeal? Whose beliefs will it alter even by a hair’s
breadth?”

These are pertinent questions. Let me try to answer them.

The customary claims of Naturalism, which I have here put into the
mouth of my imaginary critic, seem to me (as you know) to be quite
unreasonable. Otherwise I have no great objection to the statements
contained in his indictment—however little I may agree with its
spirit. In particular I admit the charge that the argument of these
lectures, elaborate as it may appear, does not after all carry us far
beyond the position occupied by uncritical piety and simple faith.
Could it be otherwise? If we build, as I build, upon our common-sense
beliefs about the natural world, our theories of the supernatural
world will surely share the defects inherent in their foundation. It
may—or may not—be possible to know all about the evolution of God as
the Absolute Idea, while lamentably ignorant of much that pertains
to the Particular. But if we begin with the Particular—and that most
imperfectly apprehended—we cannot hope to grasp the full reality of the
Absolute. On this line of advance the philosopher will not far outstrip
the peasant.

When, therefore, my supposed critic satirically asks who it is that I
hope to influence, I grant at once that it is not the plain man who
already accepts without doubt or commentary a theistic view of the
Universe. He is beyond my arguments;—perhaps above them.

Neither do I greatly hope to influence the trained man of speculation,
who has already found a theory of things which satisfies his reason,
or is sure that no such theory is within his reach. Even he may, I
trust, find in these lectures discussions of some philosophic interest.
I ask him to consider whether his system provides an honourable place
for the actual beliefs by which his waking life is ruled; whether all
the gradations of intuitive probability, from inevitable compulsion
to faint inclination, find house-room not merely in his psychology of
belief, but in his theory of knowledge; whether he is satisfied with
his logic of science, or can bring into one harmonious scheme his creed
regarded as a body of rational conclusions and his creed regarded as a
bundle of natural effects. If he replies in the affirmative his state
is the more gracious. But he is not likely to be interested in my
arguments; and assuredly they will not convert him to my views.

I need say nothing about his pretentious imitator, who, under many
names, has long been a familiar figure in certain societies. With no
deep desire for truth, and poorly equipped for pursuing it, his main
ambition is to indicate discreetly that he holds what the fashion
of the moment regards as “advanced” views in their most advanced
form. Wherein the quality of “advancement” consists, it might be
hard to determine; nor is it (in this connection) a subject worthy
of investigation. It is enough to say that “advanced” views must
have an air of novelty, must be making some stir in the world, must
be sufficiently unorthodox to shock the old-fashioned, and either
sufficiently plausible to deceive the simple or sufficiently imposing
to overawe them. I do not think that I shall find many converts among
members of this class; nor is it to them that I desire to speak.

But there are many persons, both earnest and sincere, to whom the
conclusions which modern Naturalism extracts from modern science are
a source of deep perplexity and intellectual unrest. Their mood, if
I rightly read it, is something of this kind. They would agree that
a world where God is either denied or ignored is a world where some
higher values are greatly impoverished. They would read the lectures I
have devoted to Beauty and Morals with sympathy, if not with agreement.
Life, they would admit, is but a poor thing if it does no more than
fill with vain desires the brief interval between two material
“accidents”—the “accident” which brought it into being, and the
“accident” which will extinguish it for ever. But this (they will say)
is no argument. A wise man faces facts, a good man prefers the hardest
truth to the most alluring illusion. If there be no ground for assuming
a living purpose behind the indifferent mask of nature, let us not fill
the vacancy with a phantasm of our own creation. Let us at least sink
back into the nothingness from which we rose with our intellectual
integrity undamaged. Let all other values perish, so long as rational
values remain undimmed.

Here, according to my view, lies the great illusion. Those who in all
sincerity, and often with deep emotion, plead after a fashion like
this, profoundly misunderstand the situation. They are indeed worthy
of respect. They must not be confounded with those unstable souls
who ignore God when they are happy, deny Him when they are wretched,
tolerate Him on Sundays, but truly call on Him only when life, or
fortune, hangs doubtfully in the balance. They are of a different
and more virile temper. But are they less mistaken? They search for
proofs of God, as men search for evidence about ghosts or witches.
Show us, they say, the marks of His presence. Tell us what problems
His existence would solve. And when these tasks have been happily
accomplished, then will we willingly place Him among the hypothetical
causes by which science endeavours to explain the only world we
directly know, the familiar world of daily experience.

But God must not thus be treated as an entity, which we may add to, or
subtract from, the sum of things scientifically known as the canons
of induction may suggest. He is Himself the condition of scientific
knowledge. If He be excluded from the causal series which produces
beliefs, the cognitive series which justifies them is corrupted at
the root. And as it is only in a theistic setting that beauty can
retain its deepest meaning, and love its brightest lustre, so these
great truths of æsthetics and ethics are but half-truths, isolated and
imperfect, unless we add to them yet a third. We must hold that reason
and the works of reason have their source in God; that from Him they
draw their inspiration; and that if they repudiate their origin, by
this very act they proclaim their own insufficiency.


FOOTNOTES:

[16] Let me here parenthetically remind you that again (as I observed
in an earlier lecture) the Naturalism of which I speak is Naturalism
in what, from our present point of view, must be regarded as its most
plausible shape. Those who have followed, even at a distance, the trend
of biological thought are aware that many naturalists of the highest
authority are shaken in their allegiance to natural selection. They do
not, indeed, exclude it from the evolutionary drama, but they reduce
its rôle to insignificance. Why then, you may ask, do these lectures
so constantly refer to selection, but say never a word about other
theories of organic evolution?

The answer is that selection, and only selection, really imitates
contrivance. Other theories may deal, and do deal, with variation and
heredity. But selection alone can explain adjustment; whence it follows
that selection alone can imitate design.


       _Printed in Great Britain by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld.,
                        London and Aylesbury._





End of Project Gutenberg's Theism and Humanism, by Arthur James Balfour

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEISM AND HUMANISM ***

***** This file should be named 57773-0.txt or 57773-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/7/7/57773/

Produced by Richard Hulse, Les Galloway and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


