PART III

_INTELLECTUAL VALUES_




LECTURE V

INTRODUCTION TO PART III


I

In the preceding lectures I have given reasons for thinking that in two
great departments of human interest—Æsthetics and Ethics—the highest
beliefs and emotions cannot claim to have any survival value. They
must be treated as by-products of the evolutionary process; and are,
therefore, on the naturalistic hypothesis, doubly accidental. They are
accidental in the larger sense of being the product of the undesigned
collocation and interplay of material entities—molecular atoms,
sub-atoms, and ether—which preceded, and will presumably outlast,
that fraction of time during which organic life will have appeared,
developed, and perished. They are also accidental in the narrower sense
of being only accidentally associated with that process of selective
elimination, which, if Darwinism be true, has so happily imitated
contrivance in the adaptation of organisms to their environment. They
are the accidents of an accident.

I disagreed with this conclusion, but I did not attempt to refute it. I
contented myself with pointing out that it was destructive of values;
and that, the greater the values, the more destructive it became.
The difficulty, indeed, on which I have so far insisted is not a
logical one. We have not been concerned with premises and conclusions.
Neither our æsthetic emotions nor our moral sentiments are the product
of ratiocination; nor is it by ratiocination that they are likely
to suffer essential wrong. If you would damage them beyond repair,
yoke them to a theory of the universe which robs them of all general
significance. Then, at the very moment when they aspire to transcendent
authority, their own history will rise up in judgment against them,
impugning their pretensions, and testifying to their imposture.


II

The inquiry on which I now propose to enter will follow a more or less
parallel course, and will reach a more or less similar conclusion.
Yet some characteristic differences it must necessarily exhibit.
In the higher regions of æsthetics and ethics, emotions and beliefs
are inextricably intertwined. They are what naturalists describe as
“symbiotic.” Though essentially different, they are mutually dependent.
If one be destroyed, the other withers away.

But Knowledge—the department of human interest to which I now turn—is
differently placed. The values with which we shall be concerned are
mainly rational; and intellectual curiosity is the only emotion
with which they are associated. Yet here also two questions arise
corresponding to those which we have already dealt with in a different
connection: (1) what are the causes of our knowledge, or of that part
of our knowledge which concerns the world of common sense and of
science? (2) does the naturalistic account of these causes affect the
rational value—in other words the validity—of their results?

We are, perhaps, more sensitive about the pedigree of our intellectual
creed than we are about the pedigree of our tastes or our sentiments.
We like to think that beliefs which claim to be rational are the
product of a purely rational process; and though, where others are
concerned, we complacently admit the intrusion of non-rational links
in the causal chain, we have higher ambitions for ourselves.

Yet surely, on the naturalistic theory of the world, all such ambitions
are vain. It is abundantly evident that, however important be the part
which reason plays among the immediate antecedents of our beliefs,
there are no beliefs which do not trace back their origin to causes
which are wholly irrational. Proximately, these beliefs may take rank
as logical conclusions. Ultimately, they are without exception rooted
in matter and motion. The rational order is but a graft upon the causal
order; and, if Naturalism be true, the causal order is blind.


III

Before I further develop this line of speculation it may help you to
understand what I am driving at if I venture upon an autobiographical
parenthesis. The point I have just endeavoured to make I have made
before in these lectures, and I have made it elsewhere. It is one
of a number of considerations which have led me to question the
prevalent account of the theoretical ground-work of our accepted
beliefs. Taken by itself, its tendency is sceptical; and, since it
has been associated with arguments in favour of a spiritual view
of the universe, I have been charged (and not always by unfriendly
commentators) with the desire to force doubt into the service of
orthodoxy by recommending mankind to believe what they wish, since all
beliefs alike are destitute of proof. As we cannot extricate ourselves
from the labyrinth of illusion, let us at least see to it that our
illusions are agreeable.

This, however, is not what I have ever wanted to say, nor is it what I
want to say now. If I have given just occasion for such a travesty of
my opinions, it must have been an indirect consequence of my early, and
no doubt emphatically expressed, contempt for the complacent dogmatism
of the empirical philosophy, which in Great Britain reigned supreme
through the third quarter of the nineteenth century. But was this
contempt altogether unreasonable?

I went to Cambridge in the middle sixties with a very small equipment
of either philosophy or science, but a very keen desire to discover
_what_ I ought to think of the world, and _why_. For the history
of speculation I cared not a jot. Dead systems seemed to me of no
more interest than abandoned fashions. My business was with the
ground-work of living beliefs; in particular, with the ground-work of
that scientific knowledge whose recent developments had so profoundly
moved mankind. And surely there was nothing perverse in asking modern
philosophers to provide us with a theory of modern science!

I was referred to Mill; and the shock of disillusionment remains with
me to the present hour. Mill possessed at that time an authority in
the English Universities, and, for anything I know to the contrary,
in the Scotch Universities also, comparable to that wielded forty
years earlier by Hegel in Germany and in the Middle Ages by Aristotle.
Precisely the kind of questions which I wished to put, his Logic was
deemed qualified to answer. He was supposed to have done for scientific
inference what Bacon tried to do, and failed. He had provided science
with a philosophy.

I could have forgiven the claims then made for him by his admirers;
I could have forgiven, though young and intolerant, what seemed to
me the futility of his philosophic system, if he had ever displayed
any serious misgiving as to the scope and validity of his empirical
methods. If he had admitted, for example, that, when all had been done
that could be done to systematise our ordinary modes of experimental
inference, the underlying problem of knowledge still remained unsolved.
But he seemed to hold, in common with the whole empirical school
of which, in English-speaking countries, he was the head, that the
fundamental difficulties of knowledge do not begin till the frontier is
crossed which divides physics from metaphysics, the natural from the
supernatural, the world of “phenomena” from the world of “noumena,”
“positive” experiences from religious dreams. It may be urged that, if
these be errors, they are errors shared by ninety-nine out of every
hundred persons educated in the atmosphere of Western civilisation,
whatever be their theological views: and I admit that it has sunk deep
into our ordinary habits of thought. Apologetics are saturated with
it, not less than agnosticism or infidelity. But, for my own part, I
feel now, as I felt in the early days of which I am speaking, that
the problem of knowledge cannot properly be sundered in this fashion.
Its difficulties begin with the convictions of common sense, not with
remote, or subtle, or otherworldly speculations; and if we could
solve the problem in respect of the beliefs which, roughly speaking,
everybody shares, we might see our way more clearly in respect of the
beliefs on which many people are profoundly divided.

That Mill’s reasoning should have satisfied himself and his immediate
disciples is strange. But that the wider public of thinking men, whom
he so powerfully influenced, should on the strength of this flimsy
philosophy adopt an attitude of dogmatic assurance both as to what can
be known and what cannot, is surely stranger still. Thus, at least, I
thought nearly half a century ago, and thus I think still.

Consider, for example, a typical form of the ordinary agnostic
position: that presented by Leslie Stephen. The best work of this
excellent writer was biographical and literary; but he was always
deeply interested in speculation; and his own creed seems early to have
taken its final shape under the philosophical influences of the British
empiricists. He regarded the “appeal to experience” as the fundamental
dogma of agnosticism, and by the “appeal to experience” he meant what
Mill meant by it. He sincerely supposed that this gave you indisputable
knowledge of “phenomena,” and that if you went beyond “phenomena” you
were dreaming, or you were inventing.

This is a possible creed; and it is, in fact, the creed held
implicitly, or explicitly, by many thousands of quite sensible people.
But why should those who hold it suppose that it must always satisfy
impartial inquirers? Why should they assume that those who reject it
are sacrificing their reason to their prejudices or their fancies? It
may represent the best we can do, but is it, after all, so obviously
reasonable? On this subject the empirical agnostic has no doubts. He
holds, with unshaken confidence, that nothing deserves to be believed
but that which in the last resort is proved by “experience”; that the
strength of our beliefs should be exactly proportioned to the evidence
which “experience” can supply, and that every one knows or can discover
exactly what this evidence amounts to. Leslie Stephen refers to a
well-known aphorism of Locke, who declared that “there is one unerring
mark by which a man may know whether he is a lover of truth in earnest,
viz. the not entertaining any proposition with greater assurance than
the proofs it is built on will warrant.” Upon which Leslie Stephen
observes that the sentiment is a platitude, but, in view of the
weakness of human nature, a useful platitude.

Is it a platitude? Did Locke act up to it? Did Hume act up to it, or
any other of Leslie Stephen’s philosophic progenitors? Does anybody
act up to it? Does anybody sincerely try to act up to it?

Read through the relevant chapters in Locke’s Essay, and observe
his ineffectual struggles, self-imprisoned in the circle of his own
sensations and ideas, to reach the external world in which he believed
with a far “greater assurance” than was warranted by any proofs which
_he_, at all events, was able to supply. Read Hume’s criticism of our
grounds for believing in a real world without, or a real self within,
and compare it with his admission that scepticism on these subjects is
a practical impossibility.

But we need not go beyond the first chapter of “An Agnostic’s Apology”
to find an illustration of my argument. Leslie Stephen there absolves
himself from giving heed to the conclusions of philosophers, because
there are none on which all philosophers are agreed, none on which
there is even a clear preponderance of opinion. On the other hand,
he is ready to agree with astronomers, because astronomers, “from
Galileo to Adams and Leverrier,” substantially agree with each other.
Agreement among experts is, in his opinion, a guarantee of truth, and
disagreement a proof of error.

But then he forgets that these distressing differences among
philosophers do not touch merely such entities as God and the soul, or
the other subjects with which agnostics conceive man’s faculties are
incapable of dealing. They are concerned (among other things) with the
presuppositions on which our knowledge of “phenomena”—including, of
course “astronomy from Galileo to Adams and Leverrier,” is entirely
constructed. What, in these circumstances, is Locke’s “sincere lover
of truth” to do? How is he to avoid “entertaining propositions with
greater assurance than the proofs they are built on will warrant”?
Where will he find a refuge from the “pure scepticism” which is, in
Leslie Stephen’s opinion, the natural result of divided opinions? How
is he to get on while he is making up his mind whether any theory of
the world within his reach will satisfy unbiased reason?

The fact is that the adherents of this philosophic school apply,
quite unconsciously, very different canons of intellectual probity to
themselves and to their opponents. “Why,” asks Mr. Stephen, “should
a lad who has just run the gauntlet of examination and escaped to a
country parsonage be dogmatic?” If to be dogmatic is to hold opinions
with a conviction in excess of any reason that can be assigned for
them, there seems to be no escape for the poor fellow. The common lot
of man is not going to be reversed for him. Though he abandon his
parsonage and renounce his Church, though he scrupulously purify his
creed from every taint of the “metempirical,” though he rigidly confine
himself to themes which his critics declare to be within the range of
his intellectual vision, fate will pursue him still. He may argue much
or argue little; he may believe much or believe little; but, however
much he argues and however little he believes, his beliefs will always
transcend his arguments, and to faith, in his own despite, he must
still appeal.

Those who accept Leslie Stephen’s philosophy suppose that for this
young man, as for all others, a way of escape may be found by appealing
to experience. But surely none are so sanguine as to suppose that,
by appealing to experience, they are going to avoid what Mr. Stephen
describes as “endless and hopeless controversies.” Alas, this is not
so! The field of experience is no well-defined and protected region
under whose clear skies useful knowledge flourishes unchallenged, while
the mist-enshrouded territories of its metaphysical neighbours are
devastated by unending disputations. On the contrary, it is the very
battlefield of philosophy, the cockpit of metaphysics, strewn with
abandoned arguments, where every strategic position has been taken
and retaken, to which every school lays formal claim, which every
contending system pretends to hold in effective occupation. Indeed, by
a singular irony, the thinkers who, at this particular moment, talk
most about experience are those metaphysicians of the Absolute in
whose speculations Mr. Stephen saw no beginning of interest, except
that of being (as he supposed) at once the refuge and the ruin of
traditional religion. But these philosophers have no monopoly. All men
nowadays speak well of experience. They begin to differ only when they
attempt to say what experience is, to define its character, explain its
credentials, and expound its message. But, unhappily, when this stage
is reached their differences are endless.


IV

I am, of course, not concerned with Mr. Stephen except as a brilliant
representative of a mode of thought to which I most vehemently object.
I do not object to it merely because it is in my judgment insufficient
and erroneous, still less because I dislike its conclusion. I object
to it because it talks loudly of experience, yet never faces facts;
and boasts its rationality, yet rarely reasons home. These are far
graver crimes against the spirit of truth than any condemned in Locke’s
pretentious aphorism, and they lead to far more serious consequences.

If you ask me what I have in mind when I say that agnostic empiricism
never faces facts, I reply that it never really takes account of that
natural history of knowledge, of that complex of causes, rational and
non-rational, which have brought our accepted stock of beliefs into
being. And if you ask me what I have in mind when I say that though it
reasons, it rarely reasons home, I reply that, when it is resolved not
to part with a conclusion, anything will serve it for an argument; only
when it is incredulous does it know how to be critical.

This is not an error into which I propose to fall. But I hope that
I shall not on that account be deemed indifferent to the claims of
reason, or inclined to treat lightly our beliefs either about the
material world or the immaterial. On the contrary, my object, and my
only object, is to bring reason and belief into the closest harmony
that at present seems practicable. And if you thereupon reply that such
a statement is by itself enough to prove that I am no ardent lover of
reason; if you tell me that it implies, if not permanent contentment,
at least temporary acquiescence in a creed imperfectly rationalised,
I altogether deny the charge. So far as I am concerned, there is no
acquiescence. Let him that thinks otherwise show me a better way. Let
him produce a body of beliefs which shall be at once living, logical,
and sufficient;—not forgetting that it cannot be sufficient unless it
includes within the circuit of its doctrines some account of itself
regarded as a product of natural causes, nor logical unless it provides
a rational explanation of the good fortune which has made causes which
are not reasons, mixed, it may be, with causes which are not _good_
reasons, issue in what is, by hypothesis, a perfectly rational system.
He who is fortunate enough to achieve all this may trample as he
likes upon less successful inquirers. But I doubt whether, when this
discoverer appears, he will be found to have reached his goal by the
beaten road of empirical agnosticism. This, though it be fashionably
frequented, is but a blind alley after all.

In the meanwhile we must, I fear, suffer under a system of beliefs
which is far short of rational perfection. But we need not acquiesce,
and we should not be contented. Whether this state of affairs will ever
be cured by the sudden flash of some great philosophic discovery is
another matter. My present aim, at all events, is far more modest. But
they, at least, should make no complaint who hold that common-sense
beliefs, and science which is a development of common-sense beliefs,
are, if not true, at least on the way to truth. For this conviction
I share. I profess it; I desire to act upon it. And surely I cannot
act upon it better than by endeavouring, so far as I can, to place it
in the setting which shall most effectually preserve its intellectual
value. This, at all events, is the object to which the four lectures
that immediately follow are designed to contribute.




LECTURE VI

PERCEPTION, COMMON SENSE, AND SCIENCE


I

Nothing would seem easier, at first sight, than to give a general
description of the ordinary beliefs of ordinary people about our
familiar world of things and persons. It is the world in which we live;
it is for all men _a_ real world; it is for many men _the_ real world;
it is the world of common sense, the world where the plain man feels at
home, and where the practical man seeks refuge from the vain subtleties
of metaphysics. Our stock of beliefs about it may perhaps be difficult
to justify, but it seems strange that they should be difficult to
describe; yet difficult, I think, they are.

Some statements about it may, however, be made with confidence. It is
in space and time; i.e. the material things of which it is composed,
including living bodies, are extended, have mutual position, and
possess at least some measure of duration.

Things are not changed by a mere change of place, but a change of place
relative to an observer always changes their appearance _for him_.
Common sense is, therefore, compelled in this, as in countless other
cases, to distinguish the appearance of a thing from its reality; and
to hold, as an essential article of its working creed, that appearances
may alter, leaving realities unchanged.

Common sense does not, however, draw the inference that our experiences
of material things is other than direct and immediate. It has never
held the opinion—or, if you will, the heresy—that what we perceive (at
least by sight and touch) are states of our own mind, which somehow
copy or represent external things. Neither has it ever held that the
character or duration of external things in any way depends upon
our observations of them. In perception there is no reaction by the
perceiving mind on the object perceived. Things in their true reality
are not affected by mere observation, still less are they constituted
by it. When material objects are in question, common sense never
supposes that _esse_ and _percipi_ are identical.

But then, what, according to common sense, _are_ things in their true
reality? What are they “in themselves,” when no one is looking at them,
or when only some of their aspects are under observation?

We can, at all events, say what (according to common sense) things
are _not_. They are more than collections of aspects. If we could
simultaneously perceive a “thing” at a thousand different distances,
at a thousand different angles, under a thousand varieties of
illumination, with its interior ideally exposed in a thousand different
sections, common sense, if pressed, would, I suppose, still hold that
these were no more than specimens of the endless variety of ways in
which things may appear, without either changing their nature or
fully revealing what that nature is. But though common sense might
give this answer, it would certainly resent the question being put.
It finds no difficulty in carrying on its work without starting these
disturbing inquiries. It is content to say that, though a thing is
doubtless always more than the sum of those aspects of it to which
we happen to be attending, yet our knowledge _that_ it is and _what_
it is, however imperfect, is, for practical purposes, sufficiently
clear and trustworthy, requiring the support neither of metaphysics
nor psychology.—This, with all its difficulties, is, I believe, an
account, true as far as it goes, of the world of things as common sense
conceives it. This is the sort of world which science sets out to
explain. Let me give an illustration.

We perceive some object—let us say the sun. We perceive it directly
and not symbolically. What we see is not a mental image of the sun,
nor a complex of sensations caused by the sun; but the sun itself.
Moreover, this material external object retains its identity while it
varies in appearance. It is red in the morning; it is white at midday;
it is red once more in the evening; it may be obscured by clouds or
hidden in eclipse; it vanishes and reappears once in every twenty-four
hours; yet, amid all these changes and vanishings, its identity is
unquestioned. Though we perceive it differently at different times, and
though there are times when we do not perceive it at all, we know it
to be the same; nor do we for a moment believe (with Heraclitus) that
when it is lost to view it has, on that account, either altered its
character or ceased to exist.

In the main, therefore, experience is, according to common sense, a
very simple affair. We see something, or we feel something, or, like
Dr. Johnson, we kick something, and “there’s an end on’t.” Experience
is the source of all knowledge, and therefore of all explanation; but,
in itself, it seems scarcely to require to be explained. Common sense
is prepared to leave it where it finds it. No doubt the occurrence
of optical or other illusions may disturb this mood of intellectual
tranquillity. Common sense, when it has to consider the case of
appearances, some of which are held, on extraneous grounds, to be real
and others to be illusory, may feel that there are, after all, problems
raised by perception—by the direct experience of things—which are not
without their difficulties. But the case of illusions is exceptional,
and rarely disturbs the even tenor of our daily round.


II

Now science, as it gladly acknowledges, is but an extension of common
sense. It accepts, among other matters, the common-sense view of
perception. Like common sense, it distinguishes the thing as it is
from the thing as it appears. Like common sense, it regards the things
which are experienced as being themselves unaffected by experience.
But, unlike common sense, it devotes great attention to the way in
which experience is produced by things. Its business is with the causal
series. This, to be sure, is a subject which common sense does not
wholly ignore. It would acknowledge that we perceive a lamp through the
light which it sheds, and recognise a trumpet through the sound which
it emits; but the nature of light or sound, and the manner in which
they produce our experience of bright or sonorous objects, it hands
over to science for further investigation.

And the task is cheerfully undertaken. Science also deems perception to
be the source of all our knowledge of external nature. But it regards
it as something more, and different. For perception is itself a part
of nature, a natural process, the product of antecedent causes, the
cause of subsequent effects. It requires, therefore, like other natural
facts, to be observed and explained; and it is the business of science
to explain it.

Thus we are brought face to face with the contrast on which so much
of the argument of these lectures turns: the contrast between beliefs
considered as members of a cognitive series, and beliefs considered
as members of a causal series. In the cognitive series, beliefs of
perception are at the root of our whole knowledge of natural laws.
In the causal series, they are the effects of natural laws in actual
operation. This is so important an example of this dual state that you
must permit me to consider it in some detail.

We may examine what goes on between the perceiving person and the
thing he perceives from either end; but it is by no means a matter of
indifference with which end we begin. If we examine the relation of the
perceiver to the perceived it does not seem convenient or accurate to
describe that relation as a process. It is an experience, immediate and
intuitive; not indeed infallible, but direct and self-sufficient. If
I look at the sun, it is the sun I see, and not an image of the sun,
nor a sensation which suggests the sun, or symbolises the sun. Still
less do I see ethereal vibrations, or a retinal image, or a nervous
reaction, or a cerebral disturbance. For, in the act of perceiving, no
intermediate entities are themselves perceived.

But now if we, as it were, turn round, and, beginning at the other end,
consider the relation of the perceived to the perceiver, no similar
statements can be made. We find ourselves concerned, not with an
act of intuition, but with a physical process, which is complicated,
which occupies time, which involves many stages. We have left behind
cognition; we are plunged in causation. Experience is no longer the
immediate apprehension of fact; it is the transmission of a message
conveyed from the object to the percipient by relays of material
messengers. As to how the transmission is effected explanations vary
with the growth of science. They have been entirely altered more than
once since the modern era began, and with each alteration they become
more complicated. They depend, not on one branch of science only, but
on many. Newtonian astronomy, solar physics, the theory of radiation,
the optical properties of the atmosphere, the physiology of vision,
the psychology of perception, and I daresay many other branches of
research, have to be drawn upon: and all this to tell us what it is we
see, and how it is we come to see it.


III

Now there is no one who possesses the least smattering of philosophy
who does not know that the views I have just endeavoured to describe
are saturated with difficulties: difficulties connected with the nature
of perception; difficulties connected with the nature of the object as
perceived; difficulties connected with its unperceived physical basis;
difficulties connected with the relation in which these three stand to
each other. For common sense the material object consists of a certain
number of qualities and aspects which are perceived, an inexhaustible
number which might be perceived, but are not, and (perhaps) a vaguely
conceived “somewhat” lying behind both. The medieval Aristotelian,
if I rightly understand him (which very likely I do not), developed
this “somewhat” into the notion of substance—an entity somewhat
loosely connected with the qualities which it supported, and in no
way explaining them. There was “substance” in a piece of gold, and
“substance” in a piece of lead; but there was nothing unreasonable in
the endeavour to associate the qualities of gold with the substance of
lead, and thus for all practical purposes to turn lead into gold.

Modern science teaches a very different lesson. It has, perhaps,
not wholly abandoned the notion of material substance, if this be
defined as the unperceivable support of perceivable qualities; but it
persistently strives to connect the characteristics of matter with
its structure, and, among other characteristics, that of producing, or
helping to produce, in us those immediate perceptions which we describe
as our experience of matter itself.

An important stage in this endeavour was marked by the famous
distinction between the primary and the secondary qualities of matter:
the primary qualities being the attributes of external material things
which were deemed to be independent of the observer (for example,
impenetrability, density, weight, configuration); the secondary
qualities being those which, apart from observers endowed with senses
like our own, would either exist differently, or would not exist at all
(for example, colour and taste). On this view the primary qualities
were among the causes of the secondary qualities, and the secondary
qualities were transferred from the thing perceived to the person
perceiving.

I am not the least concerned to defend this theory. It has been much
derided, and is certainly open to attack. But something like it seems
to be an inevitable stage in the development of modern views of nature.
The whole effort of physical science is to discover the material or
non-psychical facts which shall, among other things, account for
our psychical experiences. It is true that there are men of science,
as well as philosophers, who regard all such constructions as purely
arbitrary—mere labour-saving devices which have nothing to do with
reality. But though I shall have something to say about these theories
in my next course of lectures, for the present I need only observe that
they do not represent ordinary scientific opinion, either as it is,
or as it has ever been. Science thinks, rightly or wrongly, that she
is concerned with a real world, which persists independently of our
experience: she has never assented to the doctrine that the object of
her patient investigations is no more than a well-contrived invention
for enabling us to foretell, and perhaps to modify, the course of our
personal feelings.

But then, if science is right, we are committed to a division between
the contents of immediate experience and its causes, which showed
itself dimly and tentatively in the distinction between the secondary
and the primary qualities of matter, but has become deeper and more
impassable with every advance in physics and physiology. It was
possible to maintain (though, I admit, not very easy) that, while the
secondary qualities of matter are due to the action of the primary
qualities on our organs of perception, the primary qualities themselves
are, nevertheless, the objects of direct experience. The fact, for
example, that colour is no more than a sensation need not preclude us
from perceiving the material qualities which, like shape, or motion, or
mass, are the external and independent causes to which the sensation is
due. I do not say that this view was ever explicitly entertained—nor
does it signify. For, if we accept the teaching of science, it can, I
suppose, be entertained no more. The physical causes of perception are
inferred, but not perceived. The real material world has been driven
by the growth of knowledge further and further into the realm of the
unseen, and now lies completely hidden from direct experience behind
the impenetrable screen of its own effects.


IV

For consider what the causal process of perception really is if we
trace it from the observed to the observer—if we follow the main
strands in the complex lines of communication through which the object
seen reveals itself to the man who sees it.

I revert to my previous example—the sun. We need not consider those
of its attributes which are notoriously arrived at by indirect
methods—which are not perceived but inferred—its magnitude, for
example, or its mass. Confining ourselves to what is directly
perceived, its angular size, its shape (projected on a plane),
its warmth, its brightness, its colour, its (relative) motion,
its separation from the observer in space—how are these immediate
experiences produced?

The answers have varied with the progress of science; nor, for my
present purpose, does it greatly matter which answers we adopt. Let us
take those which are commonly accepted at the present moment. They are
not only the truest, but the fullest; and for that very reason they
put the difficulty with which we are concerned in the highest relief.
We begin our causal series with electrons, or, if you do not accept
the electric theory of matter in any of its forms, then with atoms and
molecules. We start with these, because the sun is a collection of
them, and because it is their movements which set going the whole train
of causes and effects by which the sun produces in us the perception of
itself.

We may take, as the next stage, ethereal vibrations, of various
lengths and various amplitudes, sent travelling into space by the
moving particles. A fraction of these waves reaches our atmosphere, and
of that fraction a fraction reaches our eyes, and of that fraction a
further fraction falls within the narrow limits of length to which our
eyes are sensitive. It is through these that we are able to _see_ the
sun. Still another fraction, not necessarily identical in wave-lengths,
affects the nerves which produce in us the sensation of warmth. It is
through these that we are able to _feel_ the sun.

But, before we either see or feel, there is much still to be
accomplished. The causal series is not nearly completed. Complicated
neural processes, as yet only imperfectly understood; complicated
cerebral processes—as yet understood still less—both involving
physiological changes far more complicated than the electrical
“accelerations” or electro-magnetic disturbances with which we have
hitherto been dealing, bring us to the end of the material sequence of
causes and effects, and lay the message from the object perceived on
the threshold of the perceiving consciousness. So does a postman slip
into your letter-box a message which has been first written, then
carried by hand, then by a mail-cart, then by a train, then by hand
again, till it reaches its destination, and nothing further is required
except that what has been written should be read and understood.

Thus far the material process of transmission. The psychical process
has still to come. Psychology is a science, not less than physiology or
physics; and psychology has much to say on the subject of perception.
It is true that scientific explorers whose point of departure
is introspective; who concern themselves primarily with ideas,
conceptions, sensations, and so forth, rarely succeed in fitting their
conclusions without a break to those of their colleagues who begin
with the “external” causes of perception. The two tunnels, driven from
opposite sides of the mountain, do not always meet under its crest.
Still, we cannot on that account ignore the teaching of psychology on
the genesis of perceptual experience regarded, not as the ground of
knowledge, but as a natural product.

I do not mean to attempt a summary of psychology from this point
of view, any more than I have attempted a summary of physics or
physiology. My argument is really independent, in this case as in the
other, of particular systems. All I ask for is the admission that in
perception there are conditions antecedently supplied by the perceiving
consciousness which profoundly modify every perceptual experience—and
that these conditions (unlike Kant’s forms) are natural growths,
varying, like other natural growths, from individual to individual.
This admission must, I think, be made by every empirical psychologist,
to whatever school he happens to belong.

If this statement seems obscure in its general and abstract form,
consider a particular application of it. Let us assume, with many
psychologists, that Will, in the form of selective attention, lies
at the root of our perceptual activities; that we may therefore be
said, in a sense, voluntarily to create the objects we perceive; that
experience of the present is largely qualified by memories of the
past, and that the perceptual mould into which our sensations are run
is largely a social product—born of the intercourse between human
beings, and, in its turn, rendering that intercourse possible. Is it
not clear that, on assumptions like these, consciousness, so far from
passively receiving the messages conveyed to it through physical and
physiological channels, actively modifies their character?


V

But why, it may be asked, should these considerations involve any
difficulty? And, if there be a difficulty, what is its exact character?

In its most general form the difficulty is this. It is claimed by
science that its conclusions are based upon experience. The experience
spoken of is unquestionably the familiar perception of external things
and their movements as understood by common sense; and, however much
our powers of perception be increased by telescopes, microscopes,
balances, thermometers, electroscopes, and so forth, this common-sense
view suffers no alteration. The perceptions of a man of science are,
in essence, the perceptions of ordinary men in their ordinary moments,
beset with the same difficulties, accepted with the same assurance.
Whatever be the proper way of describing scientific results, the
experimental data on which they rest are sought and obtained in the
spirit of “naïf realism.”

On this foundation science proceeds to build up a theory of nature
by which the foundation itself is shattered. It saws off the branch
on which it is supported. It kicks down the ladder by which it has
climbed. It dissolves the thing perceived into a remote reality which
is neither perceived nor perceivable. It turns the world of common
sense into an illusion, and on this illusion it calmly rests its case.

But this is not the only logical embarrassment in which we are
involved. When science has supplied us with a description of external
things as they “really are,” and we proceed to ask how the physical
reality reveals itself to us in experience, a new difficulty arises,
or, if you like, the old difficulty with a new face. For science
requires us to admit that experience, from this point of view, is
equivalent to perception; and that perception is a remote psychological
effect of a long train of causes, physical and physiological,
originally set in motion by the external thing, but in no way
resembling it. Look carefully at this process from the outside, and
ask yourselves why there should be any such correspondence between the
first of these causes and the last of these effects, as should enable
us to know or infer the one from the other? Why should the long train
of unperceivable intermediaries that connect the perceived with the
perceiver be trusted to speak the truth?

I just now likened these intermediaries to relays of messengers. But
messengers are expected to hand on their message in the form in which
they have received it. The messengers change, but not the message. The
metaphor, therefore, is far too complimentary to the train of physical
causes which reveal the material thing to the perceiving consciousness.
The neural changes which are in immediate causal contiguity with that
psychical effect which we call “the experience of an external object”
have no resemblance whatever either to the thing as it is perceived
or to the thing as it really is. Nor have they any resemblance to the
proximate cause which sets them going, namely, the ethereal vibrations;
nor have these to the accelerated electrons which constitute the
incandescent object which we “experience” as the sun. Nor has the sun,
as experienced, the slightest resemblance to the sun as it really is.

Hume, in his “Dialogues on Natural Religion,” urges the absurdity of
arguing from an effect like the universe to a cause like God, since
the argument from a particular effect to a particular cause, or from
a particular cause to a particular effect, is only legitimate when we
have had some previous experience of that particular class of causal
sequence; and nobody, it is plain, has had the opportunity of observing
Creation. Whatever be the value of this argument in the case of God
and the world, it seems to me conclusive in the case of matter and
man. We cannot argue from purely psychical effects, like perceptions
and sensations, to external causes, like physiological processes or
ethereal vibrations, _unless_ we can experience both sets of facts in
causal relation. And this, if we accept the conclusions of science,
we can never do—partly because the intermediate members of the causal
series are unperceivable; partly because, if they were perceivable,
perception has been reduced by science to a purely psychical
effect—which obviously cannot include its material cause. This last
must for ever remain outside the closed circle of sensible experiences.

Here, of course, we find ourselves face to face with a familiar
objection to those philosophies of perception which deny that we
have any access to external reality, except through ideas which are
its copy. But they are in a better case than science. They need not
explicitly admit a discrepancy between their premises and their
conclusions. They arrive at the subjectivity of perception by methods
of introspection. They interrogate consciousness, and are convinced
that every experience can be analysed into sensations and ideas,
some of which, no doubt, suggest externality, but none of which are
external. If, then, the worst comes to the worst, they can, and often
do, lighten their philosophic ship by pitching the whole material
universe overboard as a bit of superfluous cargo. But physical science
cannot (at least in my opinion) do anything of the kind. Its whole
business is with the material universe. Its premises are experiences
of external things, not of internal sensation and ideas. And if it
has associated its fortunes with a theory of perception which treats
experience as a natural effect of the thing experienced; if it has
thereby wandered within sight of the perilous problems which haunt the
frontier where mind and matter meet, it has not done so in a spirit of
reckless adventure, but in the legitimate pursuit of its own affairs.

This does not necessarily make things easier. We are not here concerned
with questionings about the remoter provinces of knowledge—provinces
unexplored except by specialists, negligible by ordinary men engaged
on ordinary business. On the contrary, the difficulties to which I
have called your attention threaten the unquestioned assumption of
daily life, the presupposition of every scientific experiment, and the
meaning of every scientific generalisation. They cannot be ignored.

On the other hand, threaten as they may, these difficulties can never
modify our attitude either towards practical action or scientific
theory. Beliefs which were inevitable before remain inevitable still.
The supreme act of instinctive faith involved in the perception of
external objects stands quite unshaken. Whatever we may think of
Berkeley, we cannot give up Dr. Johnson. “Seeing,” says the proverb,
“is believing”; and it speaks better than it knows.


VI

Can we, then, adopt a middle course, and, imitating the serene
acquiescence of Hume, accept the position of sceptics in the study and
believers in the market-place? This seems eminently unsatisfactory;
and, since believers on this subject we must perforce remain, it
behoves us to consider how, and on what terms, we can best qualify our
scepticism.

Observe, then, that the particular difficulty which has been occupying
our attention arises in the main from the assumption that our
common-sense beliefs in the reality and character of material things
have no other foundation than the fact that we so perceive them. From
such premises it was impossible, it seemed, to infer that they exist
otherwise than as they are perceived; and still more impossible to
regard the immediate intuition by which we apprehend the object, and
the long-drawn sequence of causes by which the object is revealed, as
being the same process looked at from different ends.

But this difficulty is greatly mitigated if we hold that our belief in
an independent world of material objects, however it may be caused, is
neither a conclusion drawn from this or that particular experience nor
from all our experiences put together, but an irresistible assumption.
Grant the existence of external things, and it becomes possible and
legitimate to attempt explanations of their appearance, to regard
our perceptions of them as a psychical and physiological product
of material realities which do not themselves appear and cannot be
perceived. Refuse, on the other hand, to grant this assumption, and no
inductive legerdemain will enable us to erect our scientific theories
about an enduring world of material things upon the frail foundation
of successive personal perceptions.

If this does not seem clear at first sight it is, I think, because
we do not consider our experiences as a whole. A limited group of
experiences—say Faraday’s experiments with electro-magnets—may guide
us into new knowledge about the external world, including aspects of
that world which are not open to sense perception. But then these
experiences assume that this external world exists, they assume it
to be independent of perception, they assume it to be a cause of
perception. These assumptions once granted, experiment may be, and
is, the source of fresh discoveries. But experiment based on these
assumptions never can establish their truth; and if our theory
of knowledge requires us to hold that “no proposition should be
entertained with greater assurance than the proofs it is built on will
warrant,” our fate is sealed, and we need never hope to extricate
ourselves from the entanglements in which a too credulous empiricism
has involved us. This means that one at least of the inevitable
beliefs enumerated in the first lecture—the belief in an external
world—is a postulate which science is compelled to use but is unable to
demonstrate. How, then, are we to class it? It is not a law of thought
in the accepted meaning of that expression. We are not rationally
required to accept it by the very structure of our thinking faculties.
Many people, indeed, theoretically reject it; none, so far as I know,
regard it as self-evident. On the other hand, it is not an inference
from experience; neither is it an analytic judgment in which the
predicate is involved in the subject. Described in technical language,
it would seem to be _a priori_ without being necessary, and synthetic
without being empirical—qualities which, in combination, scarcely fit
into any familiar philosophic classification.

According to the view which I desire to press in these lectures, this
marks a philosophic omission. I regard the belief in an external world
as one of a class whose importance has been ignored by philosophy,
though all science depends on them. They refuse to be lost in the
common herd of empirical beliefs; though they have no claim to be
treated as axioms. We are inclined to accept them, but not rationally
compelled. The inclination may be so strong as practically to exclude
doubt; and it may diminish from this maximum to a faint feeling of
probability. But, whatever be the strength of these beliefs, and
whatever the nature of their claims, the importance of the part they
play in the development and structure of our current creed cannot
easily be exaggerated.

Before, however, I consider other specimens of this class, I must
interpolate a long parenthesis upon probability. I have just described
these fundamental beliefs as being “probable” in varying degrees.
Gradations of probability are familiar to the mathematical theorist.
Are we, then, here concerned with probability as conceived by the
mathematician? It is evidently essential to settle this question before
proceeding with the main argument; and I propose, therefore, to turn
aside and devote the next lecture to its consideration.




LECTURE VII

PROBABILITY, CALCULABLE AND INTUITIVE


I

I wish I were a mathematician. There is in the history of the
mathematical sciences, as in their substance, something that strangely
stirs the imagination even of the most ignorant. Its younger sister,
Logic, is as abstract, and its claims are yet wider. But it has never
shaken itself free from a certain pretentious futility: it always seems
to be telling us, in language quite unnecessarily technical, what we
understood much better before it was explained. It never helps to
discover, though it may guarantee discovery; it never persuades, though
it may show that persuasion has been legitimate; it never aids the work
of thought, it only acts as its auditor and accountant-general. I am
not referring, of course, to what I see described in recent works as
“modern scientific logic.” Of this I do not presume to speak. Still
less am I referring to so-called Inductive Logic. Of this it is scarce
worth while to speak.[9] I refer to their more famous predecessor, the
formal logic of the schools.

But in what different tones must we speak of mathematics! Mill, if
I remember rightly, said it was as full of mysteries as theology.
But while the value of theology for knowledge is disputed, the value
of mathematics for knowledge is indisputable. Its triumphs can be
appreciated by the most foolish, they appeal to the most material. If
they seem sometimes lost to ordinary view in the realms of abstract
infinities, they do not disdain to serve us in the humbler fields of
practice. They have helped mankind to all the greatest generalisations
about the physical universe: and without them we should still be
fumbling over simple problems of practical mechanics, entangled in a
costly and ineffectual empiricism.

But while we thank the mathematician for his aid in conquering Nature,
we envy him his powers of understanding her. Though he deals, it would
seem, entirely with abstractions, they are abstractions which, at his
persuasion, supply the key to the profoundest secrets of the physical
universe. He holds the clues to mazes where the clearest intellect,
unaided, would wander hopelessly astray. He belongs to a privileged
caste.

I intend no serious qualification of this high praise when I add that,
as regards the immediate subject of this lecture, I mean Probability,
mathematicians do not seem to have given ignorant inquirers like myself
all the aid which perhaps we have a right to ask. They have treated
the subject as a branch of applied mathematics. They have supplied us
with much excellent theory. They have exercised admirable skill in the
solution of problems. But I own that, when we inquire into the rational
basis of all this imposing superstructure, their explanations, from the
lay point of view, leave much to be desired.

“Probability,” says an often-quoted phrase of Butler, “is the guide
of life.” But the Bishop did not define the term; and he wrote
before the theory of probability had attained to all its present
dignities. Neither D’Alembert nor Laplace had discussed it. Quetelet
had not applied it to sociology, nor Maxwell to physics. Jevons had
not described it as the “noblest creation of the intellect.” It is
doubtful whether Butler meant by it exactly what the mathematicians
mean by it, and certain that he did not suspect any lurking ambiguity
in the expression.

Nor, indeed, would the existence of such ambiguity be commonly admitted
by any school of thought. The ordinary view is that the theory of
probabilities is, as Laplace described it, “common sense reduced to
calculation.” That there could be two kinds of probability, only one of
which fitted this description, would be generally regarded as a heresy.
But it is a heresy in which I myself believe; and which, with much
diffidence, I now propose to defend.


II

The well-known paradox of the theory of probabilities is that, to all
seeming, it can extract knowledge from ignorance and certainty from
doubt. The point cannot be better put than by Poincaré in discussing
the physical theory of gases, where the doctrine of probability
finds an important application. Let me give you his view—partly in
paraphrase, partly in translation. “For omniscience,” he says in
substance, “chance would not exist. It is but the measure of our
ignorance. When we describe an event as accidental we mean no more
than that we do not fully comprehend the conditions by which it was
brought about.

“But is this the full truth of the matter? Are not the laws of chance a
source of knowledge? And, stranger still, is it not sometimes easier to
generalise (say) about random movements than about movements which obey
even a simple law—witness the kinetic theory of gases? And, if this be
so, how can chance be the equivalent of ignorance? Ask a physicist to
explain what goes on in a gas. He might, perhaps, express his views in
some such terms as these: ‘You wish me to tell you about these complex
phenomena. If by ill luck I happened to know the laws which govern
them, I should be helpless. I should be lost in endless calculations,
and could never hope to supply you with an answer to your questions.
Fortunately for both of us, I am completely ignorant about the matter;
I can, therefore, supply you with an answer at once. This may seem odd.
But there is something odder still, namely, that my answer will be
right.’”

Now, what are the conditions which make it possible thus to extract
a correct answer from material apparently so unpromising? They
would seem to be a special combination of ignorance and knowledge,
the joint effect of which is to justify us in supposing that the
particular collection of facts or events with which we are concerned
are happening “at random.” If we could calculate the complex causes
which determine the fall of a penny, or the collisions of a molecule,
we might conceivably deal with pennies or molecules individually; and
the calculus of probability might be dispensed with. But we cannot;
ignorance, therefore, real or assumed, is thus one of the conditions
required to provide us with the kind of chaos to which the doctrine of
chances may most fittingly be applied. But there is another condition
not less needful, namely, knowledge—the knowledge that no extraneous
cause or internal tendency is infecting our chaotic group with some
bias or drift whereby its required randomness would be destroyed. Our
penny must be symmetrical, and Maxwell’s demons[10] must not meddle
with the molecules.

The slow disintegration of radium admirably illustrates the behaviour
of a group or collection possessing all the qualities which we require.
The myriad atoms of which the minutest visible fragment is composed are
numerous enough to neutralise eccentricities such as those which, in
the case of a game of chance, we call “runs of luck.” Of these atoms
we have no individual knowledge. What we know of one we know of all;
and we treat them not only as a collection, but as a collection made at
random. Now, physicists tell us that out of any such random collection
a certain proportion will disintegrate in a given time; and always the
same proportion. But whence comes their confidence in the permanence
of this ratio? Why are they so assured of its fixity that these random
explosions are thought to provide us with a better time-keeper than
the astronomical changes which have served mankind in that capacity
through immemorial ages? The reason is that we have here the necessary
ignorance and the necessary knowledge in a very complete form. Nothing
can well exceed our ignorance of the differences between one individual
radium atom and another, though relevant differences there must be.
Nothing, again, seems better assured than our knowledge that no
special bias or drift will make one collection of these atoms behave
differently from another. For the atomic disintegration is due to no
external shock or mutual reaction which might affect not one atom only,
but the whole group. A milligram of radium is not like a magazine of
shells, where if one spontaneously explodes all the rest follow suit.
The disruption of the atom is due to some internal principle of decay
whose effects no known external agent can either hasten or retard.
Although, therefore, the proportion of atoms which will disintegrate
in a given time can only be discovered, like the annual death-rate
among men, by observation, yet once discovered it is discovered for
ever. Our human death-rate not only may change, but does change. The
death-rate of radium atoms changes not. In the one case, causes are in
operation which modify both the organism and the surroundings on which
its life depends. In the other case, it would seem that the average of
successive generations of atoms does not vary, and that, once brought
into existence, they severally run their appointed course unaffected by
each other or by the world outside.

So far we have been concerned with groups or collections or series;
and about these the doctrine of chances and the theory of error
may apparently supply most valuable information. But in practical
affairs—nay, even in many questions of scientific speculation—we are
yet more concerned about individual happenings. We have, therefore,
next to ask how we can infer the probability of a particular event from
our knowledge of some group or series to which it belongs.

There seems at first sight no difficulty in this, provided we have
sufficient knowledge of the group or series of which the particular
event is a member. If we know that a tossed penny will in the long run
give heads and tails equally often, we do not hesitate to declare that
the chances of a particular throw giving “heads” are even. To expect
in any given case heads rather than tails, or tails rather than heads,
is inconsistent with the objective knowledge of the series which by
hypothesis we actually possess.

But what if our information about the group or series is much less
than this? Suppose that, instead of knowing that the two possible
alternatives do in fact occur equally often, we are in the less
advantageous position of knowing no reason why they should _not_ occur
equally often. We ought, I suppose, still to regard the chances of
a particular toss as even; although this estimate, expressed by the
same fraction (½) and held with the same confidence, is apparently
a conclusion based on ignorance, whereas the first conclusion was
apparently based on knowledge.

If, for example, we know that a die is fairly made and fairly thrown,
we can tell how often a particular number will turn up in a long series
of throws, and we can tell what the chances are that it will turn up on
the occasion of a single throw. Moreover, the two conclusions seem to
be logically connected.

But if we know that the die is loaded we can no longer say how the
numbers will be distributed in a series of throws, however long, though
we are sure that the distribution will be very different from what it
would have been had the die been a fair one. Nevertheless, we can still
say (before the event) what the chances are of a particular number
turning up on a single throw; and these chances are exactly the same
whether the die be loaded or whether it be fair—namely, one-sixth. Our
objective knowledge of the group or series has vanished, but, with the
theory of probability to help us, our subjective conviction on this
point apparently remains unchanged.

There is here, surely, a rather awkward transition from the “objective”
to the “subjective” point of view. We were dealing, in the first case,
with groups or series of events about which the doctrine of chances
enabled us to say something positive, something which experience would
always confirm if the groups or series were large enough. A perfect
calculator, endowed with complete knowledge of all the separate group
members, would have no correction to make in our conclusions. His
information would be more complete than our own, but not more accurate.
It is true that for him “averages” would have no interest and “chance”
no meaning. Nevertheless, he would agree that in a long series of
fair throws of a fair die any selected face would turn up one-sixth
times as often as all the others taken together. But in the second
case this is no longer so. Foresight based on complete knowledge would
apparently differ from foresight based on the calculation of chances.
Our calculator would be aware of the exact manner in which the die
was loaded, and of the exact advantage which this gave to certain
numbers. He would, therefore, know that in asserting the chance of any
particular number turning up on the first throw to be one-sixth, we
were wrong. In what sense, then, do we deem ourselves to have been
right?

The answer, I suppose, is that we were right _not_ about a group of
throws made with _this_ loaded die, but about a group of such groups
made with dice loaded at random—a group in which “randomness” was so
happily preserved among its constituent groups that its absence within
each of these groups was immaterial, and no one of the six alternative
numbers was favoured above another.

A similar reply might be given if we suppose our ignorance carried
yet a step further. Instead of knowing that our die was loaded, and
being ignorant only of the manner of its loading, we might be entirely
ignorant whether it was loaded or not. The chances of a particular
number turning up on the first throw would still be one-sixth. But the
series to which this estimate would refer would neither be one composed
of fair throws with a fair die, nor one composed of a series of throws
with dice loaded at random, but one composed of a series of throws with
dice chosen at random from a random collection of dice, loaded and not
loaded!

It seems plain that we have no experimental knowledge of series piled
on series after this fashion. Our conclusions about them are not based
on observation, nor collected from statistics. They are arrived at _a
priori_; and when the character of a series is arrived at _a priori_,
the probability of a particular event belonging to it can be arrived
at independently by the same method. No reference to the series is
required. The reason we estimate the chances against any one of the
six possible throws of a die as five to one under each and all of
the suppositions we have been discussing is that under none of them
have we any ground for thinking any one of the six more probable than
another;—even though we may have ground for thinking that in a series
of throws made with that particular die, some number, to us unknown,
will in fact turn up with exceptional frequency.

The most characteristic examples, therefore, of problems in probability
depend for their solution on a bold use of the “principle of sufficient
reason.” We treat alternatives as equally likely when we cannot see any
ground for supposing that one is more likely than another. This seems
sensible enough; but how far may we carry this process of extracting
knowledge from ignorance? An agnostic declines to offer any opinion
on the being of God because it is a matter about which he professes
to know nothing. But the universe either has a spiritual cause, or it
has not. If the agnostic is as ignorant as he supposes, he cannot have
any reason for preferring the first alternative to the second, or the
second to the first. Must he, therefore, conclude that the chances
of Theism are even? The man who knows this knows much. He knows, or
may know, that God’s existence is slightly more probable than his own
chance of winning a coup at Monte Carlo. He knows, or may know, the
exact fraction by which the two probabilities differ. How, then, can he
call himself an agnostic?

Every one must, I think, feel that such reasoning involves a misuse
of the theory of probability. But is that misuse without some
justification? The theory, unless I misread it, permits, or rather
requires, us to express by the same fraction probabilities based on
what is little less than complete knowledge, and probabilities based
on what is little more than complete ignorance. To arrive at a clear
conclusion, it seems only necessary to apply the “law of sufficient
reason” to defined alternatives; and it is apparently a matter of
perfect indifference whether we apply this law in its affirmative or
its negative shape; whether we say “there is every reason for believing
that such and such alternatives happen equally often,” or whether we
say “there is no reason for thinking that one alternative happens more
often than the other.” I do not criticise this method; still less do
I quarrel with it. On the contrary, I am lost in admiration of this
instrument of investigation, the quality of whose output seems to
depend so little on the sort of raw material with which it is supplied.


III

My object, indeed, is neither to discuss the basis on which rests
the calculus of probabilities—a task for which I own myself totally
unfit—nor yet to show that a certain obscurity hangs over the limits
within which it may properly be employed. I desire rather to suggest
that, wherever those limits are placed, there lies beyond them a kind
of probability yet more fundamental, about which the mathematical
methods can tell us nothing, though it possesses supreme value as a
“guide of life.”

Wherein lies the distinction between the two? In this: the doctrine of
calculable probability (if I may so call it) has its only application,
or its only assured application, within groups whose character is
either postulated, or is independently arrived at by inference and
observation. These groups, be they natural or conventional, provide a
framework, marking out a region wherein prevails the kind of ignorance
which is the subjective reflection of objective “randomness.” This is
the kind of ignorance which the calculus of probabilities can most
successfully transmute into knowledge: and herein lies the reason why
the discoverers of the calculus found their original inspiration in
the hazards of the gambling-table, and why their successors still find
in games of chance its happiest illustrations. For in games of chance
the group framework is provided by convention; perfect “randomness”
is secured by fitting devices; and he who attempts to modify it is
expelled from society as a cheat.

None of these observations apply to the kind of probability on
whose importance I am now insisting. If calculable probability be
indeed “common sense reduced to calculation,” intuitive probability
lies deeper. It supports common sense, and it supplies the ultimate
ground—be it secure or insecure—of all work-a-day practice and all
scientific theory. It has nothing to do with “randomness”; it knows
nothing of averages; it obeys no formal laws; no light is thrown on it
by cards or dice; it cannot be reduced to calculation. How, then, is it
to be treated? What place is it to occupy in our general scheme?

These are all important questions. But no answer to them can be given
till we have pressed somewhat further the line of thought which the
discussion in this present lecture has for a moment interrupted. Before
I began this long parenthesis on the theory of chance, I was occupied
with a most important example of a belief which possesses the highest
degree of intuitive probability, but no calculable probability at all.
I mean the belief in an independent physical universe. In the next
lecture I shall resume the general thread of my argument, and consider
another belief of the same kind which is not less—some would say even
more—essential to natural science than the one with which I have
already dealt. I mean a belief in the regularity of nature.


FOOTNOTES:

[9] Although, as a matter of fact, I do speak of it in the next lecture.

[10] Maxwell, as all who interest themselves in physics are aware,
arrived at very interesting conclusions by considering what would
happen if little demons interfered with the random motions of the
molecules constituting a gas.




LECTURE VIII

UNIFORMITY AND CAUSATION


I

In my last lecture but one I dwelt upon the interplay of causes and
reasons in one special case—the case of our immediate experiences of
the external world, the world in which we move, the world investigated
by the physical sciences. No case can indeed be more important; for
these immediate experiences are deemed by every man to be his guide
through all the hours of his waking life, and by every man of science
to supply the evidence on which depends all our knowledge of natural
laws.

Yet this very statement suggests the existence of another series of
problems not less important and not less closely connected with my
general argument. For, how do we get from particular experiences to
general laws—from beliefs about individual occurrences to beliefs
about the ordering of the universe? These beliefs, looked at from the
scientific point of view, are, as I have so often observed, a natural
product. They have a history like other natural products. They are the
effects of a long train of causes; and among those causes are some
which claim, rightly or wrongly, to be reasons, an uncounted multitude
which make no such claim, and others, again, which occupy a doubtful
position between the two.

Imagine an external intelligence studying the methods by which
earth-born creatures of various types adjust themselves to future
circumstances. The most primitive method is, I suppose, no more than
simple nervous reaction. The most developed method involves reasoned
expectation. And between these two extremes our supposed observer would
see a long series of intermediate forms melting into one another by
insensible gradation.

From the point of view of the argument I am endeavouring to present
to you, this development is of the greatest interest. The creation
of a capacity for expectation, and of an inclination to expect a
future similar to the past, must be deemed one of the most remarkable
triumphs of selection—if to selection it indeed be due. Here we have
this irrational mimic of reason, starting from the simplest forms of
response to external stimulus, improving them into such excellent
imitations of inductive reasoning as those which lead a chick, no more
than a few hours old, to reject food which it has once found nasty[11];
and finally evolving out of these humble beginnings a mode of inference
which, according to empirical philosophy, is the true and only source
of all our general knowledge, whether of nature or of man.

It must be owned, indeed, that the attempt to treat instinctive
expectation as a form of rational inference has been a lamentable
failure. By no exercise of ingenuity can beliefs about what is not
experienced be logically extracted from particular experiences,
multiply them as you will. It is in vain that empirical philosophers
attempt to give an air of rationality to this leap from the known to
the unknown by the use of high-sounding logical titles. “Induction
by simple enumeration” is doubtless an imposing name. But those who
practise the thing are in no wise improving on their predecessor, the
chick. Indeed they lag behind it. For the chick expects—but gives no
reason; the empirical philosopher expects—and gives a bad one.


II

Expectation, then, if it is to be rational, can only be rationally
extracted from experiences by the aid of one or more general
principles. What principles are they?

One of them, at all events, must be the regularity of nature. In some
form or other, and to some degree or other, this is assumed in every
scientific speculation and in every purposeful action reflectively
performed. It is, as you may recollect, one of the “inevitable beliefs
of common sense” to which I referred in my first lecture.

But you may also recollect that in the same lecture I pointed out that
inevitable beliefs, though we cannot avoid holding them in some shape,
are, and have been, held in many shapes; shapes which vary with the
changes in our general outlook on men and things. In what shape, then,
should our belief in regularity now be held?

The shape in which it is very commonly formulated is something of
this kind: “everything is caused; and the same causes are always
followed by the same effects.” This is the so-called “law of universal
causation.” It has been treated as an assured truth by philosophers of
many different schools, though not always for the same reasons; and, so
far as the physical universe is concerned, the modern world accepts it
without demur. It is, nevertheless, open to criticism from two points
of view. It asserts somewhat more about the course of nature than
experience suggests, and somewhat less than science requires. Let me
take the two points separately.

When I was dealing with ethics I had occasion to point out that if
the primitive manifestations of loyalty and love are products of
selection, they have developed by a kind of internal momentum, to a
point far beyond that to which selection can possibly have carried
them. Something of the same kind has happened in the case of the causal
postulate. Selection, we must suppose, has produced the capacity for
acquiring habitual expectations; and habitual expectation is induction
without reasoning. Like induction, it would not only be useless, but
harmful, if no regularity existed; if at any moment the future ceased
to bear some resemblance to the past. But the regularity asserted by
the law of universal causation is far in excess of this requirement.
The law applies to regions which never come within the range of finite
experience; and, as regards regions which do come within that range,
experience hardly confirms it. We may, of course, attribute the
apparent irregularities in nature to our ignorance or our errors; and
this, in fact, is what we always do. We must (we think) have observed
wrongly or insufficiently; or it may be that a clearer insight would
show how apparent aberrations really illustrate some larger law, or
depend on conditions at present beyond our ken. Such explanations
are easy; and, what is more, they are true. There is no complaint to
be made of a verdict in favour of absolute uniformity except that it
outruns the evidence. None surely, who understand the meaning of the
words they use, will dare to assert that nature _appears_ regular. What
they _may_ assert is, that the more you examine it, the more regular
it appears. The reign of law is always extending. New provinces are
always being added to its domains. Anomalies vanish as knowledge grows;
and the absolute uniformity which we now only know by faith, we may
some day know by sight.

To this “credo” (with reservations) I readily subscribe. But it sounds
a little strange in the mouths of some who preach it. Does it not imply
that we interpret our experiences in the light of a preconceived scheme
of things; that we force our observations into a mould which they do
not naturally fit? If, in unravelling a cypher, I come across passages
which are unintelligible, I attribute the check to my own ignorance
or dullness. Why? Because I know independently that the cypher has a
meaning, if only I could find it. But the empirical agnostic professes
to know nothing about the world, except what he has observed himself or
what other people have observed for him. Why, then, should he suppose
perfect regularity to exist when no perfect regularity appears? Why is
he not content to accept what he finds, namely, a regularity which is
real but incomplete?

It is no reply to say that patient genius is constantly detecting order
in apparent chaos. So it is. And when this happens, by all means
rearrange your map of the universe accordingly. But do not argue that
chaos is therefore non-existent. The belief in universal causation is
not based on argument, nor yet on observation. It depends on what I
have described as intuitive probability. And if we refuse to regard
nature as liable to lapses from perfect uniformity, this is not because
such a theory is unthinkable, not because it is contrary to experience,
not because it is incompatible with knowledge, not because it is fatal
to purposeful action; for it is none of these things. We reject it
because it is out of harmony with the ideal we have formed of what the
material universe ought to be and is: and so strong is this speculative
prepossession that there is no experimental evidence which would
convince a man of science that, when physical causes were the same,
physical consequences could be different.


III

But this observation brings me to my second commentary on the formula
of universal causation. If, as I have contended, it goes beyond what
mere experience suggests, it also falls short of what scientific
inference requires. The uniformity it postulates lacks a certain kind
of “structure” which is absolutely necessary if the past is to be
explained and the future foreseen. It is not enough for this purpose
that the course of Nature should be determined. It must be determined
after a particular pattern; its uniformity must conform to a particular
type.

At first sight this statement may seem rather obscure. What (you
will ask) is this “structure” or pattern whose absence would be so
disastrous to knowledge? It is a structure (I reply) which makes it
possible to break up the flow of events into intelligible repetitions.
It is not enough that the condition of the world at any moment should
be strictly determined by its condition at the preceding moment.
Such a world would, I suppose, completely conform to the doctrine of
uniformity, and obey both in spirit and in letter the law of universal
causation. Yet, unless it also conformed to the additional canon I
have just laid down, it would provide no basis either for scientific
knowledge or for practical decision. The same consequent would always
succeed the same antecedent, if and when it recurred. But, unless we
accept the cyclic theories of the Stoics, it never would recur. The
completest knowledge of the past would tell us nothing about the
future; not because the succession of events was arbitrary or (as the
word is commonly misused) miraculous; but because each cross-section
of the stream of Time (that is to say, the sum of all contemporaneous
facts and events) had to be considered as a single cause, completely
determining the whole cross-sections immediately in front of it; and,
as a single effect, completely determined by the whole cross-section
immediately behind it. Such a world might have a history, but it could
never have a science.

The reason is plain. Science requires uniformities even more than
uniformity; and a universe such as I have just described has uniformity
but no uniformities. The very phrase “laws of nature” shows that it is
these subordinate uniformities for which we look. The whole efforts
of the skilled investigator are directed towards so isolating the
sequences he is examining that his experiments shall become (as the
phrase goes) _crucial_. If no such isolation could be effected, it
would never be possible to point to some “phenomenon” and say of it
“Here is a cause,” and to some other “phenomenon” and say of it “Here
is its effect.” The world, in short, must have a structure which
connects its successive phases in such a way that definite parts of all
that exists or happens are knit with peculiar closeness to definite
parts of what existed or happened before. It is on these connecting
strands that we mainly fix our gaze; they are often difficult to trace,
they are sometimes hopelessly entangled; but when we can bring them
into clear vision, then, and not till then, we triumphantly say that we
have discovered a law of nature.

We are so familiar with this “fibrous” structure of the natural world
that it seems almost a matter of course. Mill, for example, assumes
it, unconsciously no doubt, through all his exposition of inductive
methods: and if he had not assumed it, these methods would have come
tumbling about his ears in irreparable ruin. But assuredly neither
he nor any other logician has a right to make such an assumption
in silence. In spite of many speculative difficulties, there is no
principle more vital to knowledge, practical and theoretical, than
the principle of “negligibility”; the principle which asserts that
sequences can be isolated and repeated, and that vast bodies of
contemporaneous facts and happenings may be wholly neglected. It is
much more important than the principle of causation, if by causation
is meant, not a working, though possibly imperfect, regularity, but the
speculative completeness implied by the phrase “universal causation” as
commonly interpreted.

It may be said, and I think with truth, that these observations
scarcely apply to a material world conceived in a purely mechanical
fashion. In such a world negligibility is theoretically measurable.
The mass of Sirius, without doubt, modifies the weight of the pen with
which I am writing. But the effect is demonstrably infinitesimal,
and negligibility is not assumed, but proved. Laplace’s calculator,
surveying the universe, would have no difficulty either in fixing
his attention on particular repetitions which exemplify the “laws of
nature,” or in regarding them as integral parts of a single mechanical
whole, whose successive phases (if the law of energy dissipation be
universal) can never be repeated.

But this does not lighten the difficulty. The world may, or may not,
be a single mechanical system; but, if it is, the fact can only be
empirically known to us through induction: and induction assumes
negligibility, and cannot, so far as I can see, move a step without it.
Choose the most perfect experiment on record, idealise its conditions
to your heart’s content; for greater security, suppose it repeated
even to weariness, how will you be advanced? There are, I suppose,
millions of circumstances, for the most part utterly unknown, which
have co-existed with all the experiments already tried, but will have
vanished before the next experiment is undertaken. Does this disturb
you? Do you ask yourself whether, among the unnumbered circumstances in
which the world of to-day differs from the world of yesterday, there
may not be one which is necessary to the expected effect? Not at all.
You brush them aside. You say they may be neglected. And doubtless you
do well. But why? Not on any grounds which observation or reasoning can
supply, not on any grounds formulated in the logic of induction, or
the calculus of chances. You trust yourself to a feeling of antecedent
probability;—the intuitive probability on whose importance I dwelt
in the last lecture, which is not the flower of experience but its
root;—and your trust will sometimes be betrayed.

The principle of negligibility, or (in terms of belief) the belief that
observed regularities may often be treated as if they were complete and
self-contained cases of cause and effect, separable from contemporary
events, is thus a necessary presupposition of concrete science; and,
like other presuppositions, it is incapable of scientific proof.
We often hear it said, indeed, that principles of this kind should
be regarded as hypotheses verified by an ever-increasing volume of
experimental proof. They are found to work; what more can be desired?

But it is not accurate to say that these and other fundamental
principles are, or ever have been, regarded either by common sense
or science as inferences from experience or as hypotheses requiring
verification. Nor is it accurate to suggest that verification differs
essentially from any other kind of experimental evidence except in
the date of its occurrence. If evidence follows conjecture, but not
otherwise, it is called verification; and though, from the point of
view of method, this chronological order is of immense importance, from
the point of view of logic it is nothing. A doubtful conjecture (let
us suppose) is “verified” by experiment. If the experiment had come
earlier there would have been no conjecture, but there would have been
equal evidence, indeed the same evidence. It is true that without the
conjecture there might have been no experiment, and that without the
experiment there might have been no proof. But, though the conjecture
occasioned the proof, it certainly adds nothing to its force, and we
therefore come back to the question already discussed—namely, whether
principles without which no inference from experiences is possible,
can be themselves inferred from experiences?—a question to which, as I
conceive, only one answer is possible. Experiences may produce habit,
and habit may produce expectation, and this process may masquerade
as induction. But expectations thus engendered belong to the causal
series, not the cognitive. Physiology and psychology may explain them.
But they can neither be proved nor treated as axiomatic.

Axiomatic they certainly are not; nor do they possess the universality
and precision of outline which we are accustomed to associate
with axioms. It is curious, in this connection, to note that the
philosophers who are most firmly resolved to root the principle of
regularity (they ignore negligibility) in experience always insist on
giving it that absolute character which our inferences from experience
rarely possess. The notion that fundamental beliefs should be liable to
exception, should be capable of degrees, and should apply unequally
in different fields of observation, is as abhorrent to them as to any
metaphysician out of the opposite camp. One would suppose, to hear them
talk, that, unless causation be universal, experience is worthless.


IV

The region where these uncompromising doctrines show to least advantage
is human character. I do not propose to discuss causation and free
will; but I may with advantage say something on a less hackneyed
theme, namely, negligibility and foreknowledge. The thesis I desire to
maintain is that, in dealing with a human character, full foreknowledge
is theoretically impossible, even though free will be wholly absent,
and the succession of psychic states be completely determined.
Practically impossible we know it to be. But most determinists would
hold that this impossibility is due partly to our ignorance and partly
to our incapacity. We know too little either of the general laws of
mind, or of individual character, or of surrounding circumstances,
to make accurate forecasts; and, even if we possessed the requisite
information, we could not use it, owing to the irremediable
weakness of our powers of calculation. It is this contention that
I wish to traverse. I hold that, had we the supernatural powers of
Laplace’s calculator, armed with a knowledge of the human heart which
supernatural powers of observation could alone supply, we should
still fail, because we are face to face with that which is inherently
incalculable.

The contrary opinion is due, I think, to an imperfect comprehension
of the doctrines I have touched on in this lecture. All human
foreknowledge depends on detecting old sequences in a new context. The
context, of course, is always new. There is never full or complete
repetition. But, unless there be partial repetitions embedded in the
universal flux, prescience is impossible. This is the doctrine of
“negligibility.”

Now consider two illustrative examples.

First, imagine yourself standing on the edge of a valley down which
a landslip has just let loose the waters of some great reservoir
in the hills. The catastrophe is sudden in its onset, brief in its
duration, wildly irregular in its character. Even the most tumultuous
cataract retains a certain steadiness of outline: and few sights are
more impressive than the stationary waves in a great rapid. But there
is here no trace of order imposed on disorder, fixity on motion. The
rushing wall of water, spouting into foam over every obstacle it
encounters, the tossing flood that follows furiously behind, seem
in their brief violence to present the very ideal of incalculable
confusion. But we know it is not so. In the presence of such a
spectacle our calculator would not feel a moment’s embarrassment. He
could forecast without difficulty the whole scene down to its minutest
eddy; the motions of each drop obey laws with which he was perfectly
familiar; and the total effect, catastrophic though it be, is but the
sum of all these component examples of natural uniformity.

Turn now and contemplate a calmer scene. Consider the commonplace life
of a commonplace man as it develops in the untroubled prosperity of a
steady business and a quiet home. Such a career seems as orderly and
uniform as the flood I have been describing is terrible and strange.
Surely no supernatural calculator is required to cast the horoscope
of its hero: for he does, and leaves undone, the same actions, he
thinks and leaves unthought the same ideas, as thousands of his
contemporaries; and, so far as outward appearance goes, he is an
indistinguishable member of an undistinguished crowd.

Yet, in spite of this, we know him to be unique. There never has been
before, nor will there ever be again, another individual exactly like
him. A similar statement, it may be urged, can be made about our
catastrophic flood. Though this has plenty of parallels, none of them,
strictly speaking, are exact. Where, then, lies the distinction on
which I am trying to insist? Let me endeavour to mark the contrast.

If the material world be conceived as a mechanical system, the flood
in my illustration may be regarded as a piece arbitrarily cut out
of it at the whim of the spectator. It possesses no natural unity;
and, like the whole of which it is a fraction, the moving particles
which compose it do each obey laws which are (we assume) perfectly
well known, and have been endlessly exemplified. Its behaviour is the
sum of the behaviour of these several parts: and it is by estimating
their movements that our imaginary calculator can prophesy its course
with absolute exactness. He is never perplexed by the problem of
negligibility; for negligibility in such a case can be accurately
measured, and our calculator possesses all the data required for its
measurement. In short, the principle of regularity may here be applied
in its most uncompromising form; it requires no qualification, nor can
it be pressed too boldly or too far.

But the case is otherwise when we have to abandon the strictly
mechanical point of view, and investigate regions where negligibility
has a small and uncertain application. Such a region is individual
consciousness. This possesses a natural or intrinsic unity. Its phases
are never precisely repeated; nor can it be regarded as a collection
of independent elements, the sequences of which may be separately
examined, verified, and repeated. Not only is the whole unique, but the
parts are unique also. Or, perhaps it would be more accurate to say
that there _are_ no parts possessing a fixed character of their own
apart from the whole. Not only is everything qualified by everything
else, but few of these qualifications are negligible. Perfect
repetition is therefore impossible, and our calculator, whatever his
powers, could never feel at home with his premises, or secure in his
conclusions. The present would always be new, and the future would
always be doubtful.

If this seems paradoxical it is, I think, mainly for two reasons. In
the first place, such a doctrine seems inconsistent with the fact that,
whatever Laplace’s calculator could do, humbler beings like ourselves
manage somehow or other to forecast the behaviour of our neighbours
with some small measure of success. This, no doubt, is true. But it
is in part because the alternatives of behaviour are very few and
very definite compared with the infinitely graduated variations of
thought, will, and feeling. Action is “canalised.” It can flow only
along channels engineered for it by circumstances, and among these the
choice is commonly small. But the character which lies behind action is
complex beyond all power of analysis, and variable beyond all powers
of anticipation. The routine which is unwaveringly pursued from month
to month and year to year is pursued each day in a different spirit:
and often a critical hour strikes when some well-drilled creature of
custom, to his own surprise and the scandal of his friends, deserts the
ancient ways and wanders suddenly forth into the unknown.

Of course, these violent aberrations are the exception. The more
familiar experience is that, in an orderly society, the alternatives of
action which need be taken into account are few, and the “limits of
deviation” narrow. Often, therefore, we can anticipate conduct without
any real insight into the depths of character or the complexities of
motive from which the conduct springs. And truly this is fortunate;
for, if mutual comprehension were necessary to social intercourse, how
could society exist?

But there is another reason why we take little note of the distinction
I am endeavouring to draw between the calculable uniformities of a
material world and the incalculable regularities of psychic life.
The distinction is rather speculative than practical. It does not
affect the routine of daily existence. For, although the course of
the material world is calculable, we mortals have neither the time
nor the knowledge nor the mental powers required to calculate it. We
behave, therefore, towards nature as we behave towards man. We content
ourselves with approximations, with analogies, with resemblances.
Even if we had the power, we should not have the time to resolve the
movement of all the bits of matter with which we have to deal from
minute to minute into the exact sequences of which they are composed.
We would not if we could. We apply rough methods; we are satisfied
with imperfect results. Nor are these results always more imperfect in
the psychic than in the material sphere of observation. The ways (for
example) of British weather are even more mysterious than the ways of
British men. Why, then, should we interest ourselves in a speculation
which tells us, however truly, that perfect foreknowledge is
theoretically possible in the first case, but theoretically impossible
in the second? In practice it is impossible in both. And with this we
must be content.

And yet the speculation is interesting. For the distinction between the
two cases lies deep. It has nothing (let me say again) to do with free
will. It has nothing to do with our ignorance of facts. It has nothing
to do with our intellectual insufficiency. It is due to a fundamental
difference between the uniformities of matter and the regularities of
mind. Perfect foresight requires perfect repetition, and in the psychic
sphere perfect repetition can never happen. Every self is unique; all
its experiences are unique; and these unique wholes are not compounded
of interchangeable elements obeying identical laws. They do not alter
by mere addition, subtraction, or rearrangement of parts. They grow.
And the sequence of one phase upon another faintly resembles that
which would prevail in the imaginary universe of which I spoke just
now, the universe where all contemporaneous events were treated as
the single effect of the immediate past and the single cause of the
immediate future. Of such a universe I observed that it would have a
history, but could have no science. And though we cannot go so far when
speaking of psychic unities, though we cannot rule out psychology or
sociology, it must be admitted that no regularities which observation
discloses can ever possess the precision which we theoretically
attribute to material mechanism. Instructive likenesses we shall find
in abundance, complete determination we may assume if we please; but
“laws,” in the full and strict sense of the term, we shall not find,
for they are not there.


NOTE

 The shortcomings of mechanism have been discussed by M. Bergson in a
 manner which no other thinker is likely to rival. He has, however,
 usually dealt with the subject in connection with _freedom_; whereas
 in this section I have only dealt with it in connection with
 foreknowledge, repetition, and what I have termed the doctrine of
 “negligibility.” He approaches it from the side of reality. I approach
 it from the side of inductive inference and the law of universal
 causation.


FOOTNOTES:

[11] Extract from Morgan’s “Habit and Instinct,” page 40. “A young
chick two days old, for example, had learnt to pick out pieces of
yolk from others of white of egg. I cut little bits of orange-peel of
about the same size as the pieces of yolk, and one of these was soon
seized, but at once relinquished, the chick shaking his head. Seizing
another, he held it for a moment in the bill, but then dropped it and
scratched at the base of his beak. That was enough; he could not again
be induced to seize a piece of orange-peel. The obnoxious material
was now removed, and pieces of yolk of egg substituted, but they were
left untouched, being probably taken for orange-peel. Subsequently, he
looked at the yolk with hesitation, but presently pecked doubtfully,
not seizing, but merely touching. Then he pecked again, seized, and
swallowed.”




LECTURE IX

TENDENCIES OF SCIENTIFIC BELIEF


I

In the sixth and eighth lectures of this course I dealt with two
inevitable beliefs which lie at the root of all science and all
practice—the beliefs that an independent, or, as it is commonly called,
an “external” world exists, and the belief that the world, whether
external or internal, has at least a measure of regularity. In the
seventh lecture I interpolated a discussion upon probability; and
showed, or attempted to show, that we must take account of a kind of
probability other than that which, in the hands of mathematicians, has
so greatly contributed to knowledge.

If, now, we consider these subjects in their mutual relation, we
perceive that an “inevitable” belief is one which possesses the highest
degree of this intuitive probability. These are two descriptions of the
same quality—one emphasising the objective, the other the subjective,
aspects of a single fact.

But this at once suggests a further inquiry. Probability is evidently
a matter of degree. A belief may be more probable or less probable.
Inevitableness, on the other hand, seems at first sight to be
insusceptible of gradation. It is, or it is not. Yet this extreme
definiteness vanishes if we regard it as a limiting case—as the last
term of a series whose earlier members represent varying degrees of
plausibility. On this view we should regard our beliefs about the
universe as moulded by formative forces, which vary from irresistible
coercion to faint and doubtful inclination. Beliefs in the reality of
the external world and in its regularity are important products of the
first. I now propose to call attention to some beliefs which are due
to the less obvious action of the second. Both kinds, whether capable
of proof or not, are more or less independent of it. Both are to be
regarded rather as the results of tendencies than as the conclusions of
logic.

I am well aware that a doctrine like this will find few admirers among
systematic thinkers. Inevitable beliefs which are fundamental without
being axiomatic; which lack definiteness and precision; which do not
seem equally applicable to every field of experience; which do not
claim to be of the essence of our understanding, like the categories
of the critical philosophy, or the so-called laws of thought, have
little to recommend them to philosophers. And when inevitableness is
treated as merely an extreme form of plausibility, when guidance is
discovered in tendencies which are weak and of uncertain application,
leading to error as well as to truth, their objections will scarcely be
mitigated.

Many of those who look at these problems from (what they deem to
be) a strictly scientific point of view are not likely to be more
favourable. Their loyalty to experience takes the form of supposing
that men accumulate knowledge by peering about for “sequences” among
“phenomena,” as a child looks for shells upon the beach—equally ready
to go north or south, east or west, as the humour of the moment moves
him. They would regard any antecedent preference for this or that
sort of explanation as a sin against the categorical imperatives of
intellectual morals. Science, they think, should have no partialities:
and as the honest investigator “entertains no belief with a conviction
the least in excess of the evidence,”[12] so he will resist any leaning
toward one kind of conclusion rather than another. Such is their view
of scientific duty. Scientific practice, however, has been otherwise.

That the practice of ordinary humanity has been otherwise seems indeed
sufficiently plain. The folk-lore, the magic, and the religions of
primitive races, with all their unborrowed resemblances, are there to
attest it. But these (you will say) are superstitions. The objection
is not, I think, relevant; yet, for the sake of peace, let us pass to
what is not regarded as a superstition, namely, morality. Here you
have the singular spectacle of a close agreement among moralists as
to the contents of the moral law, and a profound disagreement as to
the grounds on which the moral law is to be accepted. Can the power of
“tendency” be better shown? Can there be a clearer illustration of the
way in which it may guide belief and anticipate proof?


II

But our business to-day is neither with magic nor morality. It is
with physical science. When we survey man’s strivings to understand
the world in which he lives, can we detect any secular leanings
towards certain types of belief, any deep-lying inclination to guess
by preference in one direction rather than another? We surely can.
There are some answers, for example, which we refuse to take from
experiment and observation. I have already referred to one such case
in connection with causation. No man of science can be provoked, by
any seeming irregularities, into supposing that the course of nature
is subject to lapses from the rule of perfect uniformity. Consider,
again, another case, where the tendency is far less strong, but where
few can doubt that it is real. I refer to the deep-seated reluctance
felt by most physicists to accept as final any scientific explanation
which involves a belief in “action at a distance”—a reluctance which is
the more remarkable since action at a distance seems a familiar fact of
experience, while action by contact, when you attempt to work it out in
detail, seems hard to comprehend.

But there are tendencies feebler and less general than these which
give much food for reflection. Consider, for example, the familiar
history of atomism. At least as far back as Democritus we find the
confident assertion that the world consists of atoms, and that its
infinite variety is due to the motions and positions of immutable
and imperceptible units, which, if they are not exactly alike, at
least differ less among themselves than do the visible objects into
which they are compounded. Through successive centuries this theory
never died. With the revival of learning and the beginning of modern
science it burst into fresh life. It was believed in firmly by Bacon,
the prophet of the new era. It was treated as almost self-evident
by philosophers like Gassendi and Hobbes. Boyle held it in its most
uncompromising form. Newton assumed it without question. After a period
of varying fortunes in the eighteenth century, a modification of it in
the hands of Dalton started a new era in chemistry. Taken over by the
physicists, it now lies at the root of the modern theory of gases and
liquids; the modern theory of matter, the modern theory of heat, and
the modern theory of electricity.

This is a very strange story; and it is not really made less strange by
those who emphasise the differences between the atoms of Democritus,
which are the theme of its first chapter, and the electrons of Sir
Joseph Thomson, which appear in its last. Different indeed they are;
but, though the difference be great, the agreement is fundamental.

There are some who think that the achievement sung by Lucretius is
lessened by showing that the ancients who believed in atoms had no
experimental warrant for their convictions. And this is perfectly true.
They had not. Nor had Bacon, nor Gassendi, nor Hobbes, nor Boyle, nor
Newton. But this only brings into clearer relief the point I desire to
emphasise. If experience did not establish the belief, whence came it?
If it represents nothing better than an individual guess, why did it
appeal so persistently to leaders of scientific thought, and by what
strange hazard does it turn out to be true? It is certainly curious
that Tyndal, in a once famous address to the British Association at
Belfast, should have sketched the story from Democritus to Lucretius,
and from Lucretius to 1874, without ever putting these questions to his
audience, or, so far as I know, to himself.

But the Atomic Theory is by no means the only example of tendencies
which have played an important part in the evolution of science. There
are other beliefs, or kinds of beliefs, of the most far-reaching
importance which have almost exactly similar characteristics. They
anticipate evidence, they guide research, and in some shape or other
they turn out to be true.

Consider, for example, the group of beliefs which may be described
generally as beliefs in persistence, or beliefs in conservation—the
kind of belief which has been applied at different periods, and by
different schools of scientific thought, to matter, mass, bulk, weight,
motion, force, heat, and energy. As every one knows, these ascriptions
have not always been correct. But this only emphasises the strength of
the tendency. Weight was at one time supposed to be invariable. We know
now that the weight of a body varies with its position relatively to
other bodies. It is different, for example, at the poles from what it
is at the Equator. But how was the error discovered? Not by experiment.
There were experiments, no doubt. But those who undertook them already
believed in the law of gravitation; and the law of gravitation made it
necessary to distinguish the mass of any given fragment of matter both
from its weight and from the occult quality of gravity, which is one
of the factors on which its weight in any given situation depends. The
desire for conservation was not, however, defeated; since physicists,
till within the last few years, regarded both mass and gravity as
unalterable characteristics of all material bodies.

Again, consider the case of heat. This also has been regarded by
powerful schools of scientific thought as a substance that was
“conserved.” It is so regarded no longer. But is the inclination to
believe in conservation thereby defeated? Not at all. Though heat may
vanish, energy remains, and heat is a form of energy.

This doctrine of the conservation of energy is indeed the crowning
triumph of the tendency I am discussing, and provides the best
illustrations of its strength. For natural philosophers, intent on
finding conservation wherever they could, started too boldly on their
quest. Descartes regarded the conservation of motion as a self-evident
inference from the rationality of God. It is true that he neither
had experimental evidence of his doctrine, nor could he, under any
circumstances, have obtained it; for the energy of motion, as he
incorrectly described it, is not conserved. Leibnitz described it
correctly, and had as great a confidence as his predecessor in its
conservation, and as little proof to support him. So confident indeed
was he, and so independent of experimental evidence was his faith, that
he dogmatically asserted that, when motion seemed to disappear, what
was lost by the bodies which we see, was exactly taken up by their
component elements which we do not see; so that nothing in the nature
of what he called _vis viva_ was either lost or created. That this
transformation of energy from molar to molecular motion is constantly
occurring we now have sufficient proof. But Leibnitz had no proof; and
apparently thought none was required other than the Cartesian deduction
from the rationality of God. He made a bold anticipation of experience,
with nothing to support him but _a priori_ inclination.

His anticipation, however, was not only bold; it was fortunate. Kinetic
energy may really be transformed from molar to molecular motion, and
suffer no variation. It is conserved. On the other hand, it may not. It
may altogether cease, and what becomes of conservation then?

The scientific formula which satisfies both the facts of the case and
our desire for conservation is well known.[13] Energy, we are taught,
is of two kinds: kinetic and potential energy—energy in act and energy
in possibility. Each may turn into the other, and is continually so
turning. Each, therefore, may vary in quantity, and does vary in
quantity. It is only their sum which is indestructible.

Few scientific generalisations have been more fruitful; few have been
accepted on more slender evidence; none are more certain; none more
clearly illustrate our natural appetite for beliefs of conservation.
For, indeed, to the over-critical this sort of conservation must needs
leave something to be desired. When we assert the indestructibility of
matter we mean that a real entity continues through time unchanged in
quantity. But the word has a less obvious meaning when it is applied
to energy. The propriety of describing motion as energy seems indeed
clear enough; and if all energy were energy of motion, and if energy of
motion were always conserved, the conservation of energy would be on
all fours with the conservation of matter. But this is not the case.
In spite of Leibnitz, the amount of _vis viva_ is not indestructible.
What, then, happens when some of it is destroyed? In that case, says
science, energy changes its form but not its quantity. Energy of
motion becomes energy of position. What was kinetic becomes potential;
and, as the transformation is effected without loss, the principle of
conservation is saved.

When, however, energy thus becomes potential, in what sense does it
still exist, and why do we still call it energy? Energy suggests
“doings” and “happenings.” In the case of “potential” energy there are
no “doings” and no “happenings.” It is “stored”; and stored it may for
ever remain, hibernating (as it were) to all eternity, neither changing
nor causing change.

I do not quarrel with this; but I ask myself why “energy” should be
treated more leniently than “force.” Though force is now known not to
be “conserved,” ordinary thought attributes to it a certain continuity
of existence even when it does not show itself in motion. Force may be
exerted though nothing moves; as, for example, by a book pressing on a
table. But this view is profoundly unsatisfactory to many scientific
thinkers. For them force is nothing apart from “acceleration”; it
does not represent a cause, it only measures an effect. And if
in our ordinary moments we think otherwise, this (they think) is
simply because we illegitimately attribute to matter something which
corresponds to muscular effort in man.

It is not, perhaps, so easy as these critics suppose to extrude from
scientific thought (I say nothing of scientific language) this notion
of latent force—force which would produce movement if it could; and is
actively, though imperceptibly, striving to show itself in motion. But
why should they try? They welcome potential energy—why should they
anathematise latent force?

I think the answer is to be found in the fact that, whether force has,
or has not, any being apart from acceleration, it is certainly _not_
conserved; while, if energy be as real when it is potential as when it
is kinetic, it certainly _is_ conserved. A lapse into anthropomorphism,
therefore, is without excuse in the first case, while a lapse into
metaphysics is justified in the second. Any heresy may be forgiven, and
any evidence is worth respectful attention when conservation is the
thing to be proved.

I have sometimes amused myself by wondering what would have happened
about the year 1842 if the conservation of energy had been a
theological dogma instead of a scientific guess. Descartes, as I
mentioned just now, inferred the conservation of motion from the
attributes of God. Colding and Joule used the same argument in favour
of the conservation of energy. Now, if a belief in the conservation of
energy had been an integral part of religious orthodoxy in the early
forties of the last century surely some positivist philosopher would
have used Joule’s first investigation on Work and Heat to upset the
very dogma they were intended to establish. “Here” (he would have
said) “you have a believer in these metaphysico-theological methods
of discovering the laws of nature; and mark what happens. In true
medieval fashion he begins with some fanciful deductions from the
way in which he thinks God must have made the world. Fortunately,
however, though his principles are medieval, his methods are modern.
Not only is he a most brilliant experimenter, but he has the courage
to put his own speculations to an experimental test. He takes the
minutest precautions, he chooses the most favourable conditions, and
what happens? Does he prove his case? Do his results square with
his theories? Does he find a fixed relation between work and heat?
Does he justify his views of God? Not at all. Between his lowest
determination of the mechanical equivalent of heat, and his highest,
there is an immense and lamentable gap. What does he do? He takes their
mean value:—a very proper method if he knew there _was_ a mechanical
equivalent of heat; a very improper method if the reality of such an
equivalent was the thing to be proved. Clearly, if he had not put his
theological opinions into his scientific premises when he began his
experiment, he never would have got them out again as scientific
conclusions when he had reached its end.”

For my own part, I think this imaginary critic would, at that date,
have had something to say for himself—supposing always we are prepared
to accept his presuppositions about scientific method. If sound
reason and intellectual integrity require us to follow the lead of
observation and experiment with no antecedent preference for one class
of conclusions rather than another, then no doubt Joule and a long line
of distinguished predecessors were the spoilt children of fortune. They
made their discoveries in advance of their evidence, and in spite of
their methods. If they turned out to be right, or, at least, on the
right road, what can we do but criticise their credulity and wonder at
their luck? unless, indeed, their luck be a form of inspiration.

Before leaving beliefs of conservation, I must say one more word
about the most famous of them all—the belief in the conservation of
matter. This was an important article in the scientific creed of the
early atomists, who had no better evidence for it than they had for
the Atomic Theory itself. The material “substance” of the medieval
Aristotelians was, I imagine, also conserved; though as all that could
be known about it were its qualities, and as these were not necessarily
conserved, the doctrine in practice did not, perhaps, amount to
much. Then came the theory which, chiefly in the hands of Boyle[14]
at the end of the seventeenth century, initiated modern chemistry.
What was conserved, according to this view, was not a metaphysical
substance with detachable qualities, but elementary kinds of matter
with inseparable qualities; and out of these qualified entities was
compounded the whole material universe. I may incidentally observe
that a company promoter who should issue a prospectus based on no
better evidence than Boyle could advance for this tremendous theory
would certainly be in peril of the law. Yet Boyle was right: and,
notwithstanding subsequent developments, his conjecture remains the
corner-stone of modern chemical research.

Now, what is it that we intend to assert when we say that matter is
conserved, or is indestructible? We certainly do not mean that its
qualities never suffer change: for most of those which are obvious
and striking are always liable to change. If you sufficiently
vary temperature or pressure; if you effect chemical composition
or decomposition, the old characteristics will vanish and new
characteristics will take their place. What, then, is conserved?

In the first place, the lost qualities can (in theory) always be
restored, though not always without the expenditure of energy. Water
never ceases to be convertible into steam, nor steam into water. The
characteristics may vanish, but in appropriate conditions they will
always reappear.

Now science, as we have just seen, is tolerant of this notion of
latency or potentiality, and is ready enough to use it in aid of
beliefs in conservation. It was so used in connection with heat when
heat was regarded as a material substance. It is still so used in
connection with energy, which is sometimes described as an immaterial
substance. But (as I have already noted) it has never been so used
in connection with matter. The reason, I suppose, is that the
conservation of matter is much more a belief of common sense than the
conservation of energy. Energy is a conception which has but recently
been disengaged from other conceptions, like force and momentum, and
has but recently been associated with heat, with chemical reactions,
with changes of physical phase, and with electro-magnetic phenomena.
It is, therefore, a remote and somewhat abstract product of scientific
reflection; and science may do what it will with its own.

The notion of matter, on the other hand, is the common possession of
mankind. Whatever difficulties it may present to reflective analysis,
it presents none to our work-a-day beliefs. We are quite ready to
regard it as indestructible; but we are not ready to combine this
conviction with the view that it possesses no single characteristic
which may not be temporarily etherealised into a “potentiality.” On
such terms the eternal and unchanging identity of this or that parcel
of matter would seem a difficult and elusive doctrine, inappropriate
to the familiar and substantial world in which we suppose ourselves to
live. A belief in the conservation of matter has therefore always, or
almost always, carried with it a belief in the unchanging continuity of
at least _some_ material qualities; though as to what these qualities
are there has been much dispute.

Descartes, though not consistent, found unchanging continuity in the
attribute of size; so also did Hobbes. I presume that the older
atomists, who explained the appearances of matter by the shape of its
constituent atoms, would have regarded both atomic form and atomic
magnitude as persistent. But it was the assumption that the same piece
of ponderable matter always possessed the same gravitating power, and
that the same gravitating power was always associated with the same
mass, which, in the hands of Lavoisier, made so great a revolution in
eighteenth-century chemistry. Matter might change its size, its shape,
its colour, its phase, its power of acting and reacting; but its mass
and the quality which caused its weight it could not change; these
characteristics were always associated with each other, and were never
in abeyance.

To Lavoisier this double principle seemed self-evident. It was not
a hypothesis that required testing, but a touchstone by which other
hypotheses might safely be tested. If, in the course of some chemical
operation, weight increased, then no further proof was required to show
that mass had increased also, and that matter had been added. If, on
the other hand, weight diminished, then no further proof was required
to show that mass had diminished also, and that matter had been
subtracted. Whatever other qualities matter might gain or lose, mass
and gravity were indestructible and unchanging.

Men of science seemed, on the whole, content silently to assume these
principles of conservation without inconveniently raising the question
of evidence. Philosophers have not always been so cautious. Kant
supposed himself to have demonstrated them _a priori_. Schopenhauer
followed suit. Spencer declared their contraries to be inconceivable.
Mill said they were proved by experience. In short, all these eminent
thinkers vied with each other in conferring upon this doctrine the
highest honours permitted by their respective philosophies. But
apparently they were hasty. Recent discoveries have changed our point
of view. Mass (it seems) is no longer to be regarded as unchanging.
When bodies move at speeds approaching the velocity of light their
mass rapidly increases; so that this quality, which is peculiarly
characteristic of matter, must be removed from the category of those
which persist unchanged, and placed in the category of those which
change but can always be restored. Are we so to class gravitation?
Would the weight of a body moving nearly at the speed of light increase
as, in like circumstances, its inertia increases? If the answer is
“no,” then the link is broken which has for long been thought to
connect gravity and mass. If the answer is “yes,” then what Kant
regarded as certain _a priori_ is false; what Spencer regarded as
“inconceivable” is true; another carrier of “persistence” is lost, and
some fresh characteristic must be found which will remain unchanged
through all time, and under all conditions.

If this characteristic should turn out to be electric charge, what
a curious light it will throw upon our tendency to “beliefs of
conservation”[15]. After long seeking for some indestructible attribute
of matter; after taking up and rejecting size, shape, weight, mass,
and (perhaps) impenetrability, we shall at last find the object of our
quest in a conception which has (I suppose) been clearly realised only
within the last hundred years, about which our senses tell us nothing,
and of which the general run of educated mankind are still completely
ignorant!


III

It is possible, but not, I hope, probable, that some hasty reader may
suppose that in this and the preceding lectures I am recommending a
new method or instrument of discovery. “If you want to reach truth,
follow your unreasoned inclination,” may be his summary of my doctrine:
brief—but also unjust.

Of the manner in which discoveries are going to be made I say nothing,
for I know nothing. I am dealing with the past: and in the historic
movements of scientific thought I see, or think I see, drifts and
currents such as astronomers detect among the stars of heaven. And,
as the law of gravitation will hardly (I suppose) explain the last,
so observation, experiment, and reasoning will hardly explain the
first. They belong to the causal, not to the cognitive, series; and the
beliefs in which they issue are effects rather than conclusions.

Those who feel little sympathy for such a view may be inclined to
regard the relatively faint inclinations dealt with in this lecture
as ordinary scientific hypotheses confirmed by ordinary scientific
methods. This view, as I have already observed, is not applicable
to the inevitable beliefs dealt with in earlier lectures. Whatever
philosophers may say after the event the conviction that we live in an
external world of things and persons, where events are more or less
regularly repeated, has never been treated as a speculative conjecture
about which doubt was a duty till truth was proved. Beliefs like these
are not scientific hypotheses, but scientific presuppositions, and all
criticism of their validity is a speculative after-thought. The same
may be said, though with less emphasis and some qualification, about
beliefs fostered by the intellectual tendencies considered in this
chapter. These, as we have seen, are many. They are often inconsistent;
they are never inevitable; and they perpetually change their form under
the pressure of scientific discovery. Atomism in one shape follows
atomism in another; doctrines of conservation rise, fall, and rise
again; incredulity about “action at a distance” breeds explanations
whose failure (in the case of gravity) leaves the hope of final success
untouched.

Now, it would be an error to say that science does not, when it can,
apply to these various theories its ordinary methods of verification.
They are in a different position from inevitable beliefs, which can
hardly be verified because the process of verification assumes them.
Yet they must not be confounded with ordinary scientific hypotheses,
for they are something more and something different. Like these, they
are guesses, but they are guesses directed, not by the immediate
suggestion of particular experiences (which indeed they sometimes
contradict), but by general tendencies which are enduring though
sometimes feeble. Those who make them do not attempt the interrogation
of Nature wholly free from certain forms of bias. In cross-examining
that most stubborn and recalcitrant of witnesses they never hesitate
to ply her with leading questions; and, whether this procedure be
logically defensible or not, no lover of truth need regret its results.

Readers of M. Bergson’s “Creative Evolution” may remember the picture
he draws of the _élan vital_—the principle of life—forcing its way
along different paths of organic evolution, some without issue or
promise of progress; others leading on through regions hitherto
untraversed to ends remote and unforeseen. The secular movements of
science, as I conceive them, somewhat resemble this process, even
though it be faintly and at a distance. There is in both a striving
towards some imperfectly foreshadowed end; and in both the advance is
irregular, tentative, precarious, with many changes of direction, and
some reversals. Yet I would not press the parallel over-far or plunge
too deeply into metaphor. It is enough to say that as, according to M.
Bergson, the course followed by organic evolution cannot be wholly due
to Selection, so the course followed by scientific discovery, as I read
its history, cannot be wholly due to reasoning and experience. In both
cases we seem forced to assume something in the nature of a directing
influence, and (as I should add, though perhaps M. Bergson would
not) of supramundane design. And if “a Power that makes for truth”
be required to justify our scientific faith, we must surely count
ourselves as theists.


NOTE

 _Extracts from a letter from Sir Oliver Lodge on certain passages in
 this lecture relating to Energy and its transformations._

       *       *       *       *       *

 You say, on page 226, “Energy, we are taught, is of two kinds: kinetic
 and potential energy—energy in act and energy in possibility.”

 So long as emphasis is laid upon the words “we are taught,” I have
 no objection. People _have_ taught that, though I strongly object to
 such teaching, because I object to the idea “Energy in possibility” or
 “possible Energy” of any kind. I teach the identity of Energy in much
 the same terms as the identity of Matter; not merely the conservation,
 with the idea that one quantity can disappear and another quantity
 reappear. It is not another quantity, but the same; though it may
 have been locked up for any length of time. But then it has not been
 usually taught so, and I think you are dealing with what is usual.

       *       *       *       *       *

 Again, you say on page 227, “Energy suggests ‘doings’ and
 ‘happenings.’” No, say I, _activity_ suggests doings and happenings,
 and activity is Energy in transformation. Energy alone is something
 stored, like Capital. The earth’s rotational energy, for instance, is
 stored just as really as, and for a longer time than, the vegetation
 of the carboniferous epoch.

 Lower down you observe that “Force may be exerted though nothing
 moves.” Certainly it may, when resisted by an equal opposite force.
 But I fully admit that a lot of nonsense has been talked about the
 acceleration measure of force, as if it were the only measure, and
 that some criticism on this procedure is useful. But I should not
 speak of “latent” force; it is real force you have in mind, or at
 least real stress—_i.e._ two equal and opposite forces. It is latent
 Activity which becomes active when the other factor, viz. Motion,
 is supplied or allowed—_e.g._ by the release of a bent bow, or a
 wound-up spring, or a raised weight.

 So it is also with the Energy of a fly-wheel. That, too, is latent
 Activity until the other factor, viz. Force, is supplied, _i.e._
 when it is employed to overcome resistance, and therefore do work.
 Otherwise its Motion will be stored to all eternity.

 In short, activity, or doing of work, has two factors, Force and
 Motion. When both are present, work is done; when either is present
 alone, Energy is stored. Static Energy is the Force factor, with the
 possibility of a certain range of effectiveness understood; like a
 head of water, for instance, a certain height above the sea. Kinetic
 Energy is the Motion factor, with a certain inertia or possibility of
 Force understood; not Motion alone, but a mass in motion, so that it
 may be able to overcome resistance.

 There is no real reason why one form of Energy should be considered
 more “actual” or real than another; our eyes appreciate the one form,
 our muscles could appreciate the other.

       *       *       *       *       *

 In considering cases of Potential Energy, it is wise to realise that
 our knowledge about Gravitation is altogether too vague to make the
 case of a raised weight useful. And our knowledge of solid elasticity,
 though not so insignificant, is small enough to make the case of a
 bent bow or wound spring not very easy for fundamental contemplation.
 A case of chemical Energy, like gun-cotton, is in much the same
 predicament.

 But a typical and satisfactory example of Potential Energy is the
 case of a vessel of compressed air. Here is Energy stagnant enough,
 and violent enough when released, and one that can be locked up
 apparently to all eternity, and yet released by the pulling of a
 trigger. It represents, however, a case of which we know something
 concerning the internal mechanism; and we have learnt that in this
 case the force statically exerted on the walls of a vessel is really
 a kinetic bombardment of the molecules. In other words, we recognise
 in this case that Potential Energy is ultimately resolvable into
 Kinetic. It may be so in the other cases. And on Kelvin’s Kinetic
 Theory of Elasticity, which he showed a tendency in later life to
 abandon, all strain or stress in Ether may be ultimately due to its
 ultramicroscopic vortex circulation.

 But none of this is yet proven.

       *       *       *       *       *

 The general argument of your lecture deals with the ease with which
 certain general propositions are accepted as it were intuitively,
 without real conclusive evidence. I am entirely with you. And the way
 we feel secure about general laws, when adequate evidence for them is
 really impossible, has often struck me as remarkable. Even when facts
 appear to go against them, we question the facts, and find after all
 that in so doing we have been right.


FOOTNOTES:

[12] See Lecture VI.

[13] See note at the end of the Lecture.

[14] I got this view of Boyle’s relation to modern chemistry from
Ostwald’s work.

[15] In this chapter, especially in that part of it which deals with
beliefs of conservation, I am greatly indebted to Meyerson’s “Identité
et Réalité.” This acute and learned work is not written from the
same point of view as that which I have adopted; but this in no way
diminishes the amount of my obligation to its author.




