CHAPTER IX.—_That to give new Institutions to a Commonwealth, or to
reconstruct old Institutions on an entirely new basis, must be the work
of one Man_.


It may perhaps be thought that I should not have got so far into the
history of Rome, without some mention of those who gave that city its
institutions, and saying something of these institutions themselves, so
far as they relate to religion and war. As I have no wish to keep those
who would know my views on these matters in suspense, I say at once,
that to many it might seem of evil omen that the founder of a civil
government like Romulus, should first have slain his brother, and
afterwards have consented to the death of Titus Tatius the Sabine, whom
he had chosen to be his colleague in the kingship; since his
countrymen, if moved by ambition and lust of power to inflict like
injuries on any who opposed their designs, might plead the example of
their prince. This view would be a reasonable one were we to disregard
the object which led Romulus to put those men to death. But we must
take it as a rule to which there are very few if any exceptions, that
no commonwealth or kingdom ever has salutary institutions given it from
the first or has its institutions recast in an entirely new mould,
unless by a single person. On the contrary, it must be from one man
that it receives its institutions at first, and upon one man that all
similar reconstruction must depend. For this reason the wise founder of
a commonwealth who seeks to benefit not himself only, or the line of
his descendants, but his State and country, must endeavour to acquire
an absolute and undivided authority. And none who is wise will ever
blame any action, however extraordinary and irregular, which serves to
lay the foundation of a kingdom or to establish a republic. For
although the act condemn the doer, the end may justify him; and when,
as in the case of Romulus, the end is good, it will always excuse the
means; since it is he who does violence with intent to injure, not he
who does it with the design to secure tranquility, who merits blame.
Such a person ought however to be so prudent and moderate as to avoid
transmitting the absolute authority he acquires, as an inheritance to
another; for as men are, by nature, more prone to evil than to good, a
successor may turn to ambitious ends the power which his predecessor
has used to promote worthy ends. Moreover, though it be one man that
must give a State its institutions, once given they are not so likely
to last long resting for support on the shoulders of one man only, as
when entrusted to the care of many, and when it is the business of many
to maintain them. For though the multitude be unfit to set a State in
order, since they cannot, by reason of the divisions which prevail
among them, agree wherein the true well-being of the State lies, yet
when they have once been taught the truth, they never will consent to
abandon it. And that Romulus, though he put his brother to death, is
yet of those who are to be pardoned, since what he did was done for the
common good and not from personal ambition, is shown by his at once
creating a senate, with whom he took counsel, and in accordance with
whose voice he determined. And whosoever shall well examine the
authority which Romulus reserved to himself, will find that he reserved
nothing beyond the command of the army when war was resolved on, and
the right to assemble the senate. This is seen later, on Rome becoming
free by the expulsion of the Tarquins, when the Romans altered none of
their ancient institutions save in appointing two consuls for a year
instead of a king for life; for this proves that all the original
institutions of that city were more in conformity with a free and
constitutional government, than with an absolute and despotic one.

In support of what has been said above, I might cite innumerable
instances, as of Moses, Lycurgus, Solon, and other founders of kingdoms
and commonwealths, who, from the full powers given them, were enabled
to shape their laws to the public advantage; but passing over these
examples, as of common notoriety, I take one, not indeed so famous, but
which merits the attention of all who desire to frame wise laws. Agis,
King of Sparta, desiring to bring back his countrymen to those limits
within which the laws of Lycurgus had held them, because he thought
that, from having somewhat deviated from them, his city had lost much
of its ancient virtue and, consequently much of its strength and power,
was, at the very outset of his attempts, slain by the Spartan Ephori,
as one who sought to make himself a tyrant. But Cleomenes coming after
him in the kingdom, and, on reading the notes and writings which he
found of Agis wherein his designs and intentions were explained, being
stirred by the same desire, perceived that he could not confer this
benefit on his country unless he obtained sole power. For he saw that
the ambition of others made it impossible for him to do what was useful
for many against the will of a few. Wherefore, finding fit occasion, he
caused the Ephori and all others likely to throw obstacles in his way,
to be put to death; after which, he completely renewed the laws of
Lycurgus. And the result of his measures would have been to give fresh
life to Sparta, and to gain for himself a renown not inferior to that
of Lycurgus, had it not been for the power of the Macedonians and the
weakness of the other Greek States. For while engaged with these
reforms, he was attacked by the Macedonians, and being by himself no
match for them, and having none to whom he could turn for help, he was
overpowered; and his plans, though wise and praiseworthy, were never
brought to perfection.

All which circumstances considered, I conclude that he who gives new
institutions to a State must stand alone; and that for the deaths of
Remus and Tatius, Romulus is to be excused rather than blamed.




CHAPTER X.—_That in proportion as the Founder of a Kingdom or
Commonwealth merits Praise, he who founds a Tyranny deserves Blame._


Of all who are praised they are praised the most, who are the authors
and founders of religions. After whom come the founders of kingdoms and
commonwealths. Next to these, they have the greatest name who as
commanders of armies have added to their own dominions or those of
their country. After these, again, are ranked men of letters, who being
of various shades of merit are celebrated each in his degree. To all
others, whose number is infinite, is ascribed that measure of praise to
which his profession or occupation entitles him. And, conversely, all
who contribute to the overthrow of religion, or to the ruin of kingdoms
and commonwealths, all who are foes to letters and to the arts which
confer honour and benefit on the human race (among whom I reckon the
impious, the cruel, the ignorant, the indolent, the base and the
worthless), are held in infamy and detestation.

No one, whether he be wise or foolish, bad or good, if asked to choose
between these two kinds of men, will ever be found to withhold praise
from what deserves praise, or blame from what is to be blamed. And yet
almost all, deceived by a false good and a false glory, allow
themselves either ignorantly or wilfully to follow in the footsteps
such as deserve blame rather than praise; and, have it in their power
to establish, to their lasting renown, a commonwealth or kingdom, turn
aside to create a tyranny without a thought how much they thereby lose
in name, fame, security, tranquility, and peace of mind; and into how
much infamy, scorn, danger, and disquiet they run. But were they to
read history, and turn to profit the lessons of the past, it seems
impossible that those living in a republic as private citizens, should
not prefer, in their native city, to play the part of Scipio rather of
Cæsar; or that those who by good fortune or merit have risen to be
rulers, should not seek rather to resemble Agesilaus, Timoleon, and
Dion, than to Nabis, Phalaris and Dionysius; since they would see how
the latter are loaded with infamy, while the former have been extolled
beyond bounds. They would see, too, how Timoleon and others like him,
had as great authority in their country as Dionysius or Phalaris in
theirs, while enjoying far greater security. Nor let any one finding
Cæsar celebrated by a crowd of writers, be misled by his glory; for
those who praise him have been corrupted by his good fortune, and
overawed by the greatness of that empire which, being governed in his
name, would not suffer any to speak their minds openly concerning him.
But let him who desires to know how historians would have written of
Cæsar had they been free to declare their thoughts mark what they say
of Catiline, than whom Cæsar is more hateful, in proportion as he who
does is more to be condemned than he who only desires to do evil. Let
him see also what praises they lavish upon Brutus, because being
unable, out of respect for his power, to reproach Cæsar, they magnify
his enemy. And if he who has become prince in any State will but
reflect, how, after Rome was made an empire, far greater praise was
earned those emperors who lived within the laws, and worthily, than by
those who lived in the contrary way, he will see that Titus, Nerva,
Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus and Marcus had no need of prætorian cohorts,
or of countless legions to guard them, but were defended by their own
good lives, the good-will of their subjects, and the attachment of the
senate. In like manner he will perceive in the case of Caligula, Nero,
Vitellius, and ever so many more of those evil emperors, that all the
armies of the east and of the west were of no avail to protect them
from the enemies whom their bad and depraved lives raised up against
them. And were the history of these emperors rightly studied, it would
be a sufficient lesson to any prince how to distinguish the paths which
lead to honour and safety from those which end in shame and insecurity.
For of the twenty-six emperors from Cæsar to Maximinus, sixteen came to
a violent, ten only to a natural death; and though one or two of those
who died by violence may have been good princes, as Galba or Pertinax,
they met their fate in consequence of that corruption which their
predecessors had left behind in the army. And if among those who died a
natural death, there be found some bad emperors, like Severus, it is to
be ascribed to their signal good fortune and to their great abilities,
advantages seldom found united in the same man. From the study of this
history we may also learn how a good government is to be established;
for while all the emperors who succeeded to the throne by birth, except
Titus, were bad, all were good who succeeded by adoption; as in the
case of the five from Nerva to Marcus. But so soon as the empire fell
once more to the heirs by birth, its ruin recommenced.

Let a prince therefore look to that period which extends from Nerva to
Marcus, and contrast it with that which went before and that which came
after, and then let him say in which of them he would wish to have been
born or to have reigned. For during these times in which good men
governed, he will see the prince secure in the midst of happy subjects,
and the whole world filled with peace and justice. He will find the
senate maintaining its authority, the magistrates enjoying their
honours, rich citizens their wealth, rank and merit held in respect,
ease and content everywhere prevailing, rancour, licence, corruption
and ambition everywhere quenched, and that golden age restored in which
every one might hold and support what opinions he pleased. He will see,
in short, the world triumphing, the sovereign honoured and revered, the
people animated with love, and rejoicing in their security. But should
he turn to examine the times of the other emperors, he will find them
wasted by battles, torn by seditions, cruel alike in war and peace;
many princes perishing by the sword; many wars foreign and domestic;
Italy overwhelmed with unheard-of disasters; her towns destroyed and
plundered; Rome burned; the Capitol razed to the ground by Roman
citizens; the ancient temples desolated; the ceremonies of religion
corrupted; the cities rank with adultery; the seas covered with exiles
and the islands polluted with blood. He will see outrage follow
outrage; rank, riches, honours, and, above all, virtue imputed as
mortal crimes; informers rewarded; slaves bribed to betray their
masters, freedmen their patrons, and those who were without enemies
brought to destruction by their friends; and then he will know the true
nature of the debt which Rome, Italy, and the world owe to Cæsar; and
if he possess a spark of human feeling, will turn from the example of
those evil times, and kindle with a consuming passion to imitate those
which were good.

And in truth the prince who seeks for worldly glory should desire to be
the ruler of a corrupt city; not that, like Cæsar, he may destroy it,
but that, like Romulus, he may restore it; since man cannot hope for,
nor Heaven offer any better opportunity of fame. Were it indeed
necessary in giving a constitution to a State to forfeit its
sovereignty, the prince who, to retain his station, should withhold a
constitution, might plead excuse; but for him who in giving a
constitution can still retain his sovereignty, no excuse is to be made.

Let those therefore to whom Heaven has afforded this opportunity,
remember that two courses lie open to them; one which will render them
secure while they live and glorious when they die; another which
exposes them to continual difficulties in life, and condemns them to
eternal infamy after death.




