CHAPTER XIX.—_Whether Indulgence or Severity be more necessary for
controlling a Multitude._


The Roman Republic was distracted by the feuds of the nobles and
commons. Nevertheless, on war breaking out, Quintius and Appius
Claudius were sent forth in command of Roman armies. From his harshness
and severity to his soldiers, Appius was so ill obeyed by them, that
after sustaining what almost amounted to a defeat, he had to resign his
command. Quintius, on the contrary, by kindly and humane treatment,
kept his men obedient and returned victorious to Rome. From this it
might seem that to govern a large body of men, it is better to be
humane than haughty, and kindly rather than severe.

And yet Cornelius Tacitus, with whom many other authors are agreed,
pronounces a contrary opinion where he says, “_In governing a multitude
it avails more to punish than to be compliant._”[14] If it be asked how
these opposite views can be reconciled, I answer that you exercise
authority either over men used to regard you as their equal, or over
men who have always been subject to you. When those over whom you
exercise authority are your equals, you cannot trust wholly to
punishment or to that severity of which Tacitus speaks. And since in
Rome itself the commons had equal weight with the nobles, none
appointed their captain for a time only, could control them by using
harshness and severity. Accordingly we find that those Roman captains
who gained the love of their soldiers and were considerate of them,
often achieved greater results than those who made themselves feared by
them in an unusual degree, unless, like Manlius Torquatus, these last
were endowed with consummate valour. But he who has to govern subjects
such as those of whom Tacitus speaks, to prevent their growing insolent
and trampling upon him by reason of his too great easiness, must resort
to punishment rather than to compliance. Still, to escape hatred,
punishment should be moderate in degree, for to make himself hated is
never for the interest of any prince. And to escape hatred, a prince
has chiefly to guard against tampering with the property of any of his
subjects; for where nothing is to be gained by it, no prince will
desire to shed blood, unless, as seldom happens, constrained to do so
by necessity. But where advantage is to be gained thereby, blood will
always flow, and neither the desire to shed it, nor causes for shedding
it will ever be wanting, as I have fully shown when discussing this
subject in another treatise.

 [14] “In multitudine regenda plus poena quam obsequium valet.” But
 compare Annals, III. 55, “Obsequium inde in principem et æmulandi amoi
 validioi quam poena ex legibus et metus.”


Quintius therefore was more deserving of praise than Appius.
Nevertheless the opinion of Tacitus, duly restricted and not understood
as applying to a case like that of Appius, merits approval. But since I
have spoken of punishment and indulgence, it seems not out of place to
show how a single act of humanity availed more than arms with the
citizens of Falerii.




CHAPTER XX.—_How one humane act availed more with the men of Falerii,
than all the might of the Roman Arms._


When the besieging army of the Romans lay round Falerii, the master of
a school wherein the best-born youths of the city were taught, thinking
to curry favour with Camillus and the Romans, came forth from the town
with these boys, on pretence of giving them exercise, and bringing them
into the camp where Camillus was, presented them to him, saying, “_To
ransom these that city would yield itself into your hands._” Camillus,
however, not only rejected this offer, but causing the schoolmaster to
be stripped and his hands tied behind him, gave each of the boys a
scourge, and bade them lead the fellow back to the town scourging him
as they went. When the citizens of Falerii heard of this, so much were
they pleased with the humanity and integrity of Camillus, that they
resolved to surrender their town to him without further defence.

This authentic instance may lead us to believe that a humane and kindly
action may sometimes touch men’s minds more nearly than a harsh and
cruel one; and that those cities and provinces into which the
instruments and engines of war, with every other violence to which men
resort, have failed to force a way, may be thrown open to a single act
of tenderness, mercy, chastity, or generosity. Whereof history supplies
us with many examples besides the one which I have just now noticed.
For we find that when the arms of Rome were powerless to drive Pyrrhus
out of Italy, he was moved to depart by the generosity of Fabritius in
disclosing to him the proposal which his slave had made the Romans to
poison him. Again, we read how Scipio gained less reputation in Spain
by the capture of New Carthage, than by his virtue in restoring a young
and beautiful wife unviolated to her husband; the fame of which action
won him the love of the whole province. We see, too, how much this
generous temper is esteemed by a people in its great men; and how much
it is praised by historians and by those who write the lives of
princes, as well as by those who lay down rules of human conduct. Among
whom Xenophon has taken great pains to show what honours, and
victories, and how fair a fame accrued to Cyrus from his being kindly
and gracious, without taint of pride, or cruelty, or luxury, or any
other of those vices which cast a stain upon men’s lives.

And yet when we note that Hannibal, by methods wholly opposite to
these, achieved splendid victories and a great renown, I think I am
bound to say something in my next Chapter as to how this happened.




