CHAPTER XXVII.—_That Men seldom know how to be wholly good or wholly
bad_.


When in the year 1505, Pope Julius II. went to Bologna to expel from
that city the family of the Bentivogli, who had been princes there for
over a hundred years, it was also in his mind, as a part of the general
design he had planned against all those lords who had usurped Church
lands, to remove Giovanpagolo Baglioni, tyrant of Perugia. And coming
to Perugia with this intention and resolve, of which all men knew, he
would not wait to enter the town with a force sufficient for his
protection, but entered it unattended by troops, although Giovanpagolo
was there with a great company of soldiers whom he had assembled for
his defence. And thus, urged on by that impetuosity which stamped all
his actions, accompanied only by his body-guard, he committed himself
into the hands of his enemy, whom he forthwith carried away with him,
leaving a governor behind to hold the town for the Church. All prudent
men who were with the Pope remarked on his temerity, and on the
pusillanimity of Giovanpagolo; nor could they conjecture why the latter
had not, to his eternal glory, availed himself of this opportunity for
crushing his enemy, and at the same time enriching himself with
plunder, the Pope being attended by the whole College of Cardinals with
all their luxurious equipage. For it could not be supposed that he was
withheld by any promptings of goodness or scruples of conscience;
because in the breast of a profligate living in incest with his sister,
and who to obtain the princedom had put his nephews and kinsmen to
death, no virtuous impulse could prevail. So that the only inference to
be drawn was, that men know not how to be splendidly wicked or wholly
good, and shrink in consequence from such crimes as are stamped with an
inherent greatness or disclose a nobility of nature. For which reason
Giovanpagolo, who thought nothing of incurring the guilt of incest, or
of murdering his kinsmen, could not, or more truly durst not, avail
himself of a fair occasion to do a deed which all would have admired;
which would have won for him a deathless fame as the first to teach the
prelates how little those who live and reign as they do are to be
esteemed; and which would have displayed a greatness far transcending
any infamy or danger that could attach to it.




CHAPTER XXVIII.—_Whence it came that the Romans were less ungrateful to
their Citizens than were the Athenians_.


In the histories of all republics we meet with instances of some sort
of ingratitude to their great citizens, but fewer in the history of
Rome than of Athens, or indeed of any other republic. Searching for the
cause of this, I am persuaded that, so far as regards Rome and Athens,
it was due to the Romans having had less occasion than the Athenians to
look upon their fellow-citizens with suspicion. For, from the expulsion
of her kings down to the times of Sylla and Marius, the liberty of Rome
was never subverted by any one of her citizens; so that there never was
in that city grave cause for distrusting any man, and in consequence
making him the victim of inconsiderate injustice. The reverse was
notoriously the case with Athens; for that city, having, at a time when
she was most flourishing, been deprived of her freedom by Pisistratus
under a false show of good-will, remembering, after she regained her
liberty, her former bondage and all the wrongs she had endured, became
the relentless chastiser, not of offences only on the part of her
citizens, but even of the shadow of an offence. Hence the banishment
and death of so many excellent men, and hence the law of ostracism, and
all those other violent measures which from time to time during the
history of that city were directed against her foremost citizens. For
this is most true which is asserted by the writers on civil government,
that a people which has recovered its freedom, bites more fiercely than
one which has always preserved it.

And any who shall weigh well what has been said, will not condemn
Athens in this matter, nor commend Rome, but refer all to the necessity
arising out of the different conditions prevailing in the two States.
For careful reflection will show that had Rome been deprived of her
freedom as Athens was, she would not have been a whit more tender to
her citizens. This we may reasonably infer from remarking what, after
the expulsion of the kings, befell Collatinus and Publius Valerius; the
former of whom, though he had taken part in the liberation of Rome, was
sent into exile for no other reason than that he bore the name of
Tarquin; while the sole ground of suspicion against the latter, and
what almost led to his banishment, was his having built a house upon
the Cælian hill. Seeing how harsh and suspicious Rome was in these two
instances, we may surmise that she would have shown the same
ingratitude as Athens, had she, like Athens, been wronged by her
citizens at an early stage of her growth, and before she had attained
to the fulness of her strength.

That I may not have to return to this question of ingratitude, I shall
say all that remains to be said about it in my next Chapter.




CHAPTER XXIX.—_Whether a People or a Prince is the more ungrateful._


In connection with what has been said above, it seems proper to
consider whether more notable instances of ingratitude are supplied by
princes or peoples. And, to go to the root of the matter, I affirm that
this vice of ingratitude has its source either in avarice or in
suspicion. For a prince or people when they have sent forth a captain
on some important enterprise, by succeeding in which he earns a great
name, are bound in return to reward him; and if moved by avarice and
covetousness they fail to do so, or if, instead of rewarding, they
wrong and disgrace him, they commit an error which is not only without
excuse, but brings with it undying infamy. And, in fact, we find many
princes who have sinned in this way, for the cause given by Cornelius
Tacitus when he says, that “_men are readier to pay back injuries than
benefits, since to requite a benefit is felt to be a burthen, to return
an injury a gain_.”[3]

 [3] Proclivius est injuriæ quam beneficio vicem exsolvere, quia gratia
 oneri, ultio in quastu habetur. _Tacit. Hist._ iv. 2.


When, however, reward is withheld, or, to speak more correctly, where
offence is given, not from avarice but from suspicion, the prince or
people may deserve some excuse; and we read of many instances of
ingratitude proceeding from this cause. For the captain who by his
valour has won new dominions for his prince, since while overcoming his
enemies, he at the same time covers himself with glory and enriches his
soldiers, must needs acquire such credit with his own followers, and
with the enemy, and also with the subjects of his prince, as cannot be
wholly agreeable to the master who sent him forth. And since men are by
nature ambitious as well as jealous, and none loves to set a limit to
his fortunes, the suspicion which at once lays hold of the prince when
he sees his captain victorious, is sure to be inflamed by some arrogant
act or word of the captain himself. So that the prince will be unable
to think of anything but how to secure himself; and to this end will
contrive how he may put his captain to death, or at any rate deprive
him of the credit he has gained with the army and among the people;
doing all he can to show that the victory was not won by his valour,
but by good fortune, or by the cowardice of the enemy, or by the skill
and prudence of those commanders who were with him at this or the other
battle.

After Vespasian, who was then in Judæa, had been proclaimed emperor by
his army, Antonius Primus, who commanded another army in Illyria,
adopted his cause, and marching into Italy against Vitellius who had
been proclaimed emperor in Rome, courageously defeated two armies under
that prince, and occupied Rome; so that Mutianus, who was sent thither
by Vespasian, found everything done to his hand, and all difficulties
surmounted by the valour of Antonius. But all the reward which Antonius
had for his pains, was, that Mutianus forthwith deprived him of his
command of the army, and by degrees diminished his authority in Rome
till none was left him. Thereupon Antonius went to join Vespasian, who
was still in Asia; by whom he was so coldly received and so little
considered, that in despair he put himself to death. And of cases like
this, history is full. Every man living at the present hour knows with
what zeal and courage Gonsalvo of Cordova, while conducting the war in
Naples against the French, conquered and subdued that kingdom for his
master Ferdinand of Aragon; and how his services were requited by
Ferdinand coming from Aragon to Naples, and first of all depriving him
of the command of the army, afterwards of the fortresses, and finally
carrying him back with him to Spain, where soon after he died in
disgrace.

This jealousy, then, is so natural to princes, that they cannot guard
themselves against it, nor show gratitude to those who serving under
their standard have gained great victories and made great conquests on
their behalf. And if it be impossible for princes to free their minds
from such suspicions, there is nothing strange or surprising that a
people should be unable to do so. For as a city living under free
institutions has two ends always before it, namely to acquire liberty
and to preserve it, it must of necessity be led by its excessive
passion for liberty to make mistakes in the pursuit of both these
objects. Of the mistakes it commits in the effort to acquire liberty, I
shall speak, hereafter, in the proper place. Of mistakes committed in
the endeavour to preserve liberty are to be noted, the injuring those
citizens who ought to be rewarded, and the suspecting those who should
be trusted. Now, although in a State which has grown corrupt these
errors occasion great evils, and commonly lead to a tyranny, as
happened in Rome when Cæsar took by force what ingratitude had denied
him, they are nevertheless the cause of much good in the republic which
has not been corrupted, since they prolong the duration of its free
institutions, and make men, through fear of punishment, better and less
ambitious. Of all peoples possessed of great power, the Romans, for the
reasons I have given, have undoubtedly been the least ungrateful, since
we have no other instance of their ingratitude to cite, save that of
Scipio. For both Coriolanus and Camillus were banished on account of
the wrongs which they inflicted on the commons; and though the former
was not forgiven because he constantly retained ill will against the
people, the latter was not only recalled, but for the rest of his life
honoured as a prince. But the ingratitude shown towards Scipio arose
from the suspicion wherewith the citizens came to regard him, which
they had not felt in the case of the others, and which was occasioned
by the greatness of the enemy whom he had overthrown, the fame he had
won by prevailing in so dangerous and protracted a war, the suddenness
of his victories, and, finally, the favour which his youth, together
with his prudence and his other memorable qualities had gained for him.
These qualities were, in truth, so remarkable that the very
magistrates, not to speak of others, stood in awe of his authority, a
circumstance displeasing to prudent citizens, as before unheard of in
Rome. In short, his whole bearing and character were so much out of the
common, that even the elder Cato, so celebrated for his austere virtue,
was the first to declare against him, saying that no city could be
deemed free which contained a citizen who was feared by the
magistrates. And since, in this instance, the Romans followed the
opinion of Cato, they merit that excuse which, as I have said already,
should be extended to the prince or people who are ungrateful through
suspicion.

In conclusion it is to be said that while this vice of ingratitude has
its origin either in avarice or in suspicion, commonwealths are rarely
led into it by avarice, and far seldomer than princes by suspicion,
having, as shall presently be shown, far less reason than princes for
suspecting.




