CHAPTER II.—_That on occasion it is wise to feign Folly._


Never did any man by the most splendid achievements gain for himself so
great a name for wisdom and prudence as is justly due to Junius Brutus
for feigning to be a fool. And although Titus Livius mentions one cause
only as having led him to assume this part, namely, that he might live
more securely and look after his patrimony; yet on considering his
behavior we may believe that in counterfeiting folly it was also his
object to escape notice, and so find better convenience to overthrow
the kings, and to free his country whenever an occasion offered. That
this was in his mind is seen first of all from the interpretation he
gave to the oracle of Apollo, when, to render the gods favourable to
his designs, he pretended to stumble, and secretly kissed his mother
earth; and, again, from this, that on the death of Lucretia, though her
father, her husband, and others of her kinsmen were present, he was the
first to draw the dagger from her wound, and bind the bystanders by
oath never more to suffer king to reign in Rome.

From his example all who are discontented with their prince are taught,
first of all, to measure, and to weigh their strength, and if they find
themselves strong enough to disclose their hostility and proclaim open
war, then to take that course as at once the nobler and less dangerous;
but, if too weak to make open war, then sedulously to court the favour
of the prince, using to that end all such methods as they may judge
needful, adapting themselves to his pleasures, and showing delight in
whatever they see him delight in. Such an intimacy, in the first place,
enables you to live securely, and permits you, without incurring any
risk, to share the happy fortunes of the prince, while it affords you
every facility for carrying out your plans. Some, no doubt, will tell
you that you should not stand so near the prince as to be involved in
his downfall; nor yet at such a distance that when he falls you shall
be too far off to use the occasion for rising on his ruin. But although
this mean course, could we only follow it, were certainly the best,
yet, since I believe it to be impracticable, we must resort to the
methods above indicated, and either keep altogether aloof, or else
cleave closely to the prince. Whosoever does otherwise, if he be of
great station, lives in constant peril; nor will it avail him to say,
“I concern myself with nothing; I covet neither honours nor preferment;
my sole wish is to live a quiet and peaceful life.” For such excuses,
though they be listened to, are not accepted; nor can any man of great
position, however much and sincerely he desire it, elect to live this
life of tranquillity since his professions will not be believed; so
that although he might be contented to be let alone, others will not
suffer him to be so. Wherefore, like Brutus, men must feign folly; and
to play the part effectively, and so as to please their prince, must
say, do, see, and praise things contrary to their inclinations.

But now, having spoken of the prudence shown by Brutus when he sought
to recover the freedom of Rome, let us next speak of the severity which
he used to maintain it.




CHAPTER III.—_That to preserve a newly acquired Freedom we must slay
the Sons of Brutus._


The severity used by Brutus in preserving for Rome the freedom he had
won for her, was not less necessary than useful. The spectacle of a
father sitting on the judgment, and not merely sentencing his own sons
to death, but being himself present at their execution, affords an
example rare in history. But those who study the records of ancient
times will understand, that after a change in the form of a government,
whether it be from a commonwealth to a tyranny or from a tyranny to a
commonwealth, those who are hostile to the new order of things must
always be visited with signal punishment. So that he who sets up as a
tyrant and slays not Brutus, and he who creates a free government and
slays not the sons of Brutus, can never maintain himself long. But
since I have elsewhere treated of this matter at large, I shall merely
refer to what has there been said concerning it, and shall cite here
one instance only, happening in our own days, and memorable in the
history of our country.

I speak of Piero Soderini, who thought by his patience and goodness to
overcome the very same temper which prompted the sons of Brutus to
revert to the old government, and who failed in the endeavour. For
although his sagacity should have taught him the necessity, while
chance and the ambition of those who attacked him furnished him with
the opportunity of making an end of them, he never could resolve to
strike the blow; and not merely believed himself able to subdue
disaffection by patience and kindness, and to mitigate the enmity of
particular men by the rewards he held out to them, but also persuaded
himself, and often declared in the presence of his friends, that he
could not confront opposition openly, nor crush his adversaries,
without assuming extraordinary powers and passing laws destructive of
civil equality; which measures, although not afterward used by him for
tyrannical ends, would so alarm the community, that after his death
they would never again consent to appoint a Gonfalonier for life, an
office which he judged it essential both to maintain and strengthen.
Now although these scruples of his were wise and good, we ought never
out of regard for what is good, to suffer an evil to run its course,
since it may well happen that the evil will prevail over the good. And
Piero should have believed that as his acts and intentions were to be
judged by results, he might, if he lived and if fortune befriended him,
have made it clear to all, that what he did was done to preserve his
country, and not from personal ambition; and he might have so contrived
matters that no successor of his could ever turn to bad ends the means
which he had used for good ends. But he was misled by a preconceived
opinion, and failed to understand that ill-will is not to be vanquished
by time nor propitiated by favours. And, so, from not knowing how to
resemble Brutus, he lost power, and fame, and was driven an exile from
his country.

That it is as hard a matter to preserve a princedom as it is to
preserve a commonwealth, will be shown in the Chapter following.




