CHAPTER XV.—That weak States are always dubious in their Resolves; and
that tardy Resolves are always hurtful.


Touching this very matter, and with regard to these earliest beginnings
of war between the Latins and the Romans, it may be noted, that in all
our deliberations it behoves us to come quickly to a definite resolve,
and not to remain always in dubiety and suspense. This is plainly seen
in connection with the council convened by the Latins when they thought
to separate themselves from the Romans. For the Romans suspecting the
hostile humour wherewith the Latins were infected, in order to learn
how things really stood, and see whether they could not win back the
malcontents without recourse to arms, gave them to know that they must
send eight of their citizens to Rome, as they had occasion to consult
with them. On receiving which message the Latins, knowing that they had
done many things contrary to the wishes of the Romans, called a council
to determine who of their number should be sent, and to instruct them
what they were to say. But Annius, their prætor, being present in the
council when these matters were being discussed, told them “_that he
thought it of far greater moment for them to consider what they were to
do than what they were to say; for when their resolves were formed, it
would be easy to clothe them in fit words_.” This, in truth, was sound
advice and such as every prince and republic should lay to heart.
Because, where there is doubt and uncertainty as to what we may decide
on doing, we know not how to suit our words to our conduct; whereas,
with our minds made up, and the course we are to follow fixed, it is an
easy matter to find words to declare our resolves. I have noticed this
point the more readily, because I have often found such uncertainty
hinder the public business of our own republic, to its detriment and
discredit. And in all matters of difficulty, wherein courage is needed
for resolving, this uncertainty will always be met with, whenever those
who have to deliberate and decide are weak.

Not less mischievous than doubtful resolves are those which are late
and tardy, especially when they have to be made in behalf of a friend.
For from their lateness they help none, and hurt ourselves. Tardy
resolves are due to want of spirit or want of strength, or to the
perversity of those who have to determine, who being moved by a secret
desire to overthrow the government, or to carry out some selfish
purpose of their own, suffer no decision to be come to, but only thwart
and hinder. Whereas, good citizens, even when they see the popular mind
to be bent on dangerous courses, will never oppose the adoption of a
fixed plan, more particularly in matters which do not brook delay.

After Hieronymus, the Syracusan tyrant, was put to death, there being
at that time a great war between the Romans and the Carthaginians, the
citizens of Syracuse fell to disputing among themselves with which
nation they should take part; and so fierce grew the controversy
between the partisans of the two alliances, that no course could be
agreed on, and they took part with neither; until Apollonides, one of
the foremost of the Syracusan citizens, told them in a speech replete
with wisdom, that neither those who inclined to hold by the Romans, nor
those who chose rather to side with the Carthaginians, were deserving
of blame; but that what was utterly to be condemned was doubt and delay
in taking one side or other; for from such uncertainty he clearly
foresaw the ruin of their republic; whereas, by taking a decided
course, whatever it might be, some good might come. Now Titus Livius
could not show more clearly than he does in this passage, the mischief
which results from resting in suspense. He shows it, likewise, in the
case of the Lavinians, of whom he relates, that being urged by the
Latins to aid them against Rome, they were so long in making up their
minds, that when the army which they at last sent to succour the Latins
was issuing from their gates, word came that the Latins were defeated.
Whereupon Millionius, their prætor, said, “_With the Romans this short
march will cost us dear_.” But had the Lavinians resolved at once
either to grant aid or to refuse it, taking a latter course they would
not have given offence to the Romans, taking the former, and rendering
timely help, they and the Latins together might have had a victory. But
by delay they stood to lose in every way, as the event showed.

This example, had it been remembered by the Florentines, might have
saved them from all that loss and vexation which they underwent at the
hands of the French, at the time King Louis XII. of France came into
Italy against Lodovico, duke of Milan. For when Louis first proposed to
pass through Tuscany he met with no objection from the Florentines,
whose envoys at his court arranged with him that they should stand
neutral, while the king, on his arrival in Italy, was to maintain their
government and take them under his protection; a month’s time being
allowed the republic to ratify these terms. But certain persons, who,
in their folly, favoured the cause of Lodovico, delayed this
ratification until the king was already on the eve of victory; when the
Florentines suddenly becoming eager to ratify, the king would not
accept their ratification, perceiving their consent to be given under
constraint and not of their own good-will. This cost the city of
Florence dear, and went near to lose her freedom, whereof she was
afterwards deprived on another like occasion. And the course taken by
the Florentines was the more to be blamed in that it was of no sort of
service to Duke Lodovico, who, had he been victorious, would have shown
the Florentines many more signs of his displeasure than did the king.

Although the hurt which results to republics from weakness of this sort
has already been discussed in another Chapter, nevertheless, since an
opportunity offered for touching upon it again, I have willingly
availed myself of it, because to me it seems a matter of which
republics like ours should take special heed.




CHAPTER XVI.—_That the Soldiers of our days depart widely from the
methods of ancient Warfare._


In all their wars with other nations, the most momentous battle ever
fought by the Romans, was that which they fought with the Latins when
Torquatus and Decius were consuls. For it may well be believed that as
by the loss of that battle the Latins became subject to the Romans, so
the Romans had they not prevailed must have become subject to the
Latins. And Titus Livius is of this opinion, since he represents the
armies as exactly equal in every respect, in discipline and in valour,
in numbers and in obstinacy, the only difference he draws being, that
of the two armies the Romans had the more capable commanders. We find,
however, two circumstances occurring in the conduct of this battle, the
like of which never happened before, and seldom since, namely, that to
give steadiness to the minds of their soldiers, and render them
obedient to the word of command and resolute to fight, one of the
consuls put himself, and the other his son, to death.

The equality which Titus Livius declares to have prevailed in these two
armies, arose from this, that having long served together they used the
same language, discipline, and arms; that in disposing their men for
battle they followed the same system; and that the divisions and
officers of their armies bore the same names. It was necessary,
therefore, that as they were of equal strength and valour, something
extraordinary should take place to render the courage of the one army
more stubborn and unflinching than that of the other, it being on this
stubbornness, as I have already said, that victory depends. For while
this temper is maintained in the minds of the combatants they will
never turn their backs on their foe. And that it might endure longer in
the minds of the Romans than of the Latins, partly chance, and partly
the valour of the consuls caused it to fall out that Torquatus slew his
son, and Decius died by his own hand.

In pointing out this equality of strength, Titus Livius takes occasion
to explain the whole system followed by the Romans in the ordering of
their armies and in disposing them for battle; and as he has treated
the subject at length, I need not go over the same ground, and shall
touch only on what I judge in it most to deserve attention, but, being
overlooked by all the captains of our times, has led to disorder in
many armies and in many battles.

From this passage of Titus Livius, then, we learn that the Roman army
had three principal divisions, or battalions as we might now call them,
of which they named the first _hastati_, the second _principes_, and
the third _triarii_, to each of which cavalry were attached. In
arraying an army for battle they set the _hastati_ in front. Directly
behind them, in the second rank, they placed the _principes_; and in
the third rank of the same column, the _triarii_. The cavalry of each
of these three divisions they disposed to the right and left of the
division to which it belonged; and to these companies of horse, from
their form and position, they gave the name wings (_alæ_), from their
appearing like the two wings of the main body of the army. The first
division, the _hastati_, which was in front, they drew up in close
order to enable it to withstand and repulse the enemy. The second
division, the _principes_, since it was not to be engaged from the
beginning, but was meant to succour the first in case that were driven
in, was not formed in close order but kept in open file, so that it
might receive the other into its ranks whenever it was broken and
forced to retire. The third division, that, namely, of the _triarii_,
had its ranks still more open than those of the second, so that, if
occasion required, it might receive the first two divisions of the
_hastati_ and _principes_. These divisions, therefore, being drawn up
in this order, the engagement began, and if the _hastati_ were
overpowered and driven back, they retired within the loose ranks of the
_principes_, when both these divisions, being thus united into one,
renewed the conflict. If these, again, were routed and forced back,
they retreated within the open ranks of the _triarii_, and all three
divisions, forming into one, once more renewed the fight, in which, if
they were overpowered, since they had no further means of recruiting
their strength, they lost the battle. And because whenever this last
division, of the _triarii_, had to be employed, the army was in
jeopardy, there arose the proverb, “_Res redacta est ad triarios_,”
equivalent to our expression of _playing a last stake_.

The captains of our day, as they have abandoned all the other customs
of antiquity, and pay no heed to any part of the ancient discipline, so
also have discarded this method of disposing their men, though it was
one of no small utility. For to insure the defeat of a commander who so
arranges his forces as to be able thrice during an engagement to renew
his strength, Fortune must thrice declare against him, and he must be
matched with an adversary able three times over to defeat him; whereas
he whose sole chance of success lies in his surviving the first onset,
as is the case with all the armies of Christendom at the present day,
may easily be vanquished, since any slight mishap, and the least
failure in the steadiness of his men, may deprive him of victory.

And what takes from our armies the capacity to renew their strength is,
that provision is now no longer made for one division being received
into the ranks of another, which happens because at present an army is
arranged for battle in one or other of two imperfect methods. For
either its divisions are placed side by side, so as to form a line of
great width but of no depth or solidity; or if, to strengthen it, it be
drawn up in columns after the fashion of the Roman armies, should the
front line be broken, no provision having been made for its being
received by the second, it is thrown into complete disorder, and both
divisions fall to pieces. For if the front line be driven back, it
jostles the second, if the second line endeavour to advance, the first
stands in its way: and thus, the first driving against the second, and
the second against the third, such confusion follows that often the
most trifling accident will cause the ruin of an entire army.

At the battle of Ravenna, where M. de Foix, the French commander, was
slain, although according to modern notions this was a well-fought
field, both the French and the Spanish armies were drawn up in the
first of the faulty methods above described; that is to say, each army
advanced with the whole of its battalions side by side, so that each
presented a single front much wider than deep; this being always the
plan followed by modern armies when, as at Ravenna, the ground is open.
For knowing the disorder they fall into on retreat, forming themselves
in a single line, they endeavour, as I have said, as much as possible
to escape confusion by extending their front. But where the ground
confines them they fall at once into the disorder spoken of, without an
effort to prevent it.

Troops traversing an enemy’s country, whether to pillage or carry out
any other operation of war, are liable to fall into the same disorder;
and at S. Regolo in the Pisan territory, and at other places where the
Florentines were beaten by the Pisans during the war which followed on
the revolt of Pisa after the coming of Charles of France into Italy,
our defeat was due to no other cause than the behaviour of our own
cavalry, who being posted in front, and being repulsed by the enemy,
fell back on the infantry and threw them into confusion, whereupon the
whole army took to flight; and Messer Ciriaco del Borgo, the veteran
leader of the Florentine foot, has often declared in my presence that
he had never been routed by any cavalry save those who were fighting on
his side. For which reason the Swiss, who are the greatest proficients
in modern warfare, when serving with the French, make it their first
care to place themselves on their flank, so that the cavalry of their
friends, if repulsed, may not throw them into disorder.

But although these matters seem easy to understand and not difficult to
put in practice, none has yet been found among the commanders of our
times, who attempted to imitate the ancients or to correct the moderns.
For although these also have a tripartite division of their armies into
van-guard, main-body, and rear-guard, the only use they make of it is
in giving orders when their men are in quarters; whereas on active
service it rarely happens that all divisions are not equally exposed to
the same onset.

And because many, to excuse their ignorance, will have it that the
destructive fire of artillery forbids our employing at the present day
many of the tactics used by the ancients, I will discuss this question
in the following Chapter, and examine whether artillery does in fact
prevent us from using the valiant methods of antiquity.




