CHAPTER L.—_That neither any Council nor any Magistrate should have
power to bring the Government of a City to a stay._


T.Q. CINCINNATUS and Cn. Julius Mento being consuls of Rome, and being
at variance with one another, brought the whole business of the city to
a stay; which the senate perceiving, were moved to create a dictator to
do what, by reason of their differences, the consuls would not. But
though opposed to one another in everything else, the consuls were of
one mind in resisting the appointment of a dictator; so that the senate
had no remedy left them but to seek the help of the tribunes, who,
supported by their authority, forced the consuls to yield.

Here we have to note, first, the usefulness of the tribunes’ authority
in checking the ambitious designs, not only of the nobles against the
commons, but also of one section of the nobles against another; and
next, that in no city ought things ever to be so ordered that it rests
with a few to decide on matters, which, if the ordinary business of the
State is to proceed at all, must be carried out. Wherefore, if you
grant authority to a council to distribute honours and offices, or to a
magistrate to administer any branch of public business, you must either
impose an obligation that the duty confided shall be performed, or
ordain that, on failure to perform, another may and shall do what has
to be done. Otherwise such an arrangement will be found defective and
dangerous; as would have been the case in Rome, had it not been
possible to oppose the authority of the tribunes to the obstinacy of
the consuls.

In the Venetian Republic, the great council distributes honours and
offices. But more than once it has happened that the council, whether
from ill-humour or from being badly advised, has declined to appoint
successors either to the magistrates of the city or to those
administering the government abroad. This gave rise to the greatest
confusion and disorder; for, on a sudden, both the city itself and the
subject provinces found themselves deprived of their lawful governors;
nor could any redress be had until the majority of the council were
pacified or undeceived. And this disorder must have brought the city to
a bad end, had not provision been made against its recurrence by
certain of the wiser citizens, who, finding a fit opportunity, passed a
law that no magistracy, whether within or without the city, should ever
be deemed to have been vacated until it was filled up by the
appointment of a successor. In this way the council was deprived of its
facilities for stopping public business to the danger of the State.




CHAPTER LI.—_What a Prince or Republic does of Necessity, should seem
to be done by Choice_.


In all their actions, even in those which are matters of necessity
rather than choice, prudent men will endeavour so to conduct themselves
as to conciliate good-will. This species of prudence was well exercised
by the Roman senate when they resolved to grant pay from the public
purse to soldiers on active service, who, before, had served at their
own charges. For perceiving that under the old system they could
maintain no war of any duration, and, consequently, could not undertake
a siege or lead an army to any distance from home, and finding it
necessary to be able to do both, they decided on granting the pay I
have spoken of. But this, which they could not help doing, they did in
such a way as to earn the thanks of the people, by whom the concession
was so well received that all Rome was intoxicated with delight. For it
seemed to them a boon beyond any they could have ventured to hope for,
or have dreamed of demanding. And although the tribunes sought to make
light of the benefit, by showing the people that their burthens would
be increased rather than diminished by it, since taxes would have to be
imposed out of which the soldier’s stipend might be paid, they could
not persuade them to regard the measure otherwise than with gratitude;
which was further increased by the manner in which the senate
distributed the taxes, imposing on the nobles all the heavier and
greater, and those which had to be paid first.




CHAPTER LII.—_That to check the arrogance of a Citizen who is growing
too powerful in a State, there is no safer Method, or less open to
objection, than to forestall him in those Ways whereby he seeks to
advance himself_.


It has been seen in the preceding chapter how much credit the nobles
gained with the commons by a show of good-will towards them, not only
in providing for their military pay, but also in adjusting taxation.
Had the senate constantly adhered to methods like these, they would
have put an end to all disturbances in Rome, and have deprived the
tribunes of the credit they had with the people, and of the influence
thence arising. For in truth, in a commonwealth, and especially in one
which has become corrupted, there is no better, or easier, or less
objectionable way of opposing the ambition of any citizen, than to
anticipate him in those paths by which he is seen to be advancing to
the ends he has in view. This plan, had it been followed by the enemies
of Cosimo de’ Medici, would have proved a far more useful course for
them than to banish him from Florence; since if those citizens who
opposed him had adopted his methods for gaining over the people, they
would have succeeded, without violence or tumult, in taking his most
effective weapon from his hands.

The influence acquired in Florence by Piero Soderini was entirely due
to his skill in securing the affections of the people, since in this
way he obtained among them a name for loving the liberties of the
commonwealth. And truly, for those citizens who envied his greatness it
would have been both easier and more honourable, and at the same time
far less dangerous and hurtful to the State, to forestall him in those
measures by which he was growing powerful, than to oppose him in such a
manner that his overthrow must bring with it the ruin of the entire
republic. For had they, as they might easily have done, deprived him of
the weapons which made him formidable, they could then have withstood
him in all the councils, and in all public deliberations, without
either being suspected or feared. And should any rejoin that, if the
citizens who hated Piero Soderini committed an error in not being
beforehand with him in those ways whereby he came to have influence
with the people, Piero himself erred in like manner, in not
anticipating his enemies in those methods whereby they grew formidable
to him; I answer that Piero is to be excused, both because it would
have been difficult for him to have so acted, and because for him such
a course would not have been honourable. For the paths wherein his
danger lay were those which favoured the Medici, and it was by these
that his enemies attacked him, and in the end overthrew him. But these
paths Piero could not pursue without dishonour, since he could not, if
he was to preserve his fair fame, have joined in destroying that
liberty which he had been put forward to defend. Moreover, since
favours to the Medicean party could not have been rendered secretly and
once for all, they would have been most dangerous for Piero, who, had
he shown himself friendly to the Medici, must have become suspected and
hated by the people; in which case his enemies would have had still
better opportunities than before for his destruction.

Men ought therefore to look to the risks and dangers of any course
which lies before them, nor engage in it when it is plain that the
dangers outweigh the advantages, even though they be advised by others
that it is the most expedient way to take. Should they act otherwise,
it will fare with them as with Tullius, who, in seeking to diminish the
power of Marcus Antonius, added to it. For Antonius, who had been
declared an enemy by the senate, having got together a strong force,
mostly made up of veterans who had shared the fortunes of Cæsar,
Tullius counselled the senate to invest Octavianus with full authority,
and to send him against Antonius with the consuls and the army;
affirming, that so soon as those veterans who had served with Cæsar saw
the face of him who was Cæsar’s nephew and had assumed his name, they
would rally to his side and desert Antonius, who might easily be
crushed when thus left bare of support.

But the reverse of all this happened. For Antonius persuaded Octavianus
to take part with him, and to throw over Tullius and the senate. And
this brought about the ruin of the senate, a result which might easily
have been foreseen. For remembering the influence of that great
captain, who, after overthrowing all opponents, had seized on sovereign
power in Rome, the senate should have turned a deaf ear to the
persuasions of Tullius, nor ever have believed it possible that from
Cæsar’s heir, or from soldiers who had followed Cæsar, they could look
for anything that consisted with the name of Freedom.




