CHAPTER XLV.—_Whether in battle it is better to await and repel the
Enemy’s attack, or to anticipate it by an impetuous onset._


Decius and Fabius, the Roman consuls, were each of them in command of a
separate army, one directed against the Samnites, the other against the
Etruscans: and as both delivered battle, we have to pronounce, in
respect of the two engagements, which commander followed the better
method. Decius attacked his enemy at once with the utmost fury and with
his whole strength. Fabius was content, at first, merely to maintain
his ground; for judging that more was to be gained by a later attack,
he reserved his forces for a final effort, when the ardour of the enemy
had cooled and his energy spent itself. The event showed Fabius to be
more successful in his tactics than Decius, who being exhausted by his
first onset, and seeing his ranks begin to waver, to secure by death
the glory he could no longer hope from victory, followed the example
set him by his father, and sacrificed himself to save the Roman
legions. Word whereof being brought to Fabius, he, to gain, while he
yet lived, as much honour as the other had earned by his death, pushed
forward all the troops he had reserved for his final effort, and so
obtained an unexampled victory. Whence we see that of the two methods,
that of Fabius was the safer and the more deserving our imitation.




CHAPTER XLVI.—_How the Characteristics of Families come to be
perpetuated._


Manners and institutions differing in different cities, seem here to
produce a harder and there a softer race; and a like difference may
also be discerned in the character of different families in the same
city. And while this holds good of all cities, we have many instances
of it in reading the history of Rome. For we find the Manlii always
stern and stubborn; the Valerii kindly and courteous; the Claudii
haughty and ambitious; and many families besides similarly
distinguished from one another by their peculiar qualities.

These qualities we cannot refer wholly to the _blood_, for that must
change as a result of repeated intermarriages, but must ascribe rather
to the different training and education given in different families.
For much turns on whether a child of tender years hears a thing well or
ill spoken of, since this must needs make an impression on him whereby
his whole conduct in after life will be influenced. Were it otherwise
we should not have found the whole family of the Claudii moved by the
desires and stirred by the passions which Titus Livius notes in many of
them, and more especially in one holding the office of censor, who,
when his colleague laid down his magistracy, as the law prescribed, at
the end of eighteen months, would not resign, maintaining that he was
entitled to hold the office for five years in accordance with the
original law by which the censorship was regulated. And although his
refusal gave occasion to much controversy, and bred great tumult and
disturbance, no means could be found to depose him from his office,
which he persisted in retaining in opposition to the will of the entire
commons and a majority of the senate. And any who shall read the speech
made against him by Publius Sempronius, tribune of the people, will
find therein all the Claudian insolence exposed, and will recognize the
docility and good temper shown by the body of the citizens in
respecting the laws and institutions of their country.




CHAPTER XLVII.—_That love of his Country should lead a good Citizen to
forget private Wrongs._


While commanding as consul against the Samnites, Manlius was wounded in
a skirmish. His army being thereby endangered, the senate judged it
expedient to send Papirius Cursor as dictator to supply his place. But
as it was necessary that the dictator should be nominated by Fabius,
the other consul, who was with the army in Etruria, and as a doubt was
felt that he might refuse to nominate Papirius, who was his enemy, the
senate sent two messengers to entreat him to lay aside private
animosity, and make the nomination which the public interest required.
Moved by love of his country Fabius did as he was asked, although by
his silence, and by many other signs, he gave it to be known that
compliance was distasteful. From his conduct at this juncture all who
would be thought good citizens should take example.




CHAPTER XLVIII.—_That on finding an Enemy make what seems a grave
blunder, we should suspect some fraud to lurk behind._


The consul having gone to Rome to perform certain ceremonial rites, and
Fulvius being left in charge of the Roman army in Etruria, the
Etruscans, to see whether they could not circumvent the new commander,
planting an ambush not far from the Roman camp, sent forward soldiers
disguised as shepherds driving large flocks of sheep so as to pass in
sight of the Roman army. These pretended shepherds coming close to the
wall of his camp, Fulvius, marvelling at what appeared to him
unaccountable audacity, hit upon a device whereby the artifice of the
Etruscans was detected and their design defeated.

Here it seems proper to note that the captain of an army ought not to
build on what seems a manifest blunder on the part of an enemy; for as
men are unlikely to act with conspicuous want of caution, it will
commonly be found that this blunder is cover to a fraud. And yet, so
blinded are men’s minds by their eagerness for victory, that they look
only to what appears on the surface.

After defeating the Romans on the Allia, the Gauls, hastening on to
Rome, found the gates of the city left open and unguarded. But fearing
some stratagem, and being unable to believe that the Romans could be so
foolish and cowardly as to abandon their city, they waited during the
whole of that day and the following night outside the gates, without
daring to enter. In the year 1508, when the Florentines Avere engaged
in besieging Pisa, Alfonso del Mutolo, a citizen of that town,
happening to be taken prisoner, was released on his promise to procure
the surrender to the Florentines of one of the gates of the city.
Afterwards, on pretence of arranging for the execution of this
surrender, he came repeatedly to confer with those whom the Florentine
commissaries had deputed to treat with him, coming not secretly but
openly, and accompanied by other citizens of Pisa, whom he caused to
stand aside while he conversed with the Florentines. From all which
circumstances his duplicity might have been suspected, since, had he
meant to do as he had engaged, it was most unlikely that he should be
negotiating so openly. But the desire to recover possession of Pisa so
blinded the Florentines that they allowed themselves to be conducted
under his guidance to the Lucca Gate, where, through his treachery, but
to their own disgrace, they lost a large number of their men and
officers.




CHAPTER XLIX.—_That a Commonwealth to preserve its Freedom has constant
need of new Ordinances. Of the services in respect of which Quintius
Fabius received the surname of Maximus._


It must happen, as I have already said, in every great city, that
disorders needing the care of the physician continually spring up; and
the graver these disorders are, the greater will be the skill needed
for their treatment. And if ever in any city, most assuredly in Rome,
we see these disorders assume strange and unexpected shapes. As when it
appeared that all the Roman wives had conspired to murder their
husbands, many of them being found to have actually administered
poison, and many others to have drugs in readiness for the purpose.

Of like nature was the conspiracy of the Bacchanals, discovered at the
time of the Macedonian war, wherein many thousands, both men and women,
were implicated, and which, had it not been found out, or had the
Romans not been accustomed to deal with large bodies of offenders, must
have proved perilous for their city. And, indeed, if the greatness of
the Roman Republic were not declared by countless other signs, as well
as by the manner in which it caused its laws to be observed, it might
be seen in the character of the punishments which it inflicted against
wrong-doers. For in vindicating justice, it would not scruple or
hesitate to put a whole legion to death, to depopulate an entire city,
or send eight or ten thousand men at a time into banishment, subject to
the most stringent conditions, which had to be observed, not by one of
these exiles only, but by all. As in the case of those soldiers who
fought unsuccessfully at Cannæ, who were banished to Sicily, subject to
the condition that they should not harbour in towns, and should all eat
standing.

But the most formidable of all their punishments was that whereby one
man out of every ten in an entire army was chosen by lot to be put to
death. For correcting a great body of men no more effectual means could
be devised; because, when a multitude have offended and the ringleaders
are not known, all cannot be punished, their number being too great;
while to punish some only, and leave the rest unpunished, were unjust
to those punished and an encouragement to those passed over to offend
again. But where you put to death a tenth chosen by lot, where all
equally deserve death, he who is punished will blame his unlucky
fortune, while he who escapes will be afraid that another time the lot
may be his, and for that reason will be careful how he repeats his
offence. The poisoners and the Bacchanals, therefore, were punished as
their crimes deserved.

Although disorders like these occasion mischievous results in a
commonwealth, still they are not fatal, since almost always there is
time to correct them. But no time is given in the case of disorders in
the State itself, which unless they be treated by some wise citizen,
will always bring a city to destruction. From the readiness wherewith
the Romans conferred the right of citizenship on foreigners, there came
to be so many new citizens in Rome, and possessed of so large a share
of the suffrage, that the government itself began to alter, forsaking
those courses which it was accustomed to follow, and growing estranged
from the men to whom it had before looked for guidance. Which being
observed by Quintius Fabius when censor, he caused all those new
citizens to be classed in four _Tribes_, that being reduced within this
narrow limit they might not have it in their power to corrupt the
entire State. And this was a wisely contrived measure, for, without
introducing any violent change, it supplied a convenient remedy, and
one so acceptable to the republic as to gain for Fabius the
well-deserved name of Maximus.

THE END.

