CHAPTER III.—Of the Accidents which led in Rome to the creation of
Tribunes of the People; whereby the Republic was made more perfect.


They who lay the foundations of a State and furnish it with laws must,
as is shown by all who have treated of civil government, and by
examples of which history is full, assume that ‘all men are bad, and
will always, when they have free field, give loose to their evil
inclinations; and that if these for a while remain hidden, it is owing
to some secret cause, which, from our having no contrary experience, we
do not recognize at once, but which is afterwards revealed by Time, of
whom we speak as the father of all truth.

In Rome, after the expulsion of the Tarquins, it seemed as though the
closest union prevailed between the senate and the commons, and that
the nobles, laying aside their natural arrogance, had learned so to
sympathize with the people as to have become supportable by all, even
of the humblest rank. This dissimulation remained undetected, and its
causes concealed, while the Tarquins lived; for the nobles dreading the
Tarquins, and fearing that the people, if they used them ill, might
take part against them, treated them with kindness. But no sooner were
the Tarquins got rid of, and the nobles thus relieved of their fears,
when they began to spit forth against the commons all the venom which
before they had kept in their breasts, offending and insulting them in
every way they could; confirming what I have observed already, that men
never behave well unless compelled, and that whenever they are free to
act as they please, and are under no restraint everything falls at once
into confusion and disorder. Wherefore it has been said that as poverty
and hunger are needed to make men industrious, so laws are needed to
make them good. When we do well without laws, laws are not needed; but
when good customs are absent, laws are at once required.

On the extinction of the Tarquins, therefore, the dread of whom had
kept the nobles in check, some new safeguard had to be contrived, which
should effect the same result as had been effected by the Tarquins
while they lived. Accordingly, after much uproar and confusion, and
much danger of violence ensuing between the commons and the nobles, to
insure the safety of the former, tribunes were created, and were
invested with such station and authority as always afterwards enabled
them to stand between the people and the senate, and to resist the
insolence of the nobles.




CHAPTER IV.—That the Dissensions between the Senate and Commons of
Rome, made Rome free and powerful.


Touching those tumults which prevailed in Rome from the extinction of
the Tarquins to the creation of the tribunes the discussion of which I
have no wish to avoid, and as to certain other matters of a like
nature, I desire to say something in opposition to the opinion of many
who assert that Rome was a turbulent city, and had fallen into utter
disorder, that had not her good fortune and military prowess made
amends for other defects, she would have been inferior to every other
republic.

I cannot indeed deny that the good fortune and the armies of Rome were
the causes of her empire; yet it certainly seems to me that those
holding this opinion fail to perceive, that in a State where there are
good soldiers there must be good order, and, generally speaking, good
fortune. And looking to the other circumstances of this city, I affirm
that those who condemn these dissensions between the nobles and the
commons, condemn what was the prime cause of Rome becoming free; and
give more heed to the tumult and uproar wherewith these dissensions
were attended, than to the good results which followed from them; not
reflecting that while in every republic there are two conflicting
factions, that of the people and that of the nobles, it is in this
conflict that all laws favourable to freedom have their origin, as may
readily be seen to have been the case in Rome. For from the time of the
Tarquins to that of the Gracchi, a period of over three hundred years,
the tumults in Rome seldom gave occasion to punishment by exile, and
very seldom to bloodshed. So that we cannot truly declare those tumults
to have been disastrous, or that republic to have been disorderly,
which during all that time, on account of her internal broils, banished
no more than eight or ten of her citizens, put very few to death, and
rarely inflicted money penalties. Nor can we reasonably pronounce that
city ill-governed wherein we find so many instances of virtue; for
virtuous actions have their origin in right training, right training in
wise laws, and wise laws in these very tumults which many would
thoughtlessly condemn. For he who looks well to the results of these
tumults will find that they did not lead to banishments, nor to
violence hurtful to the common good, but to laws and ordinances
beneficial to the public liberty. And should any object that the
behaviour of the Romans was extravagant and outrageous; that for the
assembled people to be heard shouting against the senate, the senate
against the people; for the whole commons to be seen rushing wildly
through the streets, closing their shops, and quitting the town, were
things which might well affright him even who only reads of them; it
may be answered, that the inhabitants of all cities, more especially of
cities which seek to make use of the people in matters of importance,
have their own ways of giving expression to their wishes; among which
the city of Rome had the custom, that when its people sought to have a
law passed they followed one or another of those courses mentioned
above, or else refused to be enrolled as soldiers when, to pacify them,
something of their demands had to be conceded. But the demands of a
free people are hurtful to freedom, since they originate either in
being oppressed, or in the fear that they are about to be so. When this
fear is groundless, it finds its remedy in public meetings, wherein
some worthy person may come forward and show the people by argument
that they are deceiving themselves. For though they be ignorant, the
people are not therefore, as Cicero says, incapable of being taught the
truth, but are readily convinced when it is told them by one in whose
honesty they can trust.

We should, therefore, be careful how we censure the government of Rome,
and should reflect that all the great results effected by that
republic, could not have come about without good cause. And if the
popular tumults led the creation of the tribunes, they merit all
praise; since these magistrates not only gave its due influence to the
popular voice in the government, but also acted as the guardians of
Roman freedom, as shall be clearly shown in the following Chapter.




