CHAPTER XXIII.—_Why Camillus was banished from Rome._


It has been shown above how methods like those of Valerius are hurtful
to the citizen who employs them and to his country, while methods like
those of Manlius are advantageous for a man’s country, though sometimes
they be hurtful to the man himself. This is well seen in the example of
Camillus, whose bearing more nearly resembled that of Manlius than that
of Valerius, so that Titus Livius, in speaking of him, says, “_His
virtues were at once hated and admired by his soldiers._” What gained
him their admiration was his care for their safety, his prudence, his
magnanimity, and the good order he maintained in conducting and
commanding them. What made him hated was his being more stern to punish
than bountiful to reward; and Livius instances the following
circumstances as giving rise to this hatred. First, his having applied
the money got by the sale of the goods of the Veientines to public
purposes, and not divided it along with the rest of the spoils. Second,
his having, on the occasion of his triumph, caused his chariot to be
drawn by four white horses, seeking in his pride, men said, to make
himself the equal of the sun god. And, third, his having vowed to
Apollo a tenth of the Veientine plunder, which, if he was to fulfil his
vow, he had to recover from his soldiers, into whose hands it had
already come.

Herein we may well and readily discern what causes tend to make a
prince hateful to his people; the chief whereof is the depriving them
of some advantage. And this is a matter of much importance. For when a
man is deprived of what is in itself useful, he never forgets it, and
every trifling occasion recalls it to his mind; and because such
occasions recur daily, he is every day reminded of his loss. Another
error which we are here taught to guard against, is the appearing
haughty and proud, than which nothing is more distasteful to a people,
and most of all to a free people; for although such pride and
haughtiness do them no hurt, they nevertheless hold in detestation any
who display these qualities. Every show of pride, therefore, a prince
should shun as he would a rock, since to invite hatred without
resulting advantage were utterly rash and futile.




CHAPTER XXIV.—_That prolonged Commands brought Rome to Servitude_.


If we well examine the course of Roman history, we shall find two
causes leading to the break-up of that republic: one, the dissensions
which arose in connection with the agrarian laws; the other, the
prolongation of commands. For had these matters been rightly understood
from the first, and due remedies applied, the freedom of Rome had been
far more lasting, and, possibly, less disturbed. And although, as
touching the prolongation of commands, we never find any tumult
breaking out in Rome on that account, we do in fact discern how much
harm was done to the city by the ascendency which certain of its
citizens thereby gained. This mischief indeed would not have arisen, if
other citizens whose period of office was extended had been as good and
wise as Lucius Quintius, whose virtue affords a notable example. For
terms of accord having been settled between the senate and commons of
Rome, the latter, thinking their tribunes well able to withstand the
ambition of the nobles, prolonged their authority for a year.
Whereupon, the senate, not to be outdone by the commons, proposed, out
of rivalry, to extend the consulship of Quintius. He, however, refused
absolutely to lend himself to their designs, and insisted on their
appointing new consuls, telling them that they should seek to discredit
evil examples, not add to them by setting worse. Had this prudence and
virtue of his been shared by all the citizens of Rome, the practice of
prolonging the terms of civil offices would not have been suffered to
establish itself, nor have led to the kindred practice of extending the
term of military commands, which in progress of time effected the ruin
of their republic.

The first military commander whose term was extended, was Publius
Philo; for when his consulship was about to expire, he being then
engaged in the siege of Palæopolis, the senate, seeing he had the
victory in his hands, would not displace him by a successor, but
appointed him _Proconsul_, which office he was the first to hold. Now,
although in thus acting the senate did what they thought best for the
public good, nevertheless it was this act of theirs that in time
brought Rome to slavery. For the further the Romans carried their arms,
the more necessary it seemed to them to grant similar extensions of
command, and the oftener they, in fact, did so. This gave rise to two
disadvantages: first that a smaller number of men were trained to
command; second, that by the long continuance of his command a captain
gained so much influence and ascendency over his soldiers that in time
they came to hold the senate of no account, and looked only to him.
This it was, that enabled Sylla and Marius to find adherents ready to
follow them even to the public detriment, and enabled Cæsar to
overthrow the liberties of his country; whereas, had the Romans never
prolonged the period of authority, whether civil or military, though
they might have taken longer to build up their empire, they certainly
had been later in incurring servitude.




CHAPTER XXV.—_Of the poverty of Cincinnatus and of many other Roman
Citizens.


Elsewhere I have shown that no ordinance is of such advantage to a
commonwealth, as one which enforces poverty on its citizens. And
although it does not appear what particular law it was that had this
operation in Rome (especially since we know the agrarian law to have
been stubbornly resisted), we find, as a fact, that four hundred years
after the city was founded, great poverty still prevailed there; and
may assume that nothing helped so much to produce this result as the
knowledge that the path to honours and preferment was closed to none,
and that merit was sought after wheresoever it was to be found; for
this manner of conferring honours made riches the less courted. In
proof whereof I shall cite one instance only.

When the consul Minutius was beset in his camp by the Equians, the
Roman people were filled with such alarm lest their army should be
destroyed, that they appointed a dictator, always their last stay in
seasons of peril. Their choice fell on Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus, who
at the time was living on his small farm of little more than four
acres, which he tilled with his own hand. The story is nobly told by
Titus Livius where he says: “_This is worth listening to by those who
contemn all things human as compared with riches, and think that glory
and excellence can have no place unless accompanied by lavish wealth._”
Cincinnatus, then, was ploughing in his little field, when there
arrived from Rome the messengers sent by the senate to tell him he had
been made dictator, and inform him of the dangers which threatened the
Republic. Putting on his gown, he hastened to Rome, and getting
together an army, marched to deliver Minutius. But when he had defeated
and spoiled the enemy, and released Minutius, he would not suffer the
army he had rescued to participate in the spoils, saying, “_I will not
have you share in the plunder of those to whom you had so nearly fallen
a prey._” Minutius he deprived of his consulship, and reduced to be a
subaltern, in which rank he bade him remain till he had learned how to
command. And before this he had made Lucius Tarquininus, although
forced by his poverty to serve on foot, his master of the knights.

Here, then, we see what honour was paid in Rome to poverty, and how
four acres of land sufficed to support so good and great a man as
Cincinnatus. We find the same Poverty still prevailing in the time of
Marcus Regulus, who when serving with the army in Africa sought leave
of senate to return home that he might look after his farm which his
labourers had suffered to run to waste. Here again we learn two things
worthy our attention: first, the poverty of these men and their
contentment under it, and how their sole study was to gain renown from
war, leaving all its advantages to the State. For had they thought of
enriching themselves by war, it had given them little concern that
their fields were running to waste Further, we have to remark the
magnanimity of these citizens, who when placed at the head of armies
surpassed all princes in the loftiness of their spirit, who cared
neither for king nor for commonwealth, and whom nothing could daunt or
dismay; but who, on returning to private life, became once more so
humble, so frugal, so careful of their slender means, and so submissive
to the magistrates and reverential to their superiors, that it might
seem impossible for the human mind to undergo so violent a change.

This poverty prevailed down to the days of Paulus Emilius, almost the
last happy days for this republic wherein a citizen, while enriching
Rome by his triumphs, himself remained poor. And yet so greatly was
poverty still esteemed at this time, that when Paulus, in conferring
rewards on those who had behaved well in the war, presented his own
son-in-law with a silver cup, it was the first vessel of silver ever
seen in his house.

I might run on to a great length pointing out how much better are the
fruits of poverty than those of riches, and how poverty has brought
cities, provinces, and nations to honour, while riches have wrought
their ruin, had not this subject been often treated by others.




