CHAPTER XXXVIII.—_Of the Qualities of a Captain in whom his Soldiers
can confide._


Valerius Corvinus, as I have said already, was sent in command of an
army against the Samnites, who were then new enemies to Rome.
Wherefore, to reassure his soldiers and familiarize them with their
adversaries, he made them engage with them in various unimportant
passages of arms. But not thinking this enough, he resolved before
delivering battle to address his men, and by reminding them of their
valour and his own, to make it plain how little they should esteem such
enemies. And from the words which Titus Livius puts in his mouth we may
gather what manner of man the captain ought to be in whom an army will
put its trust. For he makes him say:—“_Bear ye also this in mind under
whose conduct and auspices you are about to fight, and whether he whom
you are to obey be great only in exhorting, bold only in words, and all
unpractised in arms; or whether he be one who himself knows how to use
his spear, to march before the eagles, and play his part in the
thickest of the fight. Soldiers! I would have you follow my deeds and
not my words, and look to me for example rather than for commands; for
with this right hand I have won for myself three consulships, and an
unsurpassed renown._” Which words rightly understood give every one to
know what he must do to merit a captain’s rank. And if any man obtain
it by other means, he will soon discover that advancement due to chance
or intrigue rather takes away than brings reputation, since it is men
who give lustre to titles and not titles to men.

From what has been said it will likewise be understood that if great
captains when matched against an unfamiliar foe have had to resort to
unusual methods for reassuring the minds even of veteran soldiers, much
more will it be necessary for them to use all their address when in
command of a raw and untried army which has never before looked an
enemy in the face. For if an unfamiliar adversary inspire terror even
in a veteran army, how much greater must be the terror which any army
will inspire in the minds of untrained men. And yet we often find all
these difficulties overcome by the supreme prudence of a great captain
like the Roman Gracchus or the Theban Epaminondas, of whom I have
before spoken, who with untried troops defeated the most practised
veterans. And the method they are said to have followed was to train
their men for some months in mimic warfare, so as to accustom them to
discipline and obedience, after which they employed them with complete
confidence on actual service.

No man, therefore, of warlike genius, need despair of creating a good
army if only he have the men; for the prince who has many subjects and
yet lacks soldiers, has only to thank his own inertness and want of
foresight, and must not complain of the cowardice of his people.




CHAPTER XXXIX.—_That a Captain should have good knowledge of Places._


Among other qualifications essential in a good captain is a knowledge,
both general and particular, of places and countries, for without such
knowledge it is impossible for him to carry out any enterprise in the
best way. And while practice is needed for perfection in every art, in
this it is needed in the highest degree. Such practice, or particular
knowledge as it may be termed, is sooner acquired in the chase than in
any other exercise; and, accordingly, we find it said by ancient
historians that those heroes who, in their day, ruled the world, were
bred in the woods and trained to the chase; for this exercise not
merely gives the knowledge I speak of, but teaches countless other
lessons needful in war. And Xenophon in his life of Cyrus tells us,
that Cyrus, on his expedition against the King of Armenia, when
assigning to each of his followers the part he was to perform, reminded
them that the enterprise on which they were engaged, differed little
from one of those hunting expeditions on which they had gone so often
in his company; likening those who were to lie in ambush in the
mountains, to the men sent to spread the toils on the hill-tops; and
those who were to overrun the plain, to the beaters whose business it
is to start the game from its lair that it may be driven into the
toils. Now, this is related to show how, in the opinion of Xenophon,
the chase is a mimic representation of war, and therefore to be
esteemed by the great as useful and honourable.

Nor can that knowledge of countries which I have spoken of as necessary
in a commander, be obtained in any convenient way except by the chase.
For he who joins therein gains a special acquaintance with the
character of the country in which it is followed; and he who has made
himself specially familiar with one district, will afterwards readily
understand the character of any strange country into which he comes.
For all countries, and the districts of which they are made up, have a
certain resemblance to one another, so that from a knowledge of one we
can pass easily to the knowledge of another. He therefore who is
without such practical acquaintance with some one country, can only
with difficulty, and after a long time, obtain a knowledge of another,
while he who possesses it can take in at a glance how this plain
spreads, how that mountain slopes, whither that valley winds, and all
other like particulars in respect of which he has already acquired a
certain familiarity.

The truth of what I affirm is shown by Titus Livius in the case of
Publius Decius, who, being military tribune in the army which the
consul Cornelius led against the Samnites, when the consul advanced
into a defile where the Roman army were like to be shut in by the
enemy, perceiving the great danger they ran, and noting, as Livius
relates, a hill which rose by a steep ascent and overhung the enemy’s
camp, and which, though hard of access for heavy-armed troops,
presented little difficulty to troops lightly armed, turned to the
consul and said:—“_Seest thou, Aulus Cornelius, yonder height over
above the enemy, which they have been blind enough to neglect? There,
were we manfully to seize it, might we find the citadel of our hopes
and of our safety._” Whereupon, he was sent by the consul with three
thousand men to secure the height, and so saved the Roman army. And as
it was part of his plan to make his own escape and carry off his men
safely under shelter of night, Livius represents him as saying to his
soldiers:—“_Come with me, that, while daylight still serves, we may
learn where the enemy have posted their guards, and by what exit we may
issue hence._” Accordingly, putting on the cloak of a common soldier,
lest the enemy should observe that an officer was making his rounds he
surveyed their camp in all directions.

Now any one who carefully studies the whole of this passage, must
perceive how useful and necessary it is for a captain to know the
nature of places, which knowledge had Decius not possessed he could not
have decided that it would be for the advantage of the Roman army to
occupy this hill; nor could he have judged from a distance whether the
hill was accessible or no; and when he reached the summit and desired
to return to the consul, since he was surrounded on all sides by the
enemy, he never could have distinguished the path it was safe for him
to take, from those guarded by the foe. For all which reasons it was
absolutely essential that Decius should have that thorough knowledge
which enabled him by gaining possession of this hill to save the Roman
army, and to discover a path whereby, in the event of his being
attacked, he and his followers might escape.




