CHAPTER XX.—_Of the Dangers incurred by Princes or Republics who resort
to Auxiliary or Mercenary Arms_.


Had I not already, in another treatise, enlarged on the inutility of
mercenary and auxiliary, and on the usefulness of national arms, I
should dwell on these matters in the present Discourse more at length
than it is my design to do. For having given the subject very full
consideration elsewhere, here I would be brief. Still when I find Titus
Livius supplying a complete example of what we have to look for from
auxiliaries, by whom I mean troops sent to our assistance by some other
prince or ruler, paid by him and under officers by him appointed, it is
not fit that I should pass it by in silence.

It is related, then, by our historian, that the Romans, after defeating
on two different occasions armies of the Samnites with forces sent by
them to succour the Capuans, whom they thus relieved from the war which
the Samnites Were waging against them, being desirious to return to
Rome, left behind two legions to defend the Capuans, that the latter
might not, from being altogether deprived of their protection, once
more become a prey to the Samnites. But these two legions, rotting in
idleness began to take such delight therein, that forgetful of their
country and the reverence due to the senate, they resolved to seize by
violence the city they had been left to guard by their valour. For to
them it seemed that the citizens of Capua were unworthy to enjoy
advantages which they knew not how to defend. The Romans, however,
getting timely notice of this design, at once met and defeated it, in
the manner to be more fully noticed when I come to treat of
conspiracies.

Once more then, I repeat, that of all the various kinds of troops,
auxiliaries are the most pernicious, because the prince or republic
resorting to them for aid has no authority over them, the only person
who possesses such authority being he who sends them. For, as I have
said, auxiliary troops are those sent to your assistance by some other
potentate, under his own flag, under his own officers, and in his own
pay, as were the legions sent by the Romans to Capua. Such troops, if
victorious, will for the most part plunder him by whom, as well as him
against whom, they are hired to fight; and this they do, sometimes at
the instigation of the potentate who sends them, sometimes for
ambitious ends of their own. It was not the purpose of the Romans to
violate the league and treaty which they had made with Capua; but to
their soldiers it seemed so easy a matter to master the Capuans, that
they were readily led into this plot for depriving them of their town
and territories. Many other examples might be given to the same effect,
but it is enough to mention besides this instance, that of the people
of Regium, who were deprived of their city and of their lives by
another Roman legion sent for their protection.

Princes and republics, therefore, should resort to any other expedient
for the defence of their States sooner than call in hired auxiliaries,
when they have to rest their entire hopes of safety on them; since any
accord or terms, however hard, which you may make with your enemy, will
be carefully studied and current events well considered, it will be
seen that for one who has succeeded with such assistance, hundreds have
been betrayed. Nor, in truth, can any better opportunity for usurping a
city or province present itself to an ambitious prince or commonwealth,
than to be asked to send an army for its defence. On the other hand, he
who is so greedy of conquest as to summon such help, not for purposes
of defence but in order to attack others, seeks to have what he can
never hold and is most likely to be taken from him by the very person
who helps him to gain it. Yet such is the perversity of men that, to
gratify the desire of the moment, they shut their eyes to those ills
which must speedily ensue and are no more moved by example in this
matter than in all those others of which I have spoken; for were they
moved by these examples they would see that the more disposed they are
to deal generously with their neighbours, and the more averse they are
to usurp authority over them, the readier will these be to throw
themselves into their arms; as will at once appear from the case of the
Capuans.




CHAPTER XXI.—_That Capua was the first City to which the Romans sent a
Prætor; nor there, until four hundred years after they began to make
War._


The great difference between the methods followed by the ancient Romans
in adding to their dominions, and those used for that purpose by the
States of the present time, has now been sufficiently discussed. It has
been seen, too how in dealing with the cities which they did not think
fit to destroy, and even with those which had made their submission not
as companions but as subjects, it was customary with the Romans to
permit them to live on under their own laws, without imposing any
outward sign of dependence, merely binding them to certain conditions,
or complying with which they were maintained in their former dignity
and importance. We know, further, that the same methods continued to be
followed by the Romans until they passed beyond the confines of Italy,
and began to reduce foreign kingdoms and States to provinces: as
plainly appears in the fact that Capua was the first city to which they
sent a prætor, and him from no motive of ambition, but at the request
of the Capuans themselves who, living at variance with one another,
thought it necessary to have a Roman citizen in their town who might
restore unity and good order among them. Influenced by this example,
and urged by the same need, the people of Antium were the next to ask
that they too might have a prætor given them; touching which request
and in connection with which new method of governing, Titus Livius
observes, “_that not the arms only but also the laws of Rome now began
to exert an influence;_” showing how much the course thus followed by
the Romans promoted the growth of their authority.

For those cities, more especially, which have been used to freedom or
to be governed by their own citizens, rest far better satisfied with a
government which they do not see, even though it involve something of
oppression, than with one which standing constantly before their eyes,
seems every day to reproach them with the disgrace of servitude. And to
the prince there is another advantage in this method of government,
namely, that as the judges and magistrates who administer the laws
civil and criminal within these cities, are not under his control, no
decision of theirs can throw responsibility or discredit upon him; so
that he thus escapes many occasions of calumny and hatred. Of the truth
whereof, besides the ancient instances which might be noted, we have a
recent example here in Italy. For Genoa, as every one knows, has many
times been occupied by the French king, who always, until lately, sent
thither a French governor to rule in his name. Recently, however, not
from choice but of necessity, he has permitted the town to be
self-governed under a Genoese ruler; and any one who had to decide
which of these two methods of governing gives the greater security to
the king’s authority and the greater content to the people themselves,
would assuredly have to pronounce in favour of the latter.

Men, moreover, in proportion as they see you averse to usurp authority
over them, grow the readier to surrender themselves into your hands;
and fear you less on the score of their freedom, when they find you
acting towards them with consideration and kindness. It was the display
of these qualities that moved the Capuans to ask the Romans for a
prætor; for had the Romans betrayed the least eagerness to send them
one, they would at once have conceived jealousy and grown estranged.

But why turn for examples to Capua and Rome, when we have them close at
hand in Tuscany and Florence? Who is there but knows what a time it is
since the city of Pistoja submitted of her own accord to the Florentine
supremacy? Who, again, but knows the animosity which down to the
present day exists between Florence and the cities of Pisa, Lucca, and
Siena? This difference of feeling does not arise from the citizens of
Pistoja valuing their freedom less than the citizens of these other
towns or thinking themselves inferior to them, but from the Florentines
having always acted towards the former as brothers, towards the latter
as foes. This it was that led the Pistojans to come voluntarily under
our authority while the others have done and do all in their power to
escape it. For there seems no reason to doubt, that if Florence,
instead of exasperating these neighbours of hers, had sought to win
them over, either by entering into league with them or by lending them
assistance, she would at this hour have been mistress of Tuscany. Not
that I would be understood to maintain that recourse is never to be had
to force and to arms, but that these are only to be used in the last
resort, and when all other remedies are unavailing.




