CHAPTER V.—_That changes in Sects and Tongues, and the happening of
Floods and Pestilences, obliterate the Memory of the Past_.


To those philosophers who will have it that the world has existed from
all eternity, it were, I think, a good answer, that if what they say be
true we ought to have record of a longer period than five thousand
years; did it not appear that the memory of past times is blotted out
by a variety of causes, some referable to men, and some to Heaven.

Among the causes which have a human origin are the changes in sects and
tongues; because when a new sect, that is to say a new religion, comes
up, its first endeavour, in order to give itself reputation, is to
efface the old; and should it so happen that the founders of the new
religion speak another tongue, this may readily be effected. This we
know from observing the methods which Christianity has followed in
dealing with the religion of the Gentiles, for we find that it has
abolished all the rites and ordinances of that worship, and obliterated
every trace of the ancient belief. True, it has not succeeded in
utterly blotting out our knowledge of things done by the famous men who
held that belief; and this because the propagators of the new faith,
retaining the Latin tongue, were constrained to use it in writing the
new law; for could they have written this in a new tongue, we may
infer, having regard to their other persecutions, that no record
whatever would have survived to us of past events. For any one who
reads of the methods followed by Saint Gregory and the other heads of
the Christian religion, will perceive with what animosity they pursued
all ancient memorials; burning the works of poets and historians;
breaking images; and destroying whatsoever else afforded any trace of
antiquity. So that if to this persecution a new language had been
joined, it must soon have been found that everything was forgotten.

We may believe, therefore, that what Christianity has sought to effect
against the sect of the Gentiles, was actually effected by that sect
against the religion which preceded theirs; and that, from the repeated
changes of belief which have taken place in the course of five or six
thousand years, the memory of what happened at a remote date has
perished, or, if any trace of it remain, has come to be regarded as a
fable to which no credit is due; like the Chronicle of Diodorus
Siculus, which, professing to give an account of the events of forty or
fifty thousand years, is held, and I believe justly, a lying tale.

As for the causes of oblivion which we may refer to Heaven, they are
those which make havoc of the human race, and reduce the population of
certain parts of the world to a very small number. This happens by
plague, famine, or flood, of which three the last is the most hurtful,
as well because it is the most universal, as because those saved are
generally rude and ignorant mountaineers, who possessing no knowledge
of antiquity themselves, can impart none to those who come after them.
Or if among the survivors there chance to be one possessed of such
knowledge, to give himself consequence and credit, he will conceal and
pervert it to suit his private ends, so that to his posterity there
will remain only so much as he may have been pleased to communicate,
and no more.

That these floods, plagues, and famines do in fact happen, I see no
reason to doubt, both because we find all histories full of them, and
recognize their effect in this oblivion of the past, and also because
it is reasonable that such things should happen. For as when much
superfluous matter has gathered in simple bodies, nature makes repeated
efforts to remove and purge it away, thereby promoting the health of
these bodies, so likewise as regards that composite body the human
race, when every province of the world so teems with inhabitants that
they can neither subsist where they are nor remove elsewhere, every
region being equally crowded and over-peopled, and when human craft and
wickedness have reached their highest pitch, it must needs come about
that the world will purge herself in one or another of these three
ways, to the end that men, becoming few and contrite, may amend their
lives and live with more convenience.

Etruria, then, as has been said above, was at one time powerful,
abounding in piety and valour, practising her own customs, and speaking
her own tongue; but all this was effaced by the power of Rome, so that,
as I have observed already, nothing is left of her but the memory of a
name.




CHAPTER VI.—_Of the Methods followed by the Romans in making War_.


Having treated of the methods followed by the Romans for increasing
their power, we shall now go on to consider those which they used in
making war; and in all they did we shall find how wisely they turned
aside from the common path in order to render their progress to supreme
greatness easy.

Whosoever makes war, whether from policy or ambition, means to acquire
and to hold what he acquires, and to carry on the war he has undertaken
in such a manner that it shall enrich and not impoverish his native
country and State. It is necessary, therefore, whether for acquiring or
holding, to consider how cost may be avoided, and everything done most
advantageously for the public welfare. But whoever would effect all
this, must take the course and follow the methods of the Romans; which
consisted, first of all, in making their wars, as the French say,
_great and short_. For entering the field with strong armies, they
brought to a speedy conclusion whatever wars they had with the Latins,
the Samnites, or the Etruscans.

And if we take note of all the wars in which they were engaged, from
the foundation of their city down to the siege of Veii, all will be
seen to have been quickly ended some in twenty, some in ten, and some
in no more than six days. And this was their wont: So soon as war was
declared they would go forth with their armies to meet the enemy and at
once deliver battle. The enemy, on being routed, to save their country
from pillage, very soon came to terms, when the Romans would take from
them certain portions of their territory. These they either assigned to
particular persons, or made the seat of a colony, which being settled
on the confines of the conquered country served as a defence to the
Roman frontier, to the advantage both of the colonists who had these
lands given them, and of the Roman people whose borders were thus
guarded at no expense to themselves. And no other system of defence
could have been at once so safe, so strong, and so effectual. For while
the enemy were not actually in the field, this guard was sufficient;
and when they came out in force to overwhelm the colony, the Romans
also went forth in strength and gave them battle; and getting the
better of them, imposed harder terms than before, and so returned home.
And in this way they came gradually to establish their name abroad, and
to add to their power.

These methods they continued to employ until they changed their system
of warfare, which they did during the siege of Veii; when to enable
them to carry on a prolonged war, they passed a law for the payment of
their soldiers, whom, up to that time they had not paid, nor needed to
pay, because till then their wars had been of brief duration.
Nevertheless, while allowing pay to their soldiers that they might thus
wage longer wars, and keep their armies longer in the field when
employed on distant enterprises, they never departed from their old
plan of bringing their campaigns to as speedy an end as place and
circumstances allowed, nor ever ceased to plant colonies.

Their custom of terminating their wars with despatch, besides being
natural to the Romans, was strengthened by the ambition of their
consuls, who, being appointed for twelve months only, six of which they
had to spend in the city, were eager to bring their wars to an end as
rapidly as they could, that they might enjoy the honours of a triumph.
The usage of planting colonies was recommended by the great advantage
and convenience which resulted from it. In dealing with the spoils of
warfare their practice, no doubt, in a measure changed, so that in this
respect they were not afterwards so liberal as they were at first;
partly, because liberality did not seem so necessary when their
soldiers were in receipt of pay; and, partly, because the spoils
themselves being greater than before, they thought by their help so to
enrich the public treasury as to be able to carry on their wars without
taxing the city; and, in fact, by pursuing this course the public
revenues were soon greatly augmented. The methods thus followed by the
Romans in dividing plunder and in planting colonies had, accordingly,
this result, that whereas other less prudent princes and republics are
impoverished by war, Rome was enriched by it; nay, so far was the
system carried, that no consul could hope for a triumph unless he
brought back with him for the public treasury much gold and silver and
spoils of every kind.

By methods such as these, at one time bringing their wars to a rapid
conclusion by invasion and actual defeat, at another wearing out an
enemy by protracted hostilities, and again by concluding peace on
advantageous terms, the Romans continually grew richer and more
powerful.




