CHAPTER XXXV—_Why the Creation of the Decemvirate in Rome, although
brought about by the free and open Suffrage of the Citizens, was
hurtful to the Liberties of that Republic_


The fact of those ten citizens who were chosen by the Roman people to
make laws for Rome, in time becoming her tyrants and depriving her of
her freedom, may seem contrary to what I have said above, namely that
it is the authority which is violently usurped, and not that conferred
by the free suffrages of the people which is injurious to a republic.
Here, however, we have to take into account both the mode in which, and
the term for which authority is given. Where authority is unrestricted
and is conferred for a long term, meaning by that for a year or more,
it is always attended with danger, and its results will be good or bad
according as the men are good or bad to whom it is committed. Now when
we compare the authority of the Ten with that possessed by the
dictator, we see that the power placed in the hands of the former was
out of all proportion greater than that entrusted to the latter. For
when a dictator was appointed there still remained the tribunes, the
consuls, and the senate, all of them invested with authority of which
the dictator could not deprive them. For even if he could have taken
his consulship from one man, or his status as a senator from another,
he could not abolish the senatorial rank nor pass new laws. So that the
senate, the consuls, and the tribunes continuing to exist with
undiminished authority were a check upon him and kept him in the right
road. But on the creation of the Ten, the opposite of all this took
place. For on their appointment, consuls and tribunes were swept away,
and express powers were given to the new magistrates to make laws and
do whatever else they thought fit, with the entire authority of the
whole Roman people. So that finding themselves alone without consuls or
tribunes to control them, and with no appeal against them to the
people, and thus there being none to keep a watch upon them, and
further being stimulated by the ambition of Appius, in the second year
of their office they began to wax insolent.

Let it be noted, therefore, that when it is said that authority given
by the public vote is never hurtful to any commonwealth, it is assumed
that the people will never be led to confer that authority without due
limitations, or for other than a reasonable term. Should they, however
either from being deceived or otherwise blinded, be induced to bestow
authority imprudently, as the Romans bestowed it on the Ten, it will
always fare with them as with the Romans. And this may readily be
understood on reflecting what causes operated to keep the dictator
good, what to make the Ten bad, and by observing how those republics
which have been accounted well governed, have acted when conferring
authority for an extended period, as the Spartans on their kings and
the Venetians on their doges; for it will be seen that in both these
instances the authority was controlled by checks which made it
impossible for it to be abused. But where an uncontrolled authority is
given, no security is afforded by the circumstance that the body of the
people is not corrupted; for in the briefest possible time absolute
authority will make a people corrupt, and obtain for itself friends and
partisans. Nor will it be any hindrance to him in whom such authority
is vested, that he is poor and without connections, for wealth and
every other advantage will quickly follow, as shall be shown more fully
when we discuss the appointment of the Ten.




CHAPTER XXXVI.—_That Citizens who have held the higher Offices of a
Commonwealth should not disdain the lower_.


Under the consuls M. Fabius and Cn. Manlius, the Romans had a memorable
victory in a battle fought with the Veientines and the Etruscans, in
which Q. Fabius, brother of the consul, who had himself been consul the
year before, was slain. This event may lead us to remark how well the
methods followed by the city of Rome were suited to increase her power,
and how great a mistake is made by other republics in departing from
them. For, eager as the Romans were in the pursuit of glory, they never
esteemed it a dishonour to obey one whom before they had commanded, or
to find themselves serving in the ranks of an army which once they had
led. This usage, however, is opposed to the ideas, the rules, and the
practice which prevail at the present day, as, for instance, in Venice,
where the notion still obtains that a citizen who has filled a great
office should be ashamed to accept a less; and where the State itself
permits him to decline it. This course, assuming it to lend lustre to
individual citizens, is plainly to the disadvantage of the community,
which has reason to hope more from, and to trust more to, the citizen
who descends from a high office to fill a lower, than him who rises
from a low office to fill a high one; for in the latter no confidence
can reasonably be placed, unless he be seen to have others about him of
such credit and worth that it may be hoped their wise counsels and
influence will correct his inexperience. But had the usage which
prevails in Venice and in other modern commonwealths and kingdoms,
prevailed in Rome whereby he who had once been consul was never
afterwards to go with the army except as consul, numberless results
must have followed detrimental to the free institutions of that city;
as well from the mistakes which the inexperience of new men would have
occasioned, as because from their ambition having a freer course, and
from their having none near them in whose presence they might fear to
do amiss, they would have grown less scrupulous; and in this way the
public service must have suffered grave harm.




CHAPTER XXXVII.—_Of the Mischief bred in Rome by the Agrarian Law: and
how it is a great source of disorder in a Commonwealth to pass a Law
opposed to ancient Usage and with stringent retrospective Effect._


It has been said by ancient writers that to be pinched by adversity or
pampered by prosperity is the common lot of men, and that in whichever
way they are acted upon the result is the same. For when no longer
urged to war on one another by necessity, they are urged by ambition,
which has such dominion in their hearts that it never leaves them to
whatsoever heights they climb. For nature has so ordered it that while
they desire everything, it is impossible for them to have everything,
and thus their desires being always in excess of their capacity to
gratify them, they remain constantly dissatisfied and discontented. And
hence the vicissitudes in human affairs. For some seeking to enlarge
their possessions, and some to keep what they have got, wars and
enmities ensue, from which result the ruin of one country and the
growth of another.

I am led to these reflections from observing that the commons of Rome
were not content to secure themselves against the nobles by the
creation of tribunes, a measure to which they were driven by necessity,
but after effecting this, forthwith entered upon an ambitious contest
with the nobles, seeking to share with them what all men most esteem,
namely, their honours and their wealth. Hence was bred that disorder
from which sprang the feuds relating to the Agrarian Laws, and which
led in the end to the downfall of the Roman republic. And although it
should be the object of every well-governed commonwealth to make the
State rich and keep individual citizens poor it must be allowed that in
the matter of this law the city of Rome was to blame; whether for
having passed it at first in such a shape as to require it to be
continually recast; or for having postponed it so long that its
retrospective effect was the occasion of tumult; or else, because,
although rightly framed at first, it had come in its operation to be
perverted. But in whatever way it happened, so it was, that this law
was never spoken of in Rome without the whole city being convulsed.

The law itself embraced two principal provisions. By one it was enacted
that no citizen should possess more than a fixed number of acres of
land; by the other that all lands taken from the enemy should be
distributed among the whole people. A twofold blow was thus aimed at
the nobles; since all who possessed more land than the law allowed, as
most of the nobles did, fell to be deprived of it; while by dividing
the lands of the enemy among the whole people, the road to wealth was
closed. These two grounds of offence being given to a powerful class,
to whom it appeared that by resisting the law they did a service to the
State, the whole city, as I have said, was thrown into an uproar on the
mere mention of its name. The nobles indeed sought to temporize, and to
prevail by patience and address; sometimes calling out the army,
sometimes opposing another tribune to the one who was promoting the
law, and sometimes coming to a compromise by sending a colony into the
lands which were to be divided; as was done in the case of the
territory of Antium, whither, on a dispute concerning the law having
arisen, settlers were sent from Rome, and the land made over to them.
In speaking of which colony Titus Livius makes the notable remark, that
hardly any one in Rome could be got to take part in it, so much readier
were the commons to indulge in covetous schemes at home, than to
realize them by leaving it.

The ill humour engendered by this contest continued to prevail until
the Romans began to carry their arms into the remoter parts of Italy
and to countries beyond its shores; after which it seemed for a time to
slumber—and this, because the lands held by the enemies of Rome, out of
sight of her citizens and too remote to be conveniently cultivated,
came to be less desired. Whereupon the Romans grew less eager to punish
their enemies by dividing their lands, and were content, when they
deprived any city of its territory, to send colonists to occupy it. For
causes such as these, the measure remained in abeyance down to the time
of the Gracchi; but being by them revived, finally overthrew the
liberty of Rome. For as it found the power of its adversaries doubled,
such a flame of hatred was kindled between commons and senate, that,
regardless of all civil restraints, they resorted to arms and
bloodshed. And as the public magistrates were powerless to provide a
remedy, each of the two factions having no longer any hopes from them,
resolved to do what it could for itself, and to set up a chief for its
own protection. On reaching this stage of tumult and disorder, the
commons lent their influence to Marius, making him four times consul;
whose authority, lasting thus long, and with very brief intervals,
became so firmly rooted that he was able to make himself consul other
three times. Against this scourge, the nobles, lacking other defence,
set themselves to favour Sylla, and placing him at the head of their
faction, entered on the civil wars; wherein, after much blood had been
spilt, and after many changes of fortune, they got the better of their
adversaries. But afterwards, in the time of Cæsar and Pompey, the
distemper broke out afresh; for Cæsar heading the Marian party, and
Pompey, that of Sylla, and war ensuing, the victory remained with
Cæsar, who was the first tyrant in Rome; after whose time that city was
never again free. Such, therefore, was the beginning and such the end
of the Agrarian Law.

But since it has elsewhere been said that the struggle between the
commons and senate of Rome preserved her liberties, as giving rise to
laws favourable to freedom, it might seem that the consequences of the
Agrarian Law are opposed to that view. I am not, however, led to alter
my opinion on this account; for I maintain that the ambition of the
great is so pernicious that unless controlled and counteracted in a
variety of ways, it will always reduce a city to speedy ruin. So that
if the controversy over the Agrarian Laws took three hundred years to
bring Rome to slavery, she would in all likelihood have been brought to
slavery in a far shorter time, had not the commons, by means of this
law, and by other demands, constantly restrained the ambition of the
nobles.

We may also learn from this contest how much more men value wealth than
honours; for in the matter of honours, the Roman nobles always gave way
to the commons without any extraordinary resistance; but when it came
to be a question of property, so stubborn were they in its defence,
that the commons to effect their ends had to resort to those irregular
methods which have been described above. Of which irregularities the
prime movers were the Gracchi, whose motives are more to be commended
than their measures; since to pass a law with stringent retrospective
effect, in order to remove an abuse of long standing in a republic, is
an unwise step, and one which, as I have already shown at length, can
have no other result than to accelerate the mischief to which the abuse
leads; whereas, if you temporize, either the abuse develops more
slowly, or else, in course of time, and before it comes to a head, dies
out of itself.




