CHAPTER XLV.—_That it is of evil example, especially in the Maker of a
Law, not to observe the Law when made: and that daily to renew acts of
injustice in a City is most hurtful to the Governor._


Terms having been adjusted, and the old order of things restored in
Rome, Virginius cited Appius to defend himself before the people; and
on his appearing attended by many of the nobles, ordered him to be led
to prison. Whereupon Appius began to cry out and appeal to the people.
But Virginius told him that he was unworthy to be allowed that appeal
which he had himself done away with, or to have that people whom he had
wronged for his protectors. Appius rejoined, that the people should not
set at nought that right of appeal which they themselves had insisted
on with so much zeal. Nevertheless, he was dragged to prison, and
before the day of trial slew himself. Now, though the wicked life of
Appius merited every punishment, still it was impolitic to violate the
laws, more particularly a law which had only just been passed; for
nothing, I think, is of worse example in a republic, than to make a law
and not to keep it; and most of all, when he who breaks is he that made
it.

After the year 1494, the city of Florence reformed its government with
the help of the Friar Girolamo Savonarola, whose writings declare his
learning, his wisdom, and the excellence of his heart. Among other
ordinances for the safety of the citizens, he caused a law to be
passed, allowing an appeal to the people from the sentences pronounced
by “the Eight” and by the “Signory” in trials for State offences; a law
he had long contended for, and carried at last with great difficulty.
It so happened that a very short time after it was passed, five
citizens were condemned to death by the “Signory” for State offences,
and that when they sought to appeal to the people they were not
permitted to do so, and the law was violated. This, more than any other
mischance, helped to lessen the credit of the Friar; since if his law
of appeal was salutary, he should have caused it to be observed; if
useless, he ought not to have promoted it. And his inconsistency was
the more remarked, because in all the sermons which he preached after
the law was broken, he never either blamed or excused the person who
had broken it, as though unwilling to condemn, while unable to justify
what suited his purposes. This, as betraying the ambitious and partial
turn of his mind, took from his reputation and exposed him to much
obloquy.

Another thing which greatly hurts a government is to keep alive bitter
feelings in men’s minds by often renewed attacks on individuals, as was
done in Rome after the decemvirate was put an end to. For each of the
decemvirs, and other citizens besides, were at different times accused
and condemned, so that the greatest alarm was spread through the whole
body of the nobles, who came to believe that these prosecutions would
never cease until their entire order was exterminated. And this must
have led to grave mischief had not Marcus Duilius the tribune provided
against it, by an edict which forbade every one, for the period of a
year, citing or accusing any Roman citizen, an ordinance which had the
effect of reassuring the whole nobility. Here we see how hurtful it is
for a prince or commonwealth to keep the minds of their subjects in
constant alarm and suspense by continually renewed punishments and
violence. And, in truth, no course can be more pernicious. For men who
are in fear for their safety will seize on every opportunity for
securing themselves against the dangers which surround them, and will
grow at once more daring, and less scrupulous in resorting to new
courses. For these reasons we should either altogether avoid inflicting
injury, or should inflict every injury at a stroke, and then seek to
reassure men’s minds and suffer them to settle down and rest.




CHAPTER XLVI.—_That Men climb from one step of Ambition to another,
seeking at first to escape Injury and then to injure others._


As the commons of Rome on recovering their freedom were restored to
their former position—nay, to one still stronger since many new laws
had been passed which confirmed and extended their authority,—it might
reasonably have been hoped that Rome would for a time remain at rest.
The event, however, showed the contrary, for from day to day there
arose in that city new tumults and fresh dissensions. And since the
causes which brought this about have been most judiciously set forth by
Titus Livius, it seems to me much to the purpose to cite his own words
when he says, that “whenever either the commons or the nobles were
humble, the others grew haughty; so that if the commons kept within due
bounds, the young nobles began to inflict injuries upon them, against
which the tribunes, who were themselves made the objects of outrage,
were little able to give redress; while the nobles on their part,
although they could not close their eyes to the ill behaviour of their
young men, were yet well pleased that if excesses were to be committed,
they should be committed by their own faction, and not by the commons.
Thus the desire to secure its own liberty prompted each faction to make
itself strong enough to oppress the other. For this is the common
course of things, that in seeking to escape cause for fear, men come to
give others cause to be afraid by inflicting on them those wrongs from
which they strive to relieve themselves; as though the choice lay
between injuring and being injured.”

Herein, among other things, we perceive in what ways commonwealths are
overthrown, and how men climb from one ambition to another; and
recognize the truth of those words which Sallust puts in the mouth of
Cæsar, that “_all ill actions have their origin in fair
beginnings._”[4] For, as I have said already, the ambitious citizen in
a commonwealth seeks at the outset to secure himself against injury,
not only at the hands of private persons, but also of the magistrates;
to effect which he endeavours to gain himself friends. These he obtains
by means honourable in appearance, either by supplying them with money
or protecting them against the powerful. And because such conduct seems
praiseworthy, every one is readily deceived by it, and consequently no
remedy is applied. Pursuing these methods without hindrance, this man
presently comes to be so powerful that private citizens begin to fear
him, and the magistrates to treat him with respect. But when he has
advanced thus far on the road to power without encountering opposition,
he has reached a point at which it is most dangerous to cope with him;
it being dangerous, as I have before explained, to contend with a
disorder which has already made progress in a city. Nevertheless, when
he has brought things to this pass, you must either endeavour to crush
him, at the risk of immediate ruin, or else, unless death or some like
accident interpose, you incur inevitable slavery by letting him alone.
For when, as I have said, it has come to this that the citizens and
even the magistrates fear to offend him and his friends, little further
effort will afterwards be needed to enable him to proscribe and ruin
whom he pleases.

 [4] Quod omnia mala exempla ex bonis initiis orta sunt. (Sall. Cat.
 51.)


A republic ought, therefore, to provide by its ordinances that none of
its citizens shall, under colour of doing good, have it in their power
to do evil, but shall be suffered to acquire such influence only as may
aid and not injure freedom. How this may be done, shall presently be
explained.




