CHAPTER XL.—_That Fraud is fair in War._


Although in all other affairs it be hateful to use fraud, in the
operations of war it is praiseworthy and glorious; so that he who gets
the better of his enemy by fraud, is as much extolled as he who
prevails by force. This appears in the judgments passed by such as have
written of the lives of great warriors, who praise Hannibal and those
other captains who have been most noted for acting in this way. But
since we may read of many instances of such frauds, I shall not cite
them here. This, however, I desire to say, that I would not have it
understood that any fraud is glorious which leads you to break your
plighted word, or to depart from covenants to which you have agreed;
for though to do so may sometimes gain you territory and power, it can
never, as I have said elsewhere, gain you glory.

The fraud, then, which I here speak of is that employed against an
enemy who places no trust in you, and is wholly directed to military
operations, such as the stratagem of Hannibal at the Lake of
Thrasymene, when he feigned flight in order to draw the Roman consul
and his army into an ambuscade; or when to escape from the hands of
Fabius Maximus he fastened lights to the horns of his oxen. Similar to
the above was the deceit practised by Pontius the Samnite commander to
inveigle the Roman army into the Caudine Forks. For after he had drawn
up his forces behind the hills, he sent out a number of his soldiers,
disguised as herdsmen, to drive great herds of cattle across the plain;
who being captured by the Romans, and interrogated as to where the
Samnite army was, all of them, as they had been taught by Pontius,
agreed in saying that it had gone to besiege Nocera: which being
believed by the consuls, led them to advance within the Caudine Valley,
where no sooner were they come than they were beset by the Samnites.
And the victory thus won by a fraud would have been most glorious for
Pontius had he but taken the advice of his father Herennius, who urged
that the Romans should either be set at liberty unconditionally, or all
be put to death; but that a mean course “_which neither gains friends
nor gets rid of foes_” should be avoided. And this was sound advice,
for, as has already been shown, in affairs of moment a mean course is
always hurtful.




CHAPTER XLI.—_That our Country is to be defended by Honour or by
Dishonour; and in either way is well defended._


The consuls together with the whole Roman army fell, as I have related,
into the hands of the Samnites, who imposed on them the most
ignominious terms, insisting that they should be stripped of their
arms, and pass under the yoke before they were allowed to return to
Rome. The consuls being astounded by the harshness of these conditions
and the whole army overwhelmed with dismay, Lucius Lentulus, the Roman
lieutenant, stood forward and said, that in his opinion they ought to
decline no course whereby their country might be saved; and that as the
very existence of Rome depended on the preservation of her army, that
army must be saved at any sacrifice, for whether the means be
honourable or ignominious, all is well done that is done for the
defence of our country. And he said that were her army preserved, Rome,
in course of time, might wipe out the disgrace; but if her army were
destroyed, however gloriously it might perish, Rome and her freedom
would perish with it. In the event his counsel was followed.

Now this incident deserves to be noted and pondered over by every
citizen who is called on to advise his country; for when the entire
safety of our country is at stake, no consideration of what is just or
unjust, merciful or cruel, praiseworthy or shameful, must intervene. On
the contrary, every other consideration being set aside, that course
alone must be taken which preserves the existence of the country and
maintains its liberty. And this course we find followed by the people
of France, both in their words and in their actions, with the view of
supporting the dignity of their king and the integrity of their
kingdom; for there is no remark they listen to with more impatience
than that this or the other course is disgraceful to the king. For
their king, they say, can incur no disgrace by any resolve he may take,
whether it turn out well or ill; and whether it succeed or fail, all
maintain that he has acted as a king should.




CHAPTER XLII.—_That Promises made on Compulsion are not to be
observed._


When, after being subjected to this disgrace, the consuls returned to
Rome with their disarmed legions, Spurius Posthumius, himself one of
the consuls, was the first to contend in the senate that the terms made
in the Caudine Valley were not to be observed. For he argued that the
Roman people were not bound by them, though he himself doubtless was,
together with all the others who had promised peace; wherefore, if the
people desired to set themselves free from every engagement, he and all
the rest who had given this promise must be made over as prisoners into
the hands of the Samnites. And so steadfastly did he hold to this
opinion, that the senate were content to adopt it, and sending him and
the rest as prisoners back to Samnium, protested to the Samnites that
the peace was not binding. And so kind was Fortune to Posthumius on
this occasion, that the Samnites would not keep him as a prisoner, and
that on his return to Rome, notwithstanding his defeat, he was held in
higher honour by the Romans than the victorious Pontius by his
countrymen.

Here two points are to be noted; first, that glory may be won by any
action; for although, commonly, it follow upon victory, it may also
follow on defeat, if this defeat be seen to have happened through no
fault of yours, or if, directly after, you perform some valiant action
which cancels it. The other point to be noted is that there is no
disgrace in not observing promises wrung from you by force; for
promises thus extorted when they affect the public welfare will always
be broken so soon as the pressure under which they were made is
withdrawn, and that, too, without shame on the part of him who breaks
them; of which we read many instances in history, and find them
constantly occurring at the present day. Nay, as between princes, not
only are such compulsory promises broken when the force which extorted
them is removed, but all other promises as well, are in like manner
disregarded when the causes which led to them no longer operate.

Whether this is a thing to be commended or no, and whether such methods
ought or ought not to be followed by princes, has already been
considered by me in my “_Treatise of the Prince_” wherefore I say no
more on that subject here.




