CHAPTER XXVIII.—_That a Republic must keep an eye on what its Citizens
are about; since often the seeds of a Tyranny lie hidden under a
semblance of generous deeds._


The granaries of Rome not sufficing to meet a famine with which the
city was visited, a certain Spurius Melius, a very wealthy citizen for
these days, privately laid in a supply of corn wherewith to feed the
people at his own expense; gaining thereby such general favour with the
commons, that the senate, apprehending that his bounty might have
dangerous consequences, in order to crush him before he grew too
powerful, appointed a dictator to deal with him and caused him to be
put to death.

Here we have to note that actions which seem good in themselves and
unlikely to occasion harm to any one, very often become hurtful, nay,
unless corrected in time, most dangerous for a republic. And to treat
the matter with greater fulness, I say, that while a republic can never
maintain itself long, or manage its affairs to advantage, without
citizens of good reputation, on the other hand the credit enjoyed by
particular citizens often leads to the establishment of a tyranny. For
which reasons, and that things may take a safe course, it should be so
arranged that a citizen shall have credit only for such behaviour as
benefits, and not for such as injures the State and its liberties. We
must therefore examine by what ways credit is acquired. These, briefly,
are two, public or secret. Public, when a citizen gains a great name by
advising well or by acting still better for the common advantage. To
credit of this sort we should open a wide door, holding out rewards
both for good counsels and for good actions, so that he who renders
such services may be at once honoured and satisfied. Reputation
acquired honestly and openly by such means as these can never be
dangerous. But credit acquired by secret practices, which is the other
method spoken of, is most perilous and prejudicial. Of such secret
practices may be instanced, acts of kindness done to this or the other
citizen in lending him money, in assisting him to marry his daughters,
in defending him against the magistrates, and in conferring such other
private favours as gain men devoted adherents, and encourage them after
they have obtained such support, to corrupt the institutions of the
State and to violate its laws.

A well-governed republic, therefore, ought, as I have said, to throw
wide the door to all who seek public favour by open courses, and to
close it against any who would ingratiate themselves by underhand
means. And this we find was done in Rome. For the Roman republic, as a
reward to any citizen who served it well, ordained triumphs and all the
other honours which it had to bestow; while against those who sought to
aggrandize themselves by secret intrigues, it ordained accusations and
impeachment; and when, from the people being blinded by a false show of
benevolence, these proved insufficient, it provided for a dictator, who
with regal authority might bring to bounds any who had strayed beyond
them, as instanced in the case of Spurius Melius. And if conduct like
his be ever suffered to pass unchastised, it may well be the ruin of a
republic, for men when they have such examples set them are not easily
led back into the right path.




CHAPTER XXIX.—_That the Faults of a People are due to its Prince._


Let no prince complain of the faults committed by a people under his
control; since these must be ascribed either to his negligence, or to
his being himself blemished by similar defects. And were any one to
consider what peoples in our own times have been most given to robbery
and other like offences, he would find that they have only copied their
rulers, who have themselves been of a like nature. Romagna, before
those lords who ruled it were driven out by Pope Alexander VI., was a
nursery of all the worst crimes, the slightest occasion giving rise to
wholesale rapine and murder. This resulted from the wickedness of these
lords, and not, as they asserted, from the evil disposition of their
subjects. For these princes being poor, yet choosing to live as though
they were rich, were forced to resort to cruelties innumerable and
practised in divers ways; and among other shameful devices contrived by
them to extort money, they would pass laws prohibiting certain acts,
and then be the first to give occasion for breaking them; nor would
they chastise offenders until they saw many involved in the same
offence; when they fell to punishing, not from any zeal for the laws
which they had made, but out of greed to realize the penalty. Whence
flowed many mischiefs, and more particularly this, that the people
being impoverished, but not corrected, sought to make good their
injuries at the expense of others weaker than themselves. And thus
there sprang up all those evils spoken of above, whereof the prince is
the true cause.

The truth of what I say is confirmed by Titus Livius where he relates
how the Roman envoys, who were conveying the spoils of the Veientines
as an offering to Apollo, were seized and brought on shore by the
corsairs of the Lipari islands in Sicily; when Timasitheus, the prince
of these islands, on learning the nature of the offering, its
destination, and by whom sent, though himself of Lipari, behaved as a
Roman might, showing his people what sacrilege it would be to intercept
such a gift, and speaking to such purpose that by general consent the
envoys were suffered to proceed upon their voyage, taking all their
possessions with them. With reference to which incident the historian
observes: “_The multitude, who always take their colour from their
ruler, were filled by Timasitheus with a religious awe._” And to like
purport we find it said by Lorenzo de’ Medici:—

“A prince’s acts his people imitate;
For on their lord the eyes of all men wait.”[17]


 [17] E quel che fa il signer, fanno poi molti;
 Chè nel signer son tutti gli occhi volti.
(_La Rappresentazione di San Giovanni e Paolo._)




