BOOK I.


PREFACE.


Albeit the jealous temper of mankind, ever more disposed to censure
than to praise the work of others, has constantly made the pursuit of
new methods and systems no less perilous than the search after unknown
lands and seas; nevertheless, prompted by that desire which nature has
implanted in me, fearlessly to undertake whatsoever I think offers a
common benefit to all, I enter on a path which, being hitherto
untrodden by any, though it involve me in trouble and fatigue, may yet
win me thanks from those who judge my efforts in a friendly spirit. And
although my feeble discernment, my slender experience of current
affairs, and imperfect knowledge of ancient events, render these
efforts of mine defective and of no great utility, they may at least
open the way to some other, who, with better parts and sounder
reasoning and judgment, shall carry out my design; whereby, if I gain
no credit, at all events I ought to incur no blame.

When I see antiquity held in such reverence, that to omit other
instances, the mere fragment of some ancient statue is often bought at
a great price, in order that the purchaser may keep it by him to adorn
his house, or to have it copied by those who take delight in this art;
and how these, again, strive with all their skill to imitate it in
their various works; and when, on the other hand, I find those noble
labours which history shows to have been wrought on behalf of the
monarchies and republics of old times, by kings, captains, citizens,
lawgivers, and others who have toiled for the good of their country,
rather admired than followed, nay, so absolutely renounced by every one
that not a trace of that antique worth is now left among us, I cannot
but at once marvel and grieve; at this inconsistency; and all the more
because I perceive that, in civil disputes between citizens, and in the
bodily disorders into which men fall, recourse is always had to the
decisions and remedies, pronounced or prescribed by the ancients.

For the civil law is no more than the opinions delivered by the ancient
jurisconsults, which, being reduced to a system, teach the
jurisconsults of our own times how to determine; while the healing art
is simply the recorded experience of the old physicians, on which our
modern physicians found their practice. And yet, in giving laws to a
commonwealth, in maintaining States and governing kingdoms, in
organizing armies and conducting wars, in dealing with subject nations,
and in extending a State’s dominions, we find no prince, no republic,
no captain, and no citizen who resorts to the example of the ancients.

This I persuade myself is due, not so much to the feebleness to which
the present methods of education have brought the world, or to the
injury which a pervading apathy has wrought in many provinces and
cities of Christendom, as to the want of a right intelligence of
History, which renders men incapable in reading it to extract its true
meaning or to relish its flavour. Whence it happens that by far the
greater number of those who read History, take pleasure in following
the variety of incidents which it presents, without a thought to
imitate them; judging such imitation to be not only difficult but
impossible; as though the heavens, the sun, the elements, and man
himself were no longer the same as they formerly were as regards
motion, order, and power.

Desiring to rescue men from this error, I have thought fit to note down
with respect to all those books of Titus Livius which have escaped the
malignity of Time, whatever seems to me essential to a right
understanding of ancient and modern affairs; so that any who shall read
these remarks of mine, may reap from them that profit for the sake of
which a knowledge of History is to be sought. And although the task be
arduous, still, with the help of those at whose instance I assumed the
burthen, I hope to carry it forward so far, that another shall have no
long way to go to bring it to its destination.




CHAPTER I.—_Of the Beginnings of Cities in general, and in particular
of that of Rome._


No one who reads how the city of Rome had its beginning, who were its
founders, and what its ordinances and laws, will marvel that so much
excellence was maintained in it through many ages, or that it grew
afterwards to be so great an Empire.

And, first, as touching its origin, I say, that all cities have been
founded either by the people of the country in which they stand, or by
strangers. Cities have their origins in the former of these two ways
when the inhabitants of a country find that they cannot live securely
if they live dispersed in many and small societies, each of them
unable, whether from its situation or its slender numbers, to stand
alone against the attacks of its enemies; on whose approach there is no
time left to unite for defence without abandoning many strongholds, and
thus becoming an easy prey to the invader. To escape which dangers,
whether of their own motion or at the instance of some of greater
authority among them, they restrict themselves to dwell together in
certain places, which they think will be more convenient to live in and
easier to defend.

Among many cities taking their origin in this way were Athens and
Venice; the former of which, for reasons like those just now mentioned,
was built by a scattered population under the direction of Theseus. To
escape the wars which, on the decay of the Roman Empire daily renewed
in Italy by the arrival of fresh hordes of Barbarians, numerous
refugees, sheltering in certain little islands in a corner of the
Adriatic Sea, gave beginning to Venice; where, without any recognized
leader to direct them, they agreed to live together under such laws as
they thought best suited to maintain them. And by reason of the
prolonged tranquility which their position secured, they being
protected by the narrow sea and by the circumstance that the tribes who
then harassed Italy had no ships wherewith to molest them, they were
able from very small beginnings to attain to that greatness they now
enjoy.

In the second case, namely of a city being founded by strangers, the
settlers are either wholly independent, or they are controlled by
others, as where colonies are sent forth either by a prince or by a
republic, to relieve their countries of an excessive population, or to
defend newly acquired territories which it is sought to secure at small
cost. Of this sort many cities were settled by the Romans, and in all
parts of their dominions. It may also happen that such cities are
founded by a prince merely to add to his renown, without any intention
on his part to dwell there, as Alexandria was built by Alexander the
Great. Cities like these, not having had their beginning in freedom,
seldom make such progress as to rank among the chief towns of kingdoms.

The city of Florence belongs to that class of towns which has not been
independent from the first; for whether we ascribe its origin to the
soldiers of Sylla, or, as some have conjectured, to the mountaineers of
Fiesole (who, emboldened by the long peace which prevailed throughout
the world during the reign of Octavianus, came down to occupy the plain
on the banks of the Arno), in either case, it was founded under the
auspices of Rome nor could, at first, make other progress than was
permitted by the grace of the sovereign State.

The origin of cities may be said to be independent when a people,
either by themselves or under some prince, are constrained by famine,
pestilence, or war to leave their native land and seek a new
habitation. Settlers of this sort either establish themselves in cities
which they find ready to their hand in the countries of which they take
possession, as did Moses; or they build new ones, as did Æneas. It is
in this last case that the merits of a founder and the good fortune of
the city founded are best seen; and this good fortune will be more or
less remarkable according to the greater or less capacity of him who
gives the city its beginning.

The capacity of a founder is known in two ways: by his choice of a
site, or by the laws which he frames. And since men act either of
necessity or from choice, and merit may seem greater where choice is
more restricted, we have to consider whether it may not be well to
choose a sterile district as the site of a new city, in order that the
inhabitants, being constrained to industry, and less corrupted by ease,
may live in closer union, finding less cause for division in the
poverty of their land; as was the case in Ragusa, and in many other
cities built in similar situations. Such a choice were certainly the
wisest and the most advantageous, could men be content to enjoy what is
their own without seeking to lord it over others. But since to be safe
they must be strong, they are compelled avoid these barren districts,
and to plant themselves in more fertile regions; where, the
fruitfulness of the soil enabling them to increase and multiply, they
may defend themselves against any who attack them, and overthrow any
who would withstand their power.

And as for that languor which the situation might breed, care must be
had that hardships which the site does not enforce, shall be enforced
by the laws; and that the example of those wise nations be imitated,
who, inhabiting most fruitful and delightful countries, and such as
were likely to rear a listless and effeminate race, unfit for all manly
exercises, in order to obviate the mischief wrought by the amenity and
relaxing influence of the soil and climate, subjected all who were to
serve as soldiers to the severest training; whence it came that better
soldiers were raised in these countries than in others by nature rugged
and barren. Such, of old, was the kingdom of the Egyptians, which,
though of all lands the most bountiful, yet, by the severe training
which its laws enforced, produced most valiant soldiers, who, had their
names not been lost in antiquity, might be thought to deserve more
praise than Alexander the Great and many besides, whose memory is still
fresh in men’s minds. And even in recent times, any one contemplating
the kingdom of the Soldan, and the military order of the Mamelukes
before they were destroyed by Selim the Grand Turk, must have seen how
carefully they trained their soldiers in every kind of warlike
exercise; showing thereby how much they dreaded that indolence to which
their genial soil and climate might have disposed them, unless
neutralized by strenuous laws. I say, then, that it is a prudent choice
to found your city in a fertile region when the effects of that
fertility are duly balanced by the restraint of the laws.

When Alexander the Great thought to add to his renown by founding a
city, Dinocrates the architect came and showed him how he might build
it on Mount Athos, which not only offered a strong position, but could
be handled that the city built there might present a semblance of the
human form, which would be a thing strange and striking, and worthy of
so great a monarch. But on Alexander asking how the inhabitants were to
live, Dinocrates answered that he had not thought of that. Whereupon,
Alexander laughed, and leaving Mount Athos as it stood, built
Alexandria; where, the fruitfulness of the soil, and the vicinity of
the Nile and the sea, might attract many to take up their abode.

To him, therefore, who inquires into the origin of Rome, if he assign
its beginning to Æneas, it will seem to be of those cities which were
founded by strangers if to Romulus, then of those founded by the
natives of the country. But in whichever class we place it, it will be
seen to have had its beginning in freedom, and not in subjection to
another State. It will be seen, too, as hereafter shall be noted, how
strict was the discipline which the laws instituted by Romulus, Numa,
and its other founders made compulsory upon it; so that neither its
fertility, the proximity of the sea, the number of its victories, nor
the extent of its dominion, could for many centuries corrupt it, but,
on the contrary, maintained it replete with such virtues as were never
matched in any other commonwealth.

And because the things done by Rome, and which Titus Livius has
celebrated, were effected at home or abroad by public or by private
wisdom, I shall begin by treating, and noting the consequences of those
things done at home in accordance with the public voice, which seem
most to merit attention; and to this object the whole of this first
Book or first Part of my Discourses, shall be directed.




