CHAPTER XIII.—_Whether we may trust more to a valiant Captain with a
weak Army, or to a valiant Army with a weak Captain._


Coriolanus being banished from Rome betook himself to the Volscians,
and when he had got together an army wherewith to avenge himself on his
countrymen, came back to Rome; yet, again withdrew, not constrained to
retire by the might of the Roman arms, but out of reverence for his
mother. From this incident, says Titus Livius, we may learn that the
spread of the Roman power was due more to the valour of her captains
than of her soldiers. For before this the Volscians had always been
routed, and only grew successful when Coriolanus became their captain.

But though Livius be of this opinion, there are many passages in his
history to show that the Roman soldiers, even when left without
leaders, often performed astonishing feats of valour, nay, sometimes
maintained better discipline and fought with greater spirit after their
consuls were slain than they had before. For example, the army under
the Scipios in Spain, after its two leaders had fallen, was able by its
valour not merely to secure its own safety, but to overcome the enemy
and preserve the province for the Roman Republic. So that to state the
case fairly, we find many instances in which the valour of the soldiers
alone gained the day, as well as many in which success was wholly due
to the excellence of the captain. From which it may be inferred that
the one stands in need of the other.

And here the question suggests itself: which is the more formidable, a
good army badly led, or a good captain commanding an indifferent army;
though, were we to adopt the opinion of Cæsar on this head, we ought
lightly to esteem both. For when Cæsar went to Spain against Afranius
and Petreius, who were there in command of a strong army, he made
little account of them, saying, “_that he went to fight an army without
a captain_,” indicating thereby the weakness of these generals. And,
conversely, when he went to encounter Pompeius in Thessaly, he said,
“_I go against a captain without an army_.”[13]

 [13] Professus ante inter suos, ire se ad exercitum sine duce, et inde
 reversurum ad ducem sine exercitu. (_Suet. in Vita J. Caes._)


A further question may also be raised, whether it is easier for a good
captain to make a good army, or for a good army to make a good captain.
As to this it might be thought there was barely room for doubt, since
it ought to be far easier for many who are good to find one who is good
or teach him to become so, than for one who is good to find or make
many good. Lucullus when sent against Mithridates was wholly without
experience in war: but his brave army, which was provided with many
excellent officers, speedily taught him to be a good captain. On the
other hand, when the Romans, being badly off for soldiers, armed a
number of slaves and gave them over to be drilled by Sempronius
Gracchus, he in a short time made them into a serviceable army. So too,
as I have already mentioned, Pelopidas and Epaminondas after rescuing
Thebes, their native city, from Spartan thraldom, in a short time made
such valiant soldiers of the Theban peasantry, as to be able with their
aid not only to withstand, but even to defeat the Spartan armies. So
that the question may seem to be equally balanced, excellence on one
side generally finding excellence on the other.

A good army, however, when left without a good leader, as the
Macedonian army was on the death of Alexander, or as those veterans
were who had fought in the civil wars, is apt to grow restless and
turbulent. Wherefore I am convinced that it is better to trust to the
captain who has time allowed him to discipline his men, and means
wherewith to equip them, than to a tumultuary host with a chance leader
of its own choosing. But twofold is the merit and twofold the glory of
those captains who not only have had to subdue their enemies, but also
before encountering them to organize and discipline their forces. This,
however, is a task requiring qualities so seldom combined, that were
many of those captains who now enjoy a great name with the world,
called on to perform it, they would be much less thought of than they
are.




CHAPTER XIV.—_Of the effect produced in Battle by strange and
unexpected Sights or Sounds._


That the disorder occasioned by strange and unexpected sights or sounds
may have momentous consequences in combat, might be shown by many
instances, but by none better than by what befell in the battle fought
between the Romans and the Volscians, when Quintius, the Roman general,
seeing one wing of his army begin to waver, shouted aloud to his men to
stand firm, for the other wing was already victorious. Which words of
his giving confidence to his own troops and striking the enemy with
dismay won him the battle. But if a cry like this, produce great effect
on a well disciplined army, far greater must be its effect on one which
is ill disciplined and disorderly. For by such a wind the whole mass
will be moved, as I shall show by a well-known instance happening in
our own times.

A few years ago the city of Perugia was split into the two factions of
the Baglioni and the Oddi, the former holding the government, the
latter being in exile. The Oddeschi, however, with the help of friends,
having got together an armed force which they lodged in villages of
their own near Perugia, obtained, by the favour of some of their party,
an entrance into the city by night, and moving forward without
discovery, came as far as the public square. And as all the streets of
Perugia are barred with chains drawn across them at their corners, the
Oddeschi had in front of them a man who carried an iron hammer
wherewith to break the fastenings of the chains so that horsemen might
pass. When the only chain remaining unbroken was that which closed the
public square, the alarm having now been given, the hammerman was so
impeded by the crowd pressing behind him that he could not raise his
arm to strike freely. Whereupon, to get more room for his work, he
called aloud to the others to stand back; and the word back passing
from rank to rank those furthest off began to run, and, presently, the
others also, with such precipitancy, that they fell into utter
disorder. In this way, and from this trifling circumstance, the attempt
of the Oddeschi came to nothing.

Here we may note that discipline is needed in an army, not so much to
enable it to fight according to a settled order, as that it may not be
thrown into confusion by every insignificant accident. For a tumultuary
host is useless in war, simply because every word, or cry, or sound,
may throw it into a panic and cause it to fly. Wherefore it behoves a
good captain to provide that certain fixed persons shall receive his
orders and pass them on to the rest, and to accustom his soldiers to
look to these persons, and to them only, to be informed what his orders
are. For whenever this precaution is neglected the gravest mishaps are
constantly seen to ensue.

As regards strange and unexpected sights, every captain should
endeavour while his army is actually engaged with the enemy, to effect
some such feint or diversion as will encourage his own men and dismay
his adversary since this of all things that can happen is the likeliest
to ensure victory. In evidence whereof we may cite the example of
Cneius Sulpitius, the Roman dictator, who, when about to give battle to
the Gauls, after arming his sutlers and camp followers, mounted them on
mules and other beasts of burden, furnished them with spears and
banners to look like cavalry, and placing them behind a hill, ordered
them on a given signal, when the fight was at the hottest, to appear
and show themselves to the enemy. All which being carried out as he had
arranged, threw the Gauls into such alarm, that they lost the battle.

A good captain, therefore, has two things to see to: first, to contrive
how by some sudden surprise he may throw his enemy into confusion; and
next, to be prepared should the enemy use a like stratagem against him
to discover and defeat it; as the stratagem of Semiramis was defeated
by the King of India. For Semiramis seeing that this king had elephants
in great numbers, to dismay him by showing that she, too, was well
supplied, caused the skins of many oxen and buffaloes to be sewn
together in the shape of elephants and placed upon camels and sent to
the front. But the trick being detected by the king, turned out not
only useless but hurtful to its contriver. In a battle which the
Dictator Mamercus fought against the people of Fidenae, the latter, to
strike terror into the minds of the Romans, contrived that while the
combat raged a number of soldiers should issue from Fidenae bearing
lances tipped with fire, thinking that the Romans, disturbed by so
strange a sight, would be thrown into confusion.

We are to note, however, with regard to such contrivances, that if they
are to serve any useful end, they should _be_ formidable as well as
_seem_ so; for when they menace a real danger, their weak points are
not so soon discerned. When they have more of pretence than reality, it
will be well either to dispense with them altogether, or resorting to
them, to keep them, like the muleteers of Sulpitius, in the background,
so that they be not too readily found out. For any weakness inherent in
them is soon discovered if they be brought near, when, as happened with
the elephants of Semiramis and the fiery spears of the men of Fidenae,
they do harm rather than good. For although by this last-mentioned
device the Romans at the first were somewhat disconcerted, so soon as
the dictator came up and began to chide them, asking if they were not
ashamed to fly like bees from smoke, and calling on them to turn on
their enemy, and “_with her own flames efface that Fidenae whom their
benefits could not conciliate_,” they took courage; so that the device
proved of no service to its contrivers, who were vanquished in the
battle.




