CHAPTER XXV.—_That he who attacks a City divided against itself, must
not think to get possession of it through its Divisions._


Violent dissensions breaking out in Rome between the commons and the
nobles, it appeared to the Veientines and Etruscans that now was their
time to deal a fatal blow to the Roman supremacy. Accordingly, they
assembled an army and invaded the territories of Rome. The senate sent
Caius Manlius and Marcus Fabius to meet them, whose forces encamping
close by the Veientines, the latter ceased not to reproach and vilify
the Roman name with every sort of taunt and abuse, and so incensed the
Romans by their unmeasured insolence that, from being divided they
became reconciled, and giving the enemy battle, broke and defeated
them. Here, again, we see, what has already been noted, how prone men
are to adopt wrong courses, and how often they miss their object when
they think to secure it. The Veientines imagined that they could
conquer the Romans by attacking them while they were at feud among
themselves; but this very attack reunited the Romans and brought ruin
on their assailants. For the causes of division in a commonwealth are,
for the most part, ease and tranquillity, while the causes of union are
fear and war. Wherefore, had the Veientines been wise, the more divided
they saw Rome to be, the more should they have sought to avoid war with
her, and endeavoured to gain an advantage over her by peaceful arts.
And the best way to effect this in a divided city lies in gaining the
confidence of both factions, and in mediating between them as arbiter
so long as they do not come to blows; but when they resort to open
violence, then to render some tardy aid to the weaker side, so as to
plunge them deeper in hostilities, wherein both may exhaust their
forces without being led by your putting forth an excess of strength to
suspect you of a desire to ruin them and remain their master. Where
this is well managed, it will almost always happen that you succeed in
effecting the object you propose to yourself.

The city of Pistoja, as I have said already in connection with another
matter, was won over to the Florentine republic by no other artifice
than this. For the town being split by factions, the Florentines, by
now favouring one side and now the other, without incurring the
suspicions of either, brought both to such extremities that, wearied
out with their harassed life, they threw themselves at last of their
own accord into the arms of Florence. The city of Siena, again, has
never made any change in her government which has had the support of
the Florentines, save when that support has been slight and
insignificant; for whenever the interference of Florence has been
marked and decided, it has had the effect of uniting all parties in
support of things as they stood.

One other instance I shall add to those already given. Oftener than
once Filippo Visconti, duke of Milan, relying on their divisions, set
wars on foot against the Florentines, and always without success; so
that, in lamenting over these failures, he was wont to complain that
the mad humours of the Florentines had cost him two millions of gold,
without his having anything to show for it. The Veientines and
Etruscans, therefore, as I have said already, were misled by false
hopes, and in the end were routed by the Romans in a single pitched
battle; and any who should look hereafter to prevail on like grounds
and by similar means against a divided people, will always find
themselves deceived.




CHAPTER XXVI.—_That Taunts and Abuse breed Hatred against him who uses
them, without yielding him any Advantage._


To abstain from threats and injurious language, is, methinks, one of
the wisest precautions a man can use. For abuse and menace take nothing
from the strength of an adversary; the latter only making him more
cautious, while the former inflames his hatred against you, and leads
him to consider more diligently how he may cause you hurt.

This is seen from the example of the Veientines, of whom I spoke in the
last Chapter, who, to the injury of war against the Romans, added those
verbal injuries from which all prudent commanders should compel their
soldiers to refrain. For these are injuries which stir and kindle your
enemy to vengeance, and yet, as has been said, in no way disable him
from doing you hurt; so that, in truth, they are weapons which wound
those who use them. Of this we find a notable instance in Asia, in
connection with the siege of Amida. For Gabade, the Persian general,
after besieging this town for a great while, wearied out at last by its
protracted defence, determined on withdrawing his army; and had
actually begun to strike his camp, when the whole inhabitants of the
place, elated by their success, came out upon the walls to taunt and
upbraid their enemies with their cowardice and meanness of spirit, and
to load them with every kind of abuse. Stung by these insults, Gabade,
changing his resolution, renewed the siege with such fury that in a few
days he stormed and sacked the town. And the very same thing befell the
Veientines, who, not content, as we have seen, to make war on the
Romans with arms, must needs assail them with foul reproaches,
advancing to the palisade of their camp to revile them, and molesting
them more with their tongues than with their swords, until the Roman
soldiers, who at first were most unwilling to fight, forced the consuls
to lead them to the attack. Whereupon, the Veientines, like those
others of whom mention has just now been made, had to pay the penalty
of their insolence.

Wise captains of armies, therefore, and prudent governors of cities,
should take all fit precautions to prevent such insults and reproaches
from being used by their soldiers and subjects, either amongst
themselves or against an enemy. For when directed against an enemy they
lead to the mischiefs above noticed, while still worse consequences may
follow from our not preventing them among ourselves by such measures as
sensible rulers have always taken for that purpose.

The legions who were left behind for the protection of Capua having, as
shall in its place be told, conspired against the Capuans, their
conspiracy led to a mutiny, which was presently suppressed by Valerius
Corvinus; when, as one of the conditions on which the mutineers made
their submission, it was declared that whosoever should thereafter
upbraid any soldier of these legions with having taken part in this
mutiny, should be visited with the severest punishment. So likewise,
when Tiberius Gracchus was appointed, during the war with Hannibal, to
command a body of slaves, whom the Romans in their straits for soldiers
had furnished with arms, one of his first acts was to pass an order
making it death for any to reproach his men with their servile origin.
So mischievous a thing did the Romans esteem it to use insulting words
to others, or to taunt them with their shame. Whether this be done in
sport or earnest, nothing vexes men more, or rouses them to fiercer
indignation; “_for the biting jest which flavours too much of truth,
leaves always behind it a rankling memory._”[9]

 [9] Nam facetiæ asperæ, quando nimium ex vero traxere, acrem sui
 memoriam relinquunt. _Tacit. An._ xv. 68.




