CHAPTER XLIII.—_That Men born in the same Province retain through all
Times nearly the same Character._


The wise are wont to say, and not without reason or at random, that he
who would forecast what is about to happen should look to what has
been; since all human events, whether present or to come, have their
exact counterpart in the past. And this, because these events are
brought about by men, whose passions and dispositions remaining in all
ages the same naturally give rise to the same effects; although,
doubtless, the operation of these causes takes a higher form, now in
one province, and now in another, according to the character of the
training wherein the inhabitants of these provinces acquire their way
of life.

Another aid towards judging of the future by the past, is to observe
how the same nation long retains the same customs, remaining constantly
covetous or deceitful, or similarly stamped by some one vice or virtue.
Any one reading the past history of our city of Florence, and noting
what has recently befallen it, will find the French and German nations
overflowing with avarice, pride, cruelty, and perfidy, all of which
four vices have at divers times wrought much harm to our city. As an
instance of their perfidy, every one knows how often payments of money
were made to Charles VIII. of France, in return for which he engaged to
restore the fortresses of Pisa, yet never did restore them, manifesting
thereby his bad faith and grasping avarice. Or, to pass from these very
recent events, all may have heard of what happened in the war in which
the Florentines were involved with the Visconti, dukes of Milan, when
Florence, being left without other resource, resolved to invite the
emperor into Italy, that she might be assisted by his name and power in
her struggle with Lombardy. The emperor promised to come with a strong
army to take part against the Visconti and to protect Florence from
them, on condition that the Florentines paid him a hundred thousand
ducats on his setting out, and another hundred thousand on his arrival
in Italy; to which terms the Florentines agreed. But although he then
received payment of the first instalment and, afterwards, on reaching
Verona, of the second, he turned back from the expedition without
effecting anything, alleging as his excuse that he was stopped by
certain persons who had failed to fulfil their engagements. But if
Florence had not been urged by passion or overcome by necessity, or had
she read of and understood the ancient usages of the barbarians, she
would neither on this, nor on many other occasions, have been deceived
by them, seeing that these nations have always been of the same
character, and have always, in all circumstances, and with all men
alike, used the same methods. For in ancient times we find them
behaving after the same fashion to the Etruscans, who, when overpowered
by the Romans, by whom they had been repeatedly routed and put to
flight, perceiving that they could not stand without help, entered into
a compact with the Gauls dwelling in the parts of Italy south of the
Alps, to pay them a certain sum if they would unite with them in a
campaign against the Romans. But the Gauls, after taking their money,
refused to arm on their behalf, alleging that they had not been paid to
make war on the enemies of the Etruscans, but only to refrain from
pillaging their lands. And thus the people of Etruria, through the
avarice and perfidy of the Gauls, were at once defrauded of their money
and disappointed of the help which they had counted on obtaining.

From which two instances of the Etruscans in ancient times and of the
Florentines in recent, we may see that barbaric races have constantly
followed the same methods, and may easily draw our conclusions as to
how far princes should trust them.




CHAPTER XLIV.—_That where ordinary methods fail, Hardihood and Daring
often succeed._


When attacked by the Romans, the Samnites as they could not without
help stand against them in the field, resolved to leave garrisons in
the towns of Samnium, and to pass with their main army into Etruria,
that country being then at truce with Rome, and thus ascertain whether
their actual presence in arms might not move the Etruscans to renew
hostilities against Rome, which they had refused to renew when invited
through envoys. During the negotiations which, on this occasion, passed
between the two nations, the Samnites in explaining the chief causes
that led them to take up arms, used the memorable words—“_they had
risen because peace is a heavier burthen for slaves than war for
freemen_” In the end, partly by their persuasions, and partly by the
presence of their army, they induced the Etruscans to join forces with
them.

Here we are to note that when a prince would obtain something from
another, he ought, if the occasion allow, to leave him no time to
deliberate, but should so contrive that the other may see the need of
resolving at once; as he will, if he perceive that refusal or delay in
complying with what is asked of him, will draw upon him a sudden and
dangerous resentment.

This method we have seen employed with good effect in our own times by
Pope Julius II. in dealing with France, and by M. de Foix, the general
of the French king, in dealing with the Marquis of Mantua. For Pope
Julius desiring to expel the Bentivogli from Bologna, and thinking that
for this purpose he needed the help of French troops, and to have the
Venetians neutral, after sounding both and receiving from both
hesitating and ambiguous answers, determined to make both fall in with
his views, by giving them no time to oppose him; and so, setting forth
from Rome with as strong a force as he could get together, he marched
on Bologna, sending word to the Venetians that they must stand aloof,
and to the King of France to send him troops. The result was that in
the brief time allowed them, neither of the two powers could make up
their mind to thwart him; and knowing that refusal or delay would be
violently resented by the Pope, they yielded to his demands, the king
sending him soldiers and the Venetians maintaining neutrality.

M. de Foix, again, being with the king’s army in Bologna when word came
that Brescia had risen, could not rest till he had recovered that town.
But, to get there he had to choose between two routes, one long and
circuitous leading through the territories of the king, the other short
and direct. In taking the latter route, however, not only would he have
to pass through the dominions of the Marquis of Mantua, but also to
make his way into these through the lakes and marshes wherewith that
country abounds, by following an embanked road, closed and guarded by
the marquis with forts and other defensive works. Resolving,
nevertheless, to take the shortest road at all hazards, he waited till
his men were already on their march before signifying to the marquis
that he desired leave to pass through his country, so that no time
might be left him to deliberate. Taken aback by the unexpected demand,
the marquis gave the leave sought, which he never would have given had
De Foix acted with less impetuosity. For he was in league with the
Venetians and with the Pope, and had a son in the hands of the latter;
all which circumstances would have afforded him fair pretexts for
refusal. But carried away by the suddenness and urgency of the demand,
he yielded. And in like manner the Etruscans yielded to the instances
of the Samnites, the presence of whose army decided them to renew
hostilities which before they had declined to renew.




