CHAPTER XLI.—_That it is unwise to pass at a bound from leniency to
severity, or to a haughty bearing from a humble._


Among the crafty devices used by Appius to aid him in maintaining his
authority, this, of suddenly passing from one character to the other
extreme, was of no small prejudice to him. For his fraud in pretending
to the commons to be well disposed towards them, was happily contrived;
as were also the means he took to bring about the reappointment of the
decemvirate. Most skilful, too, was his audacity in nominating himself
contrary to the expectation of the nobles, and in proposing colleagues
on whom he could depend to carry out his ends. But, as I have said
already, it was not happily contrived that, after doing all this, he
should suddenly turn round, and from being the friend, reveal himself
the enemy of the people; haughty instead of humane; cruel instead of
kindly; and make this change so rapidly as to leave himself no shadow
of excuse, but compel all to recognize the doubleness of his nature.
For he who has once seemed good, should he afterwards choose, for his
own ends, to become bad, ought to change by slow degrees, and as
opportunity serves; so that before his altered nature strip him of old
favour, he may have gained for himself an equal share of new, and thus
his influence suffer no diminution. For otherwise, being at once
unmasked and friendless, he is undone:




CHAPTER XLII.—_How easily Men become corrupted._


In this matter of the decemvirate we may likewise note the ease
wherewith men become corrupted, and how completely, although born good
and well brought up, they change their nature. For we see how
favourably disposed the youths whom Appius gathered round him became
towards his tyranny, in return for the trifling benefits which they
drew from it; and how Quintus Fabius, one of the second decemvirate and
a most worthy man, blinded by a little ambition, and misled by the evil
counsels of Appius, abandoning his fair fame, betook himself to most
unworthy courses, and grew like his master.

Careful consideration of this should make those who frame laws for
commonwealths and kingdoms more alive to the necessity of placing
restraints on men’s evil appetites, and depriving them of all hope of
doing wrong with impunity.




CHAPTER XLIII.—_That Men fighting in their own Cause make good and
resolute Soldiers._


From what has been touched upon above, we are also led to remark how
wide is the difference between an army which, having no ground for
discontent, fights in its own cause, and one which, being discontented,
fights to satisfy the ambition of others. For whereas the Romans were
always victorious under the consuls, under the decemvirs they were
always defeated. This helps us to understand why it is that mercenary
troops are worthless; namely, that they have no incitement to keep them
true to you beyond the pittance which you pay them, which neither is
nor can be a sufficient motive for such fidelity and devotion as would
make them willing to die in your behalf. But in those armies in which
there exists not such an attachment towards him for whom they fight as
makes them devoted to his cause, there never will be valour enough to
withstand an enemy if only he be a little brave. And since such
attachment and devotion cannot be looked for from any save your own
subjects, you must, if you would preserve your dominions, or maintain
your commonwealth or kingdom, arm the natives of your country; as we
see to have been done by all those who have achieved great things in
war.

Under the decemvirs the ancient valour of the Roman soldiers had in no
degree abated; yet, because they were no longer animated by the same
good will, they did not exert themselves as they were wont. But so soon
as the decemvirate came to an end, and the soldiers began once more to
fight as free men, the old spirit was reawakened, and, as a
consequence, their enterprises, according to former usage, were brought
to a successful close.




CHAPTER XLIV.—_That the Multitude is helpless without a Head: and that
we should not with the same breath threaten and ask leave._


When Virginia died by her father’s hand, the commons of Rome withdrew
under arms to the Sacred Hill. Whereupon the senate sent messengers to
demand by what sanction they had deserted their commanders and
assembled there in arms. And in such reverence was the authority of the
senate held, that the commons, lacking leaders, durst make no reply.
“Not,” says Titus Livius, “that they were at a loss what to answer, but
because they had none to answer for them;” words which clearly show how
helpless a thing is the multitude when without a head.

This defect was perceived by Virginius, at whose instance twenty
military tribunes were appointed by the commons to be their spokesmen
with the senate, and to negotiate terms; who, having asked that
Valerius and Horatius might be sent to them, to whom their wishes would
be made known, these declined to go until the decemvirs had laid down
their office. When this was done, and Valerius and Horatius came to the
hill where the commons were assembled, the latter demanded that
tribunes of the people should be appointed; that in future there should
be an appeal to the people from the magistrates of whatever degree; and
that all the decemvirs should be given up to them to be burned alive.
Valerius and Horatius approved the first two demands, but rejected the
last as inhuman; telling the commons that “they were rushing into that
very cruelty which they themselves had condemned in others;” and
counselling them to say nothing about the decemvirs, but to be
satisfied to regain their own power and authority; since thus the way
would be open to them for obtaining every redress.

Here we see plainly how foolish and unwise it is to ask a thing and
with the same breath to say, “I desire this that I may inflict an
injury.” For we should never declare our intention beforehand, but
watch for every opportunity to carry it out. So that it is enough to
ask another for his weapons, without adding, “With these I purpose to
destroy you;” for when once you have secured his weapons, you can use
them afterwards as you please.




