CHAPTER XV.—_That one and not many should head an Army: and why it is
harmful to have more Leaders than one._


The men of Fidenae rising against the colonists whom the Romans had
settled among them, and putting them to the sword, the Romans to avenge
the insult appointed four tribunes with consular powers: one of whom
they retained to see to the defence of Rome, while the other three were
sent against the Fidenati and the Veientines. But these three falling
out among themselves, and being divided in their counsels, returned
from their mission with discredit though not with loss. Of which
discredit they were themselves the cause. That they sustained no loss
was due to the valour of their soldiers But the senate perceiving the
source of the mischief, to the end that one man might put to rights
what three had thrown into confusion, resorted to the appointment of a
dictator.

Here we see the disadvantage of having several leaders in one army or
in a town which has to defend itself. And the case could not be put in
clearer words than by Titus Livius, where he says, “_The three tribunes
with consular authority gave proof how hurtful it is in war to have
many leaders; for each forming a different opinion, and each abiding by
his own, they threw opportunities in the way of their enemies._” And
though this example suffice by itself to show the disadvantage in war
of divided commands, to make the matter still plainer I shall cite two
further instances, one ancient and one modern.

In the year 1500, Louis XII. of France, after recovering Milan, sent
troops to restore Pisa to the Florentines, Giovambattista Ridolfi and
Luca d’Antonio Albizzi going with them as commissaries. Now, because
Giovambattista had a great name, and was older than Luca, the latter
left the whole management of everything to him; and although he did not
show his jealousy of him by opposing him, he betrayed it by his
silence, and by being so careless and indifferent about everything,
that he gave no help in the business of the siege either by word or
deed, just as though he had been a person of no account. But when, in
consequence of an accident, Giovambattista had to return to Florence,
all this was changed; for Luca, remaining in sole charge, behaved with
the greatest courage, prudence, and zeal, all which qualities had been
hidden while he held a joint command. Further to bear me out I shall
again borrow the words of Titus Livius, who, in relating how when
Quintius and Agrippa his colleague were sent by the Romans against the
Equians, Agrippa contrived that the conduct of the war should rest with
Quintius, observes, “_Most wholesome is it that in affairs of great
moment, supreme authority be vested in one man._” Very different,
however, is the course followed by the republics and princes of our own
days, who, thinking to be better served, are used to appoint several
captains or commissioners to fill one command; a practice giving rise
to so much confusion, that were we seeking for the causes of the
overthrow of the French and Italian armies in recent times, we should
find this to be the most active of any.

Rightly, therefore, may we conclude that in sending forth an army upon
service, it is wiser to entrust it to one man of ordinary prudence,
than to two of great parts but with a divided command.




CHAPTER XVI.—_That in Times of Difficulty true Worth is sought after;
whereas in quiet Times it is not the most deserving, but those who are
recommended by Wealth or Connection who are most in favour._


It always has happened and always will, that the great and admirable
men of a republic are neglected in peaceful times; because at such
seasons many citizens are found, who, envying the reputation these men
have justly earned, seek to be regarded not merely as their equals but
as their superiors. Touching this there is a notable passage in
Thucydides, the Greek historian, where he tells how the republic of
Athens coming victorious out of the Peloponessian war, wherein she had
bridled the pride of Sparta, and brought almost the whole of Greece
under her authority, was encouraged by the greatness of her renown to
propose to herself the conquest of Sicily. In Athens this scheme was
much debated, Alcibiades and certain others who had the public welfare
very little in their thoughts, but who hoped that the enterprise, were
they placed in command, might minister to their fame, recommending that
it should be undertaken. Nicias, on the other hand, one of the best
esteemed of the Athenian citizens, was against it, and in addressing
the people, gave it as the strongest reason for trusting his advice,
that in advising them not to engage in this war, he urged what was not
for his own advantage; for he knew that while Athens remained at peace
numberless citizens were ready to take precedence of him: whereas, were
war declared, he was certain that none would rank before him or even be
looked upon as his equal.

Here we see that in tranquil times republics are subject to the
infirmity of lightly esteeming their worthiest citizens. And this
offends these persons for two reasons: first, because they are not
given the place they deserve; and second, because they see unworthy men
and of abilities inferior to their own, as much or more considered than
they. Injustice such as this has caused the ruin of many republics. For
citizens who find themselves undeservedly slighted, and perceive the
cause to be that the times are tranquil and not troubled, will strive
to change the times by stirring up wars hurtful to the public welfare.
When I look for remedies for this state of things, I find two: first,
to keep the citizens poor, so that wealth without worth shall corrupt
neither them nor others; second, to be so prepared for war as always to
be ready to make war; for then there will always be a need for worthy
citizens, as was the case in Rome in early times. For as Rome
constantly kept her armies in the field, there was constant opportunity
for men to display their valour, nor was it possible to deprive a
deserving man of his post and give it to another who was not deserving.
Or if ever this were done by inadvertency, or by way of experiment,
there forthwith resulted such disorder and danger, that the city at
once retraced its steps and reverted to the true path. But other
republics which are not regulated on the same plan, and make war only
when driven to it by necessity, cannot help committing this injustice,
nay, will constantly run into it, when, if the great citizen who finds
himself slighted be vindictive, and have some credit and following in
the city, disorder will always ensue. And though Rome escaped this
danger for a time, she too, as has elsewhere been said, having no
longer, after she had conquered Carthage and Antiochus, any fear of
war, came to think she might commit her armies to whom she would,
making less account of the valour of her captains than of those other
qualities which gain favour with the people. Accordingly we find Paulus
Emilius rejected oftener than once when he sought the consulship; nor,
in fact, obtaining it until the Macedonian war broke out, which, being
judged a formidable business, was by the voice of the whole city
committed to his management. After the year 1494 our city of Florence
was involved in a series of wars, in conducting which none of our
citizens had any success until chance threw the command into the hands
of one who showed us how an army should be led. This was Antonio
Giacomini, and so long as there were dangerous wars on foot, all
rivalry on the part of other citizens was suspended; and whenever a
captain or commissary had to be appointed he was unopposed. But when a
war came to be undertaken, as to the issue of which no misgivings were
felt, and which promised both honour and preferment, so numerous were
the competitors for command, that three commissaries having to be
chosen to conduct the siege of Pisa, Antonio was left out; and though
it cannot with certainty be shown that any harm resulted to our
republic from his not having been sent on this enterprise, we may
reasonably conjecture that such was indeed the case. For as the people
of Pisa were then without means either for subsistence or defence, it
may be believed that had Antonio been there he would have reduced them
to such extremities as would have forced them to surrender at
discretion to the Florentines. But Pisa being besieged by captains who
knew neither how to blockade nor how to storm it, held out so long,
that the Florentines, who should have reduced it by force, were obliged
to buy its submission. Neglect like this might well move Antonio to
resentment; and he must needs have been both very patient and very
forgiving if he felt no desire to revenge himself when he could, by the
ruin of the city or by injuries to individual citizens. But a republic
should beware not to rouse such feelings, as I shall show in the
following Chapter.




