CHAPTER XXIV.—_That well-ordered States always provide Rewards and
Punishments for their Citizens; and never set off Deserts against
Misdeeds_.


The valour of Horatius in vanquishing the Curiatii deserved the highest
reward. But in slaying his sister he had been guilty of a heinous
crime. And so displeasing to the Romans was an outrage of this nature,
that although his services were so great and so recent, they brought
him to trial for his life. To one looking at it carelessly, this might
seem an instance of popular ingratitude, but he who considers the
matter more closely, and examines with sounder judgment what the
ordinances of a State should be, will rather blame the Roman people for
acquitting Horatius than for putting him on his trial. And this because
no well-ordered State ever strikes a balance between the services of
its citizens and their misdeeds; but appointing rewards for good
actions and punishment for bad, when it has rewarded a man for acting
well, will afterwards, should he act ill, chastise him, without regard
to his former deserts. When these ordinances are duly observed, a city
will live long in freedom, but when they are neglected, it must soon
come to ruin. For when a citizen has rendered some splendid service to
his country, if to the distinction which his action in itself confers,
were added an over-weening confidence that any crime he might
thenceforth commit would pass unpunished, he would soon become so
arrogant that no civil bonds could restrain him.

Still, while we would have punishment terrible to wrongdoers, it is
essential that good actions should be rewarded, as we see to have been
the case in Rome. For even where a republic is poor, and has but little
to give, it ought not to withhold that little; since a gift, however
small, bestowed as a reward for services however great, will always be
esteemed most honourable and precious by him who receives it. The story
of Horatius Cocles and that of Mutius Scævola are well known: how the
one withstood the enemy on the bridge while it was being cut down, and
the other thrust his hand into the fire in punishment of the mistake
made when he sought the life of Porsenna the Etruscan king. To each of
these two, in requital of their splendid deeds, two ploughgates only of
the public land were given. Another famous story is that of Manlius
Capitolinus, to whom, for having saved the Capitol from the besieging
Gauls, a small measure of meal was given by each of those who were shut
up with him during the siege. Which recompense, in proportion to the
wealth of the citizens of Rome at that time, was thought ample; so that
afterwards, when Manlius, moved by jealousy and malice, sought to
arouse sedition in Rome, and to gain over the people to his cause, they
without regard to his past services threw him headlong from that
Capitol in saving which he had formerly gained so great a renown.




CHAPTER XXV.—_That he who would reform the Institutions of a free
State, must retain at least the semblance of old Ways._


Whoever takes upon him to reform the government of a city, must, if his
measures are to be well received and carried out with general approval,
preserve at least the semblance of existing methods, so as not to
appear to the people to have made any change in the old order of
things; although, in truth, the new ordinances differ altogether from
those which they replace. For when this is attended to, the mass of
mankind accept what seems as what is; nay, are often touched more
nearly by appearances than by realities.

This tendency being recognized by the Romans at the very outset of
their civil freedom, when they appointed two consuls in place of a
single king, they would not permit the consuls to have more than twelve
lictors, in order that the old number of the king’s attendants might
not be exceeded. Again, there being solemnized every year in Rome a
sacrificial rite which could only be performed by the king in person,
that the people might not be led by the absence of the king to remark
the want of any ancient observance, a priest was appointed for the due
celebration of this rite, to whom was given the name of _Rex
sacrificulus_, and who was placed under the orders of the chief priest.
In this way the people were contented, and had no occasion from any
defect in the solemnities to desire the return of their kings. Like
precautions should be used by all who would put an end to the old
government of a city and substitute new and free institutions. For
since novelty disturbs men’s minds, we should seek in the changes we
make to preserve as far as possible what is ancient, so that if the new
magistrates differ from the old in number, in authority, or in the
duration of their office, they shall at least retain the old names.

This, I say, should be seen to by him who would establish a
constitutional government, whether in the form of a commonwealth or of
a kingdom. But he who would create an absolute government of the kind
which political writers term a tyranny, must renew everything, as shall
be explained in the following Chapter.




CHAPTER XXVI.—_A new Prince in a City or Province of which he has taken
Possession, ought to make Everything new._


Whosoever becomes prince of a city or State, more especially if his
position be so insecure that he cannot resort to constitutional
government either in the form of a republic or a monarchy, will find
that the best way to preserve his princedom is to renew the whole
institutions of that State; that is to say, to create new magistracies
with new names, confer new powers, and employ new men, and like David
when he became king, exalt the humble and depress the great, “_filling
the hungry with good things, and sending the rich empty away_.”
Moreover, he must pull down existing towns and rebuild them, removing
their inhabitants from one place to another; and, in short, leave
nothing in the country as he found it; so that there shall be neither
rank, nor condition, nor honour, nor wealth which its possessor can
refer to any but to him. And he must take example from Philip of
Macedon, the father of Alexander, who by means such as these, from
being a petty prince became monarch of all Greece; and of whom it was
written that he shifted men from province to province as a shepherd
moves his flocks from one pasture to another.

These indeed are most cruel expedients, contrary not merely to every
Christian, but to every civilized rule of conduct, and such as every
man should shun, choosing rather to lead a private life than to be a
king on terms so hurtful to mankind. But he who will not keep to the
fair path of virtue, must to maintain himself enter this path of evil.
Men, however, not knowing how to be wholly good or wholly bad, choose
for themselves certain middle ways, which of all others are the most
pernicious, as shall be shown by an instance in the following Chapter.




