CHAPTER XXX.—_How Princes and Commonwealths may avoid the vice of
Ingratitude; and how a Captain or Citizen may escape being undone by
it._


That he may not be tormented by suspicion, nor show ungrateful, a
prince should go himself on his wars as the Roman emperors did at
first, as the Turk does now, and, in short, as all valiant princes have
done and do. For when it is the prince himself who conquers, the glory
and the gain are all his own; but when he is absent, since the glory is
another’s, it will seem to the prince that he profits nothing by the
gain, unless that glory be quenched which he knew not how to win for
himself; and when he thus becomes ungrateful and unjust, doubtless his
loss is greater than his gain. To the prince, therefore, who, either
through indolence or from want of foresight, sends forth a captain to
conduct his wars while he himself remains inactive at home, I have no
advice to offer which he does not already know. But I would counsel the
captain whom he sends, since I am sure that he can never escape the
attacks of ingratitude, to follow one or other of two courses, and
either quit his command at once after a victory, and place himself in
the hands of his prince, while carefully abstaining from every
vainglorious or ambitious act, so that the prince, being relieved from
all suspicion, may be disposed to reward, or at any rate not to injure
him; or else, should he think it inexpedient for him to act in this
way, to take boldly the contrary course, and fearlessly to follow out
all such measures as he thinks will secure for himself, and not for his
prince, whatever he has gained; conciliating the good-will of his
soldiers and fellow-citizens, forming new friendships with neighbouring
potentates, placing his own adherents in fortified towns, corrupting
the chief officers of his army and getting rid of those whom he fails
to corrupt, and by all similar means endeavouring to punish his master
for the ingratitude which he looks for at his hands. These are the only
two courses open; but since, as I said before, men know not how to be
wholly good or wholly bad, it will never happen that after a victory a
captain will quit his army and conduct himself modestly, nor yet that
he will venture to use those hardy methods which have in them some
strain of greatness; and so, remaining undecided, he will be crushed
while he still wavers and doubts.

A commonwealth desiring to avoid the vice of ingratitude is, as
compared with a prince, at this disadvantage, that while a prince can
go himself on his expeditions, the commonwealth must send some one of
its citizens. As a remedy, I would recommend that course being adopted
which was followed by the Roman republic in order to be less ungrateful
than others, having its origin in the nature of the Roman government.
For the whole city, nobles and commons alike, taking part in her wars,
there were always found in Rome at every stage of her history, so many
valiant and successful soldiers, that by reason of their number, and
from one acting as a check upon another, the nation had never ground to
be jealous of any one man among them; while they, on their part, lived
uprightly, and were careful to betray no sign of ambition, nor give the
people the least cause to distrust them as ambitious; so that he
obtained most glory from his dictatorship who was first to lay it down.
Which conduct, as it excited no suspicion, could occasion no
ingratitude.

We see, then, that the commonwealth which would have no cause to be
ungrateful, must act as Rome did; and that the citizen who would escape
ingratitude, must observe those precautions which were observed by
Roman citizens.




CHAPTER XXXI.—_That the Roman Captains were never punished with extreme
severity for Misconduct; and where loss resulted to the Republic merely
through their Ignorance or Want of Judgment, were not punished at all_.


The Romans were not only, as has been said above, less ungrateful than
other republics, but were also more lenient and more considerate than
others in punishing the captains of their armies. For if these erred of
set purpose, they chastised them with gentleness; while if they erred
through ignorance, so far from punishing, they even honoured and
rewarded them. And this conduct was well considered. For as they judged
it of the utmost moment, that those in command of their armies should,
in all they had to do, have their minds undisturbed and free from
external anxieties, they would not add further difficulty and danger to
a task in itself both dangerous and difficult, lest none should ever be
found to act with valour. For supposing them to be sending forth an
army against Philip of Macedon in Greece or against Hannibal in Italy,
or against any other enemy at whose hands they had already sustained
reverses, the captain in command of that expedition would be weighted
with all the grave and important cares which attend such enterprises.
But if to all these cares, had been added the example of Roman generals
crucified or otherwise put to death for having lost battles, it would
have been impossible for a commander surrounded by so many causes for
anxiety to have acted with vigour and decision. For which reason, and
because they thought that to such persons the mere ignominy of defeat
was in itself punishment enough, they would not dishearten their
generals by inflicting on them any heavier penalty.

Of errors committed not through ignorance, the following is an
instance. Sergius and Virginius were engaged in the siege of Veii, each
being in command of a division of the army, and while Sergius was set
to guard against the approach of the Etruscans, it fell to Virginius to
watch the town. But Sergius being attacked by the Faliscans and other
tribes, chose rather to be defeated and routed than ask aid from
Virginius, who, on his part, awaiting the humiliation of his rival, was
willing to see his country dishonoured and an army destroyed, sooner
than go unasked to his relief. This was notable misconduct, and likely,
unless both offenders were punished, to bring discredit on the Roman
name. But whereas another republic would have punished these men with
death, the Romans were content to inflict only a money fine: not
because the offence did not in itself deserve severe handling, but
because they were unwilling, for the reasons already given, to depart
in this instance from their ancient practice.

Of errors committed through ignorance we have no better example than in
the case of Varro, through whose rashness the Romans were defeated by
Hannibal at Cannæ, where the republic well-nigh lost its liberty. But
because he had acted through ignorance and with no evil design, they
not only refrained from punishing him, but even treated him with
distinction; the whole senate going forth to meet him on his return to
Rome, and as they could not thank him for having fought, thanking him
for having come back, and for not having despaired of the fortunes his
country.

Again, when Papirius Cursor would have had Fabius put to death,
because, contrary to his orders, he had fought with the Samnites, among
the reasons pleaded by the father of Fabius against the persistency of
the dictator, he urged that never on the occasion of the defeat of any
of their captains had the Romans done what Papirius desired them to do
on the occasion of a victory.




