PART III.

We are now prepared to present in detail that general system of
beneficence, demanded alike by Scripture and reason, and best fitted to
secure permanent and ever-growing results.

While universal, it must be a system in its nature adapted to each
individual, and binding on the individual conscience; one founded on,
and embracing, the entire man,--his reason, his heart and will,
including views and principles, feelings and affections, with their
inculcation, general purposes and resolutions, with corresponding
action.  The tree must be symmetrical from its roots to its topmost
bough.  Beneficence may not stand alone; it must spring out of a
consistent character, must be a branch of activity, harmonizing with
other shoots from the common stock.  Else, it will be like a verdant
twig on a rotten trunk, growing up amid broken and withered limbs, the
sighing monitors of its own decay.

Some, I know, would advocate a system of beneficent actions without the
heart; others would direct it merely to one or a few favorite objects.
But these are views neither broad nor deep enough.  It is grafting
consistency on inconsistency.  True benevolence is a spirit of
universality, and hence, of harmony, gushing forth in streams numerous
as our relations.  No reason can be assigned why one should contribute
of his property to save the souls of others, while he neglects his own;
or spend his substance for the spiritual benefit of those at a distance,
while he neither puts forth personal efforts, nor manifests a holy
example, to rescue perishing immortals immediately around him.  A system
thus partial has a worm at the root; its protecting shadow will be as
transient as Jonah's gourd.

I.  _There must be a system of intellectual views, and a harmonizing
train of desires and affections flowing naturally from them_.

I will, therefore, present a series of principles, sentiments, and
obligations, which, by being lodged in the intellect, and quickened by
the Spirit, warm the heart, and awaken appropriate feelings; thus
forming not only the basis, but a constituent part, of an efficient
system of benevolence.

I would premise, however, that these intellectual views may also be
regarded as _inducements to munificence_, and thus to the adoption of an
individual system, fitted to each one's peculiar relations; for they
will thus operate from the nature of the case; the very object of
fastening them systematically in the understanding being, that
penetrating to the heart, and binding themselves on the conscience, they
may lead on to rational activity.

1.  We should bear in mind that we were not made for ourselves, but for
the service of God.  Let the truth, "Thou art God's," be written with
fire on the heart, as well as its legitimate consequence, that all that
appertains to our being is his;--our strength, our health, our powers of
reason and love, our capacities of acquisition, our property, our time,
our all, so that its thrilling accents, "All that thou hast is God's,"
will ring in our ears at every turn.  As Jehovah created us for himself,
has preserved us for himself, and redeemed us for himself, we ought at
once to acknowledge his claim and devote ourselves to his service.  This
self-surrender is the true foundation of all giving to the Lord.  Any
system of beneficence not built on this must crumble.  Giving one's
self is an earnest and pledge that everything else will be given; on
the contrary, while self is withheld, there is no warrant that our
possessions will be yielded, much less that God will accept the offering.
But self being surrendered, all is virtually conveyed over to the Lord
and sealed forever his.

2. That all right feeling is feeling as God does in the same
circumstances, and in respect to the same objects.  There must be a holy
sympathy of soul with him,--a oneness of affection, of desire, of will,
of purpose.  We must feel concerning ourselves as God does, who desires
to see our hearts burning with the same hallowed love that fills his
own.  We must feel concerning sinners as the Father does, "who so loved
the world that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life;"--as the Son, who
exchanged the abodes of peace for the abasement of flesh and the agonies
of the cross;--as the Holy Ghost, who is willing to dwell in our
polluted hearts, consuming the dross with his own vital energies.  We
must imitate the angels, who, sympathizing with the Triune Jehovah,
strike their lyres with new and more rapturous hallelujahs at the
repentance of the returning sinner.  No other feelings in kind or
strength, in proportion to our capacities, are right feelings.  The
sacrifices of Christ were, indeed, stupendous; but we must be willing to
make as disinterested sacrifices for a perishing world; else we are not
in sympathy with our crucified Lord.  Let us often visit the scenes of
his sufferings, hear the groans of Gethsemane, and witness the blood and
agony of the cross, and there learn what it means to have the same mind
"which was also in Christ Jesus."  Let us make this love the great
standard of feeling and action, and cultivate the habit of trying
ourselves by this, and this alone; inquiring daily, "Oh, am I benevolent
as Christ?"  "Do I sympathize with him over a ruined world?"

3.  That God created us to occupy a position near himself.  As all our
springs are in him, communion with him was to be our life and joy.  We
were to be full of God; to see him everywhere and in everything, and to
value nothing only as the work of his power, the fruit of his love, or
as showing forth his praise.  We were to dwell so far up the mount, that
earthly objects would appear insignificant; approach continually its
lofty summit, till our views of the world and the glory of it should
harmonize with God's views of them; for not only were our feelings to
accord with Jehovah's; but also our sentiments concerning sublunary
things were to be in unison with his own.  So familiar were we to be
with the glories of our spiritual existence; our tastes and moral
sensibilities were designed, by intercourse with Infinite Purity, to
become so elevated and refined, that the glitterings of gold, and the
fascinations of wealth, would fail to charm.  Our home was to be so near
the throne, that its light would perpetually shine in upon our souls;
its spirit always bathe our spirits; so that seraph-like, possessing the
benevolence of heaven, we should breathe the love of heaven on all
around.

4.  That merely becoming rich is not the great object for which we were
sent into the world.  Man's being aims at a higher goal.  This is a
point which should be distinctly understood; and to bring out the
thought clearly, I will make two distinctions.  1. The very obvious
difference between benevolence and indifference to property or its
acquisition.  Benevolence means "wishing well," and beneficence "doing
well," to others.  Benevolence, then, bears no resemblance to
undervaluing money.  I know that the gentleman who used to _skip_ his
silver dollars on the fair bosom of the Connecticut for the amusement of
his friends, and he who freely tosses around the social glass to his
boon companions, may be pronounced generous fellows.  But such may be as
entirely destitute of all true benevolence as the most determined miser,
and, what is more deplorable, as offensive to Infinite Love.  Property
is God's gift, and he does not require us to undervalue his gifts, but
to use them with his own good-will to men.  To be willing that our labor
or capital should be unproductive is no indication of a faithful
steward.  2. There is a difference between the design of becoming rich,
and that of acquiring property.  The latter, under certain restrictions,
is a duty incumbent on all.  One may have a peculiar talent in this
direction;--a turn for business, a sagacity to lay plans, to foresee the
favorable changes in the commercial world, and all that shrewdness so
essential to success in the career of opulence.  It is an endowment of
heaven, and should be used in such a way as heaven will approve.  While
regulated strictly by the principles of Revelation, it should be
employed in the acquisition of property, as a means of usefulness.  But
it is a common opinion, that money may be made solely for the sake of
accumulation.  Parents instil the idea into the minds of children, so
that they grow up with the conviction, that the great end of life is the
procuring of wealth.  Implanted in the tender mind, and nurtured with
its strength, it assumes the tenacity of a first principle.  But it is
altogether erroneous.  It is the product of the selfish heart.  No
sentiment is more fertile in covetousness, or more blighting to that
generous humanity, which it is the first object of the Christian to
cherish.  It is a sentiment grovelling in its tendency, bowing
multitudes, it is feared, even of professedly good men, to a species of
slavery, over which devils smile, and angels weep; knowing that it
obstructs the flow of thousands into the treasury of the Lord.  A
sentiment so hurtful should be eradicated from the public mind.  It
should be discarded from the individual breast.  The toils of pecuniary
gain must be pervaded by a loftier motive.  It should be sought, not as
a gratification to avarice; but, in the fear of the Lord, by industry,
by economy, by frugality, by forecast, by the most profitable
investments of capital, and with a heart full of mercy, as an instrument
to enlighten the ignorant, and relieve the sorrows of human-kind.  This
idea has not taken so firm a hold of the christian public as its
importance deserves.  How useful might some, who have little talent
either for learning or public speaking, become, would they
disinterestedly devote their lives to the acquisition of money for
purposes of beneficence.  Wealth, pursued with this spirit, will never
beget avaricious desires, and thus acquired, will be a treasury of
blessings to multitudes here, and a source of enjoyment to the pious
owner forever.  Its worth will survive the grave.  Let it be an abiding
thought--money may be invested where it will yield an eternally
increasing revenue.

5.  That in laying our pecuniary plans, we should be governed by a
single view to the glory of God.  The plans we adopt must be chosen
because, in our deliberate judgment, we can do more to advance Christ's
interests by prosecuting them than in any other way.  Every act sustains
relations of moral influence.  Every kind of business or method of
carrying it on, has certain relations which will modify its results,
and, perhaps, its moral bearings, either on own usefulness, or the
spiritual well-being of the community at large.  Now we are bound to
engage in that business, and adopt those schemes, whose results,
considering these wide-spreading relations, will be most favorable to
the kingdom of Christ.  If we lay our plans recklessly, without regard
to their moral tendencies, or shrink from these moral discriminations
respecting them, we evince anything but a will in harmony with the
Divine will.  I know some fondly cherish the opinion, that their
sagacity or peculiar tact for money-making at least is their own; and
that they may employ it in devising such pecuniary schemes as they
please, provided they are strictly honest, and do not interfere with the
privileges of others.  But this is not true.  This reference to the
Divine glory sheds the sunshine of heaven over all our employments, and
must be the guiding principle of all our enterprises.  It is also
indispensable to any sustained system of munificence.  If our schemes
have ultimate reference to self, we shall be likely to use their
proceeds as selfishness shall dictate; whereas, if our plans are laid
with a view to the honor of God, we shall be disposed to use their
results for the promotion of the same great end.  This is a truth of
incalculable importance to our present subject.  It should be bound to
the conscience of every Christian, and burn there with such intensity
that it can never be forgotten.

6.  That God made us to be almoners of his bounty to others.
Reciprocity is the pillar of every social system; it is of the human
family.  This principle was practically developed in Eden.  On this
ground, Paul argued that there should be equality between those who are
in want and those who have abundance.  (3 Cor. viii. 14.)  Every man was
designed to stand like a conductor of the electric fluid, to convey the
influences of heaven to those around him.  Our Creator has made the duty
of benevolence as obligatory as that of justice.  One is as much bound
to help other, and thus, unless in very extreme cases, to contribute of
his substance for the benefit of the needy, as to be honest.  When,
therefore, we pass a portion of the good things of life to others as
they are conveyed to us, we are fulfilling the great end of our social
being; when we grudgingly retain it, we are defeating that end.  This
sentiment must be riveted in our minds.  It is a hard lesson for selfish
men to receive; yet it must be learnt.  It is indeed the noblest idea of
our natures; the link that unites us to purer intelligences.

7.  A lively remembrance of the Source of our blessings; realizing that
they are all streams from the Father of mercies.  Had he been other than
Jehovah, they would long ere this have been stayed.  For how have we
sinned, and forfeited every claim to good; and yet he has continued to
uphold and refresh us.  We have repeated the sin, and under aggravated
form,--abused his bounties, despised his Son, grieved his Spirit,
disregarded his warnings, and slighted his entreaties; and still his
blessings have continued to flow as if nothing could provoke him to
withhold them.  What unutterable goodness!  What exhaustless mercy!
Surely the gifts of such mercy should be devoted to the works of mercy;
and how more appropriately than in aid of that wondrous scheme which the
agonized Jesus died to accomplish?  While we enjoy our blessings, let us
turn our eyes upward to the overflowing Source, and while we gaze, let
the streams of gratitude gush forth.  As we have freely received, freely
let us give.

8. The importance of praying over the gifts of Providence, and the
varied calls of charity.  As the reception of our income should be one
of the special occasions of consecrating a portion to the Lord, so in
the gladness of the moment of its reception, we should make it our rule
to decide as to the amount to be thus consecrated on our knees before
God.  Also, when the claims of the destitute are presented, let the
amount of our contributions be fixed upon so far as practicable in the
same way; determining, at whatever sacrifice to our own feelings, to
give just what God requires.  Prayer, while a privilege at all times of
doubt and perplexity, is a special duty on such occasions;--first,
because, when alone with the Searcher of hearts, brought up, as it were,
into the full blaze of his presence, our consciences will be quickened,
and speak truthfully; while the humble attitude of the suppliant is
peculiarly fitted to inspire gratitude, and render it effective;--
secondly, because such are hours of special temptations; the adversary
of all good and our wicked hearts combining their efforts to prevent a
generous liberality; and there is great danger that selfishness, rather
than mercy, will gain the ascendency, and, under artful guises, control
our determinations;--thirdly, because our decisions on such occasions
are some of the most influential in their consequences, both upon
ourselves and others, which we are ever called to make in the common
routine of duties.  Take a simple instance.  The question whether
we give to the Bible Society one dollar or ten, fifteen dollars or
twenty-five, is virtually whether we will send forth for the enlightening
and felicitating of this dark and wretched world, four or forty, sixty
or a hundred, volumes of the Word of Life.  And when, aside from all the
distorting and hardening influences exerted on our own moral natures by
a grudging refusal to meet the calls of benevolence, we consider the
civil and social melioration which has attended the pathway of this
heavenly light, together with its refining and sanctifying influences of
the individual soul; when we stretch our thoughts into the eternal
world, and catch the songs of joy, unuttered and unutterable by mortal
tongues, which will thrill forever the souls of the redeemed, what acts
of life can the thoughtful mind contemplate, demanding more solemn
consideration, more fervent prayer, than such decisions?

Thus the practice of coming to our determinations of charity with
prayer, a practice involving, as it does, both mental and moral
principles of the first importance, and even leading on to
interminable consequences, may not be neglected.  We should
cultivate, therefore, a docile temper, a simple, child-like spirit
towards Christ.  We should cherish such vital nearness to our Lord,
that we may commune as freely with him as friend communes with
friend; feeling that we can and would do nothing, even in the
common affairs of life, without his aid and guidance.  It is said of
a lady in one of our cities, whom an intimate acquaintance urged to
spend a few days with her in the country, that she replied, "I
should like to, but I don't know, it may not be best;" and added with
great simplicity, and in agreement with the spirit of her life, "I will
go and ask my Saviour."  Thus, on the reception of worldly
treasures, or in determining beforehand what  proportion of our
expected increase we shall appropriate to the Lord, we should go to
Jesus with the same sweet simplicity and earnestness, crying, "Lord,
what proportion of these thy bounties shall I share with the
destitute?" failing not to devote that portion which our consciences,
enlightened by scripture, shall dictate when kneeling before the
mercy-seat.

9.  The responsibility of maintaining a healthful and enlightened
conscience in respect to benevolence.  The Bible is the great teacher
and rectifier of the conscience.  We must in the first place, then, take
fair, impartial, disinterested views of all the precepts, examples,
promises, and teachings of the Scriptures on this point.  We must
investigate them thoroughly, and be sure that we obtain precisely the
mind of the Spirit.  Dim or distorted views either cripple the springs
of action, or give them wrong direction.  True, the scriptural standard
towers high, and shines brightly.  Some would obscure its brightness;
would wrest those passages most vividly presenting it; would convince
themselves that so great sacrifices as some, in their zeal, have
prescribed, are not required; that we are permitted to enjoy our own
interests, and, to a great extent, seek our own happiness; and if we
barely obey the suggestions of natural sympathy, and manifest common
generosity, it is enough.  They would bring down this exalted standard
to our own diminutive stature, so that we can measure ourselves by it
without inconvenience.  But all such efforts are high-handed rebellion,
and will prove utterly vain.  God has placed it on a pedestal high as
the eternal throne, and there it will stand and burn forever.  We must
bind our consciences to this standard; they must rise to its height,
and shine with its radiance.  If to our selfish hearts it appear a
blood-stained cross, we must nail them to it, and let them bleed and
agonize there.  To gratify our selfish desires, God will never lower
his claims.  We must come up to them.  If unwilling to do it in time,
we shall meet them in all their solemn realities at the final bar; if
we have been obedient, there receiving the smile of our Judge; if not,
his everlasting frown.

Secondly, we should keep ourselves informed of the spiritual wants of
our race.  Every one is bound to be in earnest in this work.  He should
strive to enstamp on his heart a full-drawn image of the world scathed
by sin.  We should realize how great a portion of our globe is yet
untouched by the vivifying light of the Cross; that the desolating
systems of idolatry, of Mohammedism, of Romanism, and other false
religions, are now overshadowing and blasting the nations.  We should
search for distinct knowledge of the intellectual degradation, of the
moral corruption, of the oppression, wretchedness, and woe, of the
groans uttered, and the tears shed, by the millions now subject to their
galling sway, "as for hid treasures."  Ignorance on these topics, at the
present day, cannot be excusable.  The organs of the various benevolent
societies come weekly or monthly to our doors, detailing scenes of
sottish ignorance, of pollutions and misery, which cause philanthropy to
weep.  They are indeed distressing to the feeling heart; and I have
sometimes thought there were those, who shrink from the affecting view
of a world ravaged, enslaved, and tortured by sin, lest it should work
too strongly on their sympathies, and thus forcing the guards of
covetousness, open their treasures against their more settled purposes;
while others have been too heartless in their investigations.  But this
is treason to the Divine government; it is an unwillingness to know
exactly our relations, and thus the claims of the human family on our
regards.  Such treachery and indifference cannot go unpunished.  Did
Christ shrink from contemplating the loathsomeness and woe of our
outcast race?  He not only contemplated, he shared our sorrows.  Let
every one then survey the world as it is, and let its appalling scenes
glare on his conscience.

In the third place, we should hold up before our minds striking examples
of benevolence.  God has raised up some with great hearts, who have
given bountifully in proportion to their means, to promote his cause.
Such were the poor widow, who gave "all that she had," the Macedonian
Christians, whose liberality exceeded their means, and the King of the
Friendly Islands already mentioned.  Such was the late Mr. Goodell of
Vermont, who, with a house and farm not estimated at over $1,000,
contrived by labor, frugality, and self-denial, to pour his hundreds and
tens of hundreds into the treasury of the Lord.  Such were the late Mr.
Smith of Hartford and Mr. Cobb of Boston, "the sweet savor" of whose
names awakens the kindliest associations, and whom God sustained, made
cheerful and happy in all their sacrifices for him.  Such was the aged
African of Jamaica.  He had earned, while a slave, ninety-six dollars.
Being afterward emancipated, he came to the missionary, and offered the
whole for the service of Christ; and when told it was too much, replied,
with the most generous devotion, "No, _I want to give it all_."  Such
was the poor colored woman, who, while she had no dependence for support
but the labor of her hands, gave $60 at one time to educate pious young
men for the Gospel ministry.  "When she offered the above sum, the agent
refused to receive it all, until pressed by the humble donor, who said
that she had reserved five dollars; and that she hoped to earn enough to
provide for her wants in her last sickness, and for her funeral."  This
is said to be but a specimen of her liberality; and her hopes in regard
to her earthly wants were not disappointed.

Perhaps in the small circle of our personal acquaintance, we can number
some few, who, with souls more elevated and spiritually refined by
grace, have bestowed in benefactions all their income; peradventure,
even common farmers and mechanics--such as have fallen under the notice
of the writer--who, after frugally supplying the wants of their
families, have generously given the remaining proceeds of their labor to
the Lord.

On these, and such as these, we should fix our eyes; they are stars of
the first magnitude which God has fixed in the dark canopy of time as
guides.  We may not be able to give as they did; but the sacrifices they
made, we can and ought to make.  If we seek to ward off the force of
their example by arguing that they gave too much, or by referring at
once to professedly good men who have given far less, we may reasonably
conclude that covetousness is still grasping and palsying our christian
sympathies.  Such efforts are clearly but the struggles of selfishness,
to ease the conscience of the dart.  For, from such generous deeds, the
voice does, and will come inevitably, "Go, and do likewise."

10.  The felicity of beneficence.  That "it is more blessed to give than
to receive," is the voice of inspiration.  Jehovah's felicity flows
mainly from that fundamental element of his being, disinterested or holy
love, and its infinitely diversified and glorious workings.  He created
us in his own image; and when this love has possession of our hearts,
and our conduct is in obedience to its laws, the mental machine works in
harmony, and the result is enjoyment; but when the opposite principle
controls, its movements are obstructed, and the result is sorrow.  It is
a law of our being, as fixed as the ordinances of heaven, that we drink
the richest draughts when holding the cup of enjoyment to another's
lips.  Happiness eludes the grasp of the pursuer; while like a flower
that sheds its sweetest fragrance when crushed, only tread it under foot
in the eager pursuit of another's good, and its subtle influence
vibrates through all our frame.  The blessedness of self-denying efforts
for the salvation of souls cannot be estimated.  It is god-like; it is
harmonizing with our dying Lord; co-working with him in carrying out the
redemptive scheme; wakening a joy which the harps of eternity alone can
utter.  "They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars
forever and ever."  What a revenue of glory will forever flow into the
enraptured souls of such men as Baxter and Doddridge, and Swartz and
Martyn, and Goodell and Norman Smith, as they cast their crowns at the
feet of the Saviour; for it is the highest fruition of the redeemed that
all their glory is ultimately Christ's.  Who, as he contemplates the
perpetually increasing joy and brightening exaltation of a soul restored
to the image of God, becoming through unnumbered years more and more
assimilated to its glorious Head, would not participate in a work so
transporting in its results?  Perhaps you have had some feeble
conception of its blessedness, some half-waking desires to become a
standard-bearer in the hottest of the fight with the foes of God,--a
minister or missionary of the Cross, so as to labor more efficiently in
saving souls.  But in your circumstances you find it an idle wish.  Do
you hence smother these kindling emotions and fold your hands in
despair?  The Gospel may be preached by your alms.  There are many links
in the chain of influences which God employs in rescuing sinners from
death; and one of the most effectual at the present period, is the
bestowment of funds to send forth the heralds of salvation.  These
desires, therefore, that feebly burn in your breast, may be gratified.
In an important sense, you may preach the unsearchable riches of Christ
to the nations, thereby becoming a coadjutor in a work, the sublimest of
heaven and the most felicitating to man.  This is an interesting truth.
Let it blaze quenchlessly before the mind, warming the heart to mercy.

11.  The sin and danger of covetousness.  Covetousness is unlikeness to
God, to our compassionate Saviour, to the blessed spirits before the
throne, whose only symphonies are love.  When indulged, the frown of the
holy universe is fastened upon us.  It is violating the laws of our
mental frame,--an instrument so exquisitely attuned that the slightest
vibration of its delicate chords awakens notes of joy or wailings of
sorrow; and it thus becomes the source of irritation and remorse here,
and of disquieting premonitions of the most appalling woes in the world
to come.  Hear what God hath spoken: "But fornication and all
uncleanness or _covetousness_, let it not be once named among you.  For
no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor _covetous_ man, who is an
_idolater_, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Let no man deceive you; for because of these things cometh the wrath of
God upon the children of disobedience."  This is terrible language, and
explicit as terrible.  According to the plainest principles of
interpretation, covetousness is here put in the same category with some
of the worst vices that degrade man and provoke the wrath of heaven.
Indeed, if benevolence is required equally with justice, then
covetousness is as distinctly a violation of the divine law as
injustice; and he who hoards as the expense of the suffering poor, is as
guilty in the sight of God as he who rifles another's goods.  And is it
strange that he who nurtures a principle thus pernicious in its
tendencies, should be excluded from heaven?  No.  Let us not flatter
ourselves; we cannot indulge in covetousness without imminent peril.
Who will dare thus offend his gracious Sovereign, and incur his wrath?
Let this bright, but awful truth, flash in our faces, deterring us from
the fearful sin, and inducing a sleepless vigilance over our selfish
propensities, lest they grow with our growth, and strengthen with our
increasing wealth.

12.  The dignity and responsibilities growing out of the fundamental
truth before partially unfolded, that God, under the gospel, having
given us general principles and laws touching benevolence, has left the
amount and frequency or our contributions to our own decision.  The
position we occupy under the new dispensation is full of interest and
solemnity.  As it is one of peculiar dignity, it is one of peculiar
peril.  God has now raised us to the true platform of intelligent and
moral beings; given our reason and consciences free scope to exercise
their own energetic and controlling powers.  He has, indeed, always
given man this prerogative, but in a higher sense under the Gospel than
before; in other words, placed him in a position better fitted for the
development of his whole being.  He has thrown him more entirely on
his personal responsibility and the decisions of individual judgment,
by laying down general principles from which he is to ascertain his
every-day duties.  All the noble powers of the soul, directed by the
Spirit's influences, are to be brought into full operation and work in
concert; the heart, without impediment, concurring with the reason; the
purposes, with the affections.  This is "the liberty wherewith Christ
hath made us free."

Paul has beautifully illustrated this subject by comparing the condition
of a son before and after becoming of age.*[Gal. iv.]  While a minor, he
is kept in subordination to his father; "under tutors and governors,"
his judgment in the management of affairs is under the control of
another.  While a minor, he is kept in subordination to his father;
"under tutors and governors," his judgment in the management of affairs
is under the control of another.  But when he comes of age, he is
elevated to a new position, assumes new interests and new
responsibilities.  He must then reason, judge, and act for himself.  So
under the Jewish dispensation, God dealt with our race as minors; left
them not to the direction of their own individual wisdom--to form
specific rules from general principles; but led them by definite
precepts; not such always as rise out of the nature of things; but such
as he saw best fitted, by a sort of foreshadowing, to prepare them for
the more glorious state to which they were approaching.  Hence all those
positive laws, rites, and solemn festivals--appointed "days, and months,
and times, and years," tithes and double tithes to which they were in
bondage.  But when Christ came, this bondage was broken.  We were
emancipated from this system of tutelage; henceforth, breathing the
spirit of adoption and enjoying the freedom of sons, we were to act
according to the dictates of our sanctified hearts and enlightened
judgments, like beatified spirits, who, swayed alone by reason,
conscience, and love, in the highest sense free and intelligent, speed
on their course in harmony with Jehovah.  So, under the dispensation of
grace, every act must spring voluntarily from the mind, enlightened by
comprehensive views of Scripture principles.  Charged with obligations
inalienable as our very being, we are sent forth on the career of
probationary existence, amenable alone to our own consciences and the
bar of final awards.  God, so to speak, has reposed confidence in us,
and it may not be abused.  This is true in relation to charity, as well
as to other duties.  For the free discharge of this duty is one of our
most solemn trusts.  Each one, enlightened by the great principles of
disinterested benevolence, is left to the decisions of his own mind in
shaping his conduct and alms to its requisitions.  To be permitted to
judge for ourselves in matters of such high and solemn import is an
exalted dignity.  But to every degree of dignity and privilege, there is
attached an increase of responsibility.

Such is our present attitude in relation to the work of benevolence.
Now shall we abuse this confidence, despise our privileges, and show
ourselves unworthy of our almost angelic exaltation?  Shall we make this
liberation from the specific requisition of tithes "an occasion to the
flesh," an excuse for less pecuniary sacrifices than the Jews were
subjected to?  What ingratitude!  How displeasing to our Heavenly Father
who has raised us thus high!

Hence, exemption from tithes, instead of relaxing our obligations to
beneficence, rather strengthens them.  As charity is purely a matter of
voluntariness, the whole soul must be enlisted in it.  We must not only
guard against a betrayal of our trust, but against dispositions in the
least at variance with its duties.  We must keep our hearts in sympathy
with Christ; lest, failing in sympathy with him, we fail to imitate him.

Let these responsibilities, together with the ingratitude and contempt
of God's favor implied in the non-fulfilment, be earnestly contemplated.
Let us tremble lest we make the privilege of a more spiritual
beneficence, and excuse "for withholding more than is meet," and turn
the blessing into a curse.

13.  That benevolence is the measure of personal piety.  Personal piety
is personal resemblance to Christ.  "Let this mind be in you, which was
also in Christ Jesus."  Christ's character is essentially love.  This
induced him to die for lost man.  Now just so far as we resemble Christ
we shall imitate him, and, therefore, feel for those on whom the wrath
of God is still abiding.  And just so far as we feel for them, we shall
be willing to do for them; and just so far as we are willing to do for
them, we shall contribute of our substance in proportion to our means to
relieve their spiritual necessities.  So that our beneficence or
sacrifices for the extension of the Redeemer's kingdom, will be the just
measure of our love to him.  This truth we should wear in our hearts.
We should make it a principle to give that amount which we shall be
satisfied to recognize as the exponent of our piety, and be content that
others should thus regard it; such as we shall be willing to pen down
and hang up in our bed-chambers, so that we can contemplate it every
evening and morning as our full estimation of Christ's dying love;--such
that after counting our herds and flocks, examining our barns and
granaries, surveying our merchandise, and reckoning up our dues, we can
enter our closets and pray for the conversion of the world without
blushing before God.  Does any one shrink from this criterion of his
piety?  I fear he will shrink away from the presence of his final Judge,
and bury himself in the darkness of hell; his works and conscience alike
testifying his unfitness for the world of light.

14.  That the true mission of the church in the present age is
beneficence.  Though the gospel has been preached nearly 2000 years, yet
a deep night of spiritual darkness is still brooding over the greatest
portion of the world.  Millions on millions have no knowledge of the
Saviour, and other millions have no right appreciation of his truth and
grace; while, blinded by sin and fascinated by its treacherous charms,
they are treading their way, rank after rank, to woes everlasting.
God's providence seems now to be moving upon the spiritual chaos,
preparing it for the reception of light.  Obstacles to the introduction
of the gospel into benighted regions are fast giving way.  The kingdoms
spread beneath the sun, from north to south, from China to the farthest
verge of the west, are seemingly in the posture of waiting for
evangelical instruction.  The Macedonian cry is coming up from the four
winds.  It is made to the church, the sacramental host of God's elect;
and _they must answer it_.

God appoints, in some respects, special duties to different ages and
nations.  It was the peculiar mission of European Christians in the
sixteenth century to break the yoke of papal supremacy; of England in
the time of Cromwell to waken those notes of ecclesiastical and civil
freedom which are still reverberating among the mountains of Europe, and
shakings dynasties; of our fathers to achieve the political independence
of the United States,--to plant the genial tree of liberty, and water it
with their blood.  Now what does the providence of God indicate as the
special ministry of the church in the present age?  It is written all
over the face of the world.  We learn it in the awakened condition of
heathen, barbarous, and half-civilized countries; in the stir of
intellectual energy which is sweeping over the kingdoms, jostling
thrones and alarming monarchs; in the tottering pillars of corrupt
religions, and of long-established institutions of iniquity; in the
progress of governmental science in connection with political liberty,
and the extension of the arts of civilization; in augmented facilities
for traveling, together with increased efforts for education, and the
consequent quickening of mind; in the degradation of those "who know not
God," the wants of seamen, of the oppressed, of the spiritually
destitute both in our own and other lands, and in the charitable
movements of the times.  All these seem to declare unequivocally that
the special work of the church in this age is benevolence--to toil, to
endure privations, to make sacrifices of ease and of property to
evangelize the nations.  God has opened channels flowing past almost
every man's door, ready to convey his donations to distant regions of
the globe, carrying light and salvation wherever they go.  The appalling
condition of the heathen in bygone ages has been as great and pitiable
as now; but never have there been so many available opportunities to
reach them.  These opportunities impose new obligations.

We have seen in a preceding part of this essay, that our bounties should
be in a compound proportion to calls and ability.  This is a principle
which the present generation would do well to consider; letting it
penetrate the very heart's core.  To meet such emergencies as are now
transpiring on the moral stage, perhaps, was one reason why Christ
designated no specific ratio of income for charity.  He foresaw there
would be crises when no proportion would be adequate, and when the
christian heart would yearn to give more than his income, even all his
living.  And may not the present be such a crisis?

Indeed, the multiplied opportunities afforded us of invading the
dominions of the prince of darkness plainly intimate that the present is
a crisis demanding the most generous sacrifices for God.  The sigh of
every breeze that sweeps over the blood-stained regions of idolatry
declares it.  The cries and outstretched arms of millions sinking into
the everlasting gulf declare it.  Then let it be laid up in the mind as
a settled truth, that it is our peculiar ministry to break the chains of
ignorance and superstition, to demolish the habitations of cruelty, to
crush the thrones of intellectual and moral enthralment, to overthrow
the temples of idolatry, and bring up man from his long degradation to
reunion with God through the blood of the Lamb.  There has probably been
no age since the foundation of the world, which has demanded so great
contributions as this, and, perhaps, no subsequent age will, till the
desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose.  At least in a few
generations we trust the Gospel light shall illumine every shore.  Then
there will be no such urgent calls on our charities; certainly none
pressing with such undying interests.  This, therefore, is emphatically
the age of _giving_; for the bulk of the church can aid effectually in
bringing about the happy consummation of millennial glory in no other
way.  Would that Christians of the present generation could be induced
to look at this truth in its intense application to themselves
individually.  Would that its accents could be made to ring over every
hill top, and echo through every valley in Christendom; startling the
soldiers of the cross to deeds of love, as the voice of Peter the hermit
once bristled with arms the plains of Europe to shed the blood of
infidels.

Not long since, thousands were starving and dying in Ireland.  A cry of
anguish came up, and thousands of generous American hearts responded to
the call.  This was noble.  It was thought to be an especial occasion
for benevolence.  Who did not feel that every Irish landholder should
have shared his abundance with the suffering and dying poor around him?
But what is the death of the body to the death of the soul!  What is the
temporal destruction of a few thousands to the eternal damnation of
hundreds of millions!  Was it the duty of the wealthy Irish to feed
their starving neighbors?  And since the providence of God has made the
remotest of earth's dwellers who are perishing for lack of vision our
neighbors, should we not supply them with the bread of heaven, and thus
prevent untold agonies?  I ask every candid reader, is not the present a
_special occasion_ for benevolence? and if the church is to be the
instrument by which God has determined to work in restoring the kingdoms
to his Son, will it not be such an occasion till that blessed period
arrives, when there shall be nothing to hurt or destroy in all God's
holy mountain?

15.  The duties growing out of the possession of property in view of
death, judgment, and eternity.  The obligations imposed upon us by the
possession of wealth may be irksome, but we cannot escape them; we must
bear them to the judgment.  In our pride we may resolve that we will use
our money as we please; but God commands us to use it as he pleases.  A
vivid sense, then, of the tremendous scenes before us should be ever
associated in our minds with ideas of property.  We should realize how
our wealth will appear in the final hour, as its pleasures and
enchanting illusions begin to fade from the dying eye, and as we reflect
how short and unsatisfactory, like "a dream when one awaketh," all these
enjoyments have been.  Rioting amid the luxuries of affluence, and giddy
with its bewildering joys, these may be unpleasant thoughts.  But why
regard thoughts of that which we cannot avoid, unpleasant?  We must not
only _think_ of these dread realities, we must _meet_ them, and
experience all their joy or woe.  Then let us realize, now and always,
how all our uses of property will appear at the bar of God, where the
thought of every misimprovement will be sharper than a serpent's fang;
how, in eternity, as we contemplate those who might have been saved by
our liberality in undying misery; how, if we are lifting up our eyes
with them in torments; how, if, while we ourselves shall be saved as by
fire, we behold them excluded from those blissful seats by our
covetousness.  Let each one put these searching questions to his own
conscience; and let him take heed that his gifts be such, that their
remembrance will not only sweeten his dying moments, but diffuse a
fragrance over all his future being.

16.  The worth of money hoarded or spent unnecessarily, contrasted with
the worth of souls as gems in the Saviour's crown.  The true value of
wealth as a worldly good we fully appreciate.  It contains no hidden
excellence which the circumstances of life conceal.  But the true glory
of a soul redeemed the mists of time obscure.  Our attachment to the
world and the hallucinations growing out of it, prevent its full
appreciation.  But soon all this illusion will vanish.  Both will stand
before us in their true light.  One will be seen to be vanity as it is;
the other to possess a worth which no language can express:--a worth
consisting not merely of the endless blessedness and glory it is itself
capable of enjoying, but also of the glory that will redound to the
adorable Trinity through its redemption.  Take a position most favorable
for its true estimation.  Transplant yourself into the heavenly state;
contemplate a blood-washed soul in all its peace, its joy, it
ravishment, as it circulates about the throne of love, approaching
nearer and nearer to its blissful centre, constantly increasing in
capacities, and more and more joyful in its high hallelujahs, till it
shall enjoy more blessedness in a single hour, than Gabriel has enjoyed
since the moment of his creation.  Behold it, as it shines, a star, in
the Saviour's diadem; gaze upon it purifying and brightening there as
revolutions of eternity's time move on, till it shall attract the
admiration of the heavenly throngs, and call forth from their wondering
harps symphonies louder and more rapturous than have yet been heard in
that world of sweetest hosannahs.  The comparative worth of money
hoarded or wasted, and the of the ransomed soul to itself, to the
Saviour who redeemed it, to the adoring hosts whose fruitions are
enhanced by the displays of grace evinced in its redemption, will be
then clearly seen.  Oh, how trifling will that money which has been
squandered or grudgingly withheld from charity then appear, contrasted
with the results in glorified souls of what was cheerfully and
prayerfully bestowed.  The condition of the churl and the liberal, how
different then!  He who hoarded most will then be found the poorest; and
he who gave most with the greatest sacrifices, the richest.

17.  The brevity of the period allotted us to labor and to make
sacrifices for the salvation of men.  "A point of time, a moment's
space," is all we have.  What we do in charity, the labors we perform,
the privations we suffer, must all be accomplished or endured soon.  The
distress we relieve, the souls we save, the joys we inspire, must feel
the quickening hand of mercy without delay.  Time is on his rapid wing.
Thousands who need our help are perishing daily; the entire generation
now occupying this stage of toil and probation, the great Destroyer will
speedily sweep from the scene.  Almost "in the twinkling of an eye" we
shall stand together before the judgment throne.  He who died to save
the poor as well as the rich, the heathen as well as the evangelized, is
now speaking from heaven; "whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with
thy might."

These are some of the intellectual views and obligations which should be
_systematized_ in the mind, forming both inducements to, and a
constituent part of, systematic beneficence.  They should lie like
blazing fuel on the heart, kindling their appropriate feelings and
affections.  I have briefly unfolded them, as a specimen of that process
of reasoning and personal application, which, according to our mental
laws, when attended by the Holy Spirit, is fitted to soften and
harmonize the mind preparatory to benevolent action; a process which
all, as rational beings, are bound to engage in and carry out.  I know
this part of the system requires unpleasant work.  Most are willing to
feel, but they would feel without principle; and if they act, they would
act only from the impulse of the moment.  They shrink from
introspection; from working on their own hearts through the laborious
operations of the intellect, so that the affections may be at once both
right and rational.  But if we would see the gorgeous palace towering in
symmetry and grandeur, unpleasant work must be done; the rubbish must be
removed, the soil excavated, the marble chiselled into form, and the
unsightly timbers erected.  Without these, though it might glitter in
the sunbeams, it would be but a gossamer tissue.  So this mental part is
the bone and sinew, the life, of a system of beneficence.  Confined to
resolutions and conduct, its movements would be like the effects of
galvanism on the muscles of the dead--unnatural and spasmodic.  The
truth is, there can be no system of action without some system both of
intellectual views and of the moral sensibilities.  All inconsistency
among Christians arises from defects in one or other of these respects.
The fountain is not invariably at the same height, and therefore the
stream alternately swells and sinks.

Resolutions are proverbially frail; and they are so, because they rest
not on a mind consolidated by principles, and a heart glowing like a
furnace with corresponding feelings.  When resting on such a mind and
heart, resolutions are not frail; but invincible as adamant.

Our purposes of charity, therefore, must rest on an unshaken foundation;
and in order to this, the principles and considerations fitted to
promote benevolent sentiments and feelings must be pressed on the mind,
till in view of them the bosom warms, and throbs, and swells, and bursts
forth in high and determined resolves.  It is not enough that they pass
like a burning ray across the mind, producing a single flash of
benevolence.  What is needed is a continuation of the same effect; and
for this, the same cause must continue to operate.  It is important,
therefore, that these truths be systematically applied.  Seasons should
be set apart for daily meditating and reasoning upon them, attended by
earnest supplication for the impressing influences of the Holy Spirit.
The mind must thus be drilled to reflection upon them till they become
principles of action, so vital and permanent, that a shape and
inflexibility shall be given to the moral sensibilities, which no wear
of time or circumstances shall change or efface.

This is the only process by which the soul can be brought into, and kept
in, that state of unity implied in volition; especially of that abiding
unity implied in a general purpose, without which no scheme of action
can be long sustained.  This, too, is the only method by which unhappy
influences exerted on the heart by the pursuits of gain can be
counteracted.  As one engages in active business, and his property
accumulates, his thoughts usually become more engrossed, and his love of
money increases.  Why is it?  Precisely on the principle recognized by
the Psalmist, "While I was musing, the fire burned."  It is a law of our
mental nature, that the more we think of any subject naturally pleasing,
the greater interest we feel respecting it.  Now the management, the
proper investment, and safe keeping of property, must engage, more or
less, the attention; and owing to the extreme selfishness of the heart,
are very liable to awaken a lively interest.  Hence, the more people are
employed in the acquisition of affluence or competence, the more
covetous they usually become.  This influence, so chilling to the
generous affections, can be resisted only by a counter process of
reflection.  The truth that ourselves and all we have belong to God; the
extreme selfishness of the natural man; the insufficiency of worldly
good to satisfy the cravings of the soul; the dangers attending
acquisition; the obligations and privilege of giving; the benevolent
mission of the age; the spiritual wants of the world; the worth of a
soul redeemed; and all those great and solemn considerations fitted to
incite to munificence, must be presented before the mind as frequently
at least as ideas of property, in order to counterbalance the influence
of the latter; and, indeed, more frequently, so as to repress the strong
tendencies of the selfish heart, which the avocations of gain are so
well calculated to invigorate.  This can be done by no merely external
system of benevolent action, any farther than such a system has a reflex
influence on the moral feelings.  Farther than this, the effort would be
like attempting to stop the floods of the Amazon with a bulrush.

The great work, therefore, in erecting a system of beneficence, must be
wrought in the soul,--in impressing views and regulating affections.
For this there can be no substitute.  This deep and steady current of
truth and thought, is to the mind in connection with the Spirit's
operations, what showers are to the earth.  If there are none, it soon
becomes parched, and verdure withers; if they descend frequently and
copiously, the ground is filled with moisture, vegetation blooms, and
fruits ripen; springs burst forth, the streams dash along the valleys,
sweep through the meadows, and pouring into the ocean, roll their
mountain waves around the world.

II.  Standing on this high ground of established principles and
correspondent affections, we are prepared to take the second step in a
universal system of beneficence; consisting in the exercises of the will
in the formation of general purposes and resolutions.  These should be
made with a solemn sense of the responsibilities of our being; of our
relations to the world and to the judgment-seat; and with a full
conviction of our own weakness and entire dependence on the grace of God
to assist us in their fulfilment.

Reader, with this humble reliance on Divine aid, will you now make the
following resolutions your own?

1.  As a foundation to all others, I solemnly consecrate myself, soul
and body, to God in an everlasting covenant.

2.  I will prayerfully endeavor to keep my heart in sympathy with the
great principles and duties above unfolded.

3.  I will make the benevolence of Jesus Christ, in its spirit and
design, the pattern of my own, constantly carrying about the conviction,
that I must practise great self-denial, and make continued sacrifices in
imitation of my dying Lord.

4.  I will make unremitting war on the selfishness of my heart, knowing
it to be the worst of evils; and fully purposing that it shall never
influence my decision, either in regard to a general scheme, or a
particular act, of beneficence.

5.  I will thoroughly and candidly consider the spiritual destitutions
of our country and the world; the peculiar mission of the church in the
present age; and manfully, and with a whole heart, make the
renunciations thereby demanded.

6.  I will regard my health, strength, life, and property, as valuable
only as instruments of advancing the kingdom of Christ; and therefore
hold them all without reserve at the call of God.

7.  I will seize every opportunity for doing good by example, by
conversation, by labor, and by contribution.

8.  I will daily and prayerfully consider whether the circumstances of
the age in which I live do not require of me as great sacrifices in
alms-giving as were made by the Jews in contributing two tenths of their
income to the service of the Lord.


9. In laying all my pecuniary plans, and in all my labors to carry them
into effect, I will have the glory of God uppermost in view, and
therefore make it one of my leading objects to acquire property for
distribution; being thus, according to the injunction of Paul, "not
slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord."

10.  To give to charitable purposes such portion of my property as God,
by his Word and providences, seems to demand, I will deem as sacredly
incumbent upon me as to make an economical expenditure of it in the
support of myself and family.

11.  For the sake of strengthening the benevolent tendencies of the
soul, I will perseveringly cherish all its generous impulses by doing or
giving as they shall dictate, so far as scripture and ability prescribe.

12.  I will fix upon a system of giving which shall be made solemnly and
prayerfully in view of my circumstances and calls; in the clear light of
God's Word and of the awful retributions of the last tribunal.  As to
amount and frequency of donations, I will endeavor to make them such as
I shall wish they had been, when, bowing before the great white throne,
I shall gaze into the face of my crucified and exalted Saviour; actually
participating in the fruits of his unutterable sacrifices for me.

13.  Cherishing, amid the toils of gain, an abiding sense of the
strength of the selfishness of the human heart, and the consequent
dangers of acquisition, I will daily pray and strive for disinterested
benevolence as the greatest good; also for direction as to the amount of
sacrifices I ought to make; and then agreeably to my prayers, act
according to the dictates of conscience uttered in the presence of God.

14.  I will frequently and at stated periods solemnly renew these or
similar resolutions.

Now, if you refuse to make these solemn resolutions your own, can you
assign any reason for such refusal, which you will be willing to utter
in self-justification when facing your Final Judge?

Whatever theories we may adopt concerning volition, or the governing
determinations of the mind, all will agree in the fact, that the
energies of the human soul, when aroused, may be strung like fibres of
steel, giving and adamantine firmness and indomitable force to the will.
We have seen this exemplified in the fortitude with which one sometimes
endures surgical operation; in the heated courage of the soldier,
rushing with the loud huzza into the very face of the engulphing
battery; in the cool, calculating resolution which carries the
unflinching column with steady tread into the very centre of bristling
squares.  All this is but the strength of will when the energies of the
soul are stirred.  Now one's resolution may and should become thus
iron-like in the war with his own covetousness.  He should determine in
the strength of grace to break it down, however much it may cost.  God
has given us this power of will, and to him we are responsible for its
proper exercise; ever remembering that it is strengthened by cultivation
of reiterated effort.  The raw recruit cannot be trusted at the post of
danger like the veteran, who has repeatedly nerved up his spirit,
till by habit it has become as unyielding as a rock.  The latter has
learnt to be brave.  So we should learn to be soldiers in the war
with selfishness, by perseveringly girding our minds to the deadly
conflict.--Has depraved man such energy of will in spreading devastation
and death; and shall not Christians exhibit as great force of resolution
in diffusing the blessings of salvation?  Who dare say, I cannot, or will
not, exercise it?  Let us be mindful of our obligations.  If our minds
may be wrought up to such invincible firmness and energy of resolution
to do evil; surely, God assisting, they may not only be inspired with a
lofty enthusiasm to resist the solicitations of selfishness, but also
roused to a sublimity of generous emotions, to engage, like a Mills or a
Howard, in disinterested and self-denying efforts for the good of
others.

III.  We are now ready to take the last step in erecting a general
system of beneficence, viz.: the carrying into effect right principles
and well-directed resolutions.  While, on the one hand, the intellectual
and emotional qualities of the mind give character and vitality to
action; on the other hand our conduct exerts a powerful reflex influence
on the affections and purposes.  Nothing tends more to give strength and
spirit to a mental principle than accordant action; and nothing tends
more to obliterate an emotion from the breast, or to paralyze a
resolution, than the neglect of its appropriate manifestations.  However
deeply the one may be engraven on the soul, or however solid the texture
or vigorous the life of the other, a few instances of neglect or
violation will strike them with the chills of death.

Principles and resolutions, then, are of little avail without
corresponding efforts.  The "well of water" must not only spring up in
the soul, it must flow out in the life.  We must act as well as think
and resolve; and act, as if we _felt_ that ourselves and all that we
have belong to God by the twofold right of creation and redemption; act,
as if selfishness were our deadliest foe, and as if it were our great
business to attain its mortification and overthrow; act, as if
disinterested love, a soul like angels, like God, were the greatest good
to be possessed by an intelligent being; act, as if we were prayerfully
watching the calls of Christ on our generosity, and were ready and
determined manfully to meet them; act, in laying our pecuniary plans, as
if the highest object of acquisition were the means of diffusing good;
act, as if self-denial were the main condition of our being on earth,
and as if the circumstances of the age were requiring of us peculiar
sacrifices in order to rescue millions, perishing in mental thraldom,
whose souls are as precious as our own; act, as if we were in earnest,
as if the whole soul were kindled to a blaze of zeal, and bent on the
most determined efforts for the exaltation of Christ in the salvation of
men; knowing that the time allotted for the accomplishment of a task
eternal in its consequences, is but a hand-breadth.

Act with _forecast_.  This is a point of unspeakable importance.  I
would reiterate and enforce the thought, till it shall be wrought into
the very web of all our benevolent purposes.  There must be
_contrivance_ to give.  Worldly men make previous arrangements to
increase their stores.  Lovers of pleasure contrive to support their
follies.  Why should not lovers of Christ be equally wise to fill the
world with light, and heaven with anthems?

Act _systematically_.  With a mind illumined with knowledge, a
conscience impressed with obligation, and a heart glowing with love of
God and man, form an individual system of beneficence; and let it be one
you will not blush to review in heaven.  Be particularly careful,
therefore, that it be such as will come most strongly in collision with
the selfishness of the heart, and yield the richest revenue to the Lord;
requiring as generous and frequent contributions as circumstances will
allow, agreeably to the Divine injunction: "Every man shall give as he
is able, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God, which he hath
given thee;" in a word, let it be such as system as you will be willing
to hand in at the judgment-seat, as decisive testimony that you have
loved your neighbor as yourself.  And when it is formed, never violate
its rules by giving _less_, except impelled by imperative necessity;
though ever stand ready to deviate from it, when Providence commands, by
giving _more_.

Let benevolence be ever operative, like the sun ever shining.  Wait not
for the modest poor, or heedlessly perishing, to ask for aid; but go
forth in search of objects appropriate for philanthropy to relieve, to
enlighten, to cheer.  Obey the voice from heaven: "Open thy hand wide
unto thy brother;" "Sow beside all waters;" scattering a little here and
a little there, and thus, to the extent of ability, aid in bringing back
"the state of Eden's bloom," and planting trees of righteousness all
over the world.

Let deeds of charity be consistent one with another, and harmonize
with a general deportment, elevated to the true Gospel standard of
self-consecration; so that they may exert an influence, not only in
relieving the wants of the needy and forlorn, but as examples of
heartfelt beneficence, inciting others to the glorious work.  Let Christ,
therefore, be the pattern of all charitable efforts.  Let the love that
moved him to endure a life of privation and a death of agony, take full
possession of the soul, prompting to the same unwearied and self-denying
activity in doing good.  With a constancy and vigor based on this
life-giving principle, let each one endeavor to make his influence felt
throughout the world; becoming, in his sphere, like one of those fixed
stars that sparkle in the midnight sky--a blazing sun to those that are
near, a gem of sweetest ray to those afar.

Such is the system, and, as we believe, substantially the only universal
system of beneficence, with which God will be well pleased.  It grows
out of our relations to him as intellectual and moral beings.  Its
life-spring is in the heart.  It is purely spiritual or moral in its
character.  It rejects all machinery, and can be permanently helped
forward by no scheme of merely external actions.  It occupies the whole
soul; with its roots winding round every intellectual and virtuous
principle, it shoots up its stately trunk, sending forth its far-reaching
branches, whose leaves are for the healing of the nations.

It is a system forming an essential part of Christian character.  It
requires that the great themes of our meditation be spiritual and
eternal, that the mind be so imbued with thoughts of God, his government
and law, of Christ, his love, his sufferings and death, of the
restorative scheme thereby wrought out, of its relation to this apostate
world, of our responsibilities as co-workers with Christ in spreading
the knowledge of his name, and of the consequences both to ourselves and
others of fidelity to our trust--it requires that these thoughts be so
thoroughly impressed, and the heart so permeated, warmed, and animated
by their influence, that they shall become, as it were, inherent
elements of moral action, involuntarily suggesting themselves as often
as occasions for their operation arise.  But all this is but another
process of thought and emotion descriptive of the _spiritually minded_.
It also requires the same intellectual and moral discipline which is
essential to the formation of the benevolent character.  This does not
consist in a single act, a single out-gushing of generous activity, but
in a series of generous actions, flowing from an established principle;
a principle pervading the whole soul, never wavering, never succumbing
to the biddings of selfishness.  But the benevolent character thus
deeply laid is the _Christian character_.  The scheme further requires
consistency of moral and religious conduct.  While it no more demands
regular and persevering beneficent action than it demands other
Christian duties, it imperiously demands regular and persevering
beneficent action as an essential branch of Christian conduct,
inevitably resulting from those immutable principles which form the
basis of the Christ-like character.  Thus the particular or individual
system grows, by a moral necessity, out of the general system of
thoughts, affections, and volitions, here unfolded; it being a moral
impossibility for one cordially to adopt the latter, in all its length
and breadth, without determining upon such a private system of
beneficence as his means, his relations to God and to the wants and woes
of our species, demand.  To refuse this system of benevolent principles
and correspondent actions, therefore, is to refuse to be spiritually
minded; is to refuse to exhibit consistency of holy conduct; is to
refuse to exert all our powers and embrace all opportunities to do good;
in a word, it is to wear a blot on our Christian name which many waters
can never wash out.

Hence the beauty of the system,--general and particular--here presented,
is that, resting down on the eternal and changeless foundations of the
spiritual universe, and consequently harmonizing with the spirit of
Revelation and with the laws of mind, it rises up and expands into a
beautiful exhibition of the fruits of the Gospel, the legitimate product
of its holy precepts.  It gives no encouragement to the idea that God's
favor may be secured, or duty done, by any mere external system of
munificence, any farther than the external system proceeds from right
affections and sound principles.  It must originate in the renewed
heart, be nourished by the life of grace, and increase its
productiveness as light and holiness increase in the soul.  In its
perfect development, _it is the full and symmetrical development of the
Christian character_.

Thus it is a system equal in its pressure, and therefore adapted to
fasten on the conscience of every one, whatever his age or
circumstances.  No one can justly plead exemption from its claims.  None
can reasonably propose questions of casuistry to shield his bosom from
its shafts.  None can shake off the convictions of duty it impresses,
but by shutting its principles from the mind, or by rousing the heart to
resistance.  In short, it leaves every man to himself, facing his God,
his conscience laid bare to the quenchless rays of truth.


CONCLUSION.

Who will refuse thus systematically to reflect, to feel, to resolve, to
give?  Will you, professed follower of the self-denying Jesus?  Can you,
"bought with blood divine," when looking around on the possessions God
has bestowed, have a heart to deny that aid which undying millions
demand?  Is it not beyond expression inconsistent to profess to give
yourself to Christ, and then withhold your property from him?--But what
are your relations to him as implied in this profession? and what are
his claims upon you, as growing out of it?  With the last tribunal and
the sorrows of Calvary in view, will you give these a moment's prayerful
reflection?

Go back with me to those delightful scenes so full of gentle joy, of
ineffable sweetness, and hallowed peace, when first you cast your all on
Jesus, and felt

     "The Saviour's pard'ning blood,
     Applied to cleanse your soul from guilt
     And bring you home to God."

Then, calm and trustful in spirit, transported in the freshness of a
new-born life, you could sing with a ravished heart,

     "I am my Lord's, and he is mine:
     He drew me--and I followed on--
     Charm'd to confess the voice divine."

These were precious seasons.  "How sweet their mem'ry still!"  Then came
an hour of tender, impressive, and almost awful interest.  You entered
the sanctuary of God, and in the presence of men, of angels, and your
adored Saviour, avouched the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
to be your God, consecrating yourself and all your possessions,
unreservedly, to his service.  Was this an unmeaning ceremony?  No.  You
remember the occasion, the hopes and fears of your trembling faith,
those sweet experiences, those glimpses of your Redeemer's smiles, which
forced the tear to your eye; the solemn and faltering accents of your
beloved pastor; and the weeping sympathy of a dear father and mother--
now, perhaps, gone to their rest--who had long yearned over a
thoughtless child.  Or you may remember your soul's peaceful trust in
God, as you stood _alone_, with no sympathizing kindred; and felt, as
you tasted the cup,--the emblem of your Saviour's blood, and the pledge
of the eternal sacrifice of yourself to him,--that you could cheerfully
forsake brother and sister, father and mother, all, for Christ.  It was
a touching scene; and you thought you should never forget it.  And, ah!
it never has been forgotten in heaven.  The eternal Judge, and those
blest spirits who affectionately stooped to sustain and strengthen you
for the irrevocable vow, remember it.

Now have you acted up to this surrender of your all to Christ,
especially in relation to the duty of beneficence?  In that impressive
hour, did you make a mental reservation, withholding certain sources of
private gratification,--the privilege of using your property as you
pleased, of seeing yourself and family supplied with the conveniences,
the comforts, and even the luxuries of life, ere you attended to the
cries of the myriads sinking to woes unutterable for the want of
Gospel light?  Were you thus unfeeling?  Did you think to deceive
the heart-searching Jesus?  Oh, no!  I cannot believe it; and you
are appalled at the suspicion.  But what did you mean by those
all-surrendering vows?  What do you mean, often as you renew them at
the sacramental board?  Let the question come home to your conscience;
_what do you mean_?  If they lead you not to hold your property at the
call of God, ought you not to tremble lest you never gave yourself away,
and are, therefore, with all your professions an heir of hell?  Did
Christ once weep over covenant-breaking Jerusalem?  Does he not now
weep over you, as he thinks of all his agonies to rescue you from
unquenchable fire; of your voluntary vows; your unfaithfulness; and your
mockery, as perhaps you have prayed that the kingdoms of the world might
speedily become his; while amid your numerous comforts, you have refused
to deny yourself scarce a convenience, or even superfluity, for the
salvation of those whom he died to redeem?  How inconsistent!  Well
might tears still bathe the Saviour's cheeks.  Oh think, are these the
kind returns you owe for pardoning love?  It is unreasonable that you
spend your worldly goods for him, who shed his blood for you?  Go, I
beseech you, to your closet, and there plead, till from the heart you
can say: "Lord, here I am and all I have.  Take the worthless sacrifice,
now and forever."

Will the rich, they who have enough and abound, reject this rational
scheme of principles, feelings, actions?  What treatment is this of the
compassionate Giver of your abundance?  Do you not owe to him alike your
being and possessions?  Perhaps you refuse to give even _yourselves_ to
him; and employ to private ends those bodily and mental powers with
which you are endowed for his service.  Is not this robbing God?  And
how is it with the favors of his hand?  Have not the crucibles of your
selfish hearts melted and moulded them into household gods?  As the
streams of Providence have poured in upon you to overflowing, instead of
dispersing abroad as God intended, have you not carefully enlarged your
own reservoirs so as to retain the whole?  Thus grasping all that lies
within your reach of that wealth which God has created for the
advancement of his kingdom, have you not withheld it from its
appropriate channel, and thus become doubly guilty of robbing God?

What a spectacle do you present to holy intelligences!  They behold you
rational and accountable beings like themselves; upheld in existence by
Jehovah's mercy, partaking freely of his bounties, and treasuring up
future supplies; but resolutely refusing to share your abundance with
the perishing, even when the generosity required would but enhance your
personal enjoyment.  And yet, perchance, you are the professed followers
of the compassionate Jesus.  Dare you compare your spirit and conduct
with his?

Truly, you, who have redundant stores, sustain tremendous
responsibilities; would that you might realize them.  You enjoy glorious
privileges; will you slight them?  With the power, under God, of
relieving the sorrowful, enlightening the ignorant, elevating the
degraded, and diffusing a vital energy through every pore of this
suffering world, will you stand like some bleak Alpine cliff, breathing
perpetual frost, merely an object for the curious to gaze upon?  so
live that your selfish heirs shall rejoice at your death, and the
judgment-day clothe you with eternal shame?

Do you say, "My money is my own; I may use it as I please?"  Hark!  God
thunders, "Thy gold and thy silver is mine."  Will you trifle with
Jehovah's voice, and incur his righteous wrath?  Hear the terrible
denunciations of James: "Go to, now, ye rich men, weep, and howl for
your miseries that shall come upon you.  Your riches are corrupted, and
your garments are moth-eaten.  Your gold and silver is cankered; and the
rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as
it were fire."  Absorbed in the pursuits of gain, or whirling on your
glittering rounds of pleasure, you may heedlessly disregard the appeals
of distressed humanity, and proudly congratulate yourselves on your
exalted positions, your honors and flatteries; but, rely upon it, you
are only heaping "treasure together for the last day."  Every call of
charity from which you turn coldly away will be a drop of anguish to
your undying soul.  How trifling your gifts to the Lord, compared with
the vastly greater sacrifices of many far poorer than yourself, and
whom, perhaps, you now despise.  When these shall shine forth as the sun
in the kingdom of their Father, where, O, where will you be found?  O,
how will all that affluence in which you have garnered up your hopes
appear, when hearing the voice of your Final Judge, "Inasmuch as you did
it not to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it not to me;"
and bereft of your treasures and your hopes together, you find the
prison of despair a dread reality, where covetousness will eternally
work without restraint, and unrelieved; a fire shut up in the soul,
agonizing it evermore?

Will the young refuse to enter upon this systematic course of doing
good?--You who are in the warm glow of youthful affections and
sympathies, I presume are not prepared to answer in the negative.  You
feel that it would be delightful, the highest grade of human excellence,
to go about scattering charities--feeding the hungry, relieving
distress, smoothing the dying pillow, and sending the light of salvation
to those on whom the dayspring of the Saviour's mercy has never dawned.
This, perhaps, you intend to do at some future time; but you cannot now;
you have not the ability; you must first amass the means.  But let me
warn you; here lies the treacherous pitfall.  You have within a subtle
and malignant principle, whose maturity is utterly destructive of
benevolence.  This the very employment of acquiring the means of charity
will fan to a flame, unless, in all your plans and avocations, you carry
along with you the spirit of Christ's good-will to men.  The work of
charity must be begun in the infancy of the selfish tendencies.  A small
blaze among the withered leaves of autumn a child may extinguish; but
when the winds have hurled it, and the wild fire is running and leaping
from point to point, streaming up trees and wrapping the forest in
sheets of flame, it will take the energies of thousands to quench it.
So it is with the principle of avarice.  It must be repressed early,
before its giant coils wind around the entire heart, crushing its better
purposes.  Hence, as the morning of life is peculiarly favorable to the
formation and fixing of habits, the importance of inuring yourself to
battle with this inward foe, in this flexible season.  Put on the armor
at once, and learn to wield it; for victory is as much dependent on
skill as on strength.

Let the spirit of benevolence be the warmest aspiration of the youthful
breast.  Let it be the early, the earnest, the daily inquiry, "What can
I do for my race?"  Good to others should be your aim when means are
small.  True, its light at first may be no more than the feeble
glimmerings of the glow-warm by the pathway of the benighted traveller;
yet it will be genial, soothing many a sad and torn heart.  In the very
commencement of business, then, cherish a Christ-like spirit; and,
adopting a system of accordant action, maintain it all along the path of
life; so that when you arrive at its close, it will be seen, a line of
light stretching around the world, with many a flower of Paradise
blooming on its borders.  But wait till you obtain the means before you
begin to seek in earnest the benefit of others, and, unless Divine Grace
powerfully interpose, by the time, in your own judgments, the means are
procured, your hearts will have become like the nether millstone.

Be persuaded, then, to lay your youth a victim on the altar of charity.
Let your whole being burn there till life is extinct; and when you enter
upon the peaceful rest of heaven, you will find multitudes there, aided
thither by your timely munificence, with whom you may unite in
transporting hallelujahs forever.

Finally, let me entreat readers of every class deeply to ponder the
subject here unfolded.  No rational being, with any sense of his
responsibilities, can treat it with indifference.  I beseech you, pass
not over these pages with a hasty glance, and then throw them aside.
Meditate upon them till your hearts burn within you.  Pray over them
till you feel a harmony of soul with Christ; and, in this spirit, come
to a solemn determination whether you will adopt or reject this system
of views, of affections, of resolutions, and of accordant actions.  Do
one or the other.  No other course is either rational or christian.  And
while you deliberately decide, realize that the eye of the Triune
Jehovah is fixed upon you, and that that dread Judge, before "whose face
the earth and the heavens" shall flee away, will review the transaction.
How solemn your position!  What amazing consequences are depending on
your present determination!  It will affect your usefulness here, and
your relations in eternity.  You are striking a chord of the mighty harp
of the universe, which will tremble with the songs of the redeemed, or
the moanings of the damned.  Can you touch it heedlessly?





