CHAPTER I

=The Relation of Training to Government and to Instruction=


136. Training looks toward the pupil’s future. It is founded on hope,
and shows itself, to begin with, in patience. It tempers government,
the object of which might perhaps be realized more speedily by greater
rigor. It moderates even instruction in case the latter puts too great
a strain upon the pupil. But it also combines with government as well
as instruction, and lightens their work.

Training consists primarily in a certain personal attitude, identical
if possible with a kind way of treating pupils. This implies readiness
on the part of the teacher to listen to the wishes and utterances of
the pupil, who, in the midst of strangers, looks to his teacher (and to
the family in charge of his education) for sympathy and support. But
training becomes active where the pupil needs help, especially help
against his own weaknesses and faults, which might frustrate the hopes
centred in him.

137. Training insists on becoming conduct; it encourages cheerfulness
of disposition. In either case it remains within limits compatible
with the occupations connected with government and instruction. The
pupil is never to lose sight of the subject on which he is engaged; it
would be bad if a desire to show off, or to amuse himself, should take
possession of him and cause him to forget his work.

The wise teacher will be glad to make himself personally agreeable to
his pupil as long as the conduct of the latter does not call for the
opposite treatment. Supervision grows less irksome in consequence.
Gentle words forestall, if anything can, all severer measures.

138. The teacher does not look upon the progress resulting from his
teaching with feelings of indifference. His sympathy, even solicitude
it may be, coöperates powerfully with the greater or lesser degree
of interest awakened in the learner. Training, however, can never be
made a substitute where there is no interest or, worse still, where
indifference has become positive dislike.

139. In instruction the presence of interest cannot be simply assumed;
just as little can good intentions on the pupil’s part always be
presupposed in training. One thing, however, must be taken for granted:
the pupil must not have come to feel that the discipline is weak and
the instruction poor. Any defect in either direction must therefore be
traced to its source and remedied. When pupils feel free to do as they
please, when they think they have good cause to blame the teacher for
their failure to make progress, his manner will be of no avail; and
futile attempts only make matters worse.

140. In some cases training becomes blended with government to such
an extent that it can scarcely be distinguished from the latter.
As an example, we may mention the large educational institutions
conducted on a military basis, where the individual pupil is carried
along by the general system, rather than made the object of special
care. In other cases, training and government remain farther apart
than is necessary; an instance of this is when a strict father keeps
himself at a distance, and leaves the business of training, within
the prescribed rigid limits, to the tutor of his children. At all
events, a distinction must be made between the two concepts, training
and government, in order that the teacher may know what he is doing,
and may notice what is perhaps lacking; we are justified in adding,
in order that he may save himself useless effort. For training is not
uniformly effectual, regardless of circumstances; the teacher needs to
be watchful in this matter in order that the opportune moment for doing
what can be done may not escape him.




CHAPTER II

=The Aim of Training=


141. While the aim of instruction was rendered sufficiently
determinate, as we saw above (17, 64, 65), by the injunction,
be perfect, the aim of training, which supplements educative
instruction, comprehends virtue as a whole. Now virtue is an ideal,
the approximation toward which is denoted by the term _morality_.
Again, since, generally speaking, a child passes on from mere capacity
for culture to culture itself, from the indeterminate to fixedness of
knowledge, the approximation to virtue consists likewise in development
toward stability. Where conduct in moral affairs vacillates, there is
a deficiency; where something morally hateful becomes confirmed, there
is a defect. Excluding both, we define the aim of training properly as
moral strength of character.

  “Training” means such will-training as conduces to the formation
  of good character; “government” means such training as conduces
  to good order. The first is for a permanent, the second for
  an immediate, purpose. In government we can appeal both to a
  positive and a negative means. The positive means is interest in
  a study and the affairs of the schoolroom; the negative means
  is inhibition of disturbing impulses. As Professor James, in his
  “Talks on Psychology,”[13] points out, this inhibition may be of
  two sorts,--that of forcible suppression, and that of substitution.
  A teacher who uses negative means of inhibiting mischief or
  inattention, employs command or punishment. This method, though
  sometimes seemingly unavoidable, often results in mental strain,
  if not permanent alienation between teacher and pupil. The method
  of substitution attempts to secure inhibition of the undesirable
  state of mind by giving rise to a set of favorable ideas strong
  enough to displace it. “If, without saying anything about the street
  disturbances,” which may be distracting the attention of your pupils,
  “you open a counter attraction by starting some very interesting
  talk or demonstration yourself, they will altogether forget the
  distracting incident, and, without any effort, follow you along.”
  Training, however, has a more difficult task. It must succeed in
  implanting what may be called regulative principles in the mind.
  It must furthermore succeed in establishing habits of conduct that
  will enable the pupil to become self-governing. That is, we must
  establish in him habits of feeling and action that will enable him
  to substitute the higher for the lower good, or, at least, instantly
  to inhibit the temptation to evil. This is a task not for a day or a
  year, but for the whole school period.

[13] James, “Talks on Psychology,” p. 193, Henry Holt & Co., New York,
1899.

142. In succeeding chapters character and moral conduct will each have
to be differentiated more minutely. For our present purpose we need
only to remind ourselves that the determinateness of the will, which
is called character, depends not only on willing, but also on not
willing. The latter is either a deficient or a denying willing, which
repels or rejects. Stern methods of governing, which bar access to
everything that might lead astray, are likely to produce a deficient
will rather than the permanence of formed strength; with the end of
school days, the dreaded opportunities arrive after all, and the pupil
may quickly undergo a change beyond recognition. The task of training
must therefore be thought of as embracing both affirmative willing and
rejecting.




