CHAPTER III

=The Effects of Training=


314.

  A. Training prevents passions in that it:--
     (1) satisfies needs,
     (2) avoids opportunities for violent desires,
     (3) provides employment,
     (4) accustoms to order,
     (5) demands reflection and responsibility.

  B. Training influences the emotions in that it:--
     (1) checks violent outbreaks,
     (2) creates other emotions,
     (3) and supplements self-control.

  C. Training impresses the courtesies of life (counteracts bad
       manners), consequently:--
     (1) the deportment of individuals is made approximately uniform;
     (2) the number of possible points of social contact becomes much
         greater than where strife and contention rule;
     (3) while the development of one or the other individual is
         checked, the more important energies are not stifled, provided
         excess of severity be avoided.

  D. Training makes cautions, for:--
     (1) It restricts foolhardiness,
     (2) It warns against dangers,
     (3) It punishes in order to make wiser,
     (4) It observes and accustoms the human being to the thought of
         being observed.

315. Looked at as a whole, these obvious and familiar effects of
training show at once that, generally speaking, its power to lessen
evil is very great, and that it is capable of effectively acting upon
the interrelations of various masses of ideas. But they suggest also
the presence of danger. Training, by driving evil from the surface, may
give rise to clandestine deeds.

316. When this happens, the relations between teacher and pupils grow
increasingly abnormal, since secret practices become general and
concerted, and the pupils assume a studied behavior in the presence of
the teacher.

The consequences are well known:--Inexorable severity in dealing with
concealed offences when discovered; great leniency in the case of open
transgressions; recourse to the machinery of supervision, often even to
secret watching, in order that the system of concealment may not get
the better of education.

317. It lowers the dignity of the teacher to take part habitually
in a competition between spy and concealers. He must not demand to
know everything, although he ought not to allow his confidence to be
victimized by clumsy or long-continued deception.

Such difficulties, however, only make it more intensely necessary
that the foundation of education be laid during the earliest years,
when supervision is still easy, and the heart is reached by formative
influences with greater certainty than ever afterward, and that, if
possible, families should not for any length of time lose sight of
their own members.

Ethical and moral judgments can be simulated; the finest maxims and
principles may be learned by rote; piety may be put on as a cloak.
Unmask the hypocrite, however, and turn him out, and, forthwith, he
plays his game over again elsewhere. Nothing remains but recourse to
severity which deters, and constant occupation under close supervision
in another quarter, in order that he may get away from the hiding
places of his misdeeds. Sometimes banishment is capable of bringing
about improvement.

318. The will is most directly tractable in social relations, where it
appears as common will. In infancy, the child, wholly devoted to his
mother, is manageable through her; at a later period training is surest
of success when it promotes attachments among the young and carefully
fosters the seeds of goodness. The social ideas, purified by teaching,
must gradually be added.

319. But as far back as boyhood, factions spring up and exclusive
sets are formed, facts which the teacher cannot permit to elude his
vigilance.

When a kind of authority is granted to some older and tried pupils
over those younger and less mature in judgment, the former become
responsible; but the latter are not on that account relieved of all
reflection on their own part, nor are they obliged to submit to every,
though plainly unreasonable, demand of the former.




CHAPTER IV

=Special Faults=


320. First of all it is necessary to distinguish between those faults
which the pupil commits and those which he has. Not all faults one
commits are direct manifestations of those he possesses; but those
which are committed repeatedly may grow permanent. This truth must be
made clear, and must be impressed upon the mind of the pupil to the
full extent of his powers of comprehension.

321. In the case of false steps caused from without by unnoticed
pitfalls, or made in spite of a firm resolve to the contrary, the pupil
is himself usually frightened by what he has done. If so, all depends
on the gravity of his offence as compared with the degree of his horror.

There is a host of minor faults, blunders, and even acts resulting in
damage, which tax the patience of the teacher severely; but it would
imply a mistaken conception of the difficulty of moral education, if
he should repel the frankness of his pupils by harsh treatment of such
offence. Frankness is too essential a factor to be sacrificed; once
gone it will hardly ever wholly return.

322. But the first lie uttered with evil intent, the first act of
theft, and similar actions positively detrimental to morality or
health, have to be dealt with severely, and always in such a way that
the pupil who thought he was permitting himself a slight fault, is made
to experience most thoroughly both fear and censure.

323. Serious treatment of a first offence is demanded also where pupils
try to see how far they may safely disregard authority and command.
It is important, however, not to overestimate the intention of these
attempts; important also to exhibit strength, but not anger. Yet
there are cases where the teacher must seem to act with some warmth,
because the necessary treatment, if combined with coldness, would only
intensify bitterness and cause pain an inordinate length of time. But
very likely as much feeling as is expedient will show itself upon
simply laying aside the assumed coldness.

324. On the restoration of perfect order after a period during which
government and training were lacking, a large number of faults will
disappear of themselves, and accordingly do not require to be combated
one by one. Respect for order, and incentives sufficiently strong to
regular activity, are the main things.

325. Faults which the pupil seems to possess are often only the
borrowed maxims of the society which he hopes to enter. Here it becomes
the business of education to set him right, if possible, and to
elevate his view of human relations, in order that he may disdain the
false appearances he before held in esteem.

326. Faults which an older pupil actually possesses rarely occur
singly. Moreover, they are seldom fully disclosed; their appearance is
determined by a prudent regard for circumstances. During the period of
education such faults can, indeed, be largely prevented from growing
worse, but the radical improvement of those who are secretive from
prudence is rarely to be thought of before they have become more
prudent still, too proud for concealment, and more susceptible to the
true estimate of moral values.

Where older boys and young men are found to possess unused talents, and
where instruction can be so arranged as to develop them, there is some
prospect of supplying a counterbalance to those habits which have been
contracted. But, in general, efforts looking toward a lasting reform
are successful only when made at an early age. At all events, where
there is much to amend, the feeling of dependence on strict training
must be kept alive for a long time.

327. More success is likely to attend the endeavor to correct those
faults which are not tolerated within the social class of which the
pupil regards himself a member. Two factors determine the proper mode
of procedure: the importance of making the pupil acquainted with the
worthiest side of his social group, and, on the other hand, the
unavoidable necessity of causing him to see its less noble features in
case he discovers in it free scope for his inherent faults.

328. Here the pupil’s capacity for education, as well as the limits
of that capacity, are brought home to the teacher. As boys approach
manhood, they let birth and external circumstances designate for
them that class of society to which they will belong. The class
defined, they seek to acquire its form of life, and to get into its
main current. On the way thither they accept and take along so much
of higher motives, of knowledge and insight, as, on the one hand,
instruction offers and training favors, and as, on the other hand,
the individuality of each one, which the earliest impressions have
further determined, is ready to assimilate. Those are rare exceptions
who, through the development of an absorbing interest of some kind,
in religion, or science, or art, have become less susceptible to the
attractive force of their social class. Their course has been marked
out by the instruction which induced the absorption; henceforth they
are self-actively engaged in the pursuit of whatever accords with the
end in view, and accept only a small part of what is presented to them.

329. Specific forms of a pupil’s attitude toward society, especially
the relative prominence in his mind of state or family relations, will
have to receive due consideration in marshalling motives to counteract
particular faults. Indeed, the same is true of the appeal to those
motives through which it is sought to establish a preponderance of
worthier endeavor over moral imperfection in general.




SECTION III

REMARKS ON THE ORGANIZATION OF EDUCATION




