CHAPTER I

=The Relation of Instruction to Government and Training=


56. Instruction furnishes a part of those occupations which lie at the
basis of government; how large a part depends on circumstances.

Children must be kept employed at all events, because idleness leads to
misbehavior and lawlessness. Now if the employment consists of useful
labor, say in the workshop or on the farm, so much the better. Better
still, if the work teaches the child something that will contribute
to his further education. But not all employment is instruction; and
in cases where the mere government of children is a difficult matter,
lessons are not always the most adequate employment. Many a growing boy
will be taught orderly conduct much sooner when placed with a mechanic
or merchant or farmer than in school. The scope of government is wider
than that of instruction.

  Teachers of manual training everywhere testify to the quieting effect
  of directed physical labor upon stormy spirits. Even a truant school
  or a school for incorrigibles becomes an attractive place to the
  inmates when adequate provision is made for the exercise of the motor
  powers. Most children can be controlled through mental occupation,
  but there are some to whom motor activity is indispensable. That a
  judicious apportionment of sensory and motor activity would favorably
  affect the development of all children is not to be questioned.

57. Instruction and training have this in common, that each makes for
education and hence for the future, while government provides for the
present. A distinction should, however, be made here. Instruction is
far from being always educative or pedagogical. Where acquisition of
wealth and external success or strong personal preference supply the
motives for study, no heed is paid to the question: What will be the
gain or loss to character? One actuated by such motives sets out, such
as he is, to learn one thing or another, no matter whether for good or
bad or for indifferent ends; to him the best teacher is he who imparts
_tuto, cito, jucunde_, the proficiency desired. Instruction of this
kind is excluded from our discussion; we are concerned here only with
instruction that educates in the moral sense of the term.

58. Man’s worth does not, it is true, lie in his knowing, but in his
willing. But there is no such thing as an independent faculty of
will. Volition has its roots in thought; not, indeed, in the details
one knows, but certainly in the combinations and total effect of
the acquired ideas. The same reason, therefore, which in psychology
accounts for considering the formation of ideas first, and then desire
and volition, necessitates a corresponding order in pedagogics: first
the theory of instruction, then that of training.

    =Note.=--Formerly, strange to say, no distinction was made between
    government and training, although it is obvious that the immediate
    present demands attention more urgently than does the future.
    Still less was instruction given its true place. The greater or
    smaller amount of knowledge, regarded as a matter of secondary
    importance in comparison with personal culture, was taken up last.
    The treatment of education as the development of character preceded
    that of instruction, just as though the former could be realized
    without the latter. During the last decades, however, a demand
    has arisen for greater activity on the part of schools, primarily
    the higher schools. Humanistic studies are to bestow humanity, or
    culture. It has come to be understood that the human being is more
    easily approached from the side of knowledge than from the side of
    moral sentiments and disposition. Furthermore, examinations might
    be set on the former, but not on the latter. Now the time for
    instruction was found to be too limited--a want that the old Latin
    schools had felt but little. This led to discussions as to the
    relative amount due each branch of study. We shall treat chiefly
    of the correlation of studies, for whatever remains isolated is of
    little significance.

59. In educative teaching, the mental activity incited by it is all
important. This activity instruction is to increase, not to lessen; to
ennoble, not to debase.

    =Note.=--A diminution of mental activity ensues, when, because
    of much study and of sitting--especially at all sorts of written
    work, often useless--physical growth is interfered with in a way
    sooner or later to the injury of health. Hence the encouragement
    given in recent years to gymnastic exercises, which may, however,
    become too violent. Deterioration sets in when knowledge is
    made subservient to ostentation and external advantages--the
    objectionable feature of many public examinations. Schools ought
    not to be called upon to display all they accomplish. By such
    methods instruction not only works against its own true end, but
    also conflicts with training, whose aim for the whole future of the
    pupil is--_mens sana in corpore sano_.

60. If all mental activity were of only one kind, the subject-matter
of instruction would be of no consequence. But we need not go beyond
experience to see that the opposite is true, that there is a great
diversity of intellectual endowment. Yet while instruction must thus be
differentiated, it should not be made so special as to cultivate only
the more prominent gifts; otherwise the pupil’s less vigorous mental
functions would be wholly neglected and perhaps suppressed. Instruction
must rather be manifold, and its manifoldness being the same for many
pupils in so far as it may help to correct inequalities in mental
tendencies.

  Not only is subject-matter to be varied on account of mental
  diversity, but also for social reasons as well. For an enlargement of
  this theme, see the annotation to paragraph 65.

61. What is to be taught and learned is, accordingly, not left for
caprice and conventionality to decide. In this respect instruction
differs in a striking manner from government, for which, if only
idleness is prevented, it hardly matters what work children are given
to do.

    =Note.=--Children are sent to school from many homes simply because
    they are in the way and their parents do not wish them to be idle.
    The school is regarded as an institution whose chief function is to
    govern, but which incidentally also imparts useful knowledge. Here
    there is a lack of insight into the nature of true mental culture;
    teachers, on the contrary, sometimes forget that they are giving
    pupils work, and that work should not exceed reasonable limits.




