CHAPTER IV

=Youth=


227. Whether instruction comes to an end or is continued during
this period, all it can accomplish depends now on the fulfilment
of the condition that the young man himself regard the retention
and increase of his attainments as something valuable. Accordingly,
the interrelations of knowledge, as well as its connection with
action, must be brought before his mind with the greatest possible
distinctness. He must be furnished, also, with the strongest incentives
to reach the goal determined upon, provided the question is merely how
to overcome indolence and thoughtlessness. For it is just at this stage
that the teacher needs to fear and to prevent those wrong motives which
would issue merely in an artificial semblance of talent.

228. Moreover, the allowance made for the child and the boy can no
longer be made for the youth. His whole ability is to be put to the
test, and his position in human society determined according to the
outcome. He must experience something of the difficulty of obtaining
a foothold among men. Positions for which he does not seem quite
prepared are contested; he is surrounded by rivals, and is spurred
on by expectations, which it is often difficult to moderate when most
necessary.

229. If now the young man puts his trust in favorable circumstances,
and, in spite of all appeals, gives himself up to the pursuit of ease
and pleasure, education is at an end. It only remains to conclude with
precepts and representations which future experiences may possibly
recall.

230. If, on the other hand, the youth has his eyes fixed on a definite
goal, the form of life which he is striving to attain, and the motives
that impel him, will determine what else may be done for him. According
as the ideals of honor that he makes his own are directed more
outwardly or inwardly, they stand more or less midway between plans for
actions and maxims.

231. The youth is no longer pliant, except when his failures have made
him feel ashamed of himself. Such cases must be made use of for the
purpose of making good deficiencies. But on the whole, duty requires
that the stern demands of morality be held up to him without disguise.
Perfect frankness can hardly be looked for any longer, and to insist
on it is out of the question entirely. The reserve of the age of
adolescence marks the natural beginning of self-control.

  These brief paragraphs on the development of the individual through
  infancy, childhood, boyhood, and youth, mark an early interest
  in what is now known as child-study, the literature of which has
  become voluminous. For a dissertation on the experimental study of
  children, and a bibliography of the subject, the reader is referred
  to the monograph by Arthur McDonald, of the United States Bureau of
  Education, entitled “Experimental Study of Children.” A smaller but
  more useful bibliography has been compiled by L. N. Wilson. It is
  found in _Pedagogical Seminary_ for September, 1899.




PART III

_SPECIAL APPLICATIONS OF PEDAGOGICS_




SECTION I

REMARKS ON THE TEACHINGS OF PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF STUDY




CHAPTER I

=Religion=


232. The content of religious instruction is for theologians to
determine, while philosophy bears witness that no knowledge is able to
surpass the trust of religious faith. But both the beginning and the
end of religious instruction call for remarks from the point of view of
pedagogy.

Religious instruction culminates, if it does not end, in the rite of
confirmation, and the subsequent admission to the Holy Communion. The
former is characteristic of a particular Christian denomination; the
latter, on the contrary, of the whole brotherhood of Christians.
Now the profound emotion which marks the first Communion service
should imply a conquest over the feeling of separation from other
denominations, especially since the mere admission to Communion is
conditioned on the general requirement of earnest ethical aspiration.
It is thus assumed that members of other confessions, provided they are
communicants at all, have fulfilled the same condition. Preparatory
instruction must work toward this end all the more, since with many
persons Christian love for those who differ from them in important
articles of faith belongs to the more difficult duties. Moreover, the
fact that this same instruction necessarily had to set forth clearly
fundamental denominational differences, lends additional weight to the
necessity of inculcating the virtue of Christian charity.

233. In academic schools, if Greek is begun early enough, it is
possible to deepen the impressions of Christian teaching by the
dialogues of Plato that bear on the death of Socrates, particularly
the “Crito” and the “Apology.” Being the weaker, however, impressions
of this sort should precede the time when the solemn initiation into
Christian fellowship produces its whole powerful effect.

234. Going back in thought, we find that the portion of religious
instruction which deals with characteristic denominational
distinctions, presupposes that which deals with tenets common to all
Christians, and we find that this in turn has been preceded by Bible
stories, including those of the Old Testament. But the question arises,
“Must we not go back to something more fundamental still?”

235. Religion cannot possibly be adequately presented by treating of it
merely as a perpetuation of something historical and past. The teacher
must needs make use also of the present testimony furnished by the
adjustment of means to end, in nature. But even this, for which some
knowledge of nature is prerequisite, and which leads up to the ideas of
wisdom and power, is not the first step.

236. True family feeling is elevated easily and directly to the idea
of the Father, of the father and mother. Only where such feeling is
wanting does it become necessary to make churches and Sunday observance
the starting-point as indications of humility and gratitude. An
all-pervading love, providence, and watchful care constitute the first
concept of the Highest Being,--a concept limited by the mental horizon
of the child, and expanding and becoming more elevated only by degrees.

237. The process of elevating religious concepts and purifying them
of unworthy admixtures must, however, have taken place, and the true
concepts must have been deeply impressed, before the mythological
conceptions of antiquity become known; in which case the latter will
produce the right effect by the contrast between the manifestly
fabulous and crude, and the worthy and sublime. If managed properly,
this subject presents no difficulties.

238. But there are other difficulties,--difficulties growing out of
individual peculiarities. While some would be harmed by much talk
about sin, because they would thus either become acquainted with it,
or else be filled with fantastic terror, there are others whom only
the strongest language can move, and still others who themselves
preach against the sins of the world, and, at the same time, front the
world in proud security. Then there are those who brood over ethical
problems, and who, without having heard of Spinoza, argue that what the
Highest Judge has permitted to happen he has approved of, whence might
is the practical proof of right. There are contemners of mere morality,
who think that prayers will consecrate their evil actions. Isolated
traces of such perversions may indeed be met with even in children,
especially if their glib reproduction of the sermon, or worse yet,
their praying aloud, has happened to receive praise.

Hence it is necessary to observe the effect of religious instruction on
each individual. Another task for home training.




