CHAPTER III

=Boyhood=


217. The boundary line between boyhood and early childhood is fixed, so
far as this is possible at all, by the fact that the boy, if allowed to
do so, will leave the company of adults. Formerly he felt insecure when
left alone: now he considers himself fairly well acquainted with his
immediate environment, beyond which vistas of all sorts are opening.
Accordingly, at this stage it becomes incumbent on the adult to attach
himself to the boy, to restrain him, to divide the time for him, and
to circumscribe the fancies born of his self-confidence,--a course of
action rendered all the more necessary by the circumstance that the boy
is a stranger as yet to the timidity with which the youth joins the
ranks of men. For boyhood is marked off from adolescence by this, that
the boy’s aims are still unsettled; he plays and takes no thought of
to-morrow. Moreover, his dream of manhood is one of arbitrary power.
The play-impulse remains active for a long time, unless checked by
conventionality.

During this period, the work of linking instruction to sense-impression
is by no means to be omitted entirely, not even where fair progress
has already been made in scholarship. We must make sure of a solid
foundation.

218. Our chief concern during the age of boyhood must be to prevent
the premature fixation of the circle of ideas. It is for instruction
to undertake the task of doing so. True, by far the greatest part of
the process of learning, however manifold, is performed through the
interpretation of words, the pupil supplying the meaning out of the
mental store collected previously. But this very fact obviously implies
that quantitively the pupil’s stock of ideas is for the most part
complete; instruction merely works it up into new forms. Accordingly,
such shaping must take place while the material is still in a plastic
state; for with increasing years it gradually assumes a more solid
character.

219. Boys differ from girls, individuals differ from one another;
and the subjects taught, together with the methods of teaching them,
should be differentiated accordingly. But here the family interposes
the interests of rank or station, and claims the right to determine by
these how much or how little instruction a boy needs.

Looked at pedagogically, each study calls for a corresponding mental
activity to be suited to the general condition of the individual. Its
success must not involve exhaustion of the pupil’s powers, nor make
demands upon them at the wrong time.

But it would be an error to argue that one who is being initiated
into one subject ought to combine with that subject a second, third,
or fourth, on the ground that subjects one, two, three, and four are
essentially interrelated. This conclusion holds for scholars, who,
so far as they are personally concerned, have long passed beyond
preliminary pedagogical considerations, and even in their case it
applies only to those branches which are intimately connected with
their specialties; it has nothing to do with the psychological
conditions by which the course of education must be governed. Only too
frequently do masses of ideas remain isolated despite the fact that
the objects corresponding to them are most intimately and necessarily
interconnected; and such isolation could not have been prevented by
merely starting work in a large web of erudition in a number of places.

The case is different where certain studies constitute the necessary
preparation for thorough knowledge of one kind or another. Here we are
right in concluding that one who cannot master the former is equally
unable to get hold of the latter.[24]

[24] These remarks upon correlation are instructive in view of later
developments of the Herbartian school in Germany. The reader is
referred to discussions in the First and Second Year-Books of the
National Herbart Society.

220. It is difficult to deal with the rare instances of tardy
development unless we find that they are due to neglected health,
or to lack of assistance in enlarging the range of experience, and
to failure to change the mode of instruction. Here an attempt may be
made to supply what is wanting. But even where the rate of progress
becomes more rapid at once, the teacher’s efforts will have turned
out favorably only when the boy gives also clear proof of a vigorous
striving for advancement.

221. To revert to fundamental ethical principles, particular mention of
the ideas of justice and equity needs to be made in this connection.
These ideas issue from reflection on human relations; they are
consequently less accessible to early childhood, which finds itself
subordinated everywhere to the family. The boy, on the other hand,
lives more among his peers, and the necessary corrections are not
always administered so promptly as to leave no time for independent
judgment. Not infrequently voluntary association takes place among
boys, personal authority plays a part, and even usurpation of power is
not rare. Now, education has to provide for clear ethical concepts and
for government and training besides. But not only that; it must also
furnish the kind of instruction that will exhibit similar but remote
relations, for purposes of unbiassed contemplation. Such instruction
must borrow its material from poetry and history.

222. To history we are referred by still another consideration. As
has already been shown (206–211), the idea of good-will points to
the necessity of religious culture; and this relies for support on
stories, old stories at that. The expansion of the pupil’s power of
thought which is here demanded must be generally attained, even though
very incompletely, in every course of instruction, that of the village
school included.

223. Another fixed goal, the importance of which exceeds even that of
reading and writing, is furnished by arithmetic, which gives clearness
to the common concepts of experience, and is indispensable in the
practical affairs of life.

224. Decimal arithmetic no pupil would be likely to think out by
himself; he would very certainly not invent Bible history. Both must
accordingly be regarded as belonging preëminently to the province of
synthetic instruction, which always involves the difficult problem of
how to assure its entrance, as a potent factor, into existing masses
of ideas. As to this, it would be a blunder to conclude that, since
Bible history and history as a whole, arithmetic and mathematics as
a whole, hang together, there is also a corresponding pedagogical
connection (219). But so much is certain, that the efficiency of
a group of ideas increases with expansion and with multiplied
association. It will be an advantage, therefore, to Bible history
and to arithmetic, if as wide a range is given to historical and
mathematical teaching as circumstances and ability permit, even if
the conditions should be such that a many-sided culture is not to be
expected.

225. The subjects next to be considered in the choice of material for
instruction are poetry and natural history, great care being taken
not to disregard the necessary sequence. The time for fables and
stories should not be curtailed; it is important to make sure that
boys do not lose the taste for them too early. The easiest and safest
facts of zoölogy will have been presented already in connection with
the picture-books of childhood. The right moment for introducing the
elements of botany has arrived when the boy is collecting plants.
Foreign languages would be assigned the lowest place, if particular
circumstances did not in many cases lend them a special importance.
The ancient classical languages, at any rate, form to such an extent
the basis of the study of theology, of jurisprudence, and of medicine,
they are so necessary to all higher scholarship, that they will
always constitute the fundamental branches of instruction in academic
preparatory schools.

It is obvious, however, that the extent of instruction depends too
much on external conditions of rank and means to permit a definite
prescription of instruction-material for all cases. Far less dependent
is the development of many-sided interest in its relation to branches
of study. If the limits set to the latter are narrow, it is still the
business of instruction to secure an approximation to many-sided
culture; while under highly favorable circumstances the very abundance
of educational help must put the teacher on his guard against losing
sight of the real aim of instruction.

226. Frequently the burden of necessary and useful studies is made
excessively heavy, a fact which the members of the teaching profession
try to conceal from themselves, but which attracts the attention of
outsiders. A few hours of gymnastics do not sufficiently counteract
such evil effects. As an offset we have at best the prevention of
the vices of idleness. From every point of view, for the mere reason
that this matter calls for special attention and that the method of
procedure has to be determined in accordance with the results of
observation, the home must do its part toward relieving that natural
strain which even good instruction exerts--and the school must not
encroach on the time necessary for that purpose. In extreme cases, to
be sure, it may be expressly demanded that the school engage the whole
of a boy’s time. But, as a rule, outside school-work should take up,
not the largest, but, on the contrary, the smallest amount of time
possible. How the remaining hours are to be employed is for parents
and guardians to decide according to individual needs, ascertained
by observation; and it is on them that the responsibility for the
consequences rests.




