CHAPTER III

=Differentiation of Character=


143. Our will activities result from ideas. Different masses of ideas
give rise to different will action; hence the difficulty experienced in
harmonizing and unifying the manifold acts of will.

The various groups of ideas do not simply succeed one another
in consciousness; the relation of one to the other may also be
that of apperception. Apperceiving attention is not confined to
sense-perception (77); it embraces inner perception as well. The
process of apperception, however, consists rarely or never in mere
perceiving. It involves more: one mass of ideas exerts a determining
influence on the other. Now, since each may be the source of will
action, it happens that often one act of will accepts or rejects
another. Again, conscious of himself preëminently as a being that
wills, man gives commands to himself and decides concerning himself;
he seeks to acquire self-control. In such efforts he makes himself
more and more the object of his own observation. That part of his will
activity which his self-observation reveals to be already in existence,
we call the objective part of character. To the new will action,
on the other hand, which first springs into existence in and with
self-examination, we give the name subjective part of character.

The subjective side of character can attain its full development only
during the years of maturity. Its beginnings, however, reach back into
boyhood, and its normal growth during adolescence is noticeably rapid,
due allowance being made for variations of kind and degree in different
individuals.

  The assumption of the unconditional primacy of ideas can no longer
  be seriously entertained. Just as there is an unfolding of ideas in
  sensation, perception, apperception, and rational insight, so there
  is an unfolding of our volitional life in impulse, conscious will
  action, and the control of conduct in accordance with the regulative
  principles of moral obligation. Knowledge and will doubtless spring
  from a common root, but they are not primarily so related that
  volition waits on knowledge. Impulse is antecedent to idea, while in
  the last analysis and in the highest realm of mind, the _actual_ is
  subordinate to the _ideal_, the _ought_ is more powerful than the
  _is_. In other words, there is, as Dr. Harris maintains, a sense in
  which the will is self-determining, even though the extent to which
  this self-active control obtains is uncertain. As Natorp says,[14]
  “It is folly to call upon the weak to be strong, to concentrate
  consciousness upon the categorical imperative, so that the inflexible
  demands of the ought shall be complied with.” Yet even in the weak
  there is a bar of consciousness or perhaps conscience before which
  judgment must be pronounced as to the worthiness or unworthiness of
  a given line of conduct. It is the function of moral education--and
  this includes all education--to make the weak strong, to strengthen
  the good impulses, to clarify the insight, to accustom the mind to
  dwell on the right set of ideas, to cultivate desirable feelings
  and interests. In this process of moral development, the world of
  ideas has perhaps all the validity claimed for it by Herbart. What
  is here called the “subjective” side of character pertains to that
  regulation of conduct which arises from its examination before the
  bar of consciousness as to its agreement or disagreement with the
  regulative principles of moral obligation. It is that advanced
  stage of development in character in which the mind is consciously
  self-directive. Naturally it is later than the “objective” side,
  where action is more spontaneous, more governed by impulses, more
  subject to hypnotic suggestion; in short, more subordinated to
  “ideo-motor” activity and less governed by reflection.

[14] Natorp, “Socialpädagogik,” p. 9, tr. Fromman, Stuttgart, 1899.

144. In view of the very manifold volitional elements which the
objective foundations of character may obviously contain, it will
facilitate a survey if we distinguish (1) that which the pupil does or
does not endure willingly, (2) that which he does or does not long to
have, (3) that which he does or does not like to do. Now one, now the
other class predominates, the strongest controlling and restricting the
rest. But this restriction is not always an easy matter. Accordingly
the objective phase of character attains at first to inner harmony only
with difficulty.

145. In consequence of frequent repetitions of similar acts of will,
general concepts are gradually formed in the subjective side of
character, concepts comprehending both the similar will actions already
present under similar circumstances, and the requirements man sets up
for himself with a view to determining his willing one way or another.

These requirements fall largely within the province of prudence; they
pertain to forethought and cautious reserve, or, may be, to action, in
order that an end may be gained by the choice of suitable means. The
boy wants to be wiser than the child; the youth wiser than either. In
this way man seeks to rise above himself.

146. Moral conduct is not always furthered by man’s effort to surpass
himself, so that the teacher’s task becomes a twofold one,--a watching
and directing not only of the objective but also of the subjective side
of character. Temperament, native bent, habit, desire, and passion
fall under the former; to the latter belong the frankness or cunning
displayed by the pupil, and his habitual method of practical reasoning.

147. As a rule, we may consider it auspicious for character building if
the pupil, instead of being swayed by moods and whims, is constant in
his willing. Such uniformity as requires no effort we may designate by
the expression memory of will.

When a pupil possesses this natural advantage, the objective part of
his character easily arrives at harmony with itself. He sees that among
his many preferences relative to enduring, having, doing, one imposes
restrictions upon the other; that it is often necessary to submit and
endure in order to have and do that which is desired; that pursuits of
which he is fond do not always yield what he longs to have, and so on.
When these truths have become sufficiently clear to him, he soon comes
to a point where he decides which things he cares about a great deal,
and which less. He chooses, and choice largely determines character,
primarily character in its objective aspects.

In the course of the development of the subjective part of character,
there are formed in succession resolves, maxims, and principles, a
process involving subsumptions, conclusions, and motives. It will cost
many a struggle before these motives can assert themselves.

The strength of a character depends on the agreement between its two
parts, the objective and the subjective. Where there is want of accord,
the character is weak. But both must be morally good; where that is not
the case, strength ceases to be desirable.




