CHAPTER VI

=General Method of Training=


160. The distinctions relative to character and morality (143–150)
furnish the thread of reflection on this subject. Concisely stated, the
function of training is to support, to determine, and to regulate; to
keep the pupil, on the whole, in a tranquil and serene frame of mind;
to arouse him occasionally by approval and reproof; to remind at the
proper moment, and to correct faults. A more definite significance
will be imparted to this brief summary by a comparative study and
application of the ideas analyzed in the preceding chapters.

  While we may accept the statement that the function of training is to
  support, to determine, and to regulate, we must not forget to ask:
  To what end shall it do these things? The answer is, that though
  the means of moral training are always psychological, the ends are
  always social. Support must hold the pupil up to social standards,
  the directive power of the teacher must be exercised for social ends,
  while all regulation of the pupil’s activities must point to the same
  result. There is scarcely a virtue to be named that does not find its
  ultimate meaning in its application to conduct as affecting others.
  This is true even in primitive society. In modern urban society it
  is not only true, but vastly important. The discussion in Chapter VI
  is psychological throughout. It must be the purpose of the annotation
  to point out the social implications.

161. First, what is meant by the supporting activity of training
becomes clearer if we recall the remarks made concerning memory of the
will (147) as opposed to the thoughtlessness usually ascribed to youth.
The thoughtless boy does not remember past acts of will. He stands in
need of being supported by training. This, further analysis shows, is
done in two ways: by holding him back from the wrong course, and by
holding him up to the right course.

Training presupposes an efficient government and the obedience
consequent to it. By implication, the pupil would not dare to disobey
a command if given. But commands ought to be employed sparingly, and
only when inevitable. Imposed too frequently, they would preclude
self-development; if given to adolescents for any but obvious and
urgent reasons, obedience would not long continue. In short, government
acts at intervals. But the pupil cannot be permitted to live in a state
of lawless liberty in the meantime. He must remain sensible, be it ever
so little, of certain limits which he is not allowed to overstep. This
result is the aim of the supporting function of training.

But the pupil, even though he be generally obedient, does not obey
every one, nor under all circumstances, nor always fully, promptly,
and without opposition; and when he once fails to comply with gentle
words, he will be still less ready to yield to a severe manner toward
himself. Of course, the teacher must know on what support he may
depend; the father needs to have made up his mind how far he would be
willing to go with coercive measures if necessary; the private tutor,
to what extent he may count on the backing of parents; the teacher in a
public institution, how far his course of action would be upheld by his
superiors. But all this involves an appeal from training to government,
a step to be avoided as much as possible. Most of the unpleasant cases
of intractability, where recourse to government becomes unavoidable,
are the gradual result of continued weak indulgence. Of such cases no
account is taken here, and justly so, since, apart from all else, even
defiant obstinacy, provided restraint has not been cast off utterly,
soon breaks down and gives way to remorse when it is met by serious and
deliberate firmness.

  The most obvious ways that the school has of securing a good “memory
  of will” are those by which it enforces the well-known school
  virtues,--regularity, punctuality, silence, and industry. It is to
  the acquisition of these habits that the government, or discipline,
  of the school is chiefly directed. Dr. Wm. T. Harris has pointed out
  in detail the significance of this acquisition in the development
  of character.[16] It is interesting to note how the teacher’s
  personal authority is reinforced by social pressure both within and
  without the school. The Superintendent of a city of thirteen thousand
  inhabitants reports that but 1462 cases of tardiness occurred during
  a whole school year. The pupils of each room are given a brief
  holiday, from time to time, provided nobody in that room is tardy
  during the stated period. This brings an immense social pressure
  within the school to bear in securing prompt attendance. Happening to
  visit the Superintendent’s office in a city of some sixty thousand
  people, the writer observed the following scene: A young girl of
  perhaps fourteen years of age, accompanied by her father, who was
  a foreigner, unable to speak English fluently, entered the office.
  The girl began at once to make excuses for her brother who was a
  somewhat confirmed truant, and to beg that he might be excused and
  reinstated. To objections stated by the Superintendent, the father
  with much emotion replied, “Oh, Mr. Superintendent, won’t you give my
  boy another trial?” The boy had been ‘tried again’ so many times that
  father and daughter were referred to the judge, an officer having
  jurisdiction over such cases. The penalty for persistent truancy was
  attendance at a state reformatory school. This is a case in which the
  authority of the teacher in securing regularity of attendance was
  reinforced by the community outside the school. The constant pressure
  of school and community tend to establish habits of will memory that
  serve as an excellent foundation for later moral training.

[16] Third Year Book of the National Herbart Society.

162. Before training can have within itself the power to make up
deficiencies in obedience, there must be awakened in the pupil a vivid
feeling that the approval of his teacher is a valuable possession,
which he would be loath to lose. This the teacher will bring about
in proportion to the effective and welcome share he has in the life
of his pupil. He must give before he can receive. Furthermore, if in
his opinion the pupil needs to be turned in a different direction, he
should not underestimate the difficulty of the task before him; he must
proceed slowly.

The initial steps in character training are admirably described by
Niemeyer in the following words: “The teacher’s first duty is to study
the positively good elements in the native character of the being to
be educated. To preserve these, to strengthen them, to transform them
into virtue, and to fortify them against every danger, should be his
incessant endeavor. They should constitute the keynote, as it were,
of his whole method of education. He should look for the good even in
the spoilt and vicious pupil, and should try to bring it to light,
no matter how many weeds may have sprung up alongside of it. For all
subsequent moral education must start from this point.”

Although this passage belongs in strictness to the discussion on moral
education, it is plainly entitled to a place here also. An appeal
to the pupil’s better nature promotes ready compliance on his part,
especially when it is accompanied by those little courtesies that go
with cultivated social intercourse. It is most effective with those who
possess at the same time the strongest memory of will, which it will
not be difficult for the supporting activity of training to strengthen
still further.

163. On the other hand, the task of training grows arduous in
proportion as the pupil fails to bear in mind his acts of will. But
even here there is a difference between capricious unruliness and
downright flightiness and levity.

Cases may arise where the impetuosity of the pupil challenges the
teacher to a kind of combat. Rather than accept such a challenge, he
will usually find it sufficient at first to reprove calmly, to look on
quietly, to wait until fatigue sets in. The embarrassing situations
into which such a pupil gets himself will furnish occasions for making
him feel ashamed, and now it remains to be seen whether or not he can
be made to adopt a more equable behavior. Here and there training may
in this way even make good the lack of government; scarcely, however,
for large numbers, after unruliness has once begotten vicious habits.

  Combats of any kind between teacher and pupil are to be deplored.
  A good teacher is always strong enough in his mental superiority,
  his authority, and his influence as an executive to avoid it. Such
  a contest shows that the pupil has become self-conscious in a bad
  sense. He sets his personality over against that of the teacher.
  If the teacher is so weak as to meet him on his own ground, the
  pupil has a good chance for a bad victory--bad for himself, the
  teacher, and the school. It should be a constant aim of the teacher
  to supplant introspection, whether pertaining to feelings or to
  wilfulness, with motor activity. The pupil should always be doing
  something that will promote not only his own best good, but that
  of the school also. Authority should rarely so assert itself as to
  incite or to permit a personal contest with the pupil. It should be a
  strong but almost unseen presupposition of all school affairs. Here
  as elsewhere idleness is the mother of mischief. Lively action is
  sure to banish morbid introspection.

164. Thoughtlessness in the narrower sense, which manifests itself in
forgetfulness, in negligence, in want of steadiness, and in so-called
youthful escapades, is a defect in native capacity, and does not
admit of a radical cure, imperceptible as it may become with age, by
reason of repeated warnings and diminishing susceptibility to external
impressions. All the more imperative is it in such cases to support
by training, in order that the evil consequences of this character
weakness may be prevented, or at least reduced to a minimum. For as
soon as a thoughtlessly impulsive boy comes to take pleasure in his
conduct, he will set himself against order and industry, and will
strive to discover the means which promise to secure for him a life
without restrictions. This danger must be forestalled by training.
At the beginning, and before an evil will has had time to develop,
training must take the place of will. It must bring home to the pupil
that of which he had lost sight. To his fluctuating and roving
impulses it must lend its own external firmness and uniformity, which
cannot be created at once, if at all, within the pupil.

Here is the proper place for the injunction, not to argue with
children. “I cannot be too emphatic and outspoken in my warning against
too much arguing,” says Caroline Rudolphi; and Schwarz, who quotes this
passage, adds, “Once is too often.” Niemeyer, after speaking of the
excesses of abnormal liveliness and characterizing thoughtlessness,
which, he says, “causes inattention, a disregard for consequences,
and hasty actions,” continues thus: “All these are not faults of the
heart; still they are faults that need to be amended, and about the
only sure educational method for amending them is to cultivate right
habits. Positive punishments wisely chosen may indeed be employed as
auxiliary means, but only when there are evidences of a lack of good
intention, or when these faults have become ominously prominent.” He
further advises teachers to insist on this, that pupils rectify on the
spot what can be rectified, since vague recollections prove barren of
good results.

This does not, of course, dispose of the whole matter, but we are still
discussing training as a supporting agency, and from this point of view
it is true that argument should not be substituted for the cultivation
of habits.

165. To restrain the lively but thoughtless boy is more difficult than
to keep him properly active, for the latter is comparatively easy, in
some cases at least, if instruction excites his interest. The reverse
holds true for the sluggish boy because an attack has to be made on
his indolence. Here the stimulation to physical exertion through
association with wide-awake playmates is the first thing to be secured;
and where hard lessons cannot as yet be managed successfully, lighter
occupations will have to suffice. Where sluggishness is traceable to
bodily feebleness, improvement may be hoped for from sanitary measures
and increasing years.

The following rule is to be observed everywhere: No exercise must
exceed the pupil’s strength, but that which has once been begun must be
completed. At the least, pupils must not be allowed to drop their work
as they choose; they must look upon it as a whole, however small.

166. That the supporting procedure of training rests on the teacher’s
own bearing--on the uniformity of his demeanor--need hardly be said;
but this evenness must also stand out clearly before the eyes of the
pupils. The teacher ought to guard particularly against causing the
complaint that no one knows how to please him, that nothing one may
do is done to his satisfaction. When matters have come to this pass,
the first thing pupils do is to watch his moods as they might the
weather, and to interchange observations. His ugly mood is dreaded;
his pleasant mood is taken advantage of for importunate requests.
The pupils try to move the firm centre which is to support them, and
the faintest signs of success awaken and foster extravagant hopes.
Gradually the after-effects of earlier government die out, and a
renewal of severe measures draws with it a train of new evils.

  Goldsmith in his “Deserted Village” has well portrayed the “moody”
  teacher:--

    “A man severe he was, and stern to view;
     I knew him well, and every truant knew:
     Well had the boding tremblers learned to trace
     The day’s disasters in his morning face;
     Full well they laughed, with counterfeited glee,
     At all his jokes, for many a joke had he;
     Full well the busy whisper, circling round,
     Conveyed the dismal tidings when he frowned.”

167. Second. Training is to exert a determining influence; it is
to induce the pupil _to choose_ (147). Under this head falls the
discrimination spoken of above between varieties of volitional
impulse--the will to bear, to have, and to do; hence also experiential
knowledge of the natural consequences of doing or of failure to
do (157), for unless these are taken into consideration, the manifold
of will cannot be reduced to harmony. Now the first point to be noticed
in connection with this aspect of training is that the teacher does not
choose for the pupil. The pupil himself must choose, for it is his own
character that is to be determined. He must himself experience a part,
although only the smallest part, of that which is desirable or harmful.
That the flame burns that a pin pricks, that a fall or knock hurts,
this lesson even the little child must learn; and similar experiences
must be gained later, provided they do not carry the pupil to the verge
of serious danger. Everything essential has been accomplished if,
in consequence of actual experiences confirming the teacher’s words
of warning, the pupil believes other warnings without waiting for
confirmation.

  Not second in importance to the act of choosing is the content of the
  choice. If conduct must have a social outcome, all the activities
  of the school will focus at this point. In order to have rational
  choice there must be first of all social intelligence. This it is
  the function of instruction to develop. According to a well-known
  doctrine of Herbart, it is the chief duty of instruction to make a
  progressive revelation to the pupil of the ethical world, in order
  that his puny will may gradually be reinforced by race experience.
  The instruments for this revelation are the studies on the one hand,
  and the conduct of the school according to social principles on the
  other. In the second place, that the ethical choice may truly express
  the pupil’s inward state, rather than his outward constraint, it must
  grow out of his insight as suffused by his social responsiveness to
  ethical ideas. In other words, his disposition should confirm his
  intellectual perception of the right line of conduct. This raises the
  whole matter of interest as related to will.[17] Here again natural,
  spontaneous, almost unconscious attitude is vastly superior to morbid
  introspection, no matter how ‘good’ the pupil’s disposition may prove
  to be. A boy should not have to ‘reflect’ as to whether he will rob
  a bird’s nest or not.

[17] See Dr. John Dewey, “Interest as Related to Will,” National
Herbart Society, reprint for 1899.

168. Pleasure and pain arise so largely out of social relations that
the pupil must grow up amidst a social environment in order to become
somewhat acquainted with his natural place among men. This requirement
gives rise accordingly to solicitous precautions against a bad example
and rudeness. On the other hand, a boy’s companions should not be
chosen with such anxious care as if the intention were to spare him
the feeling of pressure which in all human society is generated by the
efforts and counter-efforts of men. Too great complaisance on the part
of playmates causes delusions as to the actual conditions of life.

Again, society and seclusion must alternate. The social current is not
to carry everything else along with it, and to become more powerful
than education. Even the boy, and much more the youth, must learn to be
alone, and to fill up his time profitably.

  Unbroken association of the child with his mates tends to bring
  him too exclusively under the influence of imitation and of acting
  impulsively upon those forms of unreasoning suggestion which sway
  the crowd, the gang, and the mob. To quote Professor Baldwin:[18]
  “The characteristics of the social suggestions upon which the crowd
  act show them to be strictly suggestions. They are not truths, nor
  arguments, nor insights, nor inventions.... The suggestible mind
  has very well known marks. Balzac hit off one of them in ‘Eugénie
  Grandet’ in the question, ‘Can it be that collectively man has no
  memory?’ We might go through the list of mental functions asking the
  same question of them one by one. Has man collectively no thought, no
  sense of values, no deliberation, no self-control, no responsibility,
  no conscience, no will, no motive, no purpose? And the answer to
  each question would be the same, No, he has none. The suggestible
  consciousness is the consciousness that has no past, no future, no
  height, no depth, no development, no reference to anything; it is
  only in and out. It takes in and it acts out--that is all there is
  to it.” It is here that we find the source of the youthful escapade
  so common to street, school, and college, as well as of the adult
  deeds of diabolism that have so often shocked the moral sense of the
  American people. The child needs frequent opportunities to be alone,
  when he can “come to himself” as a responsible person. Even where the
  association with his mates is perfectly innocent, there is a growing
  responsiveness to mere suggestion. This tendency is corrected by
  attention to individual tasks and responsibilities.

[18] “Social and Ethical Interpretations,” pp. 236–237.

169. By living alternately with his equals in age and with adults, the
pupil grows familiar with diverse standards of honor. To unite these,
and to subordinate one to the other in a proper manner, will prove
an easy or a difficult part of training, according to the smaller or
greater gap between the value set on brute force on the one hand,
and the demand for good-breeding, as well as regard for talent and
knowledge, on the other. The main thing is not to foster ambition
artificially, though care must be taken at the same time to refrain
from crushing out a natural and true self-esteem. Usually, however,
those interested in the progress of a pupil stand in need themselves of
guarding against the self-deception due to extravagant hopes. By giving
themselves up to these, they involuntarily turn flatterers, and push
the boy, and the young man still more, beyond the position he is able
to maintain. Bitter experiences follow.

  The tendency to an abnormal overestimation of the value of physical
  excellence is seen in the attitude of the modern college toward
  athletics. Doubtless the public as a whole still underestimates
  the importance of fine physical development. Our modern life with
  its nerve-racking occupation will shatter the efficiency of large
  portions of the race, unless the physical organism is so developed
  as to withstand the strain. This, if true of men, is still more
  true of women, who are now undertaking many new lines of exhausting
  labor, not the easiest of which is teaching. But the college student
  is prone to adore muscle. The successful athlete is, for a brief
  period, praised, petted, and advertised far more than is the ablest
  student or professor in the institution. Scarcely do the noblest
  achievements of science or philanthropy receive so much notice as
  a successful full-back on a foot-ball team. The athlete goes up
  indeed like a rocket, startling the ear and dazzling the eye for
  a moment--then oblivion, or deserved obscurity. The teacher must
  endeavor to displace this false estimate of values by one more true
  if less exciting.

170. The regard for the value of things in their relation to the
ordinary necessities of life develops somewhat more slowly than the
natural sense of honor. This is true especially of money, which at
first boys rarely know how to use. Instead of saying, either this
or that, which a fixed sum will buy, the boy falls a victim to the
deception that lurks in saying, this _and_ that. In this respect also
the pupil needs to gain experience on a small scale; he must, moreover,
come to know the value of objects last, not merely in terms of money,
but also in terms of the inconvenience of doing without them. Warnings
against petty closeness are seldom necessary; not infrequently,
however, a boy follows common talk, and it may happen that he practises
parsimony by imitation, and squanders in obedience to his own impulses.
Where faults of this sort are not conquered by the pupil’s own sense of
honor, they fall within the province of moral education.

  A modern device for teaching children the value of money, and
  especially the usefulness of saving it, is the institution of
  school savings banks. Here the pupil develops his instincts for
  accumulation. At the same time he learns to inhibit his often
  inordinate fondness for spending. If indulgence to self, accompanied
  by penuriousness toward others, is permitted to grow into a habit in
  childhood and youth, it becomes a source of much unhappiness in later
  family life. Wife and children are often victims of this kind of
  selfishness. Now that women are in the main the teachers of children,
  they should have the interest of their sex sufficiently at heart
  to inculcate suitable ideals and habits respecting the gathering
  and spending of money. No form of selfishness is so obnoxious as
  self-indulgence at the expense of those who have a natural right
  to an equitable share of what is produced. The ‘meanness’ of such
  conduct if constantly unveiled will effect its own cure.

171. When experience has taught the pupil to what extent he must endure
or need not endure the pressure of human society, and what honors,
objects, enjoyments, he can have or must do without, the question
arises: How does he connect all this with the pursuits which attract
or repel him? The thoughtful pupil soon realizes, without being told,
that one thing often makes another possible, that one thing involves or
conditions another. But upon the thoughtless boy this truth does not
impress itself with sufficient force; consequently, the teacher has to
help him to deepen that impression, because a man without a settled
mind regarding these matters remains devoid of character.

Yet a lack of fixedness is often desirable rather than otherwise--a
statement applying to those pupils whose intellectual interests
it is the business of instruction to awaken, or whose moral and
religious culture are as yet in a backward state. The objective part
of character (142) should not become fixed too soon; and very often a
large part of the value of training consists in retarding this process.
Such an end is subserved by the restraint under which the pupil is
kept by the subordinate position assigned to him in conformity with
his age, and particularly by the refusal of freedom to act without
permission, and according to his own inclination (152). The theoretical
judgment of will relations (149) is frequently late in maturing,
or remains weak in comparison with the impression produced by the
experiences mentioned. In that case moral ardor is also wanting, and if
the pupil were given liberty to do as he chose, his character would be
formed, to be sure, but in the wrong way. Rather would it be better to
encourage juvenile amusements, and even boyish games, beyond the usual
age limit.

172. Third. Regulative training begins its work with the first
appearance of the subjective part of character (143). For an earlier
period the rule not to argue with children holds good (164); that is,
it holds good as long as we can get along with it. That stage, however,
is passed when the pupil begins to reason for himself; in other words,
when his thinking has acquired such consecutiveness that his thoughts
no longer come and go as momentary fancies, but attain to permanency
and coherence. Reasoning processes of this sort ought not to be left
to themselves, nor can they be repressed by dictatorial decrees. The
educator must now enter into his pupil’s trains of reflection, must
argue with him and prevent further development in the wrong direction.

The tendency to set up rules reveals itself early; for example, in the
games of children. Commands as to what to do are given every moment,
only these imperatives are imperfectly obeyed and often changed.
Neither is there lack of original, childish resolutions; but they
can mean little so long as they do not remain the same. It is very
different when they acquire stability, when means and ends combine into
plans, when execution is attempted under difficulties, and finally when
these resolves are thought in the forms of general concepts, thereby
laying claim to validity in possible future instances, and becoming
thus transformed into maxims.

173. The wise forethought essential to regulative training requires in
the first place that the teacher shall rather tolerate an inconvenient
discussion than check a frank expression of opinion, provided the
objections of the pupil are indubitably sincere, and his vanity, we
will say, is not flattered too much by the unexpected consideration
accorded to his remarks. The same foresight is to be exercised in
cases where it proves impossible to convince the pupil at once. Here
the final judgment, instead of being insisted upon, should rather
be postponed; it will always be easy to point out to the pupil his
lack of adequate knowledge and to refer him to future studies. The
positiveness that usually characterizes the assertions of boys and
young men, generally has its roots in their great ignorance. They have
not the least inkling of how many opinions have been held and disputed.
Instruction will gradually cure them of their excessive self-confidence.

  Only in a pure despotism would the enforcement of unquestioning
  obedience to authority be admissible. No country aspiring to
  political liberty could tolerate such a system. Even if all political
  considerations were dismissed, the development of subjective
  character alone would demand a condemnation of such a method. But in
  a country like ours, where men are both personally and politically
  self-governing, education to leadership is not second to education
  to obedience. There comes a time, therefore, when argument is in
  place, provided its purpose is to clarify the pupil’s insight into
  prudence or duty. It will not be too much to insist upon obedience
  without argument with all pupils so far as the ordinary school
  virtues--regularity, punctuality, silence, and industry--are
  concerned. Old and young can see their necessity. When it comes to
  the more intricate phases of conduct, the grounds for authority, if
  it is still exercised, may be revealed through dialogue. It is the
  constant effort of training to establish regulative principles in the
  minds of the older pupils, so that within the range of their capacity
  they may become self-governing. In other words, the moral plateaus of
  Kant are to be attained, not at a bound, but by a gradual progress
  in moral autonomy. Herein we see the superiority of Herbart’s
  conception of moral training. What Kant gave up as an unsolvable
  problem, can be seen to be only a natural process. Says Kant, “How a
  law can of itself directly determine the will is for human reason an
  insoluble problem, for it is identical with the problem how a free
  will is possible.”[19] The difficulty with Kant’s theory was that
  he admitted no psychological means for attaining the free directive
  power of the mind. He could only say to the child: “You are free; be
  free. You are morally autonomous; exercise your power; be a free,
  self-governing citizen.” Kant regarded natural impulses, emotions,
  desires, pleasures, interests, as impure, hence to be rejected. They
  are indeed to be rejected as the final ends of character, but what
  Kant did not recognize is that they are the psychological means
  for attaining character. Primarily these feelings, far from being
  radically bad, as he thought, are radically good, since they help to
  furnish the necessary conditions of survival, both for the individual
  and for the race. Hunger, fear, courage, combativeness, prudence,
  sexual instinct, inquisitiveness, love of adornment, frugality,
  and a hundred other elemental passions have preserved the race
  from destruction in the past. A new set of social and intellectual
  impulses will in the future provide the instruments of survival,
  now that the field of evolution is transported from the jungle to
  the city. It is through intellectual insights that new ideals are
  formulated; it is through these elemental feelings that the active
  powers of the mind are stirred up to motor efficiency for their
  realization. From being biological means for physical survival,
  the feelings of man have now become psychological means for civic
  survival. Psychologically, therefore, men are not born free; they
  become free. To become free they must have opportunity to exercise
  freedom; at first within definite but widening limits while they are
  under the tuition of the school; later within the limits set by civil
  society; at last absolutely, when they have recognized that what is
  rational law in society is the law of their own being.

[19] “Selections,” p. 284.

174. But the matter of greatest importance from the point of view of
training is consistency or inconsistency of action. One who lightly
sets up maxims must be made to feel the difficulty of living up to
them. In this way a mirror is held up to the pupils, partly in order to
put to rout untenable maxims, and partly to reinforce valid principles.

Among the untenable maxims we include also those which, although in
accord with prudence, would offend against morality. If the pupil does
not see already that they cannot be maintained, the application, by
exhibiting their objectionable consequences, must bring to light their
true character.

175. Regulative training often calls for rousing words from the
teacher. He has to remind the pupil of happenings in the past and
predict future consequences in case his faults should continue; he has
to induce him to look within himself for the purpose of tracing the
causal connection of his actions to its source. If, however, this was
done earlier, with a view to moral education, no long speeches are now
needed. Moreover, the teacher’s remarks become calmer and briefer the
more effective they have been, the more he is justified in expecting
independent judgment on the part of the pupil, and finally the more
fully the latter has entered upon that period during which he looks
about him to observe the words and actions of strangers. For, at the
time when he has begun to compare the new with the old, his receptivity
for the old is very weak, and soon vanishes completely; unless,
indeed, the old had been deeply impressed beforehand.

  The purpose of the “rousing word” is to stimulate the mind to
  exercise its dynamic force to moral ends. The pupil must not be
  permitted to assume the attitude of negation, or to be a mere passive
  observer, or an innocent, devoid alike of power and significance,
  but he must be roused into a responsible character, an efficient
  participant in life’s activities. Successful appeal may be made to
  insights already acquired, but theoretically held; to dispositions
  implanted, but not yet actively exercised; to the application of
  old habits to new uses. Even where appeal must be made against
  objectionable conduct, it is better to apply the “inhibition of
  substitution” to that of “negation.”[20] While protesting against the
  evil, point the way to the right road.

[20] James, “Talks on Psychology,” p. 192.

176. Fourth. The pupil is to be kept in a quiet frame of mind; his
intellect in a state suitable for clear apprehension. To outbursts of
passion this applies absolutely; not so generally to emotions. Above
all, tranquillity is the condition for the formation of theoretical
judgments and hence also, although not exclusively so, for laying the
foundation of morality.

Every desire may develop into passion, if the soul is so often and so
long in a desiring state that thoughts become focussed in the object
longed for, whereby plans shape themselves, hopes arise, and ill-will
toward others strikes root. Accordingly, watchful attention must be
given to all persistent and recurrent desires.

177. The most usual desires are those which arise from the physical
need of food and of bodily activity. Now the first step to take is,
while guarding against excess, to satisfy these natural impulses in
order to subdue the unruliness springing from unsatisfied cravings.
We ought not to permit hunger to tempt a boy to steal, nor encourage
truancy by making him sit still too long. This warning is not
superfluous. Such things happen even in families where less irrational
practices might be expected. Over-indulgence, to be sure, is of far
more frequent occurrence.

When the natural wants have lost their sting, a positive and
irrevocable refusal must be opposed to further desires. With it should
be combined some occupation capable of diverting the attention.

If the object which continues to excite desire can be removed, all the
better. In one’s own home this is more often practicable, and more
necessary as well, than in that of strangers. If the object cannot
be removed, gratification may be put off until some future time. The
foregoing statement may be illustrated by reference to the eating of
fruit from the tree. An unconditional prohibition carries with it a
dangerous temptation to disobedience, while unconditional permission
would be equally inadmissible on account of the plucking of green
fruit, let alone the possible injury to the orchards of others.

Analogy will suggest many similar applications of the rule given.

178. Again, children must be watched at their games. The more free
play of the imagination we discover, and the more change there is,
the less cause for concern. But when the same game is frequently
repeated according to the same fixed rules, when a species of study is
devoted to it in order to attain special proficiency, passions may be
generated, such, for instance, as an excessive fondness for playing at
cards, even where no stakes are involved. Gambling must be forbidden
entirely, and in case compliance with this prohibition is doubtful,
obedience must be secured by watchful supervision.

  To what end shall a teacher watch the games of children? To prevent
  the bullying of the weak by the strong, to see that unfairness
  does not creep in, to ward off vulgarity and profanity--these and
  similar purposes will be in the mind of the teacher. One of the chief
  functions of play, however, is to cultivate social efficiency. This
  has two aspects, willingness to coöperate with a group and ability
  to lead a group. It is necessary that there should be alternation
  of leadership and coöperation. If one child is allowed to lead all
  the time, he becomes overbearing; if another is always compelled to
  follow, he becomes subservient. Each has a one-sided development.
  Without discouraging unduly natural capacity for leadership, it
  is well for the teacher quietly to see to it that each child has
  his chance, both to lead and to follow. Just as the kindergarten
  utilizes play to simulate the occupations of men, arousing sympathy
  with them and respect for them, so the school may by proper
  modification make the numerous group games, in which children
  delight, a potent means for securing coöperative habits and a general
  aptitude for social activities. Not a little attention is now paid
  to the various forms of children’s play. This is especially true of
  such publications as the _Pedagogical Seminary_, published at Clark
  University, Worcester, Massachusetts.

179. An excellent means to avert the dangers connected with passionate
tendencies is to engage in the acquisition of one of the fine arts, say
music or drawing, even though there should be no more than a modicum of
talent. The student must be given to understand, however, that he is
not to take up the study of several musical instruments at once, nor
give himself up to distracting attempts in sundry branches of pictorial
representation. On the contrary, he is to strive consistently for
proficiency in one definite direction.

In the total absence of aptitude we may avail ourselves of preferences
of one kind or other, such as fondness for collecting plants or shells,
for work in papier-maché, for joinery, for gardening even, etc.

Poetical talent, highly desirable in itself, nevertheless demands a
solid counterweight in the shape of serious scholarly effort; for the
young poet sets up claims that are likely to prove dangerous if he
becomes absorbed in them.

  The importance of this suggestion can hardly be overestimated. It
  is a case of the permanent inhibition of a host of possible evil
  tendencies by substitution. The youth who can turn with pleasure
  to his violin at every spare moment, never seriously misses the
  companionship of his mates. He has, moreover, a never failing source
  of enjoyment when there is nothing to interfere with his happiness,
  and an equally inexhaustible source of consolation when the waves of
  life are rough.

180. Projects springing from passionate impulses, and betraying
their existence by their interference with order, diligence, and
the distribution of time, must be resolutely thwarted. This step is
rendered all the more urgent when several share in the same plan, above
all when ostentation, party spirit, and rivalry enter as impelling
factors. Such things must not be allowed to gain ground; they very
quickly vitiate the soil which education has been at such pains to
prepare for tillage.

181. The passions being kept at a distance, the successful grounding
of the pupil in morality depends in general on the manner in which
instruction coöperates with his occupations. The branch of instruction
primarily most important in this respect is religious instruction. The
most immediate source, however, of the development of disposition is
found in the pupil’s social environment, and it becomes the business
of training to cultivate a right spirit or disposition. Let us,
therefore, take up the practical ideas one by one.

  England and Germany are a unit in insisting upon the necessity of
  religious instruction in the schools. Half the elementary schools
  of the former country are in charge of the Church of England,
  five per cent are controlled by Roman Catholics, three per cent
  by Wesleyans, and some forty-two per cent by public boards of
  education. All of these schools are subsidized by the state, yet
  all, with few exceptions, give religious instruction. In Germany
  there are but two strong religious organizations--the Roman Catholic
  Church, mostly at the south, and the Lutheran, mostly at the north.
  The state establishes all schools, furnishing most of the funds
  for sustaining them and controlling their administration in large
  measure; yet the morning hour of the day is devoted to instruction
  in religion. Not so in the United States. Here, religious teaching
  is, to all appearances, permanently excluded from the public
  schools. In this condition of affairs there is but one resource:
  we must the more diligently insist upon those things that reflect
  the content of religion. That is, we must teach children to live in
  close coöperative union with their fellows. The subjective side of
  this training is portrayed in the sections that follow, where the
  transformation of ethical insights into ethical habits is discussed.

182. To speak of strife first, which cannot easily be wholly prevented
among children, and which is present to their minds, at least as a
possibility, self-help against unexpected bodily assaults cannot be
forbidden. A determined self-defence is rather to be recommended, but
self-defence paired with a merciful treatment of one’s assailant. On
the other hand, it is necessary to prohibit absolutely any arbitrary
appropriation of objects, even though these objects should consist
of ownerless or discarded trifles. No one must imagine that his mere
pleasure is a law unto others. On the contrary, children ought to get
used to limitations on ownership. That which has been given them for a
certain purpose is to be used for that purpose alone, and must be taken
care of with that purpose in view. Promises among children should not
lightly be declared void, however foolish and impossible of fulfilment.
The boy who, by a hasty promise, puts himself in an embarrassing
position must be made conscious of the fact. Let his perplexity serve
as a warning for the future. But over-hasty promises are to be accepted
as little as they are to be made; and here is where we have to begin in
untying the knots in which children occasionally entangle themselves.

It is not undesirable that pupils by their own acts furnish themselves
with a few keenly-felt instances of complicated questions of rights.
But pleasure in wrangling must be discountenanced; the pupils should
learn to prevent and to avoid contention. They may gain enough
familiarity with it to realize that it gives displeasure.

183. At this point two paths open to our reflection. In the first
place, contention pleases children because it implies strength; in
seeking it they are, as a rule, merely giving vent to excess of animal
spirits. The outlet in this direction we must block, but we must
furnish another elsewhere. Gymnastic exercises, too, are exhibitions
of strength; emulation, which is not contention, is a welcome
feature of sport and play. Mental activity likewise affords suitable
opportunities for excelling; it also provides proper occasions for
making comparisons; but relative excellence, children must understand
distinctly, is not to be advanced by them as a basis for claims. Where
the question is one of degree of attainment,--therefore one of _perfice
te_,--the pupil is supplied with a practically useful standard by his
own progress and retrogression. To hold up one pupil as a model for
another to follow awakens envy; it will be much better, instead, to
make allowances where a weak pupil cannot do more than he is actually
doing.

  In all the ages of the past men have been the teachers of boys. Being
  men, they have naturally taken the man’s attitude toward youthful
  conduct. When one boy is gratuitously assaulted by another, they have
  upheld a sturdy self-defence as belonging to self-respect. In their
  eyes an unsuccessful defence is better than a cowardly retreat. With
  the advent of women as the teachers of boys it is natural that the
  doctrine of passive non-resistance should be emphasized. When women
  were only the physical mothers of the race, there was no danger of
  the decay of virility, but now that they have become the intellectual
  mothers as well, there may be such a danger. It is generally
  conceded that the English boys’ schools, like Eton, Harrow, and
  Rugby, have been the best English conservers of independent manhood,
  for there every boy stood on his own merits, having to fight his own
  battles, being responsible for his own conduct, and at the same time
  living under a high code of boyish honor. In our own public schools,
  where no such _esprit de corps_ is possible, and where the doctrine
  of peace at any price is likely to be insisted upon, it is possible
  that there may be a distinct decline of virility in the boys. Such
  a result would be deplorable; it would work to the detriment of
  public education, and would decrease in public estimation the value
  of woman’s services in the schoolroom. While discouraging strife, a
  teacher may, by a word of approval or excuse, justify an exercise of
  primitive defence of the person against unwarranted assault. Manly
  social games, like foot-ball, basket-ball, base-ball, are our best
  resources in developing those phases of character that are closely
  associated with motor efficiency. Here under proper guidance,
  self-control, sense of power and efficiency, courage, and almost
  every characteristic of virility may be happily developed. That
  forethought and supervision are needed is most true, else unlovely
  traits of character may easily get the upper hand.

184. The second of the two ways alluded to takes us from the idea of
rights to that of equity. Strife is displeasing, but revenge still
more, notwithstanding the truth of the saying: what is fair for one
is fair for another. Children may indeed exercise their ethical
acumen by trying to determine how much one deserves to suffer or to
receive at the hands of others for the liberties he has taken or the
self-restraint he has practised, but they are not to arrogate to
themselves the function of inflicting punishments or of bestowing
rewards. Without surrendering their own insight, they must in this
respect submit willingly to the authority of their superiors.

A similar course is to be pursued with reference to the distribution
of presents, enjoyments, and marks of approval. To avoid giving the
appearance of favoritism, the teacher should not, except for very good
reasons, depart from the principle of equal division; but, on the other
hand, he should refuse to accord to the pupils a right to these free
gifts. While permitting them to have an opinion on the appropriateness
of a greater or smaller share, he will properly deny them any right to
demand by virtue of this opinion.

185. In cases deeply engaging the children’s own sense of justice and
equity, complaisance and readiness to yield should not be exacted on
the spot. Children must have time to get to the end of their thoughts,
and to weary of what is often very fruitless brooding, before they
realize that to yield is after all a necessity, and hence in no sense a
matter of magnanimous choice. At some future time they may be reminded
that their path would have been smoother if the sentiment of good-will
had been in control from the beginning and had arbitrated the dispute,
or rather had prevented it entirely.

Good-will is to be revered everywhere as higher than right; still the
latter must be represented as something that cannot be set aside with
impunity, unless it be by common agreement; that is, in consequence of
the consent of the holders of rights.

  There are two distinct aspects to good-will,--the benevolent, and
  the coöperative or social. The well-known story of the Jericho Road
  illustrates the first. He is the good neighbor who rescues the life
  of the man who has been assaulted by the way. But social good-will
  is more than benevolence; it is coöperation for the accomplishment
  of common purposes. Among farmers it means mutual care to prevent
  aggression, because of unruly stock or bad fences; it involves
  combined efforts for good schools, good roads, public libraries,
  educational agencies for promoting successful farming, associations
  for promoting successful pleasures. In cities social good-will means
  coöperation for paving and lighting streets, for the suppression of
  crime, for furnishing good water and efficient sewerage, for defence
  against fire, for rapid transit, besides the myriad agencies for
  promoting the mental, moral, and spiritual welfare of the people.
  A man in a city needs to be a good neighbor to everybody, even
  though he may know personally but one in a million. In other words,
  the civic man must be a brother, not only to him who falls among
  thieves, but to him who lives among them; not only to his brother in
  adversity, but also to his brother in prosperity.

186. Finally, the degrees of difference among older boys, and
especially among young men, with respect to the nearness with which
they approach the still distant realization of the idea of inner
freedom, are, as a rule, sufficiently marked to be patent to all. The
superior excellence of those distinguished for steady and rational
conduct is usually dwelt on by the teacher rather too much than too
little; children are themselves too keen in observing each other’s
shortcomings not to see how far behind the best some are. We ought,
therefore, rather to avoid stimulating in children the tendency to
belittle others, than to turn their attention to that which does not
escape them anyway.

187. The bad conduct of adults near to the pupils will not, of course,
be exposed by the teacher; and if publicly known, the example set
will repel more than allure, so long as self-interest does not prompt
imitation or a search for excuses. But we need not entertain much
hope either that a worthy example will be followed; youth is too
prone to regard rectitude as a matter of course. Hence it will not be
superfluous to call special attention to right conduct, and to give
expression to the esteem which is its due. This applies particularly
to the time when a growing boy’s outlook over society widens, and he
begins to compare many things whose false glitter might deceive him.

  There are many aspects of inner freedom. It is possible for a
  narrow-minded man to live in perfect tranquillity, so far as his
  conscience is concerned. Even if one lived true to Kant’s categorical
  imperative, which says, “So act that the maxims, or rules, of your
  conduct might, through your own will, become universal laws,” it
  would still be possible for one to have a mind at peace with itself
  while doing things that a higher code of morality would forbid. For
  example, suppose I am an American Indian, and the question arises,
  Shall I torture my enemies? Of course: do not the traditions of my
  tribe prescribe it? This simply means that our ideals of conduct
  grow out of our environment; they are social in their genesis. This
  truth shows the infinite importance of making instruction reveal
  clearly the best ideals of religion and civilization, for there may
  be as much inward freedom, or good conscience, in the slums as in the
  wealthy districts of the city. Subjective peace of mind may mean much
  or little. A murderer may sleep as soundly as a missionary, but a man
  of high ideals is whipped as with scorpions, if his conduct be base.
  He feels that his higher self is outraged; he has no peace except
  through repentance, restitution, and reform.

188. Fifth. The pupil’s mind, we will suppose, has been properly
directed, partly through the social relations obtaining among children,
partly through examples and instruction, to the requirements of the
various moral ideas, and he has learned accordingly to discriminate
with some keenness between will relations. Now the time has arrived for
moral education in the strict sense. For we cannot leave it to chance
whether our young charges will, of their own initiative, synthesize
for themselves noble actions on the one hand and base actions on the
other, whether they will take time to reflect, and will, each for
himself, apply the lessons taught. On the contrary, they all have to
be told, each one individually has to be told, truths that no one is
wont to hear with pleasure. The more thoroughly the teacher knows his
pupils, the better. By showing them that he divines their thoughts, he
supplies them with the most effectual incentive to self-observation.
Now the basis of what is commonly known as moralizing is furnished
by a retrospective view of the pupil’s conduct for some time past,
by references to influences formerly at work within him, and by an
analysis of his good and bad qualities. Such teaching is by no means
to be condemned, nor even to be regarded as superfluous. In its proper
place it is absolutely essential. Many, it is true, grow up without
ever having heard a serious word of deserved censure, but no one ought
to grow up in that way.

189. Only praise and censure are thought of here, not harsh words, much
less harsh treatment. Reprimands and punishments following upon single
acts are something different; they, too, may lead to moral reflections,
but must first have become things of the past. Moral improvement is not
brought about by the constraint of government, nor is it the result
of those pedagogical punishments which warn the pupil and sharpen his
wits by means of the natural consequences of actions (157). But it is
brought about through the imitation of the language of conscience and
of genuine honor, as seen in impartial spectators. Moreover, this
does not exclude consideration of the excuses which every one readily
finds in his heart. But while due allowance is made for mitigating
circumstances, the pupil is cautioned against relying on them in future.

190. Ordinarily youth deserves neither strong commendation nor severe
criticism, and it is well to guard carefully against exaggeration
in either direction, if for no other reason than merely this, that
exaggeration either detracts from effectiveness, or else causes,
if not timidity, at least an unfortunate embarrassment. There is
one species of magnifying, however, which subserves a good purpose,
because it enables pupils to see more clearly the importance of
trifles and the great significance of their own actions, and in this
way helps to counteract thoughtlessness. We refer to viewing the
present in the light of the future. The pettiest faults are liable to
grow through habit; the faintest desire, unless kept under control,
may turn into passion. Then, too, the future circumstances of one’s
life are uncertain; allurements and temptations may come into it, or
unlooked-for misfortunes. This prevision of the possibilities of the
future is, of course, not prophecy, and no such claim should be made
for it; nevertheless, it does good service as a warning.

191. When the pupil has been brought to the point where he regards
his moral education as a matter of serious import, instruction in
conjunction with a growing knowledge of the world may bring it about
that a glow of moral sentiment permeates his whole thought, and that
the idea of a moral order unites on the one hand with his religious
concepts, and with his self-observation on the other. Henceforth the
direct, emphatic expression of praise or censure will have to be less
frequent. It will no longer be as easy as formerly to give a clearer
account to the pupil of what goes on within him than he has already
rendered to himself. We may still, however, come to his assistance from
another direction, namely, that of general concepts,--a field in which
advancing youthful reflection is little by little finding its bearings.

192. Sixth. It is the business of training to remind at the right
moment and to correct faults. We may safely assume that, even after a
young man has reached the plane of moral decisions, he will still stand
in need of frequent reminders, although in this respect individuals
exhibit great differences, which observation alone is able to reveal.
But that which he is reminded of consists of resolves which lay claim
to something like universal validity, but which are not likely to make
good that claim when incorrectly formulated or conceived in the wrong
connection. General considerations become predominant with only a very
few at best; but youth especially sees and experiences so much that
is new that the old is easily slighted for the new, and, accordingly,
the general for the particular still more. Nevertheless, it is far
easier for training to remind and to correct with success where a good,
firm foundation has been laid, than it is to support (161–166) when in
adolescence nothing is found by which the pupil might try to steady
himself.

193. It is evident from the wide divergence among the principles which
schools old and new have accepted as the basis of ethics and of systems
of justice, that many conflicting, or at any rate, one-sided views may
arise when the attempt is made to introduce order, definiteness, and
consistency into existing ethical concepts. This whole conflict and
one-sidedness of opinion, together with the innumerable fluctuations
that may find a place here besides,--all this is likely to be
reproduced in youthful minds, particularly where they make it a point
of going their own way. Very frequently acquired principles adjust
themselves to inclinations; the subjective side of character adapts
itself to the objective. Now, while it is the business of instruction
to correct error, training must avail itself of those opportunities
that reveal a directing of thoughts by inclination.

194. When, however, the pupil has once established confidence
in his disposition as well as in his principles, training must
withdraw. Unnecessary judging and over-anxious observation would only
impair naturalness, and give rise to extraneous motives. When once
self-culture has been assumed, it should be left alone.




SECTION IV

SYNOPSIS OF GENERAL PEDAGOGICS FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF AGE




