CHAPTER VI

=Greek and Latin=


277. As is well known, the exposition of grammatical distinctions
and of the many turns of expression whereby language may become an
adequate symbolization of thought, gains very materially in clearness
by a comparison of the mother-tongue with Latin and Greek. Even with
boys not more than eight years old the attempt may be made to utilize
this advantage in the teaching of English, whether it has been finally
decided, or not, that they are to take the regular classical course.
Some boys learn, without much trouble, enough of Latin inflections to
enable them soon to translate short sentences from the mother-tongue
into Latin, and _vice versa_.

  The present plan in Germany is to have boys in the gymnasia begin the
  study of Latin at the age of ten. The study is continued for a period
  of nine years. Greek is begun three years later and continued for
  six years. In the United States the prevailing plan is to postpone
  the study of Latin until the pupil enters the high school at the age
  of fourteen or fifteen. Good private schools and many city grammar
  schools permit children to begin when some two years younger than
  this. The Report on College Entrance Requirements made before the
  National Educational Association in 1899 suggested the propriety
  of extending the influence of the high school over the two highest
  grades of the grammar school, making in effect a six-year high school
  course. For students who expect to enter college or technical schools
  this plan offers great advantages, since it permits the desirable
  preparation to be distributed over six years instead of being
  concentrated into four.

278. This experiment will not, however, be long continued; since, with
the large majority of pupils, the difficulties accumulate so rapidly as
to lead unavoidably to the admission that the burden cannot be assumed
merely for the sake of incidental advantages. Moreover, the customary
view, handed down from the time of the Reformation, of the relation of
the classical languages to the sciences, and to the needs of the age,
is undergoing a change more and more apparent from decade to decade.
The labor implied in the study of the ancient languages now pays only
where talent combines with the earnest purpose to achieve the most
complete scholarship.

  This remark is prophetic of the enormous increase of instruction
  in the sciences since Herbart’s day, yet Latin has also enjoyed a
  phenomenal increase in popularity in American schools. According to
  the Report of the National Commissioner of Education the increase of
  enrollment in high schools for the years between 1890 and 1898 was
  84 per cent, while the increase in the number of students pursuing
  Latin was 174 per cent.[37] This surprising growth in the number
  pursuing an ancient language can hardly be accounted for by increased
  stringency in college entrance requirements in Latin, but must rather
  be ascribed to a growing conviction among the people that the study
  is indispensable in secondary education. That this must be the case
  is seen by the attendant circumstances. In the first place, Latin has
  become an elective in nearly all high schools; in the next place,
  many rich equivalents are offered, both in science and in modern
  languages; and finally our system of universal elementary education
  has sent large classes of persons into the secondary schools that
  have never previously been there. Yet the number of students electing
  this study grows by leaps and bounds.

    =Note.=--(1) The assertion is often heard that the ancient
    languages supply a permanent standard by which to judge of the
    progress and the decay of modern languages; also that the ancient
    classics must be regarded as furnishing the models for purity and
    beauty in style. These and similar contentions are undeniably
    correct, and carry the greatest weight, but they are unpedagogical.
    They embody the absolute requirement, but not that which younger
    pupils need for _their_ culture; and the large majority of those
    who are fitting themselves for official positions cannot afford to
    make themselves guardians of language and style. They must take
    language as it is, and acquire the manner of expression which is
    adapted to the world of affairs. Those higher cares belong to
    authors, but no one is educated for authorship.

    (2) It is a familiar notion that the difficulty would diminish if
    the ancient languages were begun later, that then the ability to
    learn would prove greater. On the contrary, the older the pupil the
    stronger the tendency of his thought-mass toward exclusion. Memory
    work must be introduced early, especially where its usefulness
    depends wholly on the acquisition of facility. It is essential to
    begin early in order to make it possible to proceed slowly and to
    avoid unpedagogical pressure. Four hours a week of Latin do not
    hurt a healthy, bright boy, provided his other tasks are arranged
    with pedagogical correctness. To put modern languages first would
    be to put the cart before the horse. Useful enough, however, are
    single French and English expressions relating to everyday life.
    They will be of service in acquiring the pronunciation; but a few
    phrases do not constitute the teaching of a language.

[37] Bennett and Bristol, “The Teaching of Latin and Greek,” Longmans,
Green & Co., New York, 1900.

279. The manner of teaching the ancient languages, where they are
regarded as a matter of necessity or conventionality, no account being
taken of pedagogical considerations, need not be discussed here. It
must rather be admitted at once that no pedagogical means whatever
exist, whereby those who live with their interests strictly confined
to the present could be brought to acquire, with genuine sympathy, the
content of the works of antiquity.

  American teachers in estimating the value of Latin for the high
  school student lay more stress upon training in the mastery of the
  mother-tongue than upon the literary contents of the classical
  writings. Professor Bennett in his treatment of “The Teaching of
  Latin in the Secondary School,”[38] places in strong light the
  splendid linguistic training a youth undergoes when taught by a good
  teacher of this subject. In Germany, since Herbart’s time, Professor
  Russell tells us that the teaching of Latin has fluctuated between
  two aims--“between that view which makes the classics a purely formal
  discipline, and that other view which bases the worth of such a
  study on the acquisition of humanistic culture, in contact with ‘the
  best thoughts of the best men of antiquity.’ In the one case it is
  considered of equal value as a means of preparation for all trades
  and professions dependent on intellectual acumen; in the other case
  it is of worth only for those who can practically apply the technical
  knowledge thereby acquired, or may have sufficient leisure to enjoy
  its æsthetic qualities. It is a question of making the ancient
  literature a means to an end or an end in itself.”[39]

  The dogma of formal discipline as a leading aim in education has
  nowhere been more discredited than among Herbartian writers. A
  judicious estimate of its truth and error is made by Professor
  Hinsdale.[40] His main conclusions are as follows:--

  1. The degree to which power generated by education is general
  depends upon the extent to which it energizes the mind, and
  particularly the extent to which it overflows into congruent channels.

  2. Such power is far more special than general; it is only in a
  limited sense that we can be said to have a store of mobilized mental
  power.

  3. No one kind of mental exercise--no few kinds--can develop the
  whole mind.

  4. No study, no single group of studies, contains within itself the
  possibilities of a whole education.

  On the other hand, American students rarely study classics long
  enough to acquire much facility in mastering the literary contents of
  the ancient writers. If, to considerable extent, the idea of formal
  discipline is a delusive one, and the idea of a broad, humanistic
  culture is an illusion of the American schoolmaster, we must justify
  the study of Latin upon other grounds. The linguistic advantages
  arising from it are obvious and decided. Among these stands first the
  mastery of the mother-tongue, first through the comparative study
  rendered necessary by translation, then by study of the roots of a
  large part of the English vocabulary, and more remotely by the light
  thrown by Latin upon history and institutional life.

  There is an advantage in Latin of great, though usually unmentioned,
  importance, and that is its peculiar usefulness as an educational
  instrument, in that it presents to the pupil a graduated scale of
  surmountable difficulties. In this respect it is surpassed only by
  mathematics. The difference between a good and a poor educational
  instrument lies in this: a study offering few surmountable obstacles
  is a poor educational instrument, for the pupil can find no fulcrum
  upon which to use his mental powers. Thus he may stare at a natural
  object when directed to observe its characteristics, but he finds
  it hard to think when no thought problem is presented to him. But a
  study that involves thought problems of a definite and solvable kind
  is a good educational instrument, for the pupil finds something to
  move and a fulcrum upon which he may exert his power. Translation
  from an ancient language exercises the working powers of a student up
  to their highest efficiency, for the translation of ten sentences may
  easily provide the hardest kind of work for an hour; if ten lines do
  not, then more lines will. When a foreign language ceases to offer
  such surmountable difficulties, we leave it for something else that
  does offer them.

[38] Bennett and Bristol, “The Teaching of Latin and Greek,” pp. 11–32,
Longmans, Green & Co., New York, 1900.

[39] Russell, “German Higher Schools,” Longmans, Green & Co., New York,
1899.

[40] Hinsdale, “Studies in Education,” pp. 46–61, Werner School Book
Co., Chicago, 1896.

280. Pedagogically considered, every difference in the degree of vivid
realization of antiquity, in the degree of its correlation with
other main departments of knowledge, and in the extent to which a
disagreeable aftertaste of school-day drudgery is prevented, determines
the greater or smaller value to be ascribed to the knowledge acquired.
If the same realization could be secured without the ancient languages
and without the potency of early impressions, then the studies
mentioned in preceding chapters, which outline the work of burgher
schools, would leave nothing further to be desired; and the study of
the ancient languages in gymnasia would be a necessary evil, highly as
their incidental advantages are usually extolled.

281. But languages alone give to a boy a picture neither of bygone
ages nor of men of the past; to him they are solely troublesome tasks
imposed by the teacher. Nor can golden maxims, fables, and short
narratives change his attitude. For even if these are well suited to
the youthful mind, they do not materially offset the aversion to the
work on stems, which have to be memorized; inflections, which must be
practised; and conjunctions, which are required for guidance in the
study of periods.

Ancient history (243, 246) is the only possible groundwork for the
pedagogical treatment of the ancient languages.

282. Now it is true that if Latin is begun first, Eutropius and
Cornelius Nepos suggest themselves as suitable authors for study, as
soon as the merest rudiments of Latin have been learned in connection
with instruction in the mother-tongue (277). And their use is not to
be entirely condemned, provided the teacher takes it upon himself to
make the past present through narration. But, as is well known, these
authors are after all very meagre, and, besides, where to look for a
path beyond them still remains an open question.

283. The reasons which accord to Homer’s “Odyssey” the preference
for early use are familiar.[41] They are patent to every one who
attentively reads the “Odyssey” with constant reference to the various
main classes of interest which teaching is to awaken (83–94). But the
question involved is not merely one of immediate effect, but also of
finding points of departure for the later stages of instruction. There
can be no better preparation for ancient history than to establish an
interest in ancient Greece by means of the Homeric story. At the same
time, the soil is being made ready for the cultivation of taste, and
for language study.

To reasons of this kind, derived directly from the chief aim of all
teaching and opposed only by tradition (the conventional _doing_ of
the classics), the philologists will have to listen some time, if they
are not willing that, with the growing importance of history and of
the natural sciences, and with the increasing pressure of material
interests, the study of Greek in schools should be pushed into a corner
and suffer a reduction similar to that which has already taken place
in the case of Hebrew. (A few decades ago Greek came very near being
remitted for all but those intending to study theology.)

Of course, the “Odyssey” possesses no miraculous power to inspire
those who have no talent whatever for language studies or do not take
them seriously; nevertheless, as many years of experience have shown,
it surpasses every other work of antiquity that might be selected in
definite pedagogical effect. Moreover, its study does not preclude
an early commencement of Latin (nor even of Greek, where that seems
necessary); only Latin cannot be pushed with the customary rapidity
at the same time; for the “Odyssey” requires an hour daily, and
grammatical and lexicological work besides.

Experience has proved that the grammatical rudiments pertaining to
declension and conjugation must be worked over very carefully first,
although reduced to what is absolutely essential. Besides, the first
lessons in the “Odyssey” ought not to exceed a few lines each time;
and, during the first months, no accurate memorizing of words is to
be demanded. But farther on the acquisition of a vocabulary must be
vigorously insisted on; in fact, it becomes the pupil’s most necessary
collateral work. By continued effort in this direction a considerable
portion of the whole stock of words is gradually acquired; the language
forms are supplied with the content to which they refer, and through
which they become significant. The teacher must know exactly, not only
when to hasten on, but also when to delay; for every perceptible gain
in facility is likely to betray pupils into some carelessness which
needs to be corrected at once. With good pupils it is not infeasible
to read the whole of the “Odyssey,” since facility increases very
rapidly toward the end. Nevertheless, such work should not extend much
beyond two years; otherwise weariness sets in, or time is taken from
other things. In schools it will be well to assign the first four books
to one class, perhaps the class composed of pupils nine or ten years
old, the next class to begin with Book V. To determine exactly how
many books each class can work up thoroughly is unnecessary, as good
translations can be used to fill in the gaps that occur. The reason
for the division just made will be manifest at once upon a closer
inspection of the “Odyssey.” Some books more advanced pupils may later
on read by themselves, but they should be expected to render an account
of what they are doing. It is not necessary at this stage to explain in
detail the rarer peculiarities of the Homeric dialect. Such things may
well be deferred until, later in the course, the study of Homer (of
the “Iliad”) is resumed. The teacher who is afraid of the difficulties
connected with the plan presented should remind himself of the fact
that progress by any other path is equally beset with difficulties.
While at work on Homer, care should be taken to keep pupils from being
influenced simultaneously by such tales as those from the Arabian
Nights, because they blunt the sense of the wonderful.

[41] These reasons apply in no way to the “Iliad,” but only to
the “Odyssey.” Moreover, it is presupposed that religious feeling
has been sufficiently awakened long beforehand. In that case the
mythical elements can do no harm whatever, for, in so far as they
are inconsistent with religious feeling, their effect is decidedly
repellent, and renders an excess of illusion impossible.

284. Only two poets, two historians, and two philosophers need to be
mentioned to indicate the continuation of the course. Homer and Virgil;
Herodotus and Cæsar; Plato and Cicero. What authors should precede
these, or should intervene, or follow, may be left for circumstances
to determine. Xenophon, Livy, Euripides, Sophocles, and Horace will
probably always retain a place by the side of those mentioned; Horace
especially offers brief maxims, the after-effect of which the educator
should by no means underestimate. It is obvious that Virgil and
Herodotus are rendered much easier by taking up Homer first; on the
other hand, the return to Homer (to the “Iliad”) during adolescence, is
as little to be omitted, if only on account of mythology, as the return
to ancient history for purposes of pragmatic study (250). Again, the
syntactical scheme of the ancient languages, which involves far greater
difficulties than do even inflections and vocabulary, is more easily
mastered by placing the poets before the prose-writers, because then
the pupils are not compelled to struggle with all the difficulties of
sentence structure at once. At any rate, it is desirable that, just
as the student’s Greek vocabulary is built up from the “Odyssey,” his
hoard of Latin words should be drawn from the “Æneid.” The latter,
however, will hardly be read entirely, because it cannot be gone over
with nearly the same rapidity as the latter books of the “Odyssey,”
when facility in reading has been attained. Cæsar’s “Bellum Gallicum”
must be studied with exceptional carefulness, since its style comes
nearer to being a desirable first model for the student of Latin
than the style of the other authors in use. After this has been
accomplished, the strictly systematic teaching and memorizing of Latin
syntax, together with selected brief examples, is in order as one of
the main lines of work. In Plato several books of the “Republic,”
especially the first, second, fourth, and eighth, constitute a
desirable goal. That Cicero should be revealed to young minds on his
brilliant side first, namely, as orator, need scarcely be mentioned.
Later on his philosophical writings become important; but many passages
require a fuller development of the subject-matter than is given by him.

Cicero should frequently be read aloud, or rather declaimed, by the
teacher. An orator demands the living voice; the usual monotonous
reading by the pupils fails to do justice to him. As regards Tacitus
for school use, there is a difference of opinion. Generally speaking,
authors that say much in few words are particularly welcome, not
merely to the explaining teacher, but also to the responsive pupil.
The opposite is true of Cicero; he must be read rapidly in order to be
appreciated.

  For a full discussion of Latin texts to be read, the reader is
  referred to Professor Bennett’s chapters on “The Teaching of Latin
  in the Secondary Schools,”[42] pp. 111–130. For a discussion of the
  Greek texts, see Professor Bristol’s exposition in the same volume.

[42] Bennett and Bristol, “The Teaching of Latin and Greek,” Longmans,
Green & Co., New York, 1900.

285. Experience has long since shown how much or how little can be done
with students in Greek and Latin composition; and no method will ever
be devised which would induce earlier than at present that degree of
mental maturity which reveals itself in a good Latin style. So long as
gymnasium pupils are no more select than they now are, the majority,
so far as writing Latin is concerned, will begin something that will
never lead to successful performance. It would be better, instead, to
practise diligently that which can be achieved, namely, composition
during the recitation hour, with the assistance of the teacher, and,
afterward coöperative consideration of the appointed task, by the
pupils. This plan secures the advantage of set essays without the
disadvantage of innumerable mistakes, the correction of which the pupil
rarely remembers. Joint labor is interesting, and can be adapted to
every age. As a substitute for essays, abstracts in Latin of texts
previously interpreted are to be recommended, these abstracts to be
made at first with the help and afterward without the help of the book
in question. To abstract does not mean to imitate, and ought not to
mean that. To imitate Cicero requires Cicero’s talent, and unless this
exists, the attempt to imitate, it is to be feared, will result in
cold artificiality. Even Cæsar is not so simple that his style could
be taught and learned. But many passages of Cæsar may be memorized; at
first short sentences, then longer periods, finally whole chapters. The
usefulness of this practice is attested by experience.




