
[Transcriber’s Notes:

This e-text contains a translation of Herbart’s “Umriss pädagogischer
Vorlesungen”, the main text of which is divided into numbered
paragraphs. The numbers in the Index are references to these
paragraphs. De Garmo’s annotations are indented in this e-text by two
spaces. Herbart’s own annotations have the run-in heading “Note” and
are indented by four spaces.

Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and small-capped text by =equal
signs=.]




  OUTLINES OF EDUCATIONAL DOCTRINE


  [Illustration: Publisher’s logo]




  OUTLINES OF EDUCATIONAL DOCTRINE


  BY

  JOHN FREDERICK HERBART


  _TRANSLATED BY_

  ALEXIS F. LANGE, =Ph.D.=
  =Associate Professor of English and Scandinavian Philology, and
  Dean of the Faculty of the College of Letters,
  University of California=


  _ANNOTATED BY_

  CHARLES DE GARMO, =Ph.D.=
  =Professor of the Science and Art of Education,
  Cornell University=


  New York
  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., =Ltd.=
  1904

  _All rights reserved_


  =Copyright=, 1901,
  =By= THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

  Set up and electrotyped. Published February, 1901. Reprinted
  June, 1904.


  Norwood Press
  J. S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
  Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




PREFACE


The reasons for translating and annotating Herbart’s “Outlines” are,
first, to present to the English-speaking public Herbart’s latest, and
also his most complete, work on education; and, second, to note to some
extent at least the advances made in educational thought since Herbart
laid down his pen.

Herbart’s educational writings are distinguished by two marked
characteristics: 1, their helpfulness in actual teaching; and 2, their
systematic completeness. The thoughtful reader can see the bearing
of each part upon all the others; the purposes of education are so
completely correlated with the means, that, whether the topic under
discussion be apperception or interest or methods of teaching or school
government or moral training or the presentation of a particular study,
the reader is never at a loss to see the relation of this part to the
whole.

The eminent practicability of Herbart’s thought depends upon his
psychological point of view, which is always that of concrete
experience. The moment one tries to apply rational psychology to actual
teaching, one begins to rise into the clouds, to become vague or,
at least, general. The reason for this is that rational psychology
deals with unchangeable presuppositions of mind. We may conform our
work to these standards, but we cannot modify them, any more than we
can a law of nature. But when we have to deal with an apperceiving
content, we feel at home, for over this we have some control. We can
build up moral maxims, we can establish permanent interests, we can
reveal the unfolding of whole developments of thought and effort, we
can fix the time order of studies and parts of studies; in short, we
can apply our pedagogical insight with some degree of success to actual
school problems. Though empirical psychology has in the last fifty
years had as rapid a development as any other department of science,
it has never departed essentially from the direction fixed by Herbart.
New methods have indeed been applied, but the leading motive has
remained empirical; it has had small tendency to drift toward rational
psychology. This fact makes Herbart’s educational thought, so far as
psychological bearing is concerned, seem as fresh and modern as when it
was first recorded.

In one important respect, however, Herbart’s system needs modernizing.
It is in relating education to conditions of society as it now exists.
German society has never been that of English-speaking countries; much
less does German society of the early part of the nineteenth century
correspond to Anglo-Saxon society at the beginning of the twentieth.
Indeed, even had there been correspondence before, there would be
divergence now. It is one of the main purposes of the annotation,
therefore, to point out the social implications of various parts of the
“Outlines.”

The annotation has made no attempt to improve Herbart’s prophetic
vision concerning many important matters, or to elucidate self-evident
propositions, or to supplement observations already complete, true, and
apt.

Especial attention is called to the exactness and illuminating
character of Herbart’s diagnosis of mental weaknesses and disorders
in children, together with his suggestions as to proper treatment.
Students of child-study, moreover, will find in this work not only
encouragement in their work, but also assistance in determining what is
worth studying in the child. The reader is constantly reminded of the
fact that, when written by a master, no book is newer than an old one.

  =Cornell University=,
      January, 1901.




CONTENTS


                                                                  PAGE
  =Introduction=                                                     1


  PART I
  _THE DOUBLE BASIS OF PEDAGOGICS_

  CHAPTER
     I. The Ethical Basis                                            7
    II. The Psychological Basis                                     15


  PART II
  _OUTLINES OF GENERAL PEDAGOGICS_

  SECTION I. GOVERNMENT OF CHILDREN
     I. Theoretical Aspects                                         30
    II. Practical Aspects                                           33

  SECTION II. INSTRUCTION
     I. The Relation of Instruction to Government and Training      39
    II. The Aim of Instruction                                      44
   III. The Conditions of Many-sidedness                            51
    IV. The Conditions Determining Interest                         60
     V. The Main Kinds of Interest                                  76
    VI. The Material of Instruction from Different Points of View   93
   VII. The Process of Instruction                                 105
  VIII. Remarks on the Plan of Instruction as a Whole              134

  SECTION III. TRAINING
     I. The Relation of Training to Government and to Instruction  140
    II. The Aim of Training                                        143
   III. Differentiation of Character                               146
    IV. Differentiation of Morality                                151
     V. Helps in Training                                          154
    VI. General Method of Training                                 160

  SECTION IV. SYNOPSIS OF GENERAL PEDAGOGICS FROM THE POINT
  OF VIEW OF AGE
     I. The First Three Years                                      198
    II. The Ages from Four to Eight                                201
   III. Boyhood                                                    209
    IV. Youth                                                      216


  PART III
  _SPECIAL APPLICATIONS OF PEDAGOGICS_

  SECTION I. REMARKS ON THE TEACHINGS OF PARTICULAR BRANCHES
  OF STUDY
     I. Religion                                                   219
    II. History                                                    223
   III. Mathematics and Nature Study                               241
    IV. Geography                                                  263
     V. The Mother-tongue                                          269
    VI. Greek and Latin                                            275
   VII. Further Specification of Didactics                         289

  SECTION II. THE FAULTS OF PUPILS AND THEIR TREATMENT
     I. General Differentiation                                    292
    II. The Sources of Moral Weakness                              301
   III. The Effects of Training                                    308
    IV. Special Faults                                             312

  SECTION III. REMARKS ON THE ORGANIZATION OF EDUCATION
     I. Home Education                                             317
    II. Concerning Schools                                         321




OUTLINES OF EDUCATIONAL DOCTRINE




INTRODUCTION


1. The plasticity, or educability, of the pupil is the fundamental
postulate of pedagogics.

The concept plasticity, or capacity for being moulded, extends far
beyond the confines of pedagogics. It takes in even the primary
components of matter. It has been traced as far as the elementary
substances entering into the chemical changes of organic bodies. Signs
of plasticity of will are found in the souls of the higher animals.
Only man, however, exhibits plasticity of will in the direction of
moral conduct.

  Had not the youthful mind the capacity to receive culture, education
  would be impossible. This educability of the young has rarely if
  ever been questioned in actual practice. Much philosophical strife,
  however, has raged about the various conceptions of =WILL=, and
  the consequent possibility of teaching virtue, or of training
  the moral character. The extremes have been _fatalism_, or the
  determination of conduct by means of forces lying entirely outside
  the power of the individual; and _absolute caprice of will_, or the
  determination of conduct entirely by the individual himself without
  regard to outside influences. The doctrine of fatalism makes moral
  education mechanical; that of volitional caprice makes it futile.
  Educational theory must therefore assume a middle ground, in which
  the self-activity of the individual and the moulding influence of
  education are both recognized.

2. Pedagogics as a science is based on ethics and psychology. The
former points out the goal of education; the latter the way, the means,
and the obstacles.

This relationship involves the dependence of pedagogics on experience,
inasmuch as ethics includes application to experience, while psychology
has its starting-point, not in metaphysics alone, but in experience
correctly interpreted by metaphysics. But an exclusively empirical
knowledge of man will not suffice for pedagogics. It is the less
adequate in any age the greater the instability of morals, customs, and
opinions; for, as the new gains on the old, generalizations from former
observations cease to hold true.

  In order to accept the statement that ethics points out the goal of
  education, we must conceive of ethics in a broad way. At some periods
  in the history of the world, the development of purely individual, or
  subjective, character would have been thought a worthy and adequate
  conception of the final purpose of education. Other-worldliness was
  the ruling ideal. At present, however, we regard that man as most
  fit for the world to come who best performs all his functions in the
  world that now is. Ethics must therefore be conceived to embrace an
  estimation of the value of a man’s conduct in every department of
  life. Not only must it estimate the worth of pious feeling, but it
  must embrace a consideration of every action in its relation to the
  actor’s social, economic, and political environment. A man having
  a praiseworthy character must be a good citizen of state, nation,
  and community; he must be public-spirited, law-abiding, given to
  honest dealing. Every child should be trained to be a useful member
  of civilization as it now exists. Piety alone is insufficient; it
  must be accompanied by honesty, industry, patriotism, public spirit.
  Non-social, or purely individualistic, conceptions of character as
  the goal of education must give way to those social ideals through
  which alone the highest welfare of both individual and community
  are to be conserved. Without such conceptions an industrial state,
  such as now exists, becomes a human jungle in which men enter upon
  a fiercer struggle than do the beasts of the real jungle. Social
  coöperation is essential when we wish to transform a struggle of
  mutual destruction into one of mutual helpfulness.

3. Philosophical systems, involving either fatalism or its opposite,
pure caprice of will, are logically shut out from pedagogics, because
the notion of plasticity, implying as it does a transition from the
indeterminate to the determinate, cannot by such systems be brought in
without inconsistency.

  Common sense overcomes the logical difficulties of even the worst
  systems. Herbart’s remark has, therefore, no practical significance.
  The philosophy of Spinoza might easily be described by an opponent
  as “fatalistic,” since it leaves no room for special providences in
  the physical universe; yet Professor Paulsen, who holds substantially
  to Spinoza’s view, is one of the most eminent promoters of the
  theory of education in the university of Berlin. Herbart thought
  Kant’s doctrine of transcendental will one of absolute volitional
  caprice, yet the followers of Kant have been among the most energetic
  promoters of mental and moral training. Herbart thinks he sees in
  this remark a chance to put his philosophical opponents out of court,
  to the benefit of his own system. If one philosopher develops a
  system of “fatalism” and another one of “absolute free will,” the one
  may be charged with making education impossible and the other with
  making it futile. In either case, since we know that education is
  neither impossible nor futile, the presumption is that both systems
  are defective. This paragraph and others like it are mere indirect
  methods of defending Herbart’s system of philosophy: they have no
  real significance for the theory of education itself.

4. On the other hand, the assumption of unlimited plasticity is
equally inadmissible; it is for psychology to guard against this
error. The educability of the child is, to begin with, limited by his
individuality. Then, too, the possibility of determining and moulding
him at will through education is lessened by time and circumstances.
Lastly, the established character of the adult develops by an inner
process which in time passes beyond the reach of the educator.

5. Education seems thus to find a barrier, first, in the order of
nature, and later in the pupil’s own will. The difficulty is indeed
a real one, if the limitations of education are overlooked: hence
an apparent confirmation of fatalism as well as of the doctrine of
absolute free will.

  Modern scientific evolutionary study of anthropology and history
  tends to confirm the hasty thinker in the idea that the circumstances
  of the environment completely determine the character and destiny
  of men, since their debt to the moulding influences of society and
  physical surroundings becomes more and more apparent; yet however
  powerful the environment may prove to be in fixing the direction of
  mental growth in the race, it cannot rightly be conceived as creating
  the growing forces. All the sunshine and warmth in the world will
  not cause a pebble to sprout; so no external influences whatever
  can develop mind where there is none to develop. The exigencies
  of Herbart’s metaphysics drove him into a crusade against Kant’s
  doctrine of innate freedom, or transcendental will; all the freedom
  that Herbart would admit was that psychological freedom which is
  acquired through instruction and training. The quarrel belongs to
  eighteenth-century metaphysics, not to modern psychology, nor to
  education; for however potentially free an infant may be, nobody
  thinks of making it responsible, except so far as growing experience
  gives it insight and volitional strength.

    =Note.=--Many thinkers fluctuate constantly between these two
    erroneous extremes. When looking historically at mankind as
    a whole, they arrive at fatalism, as does Gumplowicz in his
    “Outlines of Sociology.” Teacher and pupil alike seem to them to
    be in the current of a mighty stream, not swimming,--that is,
    self-active,--which would be the correct view, but carried along
    without wills of their own. They arrive, on the other hand, at the
    idea of a perfectly free will, when they contemplate the individual
    and see him resist external influences, the aims of the teacher
    very often included. Here they fail to comprehend the nature of
    will, and sacrifice the concept of natural law for that of will.
    Young teachers can hardly avoid sharing this uncertainty, favored
    as it is by the philosophies of the day; much is gained, however,
    when they are able to observe fluctuations of their own views
    without falling into either extreme.

6. The power of education must be neither over- nor under-estimated.
The educator should, indeed, try to see how much may be done; but
he must always expect that the outcome will warn him to confine his
attempts within reasonable bounds. In order not to neglect anything
essential, he needs to keep in view the practical bearings of the
whole theory of ideas; in order to understand and interpret correctly
the data furnished by observation of the child, the teacher must make
constant use of psychology.

7. In scientific study concepts are separated which in practice must
always be kept united. The work of education is continuous. With an
eye to every consideration at once, the educator must always endeavor
to connect what is to come with what has gone before. Hence a mode of
treatment which, following the several periods of school life, simply
enumerates the things to be done in sequence, is inadequate in a work
on pedagogics. In an appendix this method will serve to facilitate
a bird’s-eye view; the discussion of general principles, arranged
according to fundamental ideas, must needs precede. But our very first
task will necessarily consist in dealing, at least briefly, with the
ethical and the psychological basis of pedagogics.




PART I

_THE DOUBLE BASIS OF PEDAGOGICS_




CHAPTER I

=The Ethical Basis=


8. The term _virtue_ expresses the whole purpose of education. Virtue
is the idea of inner freedom which has developed into an abiding
actuality in an individual. Whence, as inner freedom is a relation
between insight and volition, a double task is at once set before the
teacher. It becomes his business to make actual each of these factors
separately, in order that later a permanent relationship may result.

  Insight is conceived as the perception of what is right or wrong.
  This perception is founded on the spontaneous, or intuitive, feeling
  that arises in the mind when certain elementary will-relations are
  presented to the intelligence. The unperverted mind has a natural
  antipathy to strife, malevolence, injustice, selfishness; it has a
  corresponding approval of harmony, good-will, justice, benevolence.
  These feelings arise, naturally, only when the appropriate ideas are
  present. Insight, therefore, is a state of feeling or disposition
  arising from knowledge, or ideas.

  When volition has come into permanent accord with educated insight,
  virtue has been attained. Conscience approves every virtuous
  act; it disapproves every deviation from virtue. Inner freedom,
  therefore, is marked by approving conscience; lack of it, by accusing
  conscience. The development of virtuous character is not so easy,
  however, as might appear from these simple statements, for virtue
  has a shifting, not to say a developing character. Elementary as the
  fundamental ethical ideas may be when presented in the home or in
  the kindergarten, they are not elementary when met with in modern
  civilization. At times virtue has been of a military character, as
  in Sparta and Rome; at other times it has been ecclesiastical, as in
  the Middle Ages. At the present time, in addition to all that it has
  ever been from a purely Christian character, it is civil, social,
  industrial. Virtue in a modern city has a content quite different
  from that in a pioneer mining camp. Furthermore, virtue is uneven in
  its development. The race has, for instance, been trained long and
  hard to respect unprotected property, so that we may fairly say such
  respect has become instinctive; yet when unprotected property comes
  into new relations to the individual, as in the case of borrowed
  books, we may find only a rudimentary conscience. What scholar is not
  a sufferer from this form of unripe virtue?

9. But even here at the outset we need to bear in mind the identity of
morality with the effort put forth to realize the permanent actuality
of the harmony between insight and volition. To induce the pupil to
make this effort is a difficult achievement; at all events, it becomes
possible only when the twofold training mentioned above is well
under way. It is easy enough, by a study of the example of others,
to cultivate theoretical acumen; the moral application to the pupil
himself, however, can be made, with hope of success, only in so far as
his inclinations and habits have taken a direction in keeping with his
insight. If such is not the case, there is danger lest the pupil, after
all, knowingly subordinate his correct theoretical judgment to mere
prudence. It is thus that evil in the strict sense originates.

  It is helpful to give the pupil abundant opportunity to pass judgment
  upon the moral quality of actions not his own. The best opportunities
  are at first the most impersonal ones, for where the child himself is
  immediately concerned, the quality of his judgment may be impaired
  by intense personal feelings, such as fear of blame or punishment.
  Literature furnishes the earliest and most copious examples; later,
  history may be helpful, though there is great danger of taking
  partial or mistaken views as to the moral quality of historical
  deeds. A selection of literature is an artistic whole. All the
  relations can be easily perceived, but any given historical event is
  likely to be a small section of a whole too vast for the youthful
  mind to comprehend. It is for this reason that caution is needed when
  passing judgment upon historical facts.

  To encourage the child to pass judgment in these impersonal cases
  is to sharpen his natural perceptions of right and wrong, and
  to influence his disposition favorably. One who has been led
  to condemn cruelty to animals in this way is likely to be more
  thoughtful himself, and less disposed wantonly to inflict pain. But
  every resource of authority and persuasion, as well as appeal to
  sensibility and conscience, must be employed to make virtuous action
  habitual, and to prevent the generation of evil.

10. Of the remaining practical or ethical concepts, the idea of
perfection points to health of body and mind; it implies a high regard
for both, and their systematic cultivation.

  Perfection here means _completeness of efficiency_, rather than
  acquisition of holiness. An efficient will is strong, vigorous,
  decided; it is self-consistent in the pursuit of leading purposes,
  not vacillating or incoherent. Still, the idea of moral perfection is
  not a remote one, for, in order to be thoroughly efficient, a will
  must be in substantial accord with the ethical order of a rational
  society. All its deviations from established law and custom will be
  for their improvement, not for the destruction of what is good in
  them.

11. The idea of good-will counsels the educator to ward off temptation
to ill-will as long as such temptation might prove dangerous. It is
essential, on the other hand, to imbue the pupil with a feeling of
respect for good-will.

  Good-will is one of the three concrete virtues lying at the basis of
  social order. It is both _passive_, as in _laissez faire_ attitudes
  of mind, and _active_ as in thoroughgoing civic, business, and social
  coöperation. School training must seek to impress the mind with
  respect for the active rather than the passive type of good-will.
  So, too, must it ward off the dangers both of passive and active
  ill-will, as manifested, in covetousness, malice, malevolence, envy,
  treachery, stinginess, cruelty, hard-heartedness. How these ends may
  be attained, will be considered later.

12. The idea of justice demands that the pupil abstain from
contention. It demands, furthermore, reflection on strife, so that
respect for justice may strike deep root.

  No idea appeals more strongly to the unperverted youthful mind than
  that of justice or fair play; even the gentlest natures become
  indignant at manifestations of injustice. The basis of the idea is,
  in the thought of our author, our natural displeasure in contention
  over that which, in the nature of the case, only one person can
  have. Primarily, it concerns property rights, but secondarily it may
  extend to other relations in which two or more wills are at issue.
  Justice in the acquisition, possession, and disposition of wealth is
  the theme of the greater part of every judicial system. The idea of
  justice is the second of the three concrete moral virtues necessary
  for civilized society.

13. The idea of equity is especially involved in cases where the pupil
has merited punishment as requital for the intentional infliction of
pain. Here the degree of punishment must be carefully ascertained and
acknowledged as just.

    =Note.=--This kind of punishment should not be confounded with
    educative punishment--so called, _i.e._, punishment through natural
    consequences.

  The third concrete moral idea is that of _equity_, or _requital_. It
  arises when existing will-relations are altered either for good or
  bad. The natural demand is that the requital shall be adequate to the
  deed. Lack of requital for good deeds we call ingratitude, one of the
  most hateful of human failings. In savagery and barbarism private
  vengeance is the normal method of requiting injuries. Remnants of
  this system still exist in the duel, and in the fierce vendettas of
  some sparsely settled regions. Civilization demands that requital
  for evil deeds shall be remanded to the executors of established
  law. Only in this way is society saved from destructive broils. In
  this respect, as in so many others, the school is the miniature of
  the institutional world. The teacher is, to a considerable extent,
  lawgiver, judge, and executive. Not a small part of his moral
  influence upon his pupils depends upon the justice of his requitals
  for violated law. Good-will, justice or rights, and requital are the
  three fundamental concrete moral ideas upon which sound character,
  both individual and national, is based. The remaining two are that
  of inner freedom and that of efficiency. Though formal in character,
  _i.e._, devoid of positive content, they are equally important with
  the more concrete conceptions.

14. Where a number of pupils are assembled there arises, naturally,
on a small scale, a system of laws and rewards. This system, and the
demands which in the world at large spring from the same ideas, must be
brought into accord.

  The school is a miniature world, to be regulated by the same system
  of moral ideas as that which obtains in society. Compare 182, 310.

15. The concept of an administrative system has great significance for
pedagogics, since every pupil, whatever his rank or social status,
must be trained for coöperation in the social whole to fit him for
usefulness. This requirement may assume very many different forms.

16. Of the system of civilization only the aspect of general culture,
not that of special training, must be emphasized at this point.

    =Note.=--The principles of practical philosophy which have just
    been briefly indicated are at the same time the starting-points of
    ethical insight for the pupils. If the resolve to direct the will
    accordingly be added, and if the pupil obeys this resolve, such
    obedience constitutes morality. Quite distinct from this is the
    obedience yielded, be the motive fear or affection, to the person
    of the teacher, so long as that higher obedience is not securely
    established.

17. For the business of education, the idea of perfection, while it
does not rise into excessive prominence, stands out above all others
on account of its uninterrupted application. The teacher discovers in
the as yet undeveloped human being a force which requires his incessant
attention to intensify, to direct, and to concentrate.

    =Note.=--The maxim _perfice te_ is neither so universal as Wolff
    asserted, as though it were the sole fundamental principle
    of ethics, nor so objectionable as Kant represents it to be.
    Perfection, quantitatively regarded (_Vollkommenheit_--the state of
    having _come_ to _fulness_), is the first urgent task wherever man
    shows himself lower, smaller, weaker, more narrowly limited, than
    he might be. Growth, in every sense of the word, is the natural
    destiny of the child, and the primary condition of whatever else of
    worth may be expected of him in later life. The principle _perfice
    te_ was deprived of its true meaning by the attempt to define by
    it the whole of virtue--a blunder, since no single practical idea
    ever exhausts the contents of that term. Quite different is the
    import of the next remark, which applies solely to the practice of
    pedagogy.

18. The constant presence of the idea of perfection easily introduces
a false feature into moral education in the strict sense. The pupil
may get an erroneous impression as to the relative importance of the
lessons, practice, and performance demanded of him, and so be betrayed
into the belief that he is essentially perfect when these demands are
satisfied.

19. For this reason alone, if others were wanting, it is necessary to
combine moral education proper, which in everyday life lays stress
continually on correct self-determination, with religious training.
The notion that something really worthy has been achieved needs to be
tempered by humility. Conversely, religious education has need of the
moral also to forestall cant and hypocrisy, which are only too apt to
appear where morality has not already secured a firm foothold through
earnest self-questioning and self-criticism with a view to improvement.
Finally, inasmuch as moral training must be put off until after insight
and right habits have been acquired, religious education, too, should
not be begun too early; nor should it be needlessly delayed.

  It is well known what obstacles confront the American teacher who
  desires to give a religious basis to moral character. For a full
  discussion of the subject viewed from numerous standpoints, the
  reader is referred to “Principles of Religious Education,” Longmans,
  Green & Co., New York, 1900. This book is a series of lectures by
  prominent school men and others.




