CHAPTER V

=The Mother-tongue=


269. There would be less controversy about language teaching if
existing differences in conditions were given proper attention.

The most general distinction to make is that between understanding and
speaking. The distance between the two is a given factor at the time
when regular instruction begins. It is very great in some cases, and,
again, slight in others, according to individual aptitude and early
surroundings.

270. First of all, one’s language was acquired by hearing it spoken, by
receiving it from others, by imitation; it was refined or vulgar; it
was perceived accurately or indistinctly; it was imitated by organs,
good, bad, or indifferent. Little by little the imperfections of the
earliest stage are outgrown, where cultured persons set a daily example
and insist on correctness of speech. Sometimes, however, it takes years
to bring about such a result.

271. Another factor, and one deeply rooted in individual temperament,
is the stronger or weaker impulse toward expression through language.
This fact elevates the language of each one above mere imitation; its
improvement must start from the thoughts which it seeks to express.
Striking progress of this kind often occurs during adolescence.

  The differences noted in this and the two preceding sections are
  psychological, hence common to German and American children. The
  problem of teaching American children their mother-tongue, assumed to
  be English, is both harder and easier than to teach German to German
  children. It is easier in that English is mostly uninflected, hence
  unencumbered by nice distinctions in grammatical form. This same
  fact, on the other hand, causes didactic difficulties, since most
  teachers are at a loss as to what definite body of knowledge they
  should or can impart that will train the child into a mastery of good
  English speech. The last twenty years have seen a large number of
  experiments on the part of authors in the effort to present a body of
  information and exercises calculated to secure a good training in the
  mother-tongue. These efforts have met with but partial success, owing
  to the inherent difficulties of the subject. Many who can teach a
  foreign language, where there is a movable fulcrum of difficulties to
  be overcome, such as those found in inflection, or in the meaning of
  foreign words, fail when confronted by a language that is practically
  uninflected, and in which the words are easily understood.

  The old recourse was technical grammar. But this is an analytical
  study, calculated to lead to apprehension of subtle meanings, rather
  than to an instinct for correct form. Furthermore, the grammar cannot
  be successfully studied until after the habits of speech are fairly
  fixed. For these reasons, it bears much the same relation to living
  speech that formal logic does to real thinking. Grammar makes the
  mind keen to detect formal errors of speech, just as logic trains
  one to detect fallacies in reasoning.

  The first important instrument for securing good English in the
  early primary grades is narration by the teacher and repetition
  by the children. This means, potent enough to form the speech of
  any child whether from the slums or from the homes of those who
  know no English, is rarely utilized up to the full measure of its
  efficiency. Teachers are filled with the prepossession that they
  must enable their pupils to write good English, forgetting that if
  the mind is habituated to _think_ in good English first, the problem
  of writing it is well-nigh solved. The requisites for successful
  oral training in the mother-tongue are first, the selection of a
  body of interesting and appropriate literature, and second, skill in
  narration by the teacher. Given these two things, and we have the
  first in great abundance, and every child will be able in a year
  to give extended and correct speech within the range of his sphere
  of thought to an almost unlimited extent. His tenacious memory for
  forms frequently heard, together with his delight in repeating almost
  word for word stories told in his presence, will produce astonishing
  facility in correct speech. As much of this may be written as seems
  best, but it is probable that there would not be great loss if a
  child were not called upon to write a ‘composition’ before he is ten
  or twelve years old. Could we be sure he would go through the high
  school, formal writing might be postponed until he enters it. Not
  much is ever gained by attempts to produce fruit before its natural
  period for appearing.

  Upon the basis of this training in correct oral speech, the children
  may begin, when nine or ten years of age, to have systematic language
  lessons, which should be calculated to produce two results: first, a
  facile use of the pen in recording thought, special caution being
  given not to weary the mind and body too much by unduly extending
  the length of the written exercises; second, an inductive approach,
  through brief written exercises, toward the classifications and
  distinctions of technical grammar. To be of use, this latter
  requirement should be clearly understood. The method of approach
  is purely synthetic. It consists in devices to enable the pupil
  repeatedly to use a given construction, say a relative pronoun, until
  the name and construction seem natural from use alone.[35]

  At the age of thirteen or fourteen the analytical study of grammar
  should be begun. The essential thing here is that the pupil should
  connect _words_ with the _ideas_ they express, and _sentences_ with
  the _thoughts_ that give rise to them.[36] Seeing mental distinctions
  clearly, he has small difficulty in their written or oral expression.

[35] For extended illustration of this point, see the “Annotator’s
Language Lessons,” the Werner School Book Co., New York, Boston, and
Chicago.

[36] This position is best exemplified by Mr. George P. Brown in his
“Essentials of English Grammar,” the Werner School Book Co., New York,
Boston, and Chicago.

272. Now such facts might seem to point to the conclusion that no
special periods of instruction are needed for the mother-tongue, or
at least not for language lessons alone. On the one hand, it might be
urged that cultured teachers will improve the language of their pupils
by their mere example, and by the occasional corrections which will of
course be necessary; while, on the other hand, the gradual progress of
mental development will shape the means of expression from within, to
the natural limits of individual capacity. But before accepting the
view here given, we need to remind ourselves, in the first place, that
for a long time the educated teacher is only imperfectly understood by
the uneducated listener, and that instruction is very much impeded if
each unusual turn of expression necessitates an inquiry as to whether
its meaning is clear.

273. But this is not all. Language is also to be read and written.
Hence, it becomes a standing object for consideration, and, to one
whose knowledge of it is deficient, a source of embarrassment.
Accordingly, the first thing for the teacher to do is to show
analytically, on the basis of what has been read or written, how
the meaning would be lost or altered if either single words were
interchanged, or the inflectional endings (especially in German) were
incorrectly chosen. That the synthesis of sentences should follow next,
advancing step by step toward greater complexity, especially by means
of various conjunctions, may be assumed to be well understood.

274. Now if all experienced equal difficulty in their reading and
writing, the language lessons designed as a remedy would commend
themselves in all cases, and might fittingly be carried to the same
extent everywhere.

But here the widest divergence appears. Accordingly, where many are
being taught together, the teacher will seek to connect language work
with other subjects. Thus, in the course of the same recitation,
analytic instruction may be directed to the language side for some
pupils, while for others it may be given a far wider scope. Moreover,
the accompanying written exercises may have a corresponding diversity.

275. The work of a recitation period will be further diversified by the
introduction of exercises in reading aloud, and in oral reproduction.
But never will it be possible to raise all pupils to the same plane of
proficiency. Here, above all, the determining power of individuality
must be acknowledged.

276. For older boys and young men, the work in the mother-tongue will
consist partly in the study of excellent examples of the various kinds
of poetry and oratory, partly in the writing of essays. Such study
will prove the more profitable, the more perfect the models, the more
suitably they are adapted to the stage of culture already attained
by the student, and the more scrupulously the teacher refrains from
forcing upon him a literary taste not congenial to his nature. The
least promising of all written exercises are those in letter-writing.
Confidential letters every one can write, each in his own way. Best of
all are written exercises with a definite and rich store of thought
to draw from and admitting of various forms of treatment. Several may
then emulate each other in handling the same theme, and the process of
correcting will awaken greater interest in consequence.




