
                          THE EVERLASTING MAN




                                  THE
                            EVERLASTING MAN

                                  BY
                           G. K. CHESTERTON


                         HODDER AND STOUGHTON
                          LIMITED      LONDON


                   Made and Printed in Great Britain
             T. and A. CONSTABLE LTD., Printers, Edinburgh




PREFATORY NOTE


This book needs a preliminary note that its scope be not misunderstood.
The view suggested is historical rather than theological, and does not
deal directly with a religious change which has been the chief event of
my own life; and about which I am already writing a more purely
controversial volume. It is impossible, I hope, for any Catholic to
write any book on any subject, above all this subject, without showing
that he is a Catholic; but this study is not specially concerned with
the differences between a Catholic and a Protestant. Much of it is
devoted to many sorts of Pagans rather than any sort of Christians; and
its thesis is that those who say that Christ stands side by side with
similar myths, and his religion side by side with similar religions, are
only repeating a very stale formula contradicted by a very striking
fact. To suggest this I have not needed to go much beyond matters known
to us all; I make no claim to learning; and have to depend for some
things, as has rather become the fashion, on those who are more learned.
As I have more than once differed from Mr. H. G. Wells in his view of
history, it is the more right that I should here congratulate him on the
courage and constructive imagination which carried through his vast and
varied and intensely interesting work; but still more on having asserted
the reasonable right of the amateur to do what he can with the facts
which the specialists provide.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

INTRODUCTION: THE PLAN OF THIS BOOK                                    3


                               _PART I_

                      ON THE CREATURE CALLED MAN

CHAP.

   I. THE MAN IN THE CAVE                                             19

  II. PROFESSORS AND PREHISTORIC MEN                                  39

 III. THE ANTIQUITY OF CIVILISATION                                   58

  IV. GOD AND COMPARATIVE RELIGION                                    89

   V. MAN AND MYTHOLOGIES                                            111

  VI. THE DEMONS AND THE PHILOSOPHERS                                129

 VII. THE WAR OF THE GODS AND DEMONS                                 154

VIII. THE END OF THE WORLD                                           171


                               _PART II_

                       ON THE MAN CALLED CHRIST

CHAP.

  I. THE GOD IN THE CAVE                                             191

 II. THE RIDDLES OF THE GOSPEL                                       211

III. THE STRANGEST STORY IN THE WORLD                                227

 IV. THE WITNESS OF THE HERETICS                                     245

  V. THE ESCAPE FROM PAGANISM                                        267

 VI. THE FIVE DEATHS OF THE FAITH                                    288


CONCLUSION: THE SUMMARY OF THIS BOOK                                 302

APPENDIX I.: ON PREHISTORIC MAN                                      313

APPENDIX II.: ON AUTHORITY AND ACCURACY                              315





INTRODUCTION

THE PLAN OF THIS BOOK


There are two ways of getting home; and one of them is to stay there.
The other is to walk round the whole world till we come back to the same
place; and I tried to trace such a journey in a story I once wrote. It
is, however, a relief to turn from that topic to another story that I
never wrote. Like every book I never wrote, it is by far the best book I
have ever written. It is only too probable that I shall never write it,
so I will use it symbolically here; for it was a symbol of the same
truth. I conceived it as a romance of those vast valleys with sloping
sides, like those along which the ancient White Horses of Wessex are
scrawled along the flanks of the hills. It concerned some boy whose farm
or cottage stood on such a slope, and who went on his travels to find
something, such as the effigy and grave of some giant; and when he was
far enough from home he looked back and saw that his own farm and
kitchen-garden, shining flat on the hill-side like the colours and
quarterings of a shield, were but parts of some such gigantic figure, on
which he had always lived, but which was too large and too close to be
seen. That, I think, is a true picture of the progress of any real
independent intelligence to-day; and that is the point of this book.

The point of this book, in other words, is that the next best thing to
being really inside Christendom is to be really outside it. And a
particular point of it is that the popular critics of Christianity are
not really outside it. They are on a debatable ground, in every sense
of the term. They are doubtful in their very doubts. Their criticism has
taken on a curious tone; as of a random and illiterate heckling. Thus
they make current an anti-clerical cant as a sort of small-talk. They
will complain of parsons dressing like parsons; as if we should be any
more free if all the police who shadowed or collared us were
plain-clothes detectives. Or they will complain that a sermon cannot be
interrupted, and call a pulpit a coward’s castle; though they do not
call an editor’s office a coward’s castle. It would be unjust both to
journalists and priests; but it would be much truer of journalists. The
clergyman appears in person and could easily be kicked as he came out of
church; the journalist conceals even his name so that nobody can kick
him. They write wild and pointless articles and letters in the press
about why the churches are empty, without even going there to find out
if they are empty, or which of them are empty. Their suggestions are
more vapid and vacant than the most insipid curate in a three-act farce,
and move us to comfort him after the manner of the curate in the Bab
Ballads; ‘Your mind is not so blank as that of Hopley Porter.’ So we may
truly say to the very feeblest cleric: ‘Your mind is not so blank as
that of Indignant Layman or Plain Man or Man in the Street, or any of
your critics in the newspapers; for they have not the most shadowy
notion of what they want themselves, let alone of what you ought to give
them.’ They will suddenly turn round and revile the Church for not
having prevented the War, which they themselves did not want to prevent;
and which nobody had ever professed to be able to prevent, except some
of that very school of progressive and cosmopolitan sceptics who are the
chief enemies of the Church. It was the anti-clerical and agnostic world
that was always prophesying the advent of universal peace; it is that
world that was, or should have been, abashed and confounded by the
advent of universal war. As for the general view that the Church was
discredited by the War--they might as well say that the Ark was
discredited by the Flood. When the world goes wrong, it proves rather
that the Church is right. The Church is justified, not because her
children do not sin, but because they do. But that marks their mood
about the whole religious tradition: they are in a state of reaction
against it. It is well with the boy when he lives on his father’s land;
and well with him again when he is far enough from it to look back on it
and see it as a whole. But these people have got into an intermediate
state, have fallen into an intervening valley from which they can see
neither the heights beyond them nor the heights behind. They cannot get
out of the penumbra of Christian controversy. They cannot be Christians
and they cannot leave off being Anti-Christians. Their whole atmosphere
is the atmosphere of a reaction: sulks, perversity, petty criticism.
They still live in the shadow of the faith and have lost the light of
the faith.

Now the best relation to our spiritual home is to be near enough to love
it. But the next best is to be far enough away not to hate it. It is the
contention of these pages that while the best judge of Christianity is a
Christian, the next best judge would be something more like a Confucian.
The worst judge of all is the man now most ready with his judgments; the
ill-educated Christian turning gradually into the ill-tempered agnostic,
entangled in the end of a feud of which he never understood the
beginning, blighted with a sort of hereditary boredom with he knows not
what, and already weary of hearing what he has never heard. He does not
judge Christianity calmly as a Confucian would; he does not judge it as
he would judge Confucianism. He cannot by an effort of fancy set the
Catholic Church thousands of miles away in strange skies of morning and
judge it as impartially as a Chinese pagoda. It is said that the great
St. Francis Xavier, who very nearly succeeded in setting up the Church
there as a tower overtopping all pagodas, failed partly because his
followers were accused by their fellow missionaries of representing the
Twelve Apostles with the garb or attributes of Chinamen. But it would be
far better to see them as Chinamen, and judge them fairly as Chinamen,
than to see them as featureless idols merely made to be battered by
iconoclasts; or rather as cockshies to be pelted by empty-headed
cockneys. It would be better to see the whole thing as a remote Asiatic
cult; the mitres of its bishops as the towering head-dresses of
mysterious bonzes; its pastoral staffs as the sticks twisted like
serpents carried in some Asiatic procession; to see the prayer-book as
fantastic as the prayer-wheel and the Cross as crooked as the Swastika.
Then at least we should not lose our temper as some of the sceptical
critics seem to lose their temper, not to mention their wits. Their
anti-clericalism has become an atmosphere, an atmosphere of negation and
hostility from which they cannot escape. Compared with that, it would be
better to see the whole thing as something belonging to another
continent, or to another planet. It would be more philosophical to stare
indifferently at bonzes than to be perpetually and pointlessly grumbling
at bishops. It would be better to walk past a church as if it were a
pagoda than to stand permanently in the porch, impotent either to go
inside and help or to go outside and forget. For those in whom a mere
reaction has thus become an obsession, I do seriously recommend the
imaginative effort of conceiving the Twelve Apostles as Chinamen. In
other words, I recommend these critics to try to do as much justice to
Christian saints as if they were Pagan sages.

But with this we come to the final and vital point. I shall try to show
in these pages that when we _do_ make this imaginative effort to see the
whole thing from the outside, we find that it really looks like what is
traditionally said about it inside. It is exactly when the boy gets far
enough off to see the giant that he sees that he really is a giant. It
is exactly when we do at last see the Christian Church afar under those
clear and level eastern skies that we see that it is really the Church
of Christ. To put it shortly, the moment we are really impartial about
it we know why people are partial to it. But this second proposition
requires more serious discussion; and I shall here set myself to discuss
it.

As soon as I had clearly in my mind this conception of something solid
in the solitary and unique character of the divine story, it struck me
that there was exactly the same strange and yet solid character in the
human story that had led up to it; because that human story also had a
root that was divine. I mean that just as the Church seems to grow more
remarkable when it is fairly compared with the common religious life of
mankind, so mankind itself seems to grow more remarkable when we compare
it with the common life of nature. And I have noticed that most modern
history is driven to something like sophistry, first to soften the sharp
transition from animals to men, and then to soften the sharp transition
from heathens to Christians. Now the more we really read in a realistic
spirit of those two transitions the sharper we shall find them to be. It
is because the critics are _not_ detached that they do not see this
detachment; it is because they are not looking at things in a dry light
that they cannot see the difference between black and white. It is
because they are in a particular mood of reaction and revolt that they
have a motive for making out that all the white is dirty grey and the
black not so black as it is painted. I do not say there are not human
excuses for their revolt; I do not say it is not in some ways
sympathetic; what I say is that it is not in any way scientific. An
iconoclast may be indignant; an iconoclast may be justly indignant; but
an iconoclast is not impartial. And it is stark hypocrisy to pretend
that nine-tenths of the higher critics and scientific evolutionists and
professors of comparative religion are in the least impartial. Why
should they be impartial, what is being impartial, when the whole world
is at war about whether one thing is a devouring superstition or a
divine hope? I do not pretend to be impartial in the sense that the
final act of faith fixes a man’s mind because it satisfies his mind. But
I do profess to be a great deal more impartial than they are; in the
sense that I can tell the story fairly, with some sort of imaginative
justice to all sides; and they cannot. I do profess to be impartial in
the sense that I should be ashamed to talk such nonsense about the Lama
of Thibet as they do about the Pope of Rome, or to have as little
sympathy with Julian the Apostate as they have with the Society of
Jesus. They are not impartial; they never by any chance hold the
historical scales even; and above all they are never impartial upon this
point of evolution and transition. They suggest everywhere the grey
gradations of twilight, because they believe it is the twilight of the
gods. I propose to maintain that whether or no it is the twilight of
gods, it is not the daylight of men.

I maintain that when brought out into the daylight, these two things
look altogether strange and unique; and that it is only in the false
twilight of an imaginary period of transition that they can be made to
look in the least like anything else. The first of these is the creature
called man, and the second is the man called Christ. I have therefore
divided this book into two parts: the former being a sketch of the main
adventure of the human race in so far as it remained heathen; and the
second a summary of the real difference that was made by it becoming
Christian. Both motives necessitate a certain method, a method which is
not very easy to manage, and perhaps even less easy to define or defend.

In order to strike, in the only sane or possible sense, the note of
impartiality, it is necessary to touch the nerve of novelty. I mean that
in one sense we see things fairly when we see them first. That, I may
remark in passing, is why children generally have very little difficulty
about the dogmas of the Church. But the Church, being a highly practical
thing for working and fighting, is necessarily a thing for men and not
merely for children. There must be in it for working purposes a great
deal of tradition, of familiarity, and even of routine. So long as its
fundamentals are sincerely felt, this may even be the saner condition.
But when its fundamentals are doubted, as at present, we must try to
recover the candour and wonder of the child; the unspoilt realism and
objectivity of innocence. Or if we cannot do that, we must try at least
to shake off the cloud of mere custom and see the thing as new, if only
by seeing it as unnatural. Things that may well be familiar so long as
familiarity breeds affection had much better become unfamiliar when
familiarity breeds contempt. For in connection with things so great as
are here considered, whatever our view of them, contempt must be a
mistake. Indeed contempt must be an illusion. We must invoke the most
wild and soaring sort of imagination; the imagination that can see what
is there.

The only way to suggest the point is by an example of something, indeed
of almost anything, that has been considered beautiful or wonderful.
George Wyndham once told me that he had seen one of the first aeroplanes
rise for the first time, and it was very wonderful; but not so wonderful
as a horse allowing a man to ride on him. Somebody else has said that a
fine man on a fine horse is the noblest bodily object in the world. Now,
so long as people feel this in the right way, all is well. The first and
best way of appreciating it is to come of people with a tradition of
treating animals properly; of men in the right relation to horses. A boy
who remembers his father who rode a horse, who rode it well and treated
it well, will know that the relation can be satisfactory and will be
satisfied. He will be all the more indignant at the ill-treatment of
horses because he knows how they ought to be treated; but he will see
nothing but what is normal in a man riding on a horse. He will not
listen to the great modern philosopher who explains to him that the
horse ought to be riding on the man. He will not pursue the pessimist
fancy of Swift and say that men must be despised as monkeys, and horses
worshipped as gods. And horse and man together making an image that is
to him human and civilised, it will be easy, as it were, to lift horse
and man together into something heroic or symbolical; like a vision of
St. George in the clouds. The fable of the winged horse will not be
wholly unnatural to him: and he will know why Ariosto set many a
Christian hero in such an airy saddle, and made him the rider of the
sky. For the horse has really been lifted up along with the man in the
wildest fashion in the very word we use when we speak of ‘chivalry.’ The
very name of the horse has been given to the highest mood and moment of
the man; so that we might almost say that the handsomest compliment to a
man is to call him a horse.

But if a man has got into a mood in which he is _not_ able to feel this
sort of wonder, then his cure must begin right at the other end. We must
now suppose that he has drifted into a dull mood, in which somebody
sitting on a horse means no more than somebody sitting on a chair. The
wonder of which Wyndham spoke, the beauty that made the thing seem an
equestrian statue, the meaning of the more chivalric horseman, may have
become to him merely a convention and a bore. Perhaps they have been
merely a fashion; perhaps they have gone out of fashion; perhaps they
have been talked about too much or talked about in the wrong way;
perhaps it was then difficult to care for horses without the horrible
risk of being horsy. Anyhow, he has got into a condition when he cares
no more for a horse than for a towel-horse. His grandfather’s charge at
Balaclava seems to him as dull and dusty as the album containing such
family portraits. Such a person has not really become enlightened about
the album; on the contrary, he has only become blind with the dust. But
when he has reached _that_ degree of blindness, he will not be able to
look at a horse or a horseman at all until he has seen the whole thing
as a thing entirely unfamiliar and almost unearthly.

Out of some dark forest under some ancient dawn there must come towards
us, with lumbering yet dancing motions, one of the very queerest of the
prehistoric creatures. We must see for the first time the strangely
small head set on a neck not only longer but thicker than itself, as the
face of a gargoyle is thrust out upon a gutter-spout, the one
disproportionate crest of hair running along the ridge of that heavy
neck like a beard in the wrong place; the feet, each like a solid club
of horn, alone amid the feet of so many cattle; so that the true fear is
to be found in showing not the cloven but the uncloven hoof. Nor is it
mere verbal fancy to see him thus as a unique monster; for in a sense a
monster means what is unique, and he is really unique. But the point is
that when we thus see him as the first man saw him, we begin once more
to have some imaginative sense of what it meant when the first man rode
him. In such a dream he may seem ugly, but he does not seem
unimpressive; and certainly that two-legged dwarf who could get on top
of him will not seem unimpressive. By a longer and more erratic road we
shall come back to the same marvel of the man and the horse; and the
marvel will be, if possible, even more marvellous. We shall have again a
glimpse of St. George; the more glorious because St. George is not
riding on the horse, but rather riding on the dragon.

In this example, which I have taken merely because it is an example, it
will be noted that I do not say that the nightmare seen by the first man
of the forest is either more true or more wonderful than the normal mare
of the stable seen by the civilised person who can appreciate what is
normal. Of the two extremes, I think on the whole that the traditional
grasp of truth is the better. But I say that the truth is found at one
or other of these two extremes, and is lost in the intermediate
condition of mere fatigue and forgetfulness of tradition. In other
words, I say it is better to see a horse as a monster than to see it
only as a slow substitute for a motor-car. If we have got into _that_
state of mind about a horse as something stale, it is far better to be
frightened of a horse because it is a good deal too fresh.

Now, as it is with the monster that is called a horse, so it is with the
monster that is called a man. Of course the best condition of all, in my
opinion, is always to have regarded man as he is regarded in my
philosophy. He who holds the Christian and Catholic view of human nature
will feel certain that it is a universal and therefore a sane view, and
will be satisfied. But if he has lost the sane vision, he can only get
it back by something very like a mad vision; that is, by seeing man as a
strange animal and realising how strange an animal he is. But just as
seeing the horse as a prehistoric prodigy ultimately led back to, and
not away from, an admiration for the mastery of man, so the _really_
detached consideration of the curious career of man will lead back to,
and not away from, the ancient faith in the dark designs of God. In
other words, it is exactly when we do see how queer the quadruped is
that we praise the man who mounts him; and exactly when we do see how
queer the biped is that we praise the Providence that made him.

In short, it is the purpose of this introduction to maintain this
thesis: that it is exactly when we do regard man as an animal that we
know he is not an animal. It is precisely when we do try to picture him
as a sort of horse on its hind legs that we suddenly realise that he
must be something as miraculous as the winged horse that towered up into
the clouds of heaven. All roads lead to Rome, all ways lead round again
to the central and civilised philosophy, including this road through
elfland and topsyturvydom. But it may be that it is better never to have
left the land of a reasonable tradition, where men ride lightly upon
horses and are mighty hunters before the Lord.

So also in the specially Christian case we have to react against the
heavy bias of fatigue. It is almost impossible to make the facts vivid,
because the facts are familiar; and for fallen men it is often true that
familiarity is fatigue. I am convinced that if we could tell the
supernatural story of Christ word for word as of a Chinese hero, call
him the Son of Heaven instead of the Son of God, and trace his rayed
nimbus in the gold thread of Chinese embroideries or the gold lacquer of
Chinese pottery instead of in the gold leaf of our own old Catholic
paintings, there would be a unanimous testimony to the spiritual purity
of the story. We should hear nothing then of the injustice of
substitution or the illogicality of atonement, of the superstitious
exaggeration of the burden of sin or the impossible insolence of an
invasion of the laws of nature. We should admire the chivalry of the
Chinese conception of a god who fell from the sky to fight the dragons
and save the wicked from being devoured by their own fault and folly.
We should admire the subtlety of the Chinese view of life, which
perceives that all human imperfection is in very truth a crying
imperfection. We should admire the Chinese esoteric and superior wisdom,
which said there are higher cosmic laws than the laws we know; we
believe every common Indian conjurer who chooses to come to us and talk
in the same style. If Christianity were only a new oriental fashion, it
would never be reproached with being an old and oriental faith. I do not
propose in this book to follow the alleged example of St. Francis Xavier
with the opposite imaginative intention, and turn the Twelve Apostles
into Mandarins; not so much to make them look like natives as to make
them look like foreigners. I do not propose to work what I believe would
be a completely successful practical joke; that of telling the whole
story of the Gospel and the whole history of the Church in a setting of
pagodas and pigtails; and noting with malignant humour how much it was
admired as a heathen story in the very quarters where it is condemned as
a Christian story. But I do propose to strike wherever possible this
note of what is new and strange, and for that reason the style even on
so serious a subject may sometimes be deliberately grotesque and
fanciful. I do desire to help the reader to see Christendom from the
outside in the sense of seeing it as a whole, against the background of
other historic things; just as I desire him to see humanity as a whole
against the background of natural things. And I say that in both cases,
when seen thus, they stand out from their background like supernatural
things. They do not fade into the rest with the colours of
impressionism; they stand out from the rest with the colours of
heraldry; as vivid as a red cross on a white shield or a black lion on a
ground of gold. So stands the Red Clay against the green field of
nature, or the White Christ against the red clay of his race.

But in order to see them clearly we have to see them as a whole. We have
to see how they developed as well as how they began; for the most
incredible part of the story is that things which began thus should have
developed thus. Any one who chooses to indulge in mere imagination can
imagine that other things might have happened or other entities evolved.
Any one thinking of what might have happened may conceive a sort of
evolutionary equality; but any one facing what did happen must face an
exception and a prodigy. If there was ever a moment when man was only an
animal, we can if we choose make a fancy picture of his career
transferred to some other animal. An entertaining fantasia might be made
in which elephants built in elephantine architecture, with towers and
turrets like tusks and trunks, cities beyond the scale of any colossus.
A pleasant fable might be conceived in which a cow had developed a
costume, and put on four boots and two pairs of trousers. We could
imagine a Supermonkey more marvellous than any Superman, a quadrumanous
creature carving and painting with his hands and cooking and
carpentering with his feet. But if we are considering what did happen,
we shall certainly decide that man has distanced everything else with a
distance like that of the astronomical spaces and a speed like that of
the still thunderbolt of the light. And in the same fashion, while we
can if we choose see the Church amid a mob of Mithraic or Manichean
superstitions squabbling and killing each other at the end of the
Empire, while we can if we choose imagine the Church killed in the
struggle and some other chance cult taking its place, we shall be the
more surprised (and possibly puzzled) if we meet it two thousand years
afterwards rushing through the ages as the winged thunderbolt of thought
and everlasting enthusiasm; a thing without rival or resemblance; and
still as new as it is old.




PART I

ON THE CREATURE CALLED MAN




CHAPTER I

THE MAN IN THE CAVE


Far away in some strange constellation in skies infinitely remote, there
is a small star, which astronomers may some day discover. At least I
could never observe in the faces or demeanour of most astronomers or men
of science any evidence that they had discovered it; though as a matter
of fact they were walking about on it all the time. It is a star that
brings forth out of itself very strange plants and very strange animals;
and none stranger than the men of science. That at least is the way in
which I should begin a history of the world if I had to follow the
scientific custom of beginning with an account of the astronomical
universe. I should try to see even this earth from the outside, not by
the hackneyed insistence of its relative position to the sun, but by
some imaginative effort to conceive its remote position for the
dehumanised spectator. Only I do not believe in being dehumanised in
order to study humanity. I do not believe in dwelling upon the distances
that are supposed to dwarf the world; I think there is even something a
trifle vulgar about this idea of trying to rebuke spirit by size. And as
the first idea is not feasible, that of making the earth a strange
planet so as to make it significant, I will not stoop to the other trick
of making it a small planet in order to make it insignificant. I would
rather insist that we do not even know that it is a planet at all, in
the sense in which we know that it is a place; and a very extraordinary
place too. That is the note which I wish to strike from the first, if
not in the astronomical, then in some more familiar fashion.

One of my first journalistic adventures, or misadventures, concerned a
comment on Grant Allen, who had written a book about the Evolution of
the Idea of God. I happened to remark that it would be much more
interesting if God wrote a book about the evolution of the idea of Grant
Allen. And I remember that the editor objected to my remark on the
ground that it was blasphemous; which naturally amused me not a little.
For the joke of it was, of course, that it never occurred to him to
notice the title of the book itself, which really was blasphemous; for
it was, when translated into English, ‘I will show you how this
nonsensical notion that there is a God grew up among men.’ My remark was
strictly pious and proper; confessing the divine purpose even in its
most seemingly dark or meaningless manifestations. In that hour I
learned many things, including the fact that there is something purely
acoustic in much of that agnostic sort of reverence. The editor had not
seen the point, because in the title of the book the long word came at
the beginning and the short word at the end; whereas in my comment the
short word came at the beginning and gave him a sort of shock. I have
noticed that if you put a word like God into the same sentence with a
word like dog, these abrupt and angular words affect people like
pistol-shots. Whether you say that God made the dog or the dog made God
does not seem to matter; that is only one of the sterile disputations of
the too subtle theologians. But so long as you begin with a long word
like evolution the rest will roll harmlessly past; very probably the
editor had not read the whole of the title, for it is rather a long
title and he was rather a busy man.

But this little incident has always lingered in my mind as a sort of
parable. Most modern histories of mankind begin with the word evolution,
and with a rather wordy exposition of evolution, for much the same
reason that operated in this case. There is something slow and soothing
and gradual about the word and even about the idea. As a matter of fact,
it is not, touching these primary things, a very practical word or a
very profitable idea. Nobody can imagine how nothing could turn into
something. Nobody can get an inch nearer to it by explaining how
something could turn into something else. It is really far more logical
to start by saying ‘In the beginning God created heaven and earth’ even
if you only mean ‘In the beginning some unthinkable power began some
unthinkable process.’ For God is by its nature a name of mystery, and
nobody ever supposed that man could imagine how a world was created any
more than he could create one. But evolution really is mistaken for
explanation. It has the fatal quality of leaving on many minds the
impression that they do understand it and everything else; just as many
of them live under a sort of illusion that they have read the _Origin of
Species_.

But this notion of something smooth and slow, like the ascent of a
slope, is a great part of the illusion. It is an illogicality as well as
an illusion; for slowness has really nothing to do with the question. An
event is not any more intrinsically intelligible or unintelligible
because of the pace at which it moves. For a man who does not believe in
a miracle, a slow miracle would be just as incredible as a swift one.
The Greek witch may have turned sailors to swine with a stroke of the
wand. But to see a naval gentleman of our acquaintance looking a little
more like a pig every day, till he ended with four trotters and a curly
tail, would not be any more soothing. It might be rather more creepy and
uncanny. The medieval wizard may have flown through the air from the top
of a tower; but to see an old gentleman walking through the air, in a
leisurely and lounging manner, would still seem to call for some
explanation. Yet there runs through all the rationalistic treatment of
history this curious and confused idea that difficulty is avoided, or
even mystery eliminated, by dwelling on mere delay or on something
dilatory in the processes of things. There will be something to be said
upon particular examples elsewhere; the question here is the false
atmosphere of facility and ease given by the mere suggestion of going
slow; the sort of comfort that might be given to a nervous old woman
travelling for the first time in a motor-car.

Mr. H. G. Wells has confessed to being a prophet; and in this matter he
was a prophet at his own expense. It is curious that his first
fairy-tale was a complete answer to his last book of history. The Time
Machine destroyed in advance all comfortable conclusions founded on the
mere relativity of time. In that sublime nightmare the hero saw trees
shoot up like green rockets, and vegetation spread visibly like a green
conflagration, or the sun shoot across the sky from east to west with
the swiftness of a meteor. Yet in his sense these things were quite as
natural when they went swiftly; and in our sense they are quite as
supernatural when they go slowly. The ultimate question is why they go
at all; and anybody who really understands that question will know that
it always has been and always will be a religious question; or at any
rate a philosophical or metaphysical question. And most certainly he
will not think the question answered by some substitution of gradual for
abrupt change; or, in other words, by a merely relative question of the
same story being spun out or rattled rapidly through, as can be done
with any story at a cinema by turning a handle.

Now what is needed for these problems of primitive existence is
something more like a primitive spirit. In calling up this vision of the
first things, I would ask the reader to make with me a sort of
experiment in simplicity. And by simplicity I do not mean stupidity, but
rather the sort of clarity that sees things like life rather than words
like evolution. For this purpose it would really be better to turn the
handle of the Time Machine a little more quickly and see the grass
growing and the trees springing up into the sky, if that experiment
could contract and concentrate and make vivid the upshot of the whole
affair. What we know, in a sense in which we know nothing else, is that
the trees and the grass did grow and that a number of other
extraordinary things do in fact happen; that queer creatures support
themselves in the empty air by beating it with fans of various fantastic
shapes; that other queer creatures steer themselves about alive under a
load of mighty waters; that other queer creatures walk about on four
legs, and that the queerest creature of all walks about on two. These
are things and not theories; and compared with them evolution and the
atom and even the solar system are merely theories. The matter here is
one of history and not of philosophy; so that it need only be noted that
no philosopher denies that a mystery still attaches to the two great
transitions: the origin of the universe itself and the origin of the
principle of life itself. Most philosophers have the enlightenment to
add that a third mystery attaches to the origin of man himself. In other
words, a third bridge was built across a third abyss of the unthinkable
when there came into the world what we call reason and what we call
will. Man is not merely an evolution but rather a revolution. That he
has a backbone or other parts upon a similar pattern to birds and fishes
is an obvious fact, whatever be the meaning of the fact. But if we
attempt to regard him, as it were, as a quadruped standing on his hind
legs, we shall find what follows far more fantastic and subversive than
if he were standing on his head.

I will take one example to serve for an introduction to the story of
man. It illustrates what I mean by saying that a certain childish
directness is needed to see the truth about the childhood of the world.
It illustrates what I mean by saying that a mixture of popular science
and journalistic jargon has confused the facts about the first things,
so that we cannot see which of them really comes first. It illustrates,
though only in one convenient illustration, all that I mean by the
necessity of seeing the sharp differences that give its shape to
history, instead of being submerged in all these generalisations about
slowness and sameness. For we do indeed require, in Mr. Wells’s phrase,
an outline of history. But we may venture to say, in Mr. Mantalini’s
phrase, that this evolutionary history has no outline or is a demd
outline. But, above all, it illustrates what I mean by saying that the
more we really look at man as an animal, the less he will look like one.

To-day all our novels and newspapers will be found swarming with
numberless allusions to a popular character called a Cave-Man. He seems
to be quite familiar to us, not only as a public character but as a
private character. His psychology is seriously taken into account in
psychological fiction and psychological medicine. So far as I can
understand, his chief occupation in life was knocking his wife about, or
treating women in general with what is, I believe, known in the world of
the film as ‘rough stuff.’ I have never happened to come upon the
evidence for this idea; and I do not know on what primitive diaries or
prehistoric divorce-reports it is founded. Nor, as I have explained
elsewhere, have I ever been able to see the probability of it, even
considered a priori. We are always told without any explanation or
authority that primitive man waved a club and knocked the woman down
before he carried her off. But on every animal analogy, it would seem an
almost morbid modesty and reluctance, on the part of the lady, always to
insist on being knocked down before consenting to be carried off. And I
repeat that I can never comprehend why, when the male was so very rude,
the female should have been so very refined. The cave-man may have been
a brute, but there is no reason why he should have been more brutal than
the brutes. And the loves of the giraffes and the river romances of the
hippopotami are effected without any of this preliminary fracas or
shindy. The cave-man may have been no better than the cave-bear; but the
child she-bear, so famous in hymnology, is not trained with any such
bias for spinsterhood. In short, these details of the domestic life of
the cave puzzle me upon either the evolutionary or the static
hypothesis; and in any case I should like to look into the evidence for
them; but unfortunately I have never been able to find it. But the
curious thing is this: that while ten thousand tongues of more or less
scientific or literary gossip seemed to be talking at once about this
unfortunate fellow, under the title of the cave-man, the one connection
in which it is really relevant and sensible to talk about him as the
cave-man has been comparatively neglected. People have used this loose
term in twenty loose ways; but they have never even looked at their own
term for what could really be learned from it.

In fact, people have been interested in everything about the cave-man
except what he did in the cave. Now there does happen to be some real
evidence of what he did in the cave. It is little enough, like all the
prehistoric evidence, but it is concerned with the real cave-man and his
cave and not the literary cave-man and his club. And it will be valuable
to our sense of reality to consider quite simply what that real evidence
is, and not to go beyond it. What was found in the cave was not the
club, the horrible gory club notched with the number of women it had
knocked on the head. The cave was not a Bluebeard’s Chamber filled with
the skeletons of slaughtered wives; it was not filled with female skulls
all arranged in rows and all cracked like eggs. It was something quite
unconnected, one way or the other, with all the modern phrases and
philosophical implications and literary rumours which confuse the whole
question for us. And if we wish to see as it really is this authentic
glimpse of the morning of the world, it will be far better to conceive
even the story of its discovery as some such legend of the land of
morning. It would be far better to tell the tale of what was really
found as simply as the tale of heroes finding the Golden Fleece or the
Gardens of the Hesperides, if we could so escape from a fog of
controversial theories into the clear colours and clean-cut outlines of
such a dawn. The old epic poets at least knew how to tell a story,
possibly a tall story but never a twisted story, never a story tortured
out of its own shape to fit theories and philosophies invented centuries
afterwards. It would be well if modern investigators could describe
their discoveries in the bald narrative style of the earliest
travellers, and without any of these long allusive words that are full
of irrelevant implication and suggestion. Then we might realise exactly
what we do know about the cave-man, or at any rate about the cave.

A priest and a boy entered some time ago a hollow in the hills and
passed into a sort of subterranean tunnel that led into a labyrinth of
such sealed and secret corridors of rock. They crawled through cracks
that seemed almost impassable, they crept through tunnels that might
have been made for moles, they dropped into holes as hopeless as wells,
they seemed to be burying themselves alive seven times over beyond the
hope of resurrection. This is but the commonplace of all such courageous
exploration; but what is needed here is some one who shall put such
stories in the primary light, in which they are not commonplace. There
is, for instance, something strangely symbolic in the accident that the
first intruders into that sunken world were a priest and a boy, the
types of the antiquity and of the youth of the world. But here I am
even more concerned with the symbolism of the boy than with that of the
priest. Nobody who remembers boyhood needs to be told what it might be
to a boy to enter like Peter Pan under a roof of the roots of all the
trees and go deeper and deeper, till he reach what William Morris called
the very roots of the mountains. Suppose somebody, with that simple and
unspoilt realism that is a part of innocence, to pursue that journey to
its end, not for the sake of what he could deduce or demonstrate in some
dusty magazine controversy, but simply for the sake of what he could
see. What he did see at last was a cavern so far from the light of day
that it might have been the legendary Domdaniel cavern that was under
the floor of the sea. This secret chamber of rock, when illuminated
after its long night of unnumbered ages, revealed on its walls large and
sprawling outlines diversified with coloured earths; and when they
followed the lines of them they recognised, across that vast and void of
ages, the movement and the gesture of a man’s hand. They were drawings
or paintings of animals; and they were drawn or painted not only by a
man but by an artist. Under whatever archaic limitations, they showed
that love of the long sweeping or the long wavering line which any man
who has ever drawn or tried to draw will recognise; and about which no
artist will allow himself to be contradicted by any scientist. They
showed the experimental and adventurous spirit of the artist, the spirit
that does not avoid but attempt difficult things; as where the
draughtsman had represented the action of the stag when he swings his
head clean round and noses towards his tail, an action familiar enough
in the horse. But there are many modern animal-painters who would set
themselves something of a task in rendering it truly. In this and twenty
other details it is clear that the artist had watched animals with a
certain interest and presumably a certain pleasure. In that sense it
would seem that he was not only an artist but a naturalist; the sort of
naturalist who is really natural.

Now it is needless to note, except in passing, that there is nothing
whatever in the atmosphere of that cave to suggest the bleak and
pessimistic atmosphere of that journalistic cave of the winds, that
blows and bellows about us with countless echoes concerning the
cave-man. So far as any human character can be hinted at by such traces
of the past, that human character is quite human and even humane. It is
certainly not the ideal of an inhuman character, like the abstraction
invoked in popular science. When novelists and educationists and
psychologists of all sorts talk about the cave-man, they never conceive
him in connection with anything that is really in the cave. When the
realist of the sex novel writes, ‘Red sparks danced in Dagmar
Doubledick’s brain; he felt the spirit of the cave-man rising within
him,’ the novelist’s readers would be very much disappointed if Dagmar
only went off and drew large pictures of cows on the drawing-room wall.
When the psychoanalyst writes to a patient, ‘The submerged instincts of
the cave-man are doubtless prompting you to gratify a violent impulse,’
he does not refer to the impulse to paint in water-colours; or to make
conscientious studies of how cattle swing their heads when they graze.
Yet we do know for a fact that the cave-man did these mild and innocent
things; and we have not the most minute speck of evidence that he did
any of the violent and ferocious things. In other words, the cave-man as
commonly presented to us is simply a myth or rather a muddle; for a myth
has at least an imaginative outline of truth. The whole of the current
way of talking is simply a confusion and a misunderstanding, founded on
no sort of scientific evidence and valued only as an excuse for a very
modern mood of anarchy. If any gentleman wants to knock a woman about,
he can surely be a cad without taking away the character of the
cave-man, about whom we know next to nothing except what we can gather
from a few harmless and pleasing pictures on a wall.

But this is not the point about the pictures or the particular moral
here to be drawn from them. That moral is something much larger and
simpler, so large and simple that when it is first stated it will sound
childish. And indeed it is in the highest sense childish; and that is
why I have in this apologue in some sense seen it through the eyes of a
child. It is the biggest of all the facts really facing the boy in the
cavern; and is perhaps too big to be seen. If the boy was one of the
flock of the priest, it may be presumed that he had been trained in a
certain quality of common sense; that common sense that often comes to
us in the form of tradition. In that case he would simply recognise the
primitive man’s work as the work of a man, interesting but in no way
incredible in being primitive. He would see what was there to see; and
he would not be tempted into seeing what was not there, by any
evolutionary excitement or fashionable speculation. If he had heard of
such things he would admit, of course, that the speculations might be
true and were not incompatible with the facts that were true. The artist
may have had another side to his character besides that which he has
alone left on record in his works of art. The primitive man may have
taken a pleasure in beating women as well as in drawing animals; all we
can say is that the drawings record the one but not the other. It may be
true that when the cave-man’s finished jumping on his mother, or his
wife as the case may be, he loves to hear the little brook a-gurgling,
and also to watch the deer as they come down to drink at the brook.
These things are not impossible, but they are irrelevant. The common
sense of the child could confine itself to learning from the facts what
the facts have to teach; and the pictures in the cave are very nearly
all the facts there are. So far as that evidence goes, the child would
be justified in assuming that a man had represented animals with rock
and red ochre for the same reason as he himself was in the habit of
trying to represent animals with charcoal and red chalk. The man had
drawn a stag just as the child had drawn a horse; because it was fun.
The man had drawn a stag with his head turned as the child had drawn a
pig with his eyes shut; because it was difficult. The child and the man,
being both human, would be united by the brotherhood of men; and the
brotherhood of men is even nobler when it bridges the abyss of ages than
when it bridges only the chasm of class. But anyhow he would see no
evidence of the cave-man of crude evolutionism; because there is none to
be seen. If somebody told him that the pictures had all been drawn by
St. Francis of Assisi out of pure and saintly love of animals, there
would be nothing in the cave to contradict it.

Indeed I once knew a lady who half-humorously suggested that the cave
was a crèche, in which the babies were put to be specially safe, and
that coloured animals were drawn on the walls to amuse them; very much
as diagrams of elephants and giraffes adorn a modern infant school. And
though this was but a jest, it does draw attention to some of the other
assumptions that we make only too readily. The pictures do not prove
even that the cave-men lived in caves, any more than the discovery of a
wine-cellar in Balham (long after that suburb had been destroyed by
human or divine wrath) would prove that the Victorian middle classes
lived entirely underground. The cave might have had a special purpose
like the cellar; it might have been a religious shrine or a refuge in
war or the meeting-place of a secret society or all sorts of things. But
it is quite true that its artistic decoration has much more of the
atmosphere of a nursery than of any of these nightmares of anarchical
fury and fear. I have conceived a child as standing in the cave; and it
is easy to conceive any child, modern or immeasurably remote, as making
a living gesture as if to pat the painted beasts upon the wall. In that
gesture there is a foreshadowing, as we shall see later, of another
cavern and another child.

But suppose the boy had not been taught by a priest but by a professor,
by one of the professors who simplify the relation of men and beasts to
a mere evolutionary variation. Suppose the boy saw himself, with the
same simplicity and sincerity, as a mere Mowgli running with the pack of
nature and roughly indistinguishable from the rest save by a relative
and recent variation. What would be for him the simplest lesson of that
strange stone picture-book? After all, it would come back to this; that
he had dug very deep and found the place where a man had drawn a picture
of a reindeer. But he would dig a good deal deeper before he found a
place where a reindeer had drawn a picture of a man. That sounds like a
truism, but in this connection it is really a very tremendous truth. He
might descend to depths unthinkable, he might sink into sunken
continents as strange as remote stars, he might find himself in the
inside of the world as far from men as the other side of the moon; he
might see in those cold chasms or colossal terraces of stone, traced in
the faint hieroglyphic of the fossil, the ruins of lost dynasties of
biological life, rather like the ruins of successive creations and
separate universes than the stages in the story of one. He would find
the trail of monsters blindly developing in directions outside all our
common imagery of fish and bird; groping and grasping and touching life
with every extravagant elongation of horn and tongue and tentacle;
growing a forest of fantastic caricatures of the claw and the fin and
the finger. But nowhere would he find one finger that had traced one
significant line upon the sand; nowhere one claw that had even begun to
scratch the faint suggestion of a form. To all appearance, the thing
would be as unthinkable in all those countless cosmic variations of
forgotten aeons as it would be in the beasts and birds before our eyes.
The child would no more expect to see it than to see the cat scratch on
the wall a vindictive caricature of the dog. The childish common sense
would keep the most evolutionary child from expecting to see anything
like that; yet in the traces of the rude and recently evolved ancestors
of humanity he would have seen exactly that. It must surely strike him
as strange that men so remote from him should be so near, and that
beasts so near to him should be so remote. To his simplicity it must
seem at least odd that he could not find any trace of the beginning of
any arts among any animals. That is the simplest lesson to learn in the
cavern of the coloured pictures; only it is too simple to be learnt. It
is the simple truth that man does differ from the brutes in kind and not
in degree; and the proof of it is here; that it sounds like a truism to
say that the most primitive man drew a picture of a monkey, and that it
sounds like a joke to say that the most intelligent monkey drew a
picture of a man. Something of division and disproportion has appeared;
and it is unique. Art is the signature of man.

That is the sort of simple truth with which a story of the beginnings
ought really to begin. The evolutionist stands staring in the painted
cavern at the things that are too large to be seen and too simple to be
understood. He tries to deduce all sorts of other indirect and doubtful
things from the details of the pictures, because he cannot see the
primary significance of the whole; thin and theoretical deductions about
the absence of religion or the presence of superstition; about tribal
government and hunting and human sacrifice and heaven knows what. In the
next chapter I shall try to trace in a little more detail the much
disputed question about these prehistoric origins of human ideas and
especially of the religious idea. Here I am only taking this one case of
the cave as a sort of symbol of the simpler sort of truth with which the
story ought to start. When all is said, the main fact that the record of
the reindeer men attests, along with all other records, is that the
reindeer man could draw and the reindeer could not. If the reindeer man
was as much an animal as the reindeer, it was all the more extraordinary
that he could do what all other animals could not. If he was an ordinary
product of biological growth, like any other beast or bird, then it is
all the more extraordinary that he was not in the least like any other
beast or bird. He seems rather more supernatural as a natural product
than as a supernatural one.

But I have begun this story in the cave, like the cave of the
speculations of Plato, because it is a sort of model of the mistake of
merely evolutionary introductions and prefaces. It is useless to begin
by saying that everything was slow and smooth and a mere matter of
development and degree. For in a plain matter like the pictures there is
in fact not a trace of any such development or degree. Monkeys did not
begin pictures and men finish them; Pithecanthropus did not draw a
reindeer badly and Homo Sapiens draw it well. The higher animals did not
draw better and better portraits; the dog did not paint better in his
best period than in his early bad manner as a jackal; the wild horse was
not an Impressionist and the race-horse a Post-Impressionist. All we can
say of this notion of reproducing things in shadow or representative
shape is that it exists nowhere in nature except in man; and that we
cannot even talk about it without treating man as something separate
from nature. In other words, every sane sort of history must begin with
man as man, a thing standing absolute and alone. How he came there, or
indeed how anything else came there, is a thing for theologians and
philosophers and scientists and not for historians. But an excellent
test case of this isolation and mystery is the matter of the impulse of
art. This creature was truly different from all other creatures; because
he was a creator as well as a creature. Nothing in that sense could be
made in any other image but the image of man. But the truth is so true
that, even in the absence of any religious belief, it must be assumed in
the form of some moral or metaphysical principle. In the next chapter we
shall see how this principle applies to all the historical hypotheses
and evolutionary ethics now in fashion; to the origins of tribal
government or mythological belief. But the clearest and most convenient
example to start with is this popular one of what the cave-man really
did in his cave. It means that somehow or other a new thing had appeared
in the cavernous night of nature; a mind that is like a mirror. It is
like a mirror because it is truly a thing of reflection. It is like a
mirror because in it alone all the other shapes can be seen like shining
shadows in a vision. Above all, it is like a mirror because it is the
only thing of its kind. Other things may resemble it or resemble each
other in various ways; other things may excel it or excel each other in
various ways; just as in the furniture of a room a table may be round
like a mirror or a cupboard may be larger than a mirror. But the mirror
is the only thing that can contain them all. Man is the microcosm; man
is the measure of all things; man is the image of God. These are the
only real lessons to be learnt in the cave, and it is time to leave it
for the open road.

It will be well in this place, however, to sum up once and for all what
is meant by saying that man is at once the exception to everything and
the mirror and the measure of all things. But to see man as he is, it is
necessary once more to keep close to that simplicity that can clear
itself of accumulated clouds of sophistry. The simplest truth about man
is that he is a very strange being; almost in the sense of being a
stranger on the earth. In all sobriety, he has much more of the external
appearance of one bringing alien habits from another land than of a mere
growth of this one. He has an unfair advantage and an unfair
disadvantage. He cannot sleep in his own skin; he cannot trust his own
instincts. He is at once a creator moving miraculous hands and fingers
and a kind of cripple. He is wrapped in artificial bandages called
clothes; he is propped on artificial crutches called furniture. His mind
has the same doubtful liberties and the same wild limitations. Alone
among the animals, he is shaken with the beautiful madness called
laughter; as if he had caught sight of some secret in the very shape of
the universe hidden from the universe itself. Alone among the animals he
feels the need of averting his thoughts from the root realities of his
own bodily being; of hiding them as in the presence of some higher
possibility which creates the mystery of shame. Whether we praise these
things as natural to man or abuse them as artificial in nature, they
remain in the same sense unique. This is realised by the whole popular
instinct called religion, until disturbed by pedants, especially the
laborious pedants of the Simple Life. The most sophistical of all
sophists are Gymnosophists.

It is not natural to see man as a natural product. It is not common
sense to call man a common object of the country or the seashore. It is
not seeing straight to see him as an animal. It is not sane. It sins
against the light; against that broad daylight of proportion which is
the principle of all reality. It is reached by stretching a point, by
making out a case, by artificially selecting a certain light and shade,
by bringing into prominence the lesser or lower things which may happen
to be similar. The solid thing standing in the sunlight, the thing we
can walk round and see from all sides, is quite different. It is also
quite extraordinary; and the more sides we see of it the more
extraordinary it seems. It is emphatically not a thing that follows or
flows naturally from anything else. If we imagine that an inhuman or
impersonal intelligence could have felt from the first the general
nature of the non-human world sufficiently to see that things would
evolve in whatever way they did evolve, there would have been nothing
whatever in all that natural world to prepare such a mind for such an
unnatural novelty. To such a mind, man would most certainly not have
seemed something like one herd out of a hundred herds finding richer
pasture; or one swallow out of a hundred swallows making a summer under
a strange sky. It would not be in the same scale and scarcely in the
same dimension. We might as truly say that it would not be in the same
universe. It would be more like seeing one cow out of a hundred cows
suddenly jump over the moon or one pig out of a hundred pigs grow wings
in a flash and fly. It would not be a question of the cattle finding
their own grazing-ground but of their building their own cattle-sheds,
not a question of one swallow making a summer but of his making a
summer-house. For the very fact that birds do build nests is one of
those similarities that sharpen the startling difference. The very fact
that a bird can get as far as building a nest, and cannot get any
farther, proves that he has not a mind as man has a mind; it proves it
more completely than if he built nothing at all. If he built nothing at
all, he might possibly be a philosopher of the Quietist or Buddhistic
school, indifferent to all but the mind within. But when he builds as he
does build and is satisfied and sings aloud with satisfaction, then we
know there is really an invisible veil like a pane of glass between him
and us, like the window on which a bird will beat in vain. But suppose
our abstract onlooker saw one of the birds begin to build as men build.
Suppose in an incredibly short space of time there were seven styles of
architecture for one style of nest. Suppose the bird carefully selected
forked twigs and pointed leaves to express the piercing piety of Gothic,
but turned to broad foliage and black mud when he sought in a darker
mood to call up the heavy columns of Bel and Ashtaroth; making his nest
indeed one of the hanging gardens of Babylon. Suppose the bird made
little clay statues of birds celebrated in letters or politics and stuck
them up in front of the nest. Suppose that one bird out of a thousand
birds began to do one of the thousand things that man had already done
even in the morning of the world; and we can be quite certain that the
onlooker would not regard such a bird as a mere evolutionary variety of
the other birds; he would regard it as a very fearful wild-fowl indeed;
possibly as a bird of ill-omen, certainly as an omen. That bird would
tell the augurs, not of something that would happen, but of something
that had happened. That something would be the appearance of a mind with
a new dimension of depth; a mind like that of man. If there be no God,
no other mind could conceivably have foreseen it.

Now, as a matter of fact, there is not a shadow of evidence that _this_
thing was evolved at all. There is not a particle of proof that _this_
transition came slowly, or even that it came naturally. In a strictly
scientific sense, we simply know nothing whatever about how it grew, or
whether it grew, or what it is. There may be a broken trail of stones
and bones faintly suggesting the development of the human body. There is
nothing even faintly suggesting such a development of this human mind.
It was not and it was; we know not in what instant or in what infinity
of years. Something happened; and it has all the appearance of a
transaction outside time. It has therefore nothing to do with history in
the ordinary sense. The historian must take it or something like it for
granted; it is not his business as a historian to explain it. But if he
cannot explain it as a historian, he will not explain it as a biologist.
In neither case is there any disgrace to him in accepting it without
explaining it; for it is a reality, and history and biology deal with
realities. He is quite justified in calmly confronting the pig with
wings and the cow that jumped over the moon, merely because they have
happened. He can reasonably accept man as a freak, because he accepts
man as a fact. He can be perfectly comfortable in a crazy and
disconnected world, or in a world that can produce such a crazy and
disconnected thing. For reality is a thing in which we can all repose,
even if it hardly seems related to anything else. The thing is there;
and that is enough for most of us. But if we do indeed want to know how
it can conceivably have come there, if we do indeed wish to see it
related realistically to other things, if we do insist on seeing it
evolved before our very eyes from an environment nearer to its own
nature, then assuredly it is to very different things that we must go.
We must stir very strange memories and return to very simple dreams if
we desire some origin that can make man other than a monster. We shall
have discovered very different causes before he becomes a creature of
causation; and invoked other authority to turn him into something
reasonable, or even into anything probable. That way lies all that is at
once awful and familiar and forgotten, with dreadful faces thronged and
fiery arms. We can accept man as a fact, if we are content with an
unexplained fact. We can accept him as an animal, if we can live with a
fabulous animal. But if we must needs have sequence and necessity, then
indeed we must provide a prelude and crescendo of mounting miracles,
that ushered in with unthinkable thunders in all the seven heavens of
another order, a man may be an ordinary thing.




