CHAPTER XI

THE VAMPIRES


Tom Swift looked deliberately around.  It was characteristic of him
that, though by nature he was prompt in action, he never acted so
hurriedly as to obscure his judgment.  So, though now Ned showed a
trace of strange excitement, Tom was cool.

"What is it?" asked the young inventor.  "What's the matter?  What did
you think you saw, Ned; another alligator?"

"Alligator?  Nonsense! Up on shore?  I saw a black shadow, and I didn't
THINK I saw it, either.  I really did."

Tom laughed quietly.

"A shadow!" he exclaimed.  "Since when were you afraid of shadows, Ned?"

"I'm not afraid of ordinary shadows," answered Ned, and in his voice
there was an uncertain tone.  "I'm not afraid of my shadow or yours,
Tom, or anybody's that I can see.  But this wasn't any human shadow.
It was as if a great big blob of wet darkness had been waved over your
head."

"That's a queer explanation," Tom said in a low voice.  "A great big
blob of wet darkness!"

"But that just describes it," went on Ned, looking up and around.  "It
was just as if you were in some dark room, and some one waved a wet
velvet cloak over your head--spooky like! It didn't make a sound, but
there was a smell as if a den of some wild beast was near here.  I
remember that odor from the time we went hunting with your electric
rifle in the jungle, and got near the den in the rocks where the tigers
lived."

"Well, there is a wild beast smell all around here," admitted Tom,
sniffing the air.  "It's the alligators in the river I guess.  You know
they have an odor of musk."

"Do you mean to say you didn't feel that shadow flying over us just
now?" asked Ned.

"Well, I felt something sail through the air, but I took it to be a big
bird.  I didn't pay much attention.  To tell you the truth I was
thinking about Beecher--wondering when he would get here," added Tom
quickly as if to forestall any question as to whether or not his
thoughts had to do with Beecher in connection with Tom's affair of the
heart.

"Well it wasn't a bird--at least not a regular bird," said Ned in a low
voice, as once more he looked at the dark and gloomy jungle that
stretched back from the river and behind the little clearing where the
camp had been made.

"Come on!" cried Tom, in what he tried to make a cheerful voice.  "This
is getting on your nerves, Ned, and I didn't know you had any.  Let's
go back and turn in.  I'm dog-tired and the mosquitoes are beginning to
find that we're here.  Let's get under the nets.  Then the black
shadows won't get you."

Not at all unwilling to leave so gloomy a scene, Ned, after a brief
glance up and down the dark river, followed his chum.  They found
Professor Bumper and Mr. Damon in their tent, a separate one having
been set up for the two men adjoining that of the youths.

"Bless my fountain pen!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, as he caught sight of Tom
and Ned in the flickering light of the smudge fire between the two
canvas shelters.  "We were just wondering what had become of you."

"We were chasing shadows!" laughed Tom.  "At least Ned was.  But you
look cozy enough in there."

It did, indeed, look cheerful in contrast to the damp and dark jungle
all about.  Professor Bumper, being an experienced traveler, knew how
to provide for such comforts as were possible.  Folding cots had been
opened for himself, Mr. Damon and the guide to sleep on, others,
similar, being set up in the tent where Tom and Ned were to sleep.  In
the middle of the tent the professor had made a table of his own and
Mr. Damon's suit cases, and on this placed a small dry battery electric
light.  He was making some notes, doubtless for a future book.  Jacinto
was going about the camp, seeing that the Indians were at their duties,
though most of them had gone directly to sleep after supper.

"Better get inside and under the nets," advised Professor Bumper to Tom
and Ned.  "The mosquitoes here are the worst I ever saw."

"We're beginning to believe that," returned Ned, who was unusually
quiet.  "Come on, Tom.  I can't stand it any longer.  I'm itching in a
dozen places now from their bites."

As Tom and Ned had no wish for a light, which would be sure to attract
insects, they entered their tent in the dark, and were soon stretched
out in comparative comfort.  Tom was just on the edge of a deep sleep
when he heard Ned murmur:

"I can't understand it!"

"What's that?" asked the young inventor.

"I say I can't understand it."

"Understand what?"

"That shadow.  It was real and yet----"

"Oh, go to sleep!" advised Tom, and, turning over, he was soon
breathing heavily and regularly, indicating that he, at least, had
taken his own advice.

Ned, too, finally succumbed to the overpowering weariness of the first
day of travel, and he, too, slept, though it was an uneasy slumber,
disturbed by a feeling as though some one were holding a heavy black
quilt over his head, preventing him from breathing.

The feeling, sensation or dream--whatever it was--perhaps a
nightmare--became at last so real to Ned that he struggled himself into
wakefulness.  With an effort he sat up, uttering an inarticulate cry.
To his surprise he was answered.  Some one asked:

"What is the matter?"

"Who--who are you?" asked Ned quickly, trying to peer through the
darkness.

"This is Jacinto--your guide," was the soft answer.  "I was walking
about camp and, hearing you murmuring, I came to your tent.  Is
anything wrong?"

For a moment Ned did not answer.  He listened and could tell by the
continued heavy and regular breathing of his chum that Tom was still
asleep.

"Are you in our tent?" asked Ned, at length:

"Yes," answered Jacinto.  "I came in to see what was the matter with
you.  Are you ill?"

"No, of course not," said Ned, a bit shortly.  "I--I had a bad dream,
that was all.  All right now."

"For that I am glad.  Try to get all the sleep you can, for we must
start early to avoid the heat of the day," and there was the sound of
the guide leaving and arranging the folds of the mosquito net behind
him to keep out the night-flying insects.

Once more Ned composed himself to sleep, and this time successfully,
for he did not have any more unpleasant dreams.  The quiet of the
jungle settled down over the camp, at least the comparative quiet of
the jungle, for there were always noises of some sort going on, from
the fall of some rotten tree limb to the scream or growl of a wild
beast, while, now and again, from the river came the pig-like grunts of
the alligators.

It was about two o'clock in the morning, as they ascertained later,
when the whole camp--white travelers and all--was suddenly awakened by
a wild scream.  It seemed to come from one of the natives, who called
out a certain word ever and over again.  To Tom and Ned it sounded like:

"Oshtoo! Oshtoo! Oshtoo!"

"What's the matter?" cried Professor Bumper.

"The vampires!" came the answering voice of Jacinto.  "One of the
Indians has been attacked by a big vampire bat! Look out, every one!
It may be a raid by the dangerous creatures!  Be careful!"

Notwithstanding this warning Ned stuck his head out of the tent.  The
same instant he was aware of a dark enfolding shadow passing over him,
and, with a shudder of fear, he jumped back.




