CHAPTER XIV

A NEW GUIDE


In spite of Ned Newton's cry, Tom's finger pressed the switch-trigger
of the electric rifle, for previous experience had taught him that it
was sometimes the best thing to awe the natives in out-of-the-way
corners of the earth.  But the young inventor quickly elevated the
muzzle, and the deadly missile went hissing through the air over the
head of a native Indian who, at that moment, stepped from the bush.

The man, startled and alarmed, shrank back and was about to run into
the jungle whence he had emerged.  Small wonder if he had, considering
the reception he so unwittingly met with.  But Tom, aware of the
necessity for making inquiries of one who knew that part of the jungle,
quickly called to him.

"Hold on!" he shouted.  "Wait a minute.  I didn't mean that.  I thought
at first you were a tapir or a tiger.  No harm intended.  I say,
Professor," Tom called back to the savant, "you'd better speak to him
in his lingo, I can't manage it.  He may be useful in guiding us to
that Indian village Jacinto told us of."

This Professor Bumper did, being able to make himself understood in the
queer part-Spanish dialect used by the native Hondurians, though he
could not, of course, speak it as fluently as had Jacinto.

Professor Bumper had made only a few remarks to the man who had so
unexpectedly appeared out of the jungle when the scientist gave an
exclamation of surprise at some of the answers made.

"Bless my moving picture!" cried Mr. Damon.

"What's the matter now?  Is anything wrong?  Does he refuse to help us?"

"No, it isn't that," was the answer.  "In fact he came here to help us.
Tom, this is the brother of the Indian who fell overboard and who was
eaten by the alligators.  He says you were very kind to try to save his
brother with your rifle, and for that reason he has come back to help
us."

"Come back?" queried Tom.

"Yes, he went off with the rest of the Indians when Jacinto deserted
us, but he could not stand being a traitor, after you had tried to save
his brother's life.  These Indians are queer people.  They don't show
much emotion, but they have deep feelings.  This one says he will
devote himself to your service from now on.  I believe we can count on
him.  He is deeply grateful to you, Tom."

"I'm glad of that for all our sakes.  But what does he say about
Jacinto?"

The professor asked some more questions, receiving answers, and then
translated them.

"This Indian, whose name is Tolpec, says Jacinto is a fraud," exclaimed
Professor Bumper.  "He made all the Indians leave us in the night,
though many of them were willing to stay and fill the contract they had
made.  But Jacinto would not let them, making them desert.  Tolpec went
away with the others, but because of what Tom had done he planned to
come back at the first chance and be our guide.  Accordingly he jumped
ashore from one of the canoes, and made his way to our camp.  He got
there, found it deserted and followed us, coming up just now."

"Well I'm glad I didn't frighten him off with my gun," remarked Tom
grimly.  "So he agrees with us that Jacinto is a scoundrel, does he?  I
guess he might as well classify Professor Beecher in the same way."

"I am not quite so sure of that," said Professor Bumper slowly.  "I can
not believe Beecher would play such a trick as this, though some
over-zealous friend of his might."

"Oh, of course Beecher did it!" cried Tom.  "He heard we were coming
here, figured out that we'd start ahead of him, and he wanted to
side-track us.  Well, he did it all right," and Tom's voice was bitter.

"He has only side-tracked us for a while," announced Professor Bumper
in cheerful tones.

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I mean that this Indian comes just in the nick of time.  He is well
acquainted with this part of the jungle, having lived here all his
life, and he offers to guide us to a place where we can get mules to
transport ourselves and our baggage to Copan."

"Fine!" cried Ned.  "When can we start?"

Once more the professor and the native conversed in the strange tongue,
and then Professor Bumper announced:

"He says it will be better for us to go back where we left our things
and camp there.  He will stay with us to-night and in the morning go on
to the nearest Indian town and come back with porters and helpers."

"I think that is good advice to follow," put in Tom, "for we do need
our goods; and if we reached the settlement ourselves, we would have to
send back for our things, with the uncertainty of getting them all."

So it was agreed that they would make a forced march back through the
jungle to where they had been deserted by Jacinto.  There they would
make camp for the night, and until such time as Tolpec could return
with a force of porters.

It was not easy, that backward tramp through the jungle, especially as
night had fallen.  But the new Indian guide could see like a cat, and
led the party along paths they never could have found by themselves.
The use of their pocket electric lights was a great help, and possibly
served to ward off the attacks of jungle beasts, for as they tramped
along they could hear stealthy sounds in the underbush on either side
of the path, as though tigers were stalking them.  For there was in the
woods an animal of the leopard family, called tiger or "tigre" by the
natives, that was exceedingly fierce and dangerous.  But watchfulness
prevented any accident, and eventually the party reached the place
where they had left their goods.  Nothing had been disturbed, and
finally a fire was made, the tents set up and a light meal, with hot
tea served.

"We'll get ahead of Beecher yet," said Tom.

"You seem as anxious as Professor Bumper," observed Mr. Damon.

"I guess I am," admitted Tom.  "I want to see that idol of gold in the
possession of our party."

The night passed without incident, and then, telling his new friends
that he would return as soon as possible with help, Tolpec, taking a
small supply of food with him, set out through the jungle again.

As the green vines and creepers closed after him, and the explorers
were left alone with their possessions piled around them, Ned remarked:

"After all, I wonder if it was wise to let him go?"

"Why not?" asked Tom.

"Well, maybe he only wanted to get us back here, and then he'll desert,
too.  Maybe that's what he's done now, making us lose two or three days
by inducing us to return, waiting for what will never happen--his
return with other natives."

A silence followed Ned's intimation.




