Notes on conference No. 116-13

Top Secret—4th copy.

                                             [signature]  BRAUCHITSCH
                             Lieutenant Colonel, GSC and Chief Adjutant

       EXTRACTS FROM TESTIMONY OF DEFENSE WITNESS MAX KOENIG[136]

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

DR. BERGOLD: Will you please give the Court your first name and second
name?

WITNESS KOENIG: Max Koenig.

Q. When were you born?

A. 19 August 1897.

Q. What was your last position in the war with the Wehrmacht?

A. Lieutenant colonel in the reserve.

Q. And where were you?

A. With the commander of the Luftwaffe in Rechlin in charge of the
testing station.

Q. Is it known to you, Witness, whether and what sort of orders, if at
all, Milch gave with reference to the treatment of so-called terror
pilots?

A. My department was subordinate to the GL, and therefore received
orders from that office concerning the treatment of pilots who had made
emergency landings, and such orders were to the effect to inform the
Buergermeister [mayors] and the councillors that the prisoners who had
made emergency landings should be sent to Oberursel at once.

Q. Then were these orders given or were they repeated in certain cases?

A. I myself went there in 1942 to that office and I remember very well
that the first orders in this respect were given in 1943 and then in
1944.

Q. Have these orders provided for the taking of prisoners of all pilots
by the Luftwaffe and taking them to Oberursel?

A. The GL ordered, followed by the threatening of heavy punishment if
the orders were not followed, that all pilots who bailed out or made
emergency landings should be taken at once in the quickest way possible
to Oberursel.

Q. Did you transmit these orders to the mayors and councillors of your
district?

A. These orders were passed on by the commander of the testing station
to the ground organization of the base, passed on to all Buergermeister
and the city councillors.

Q. Can you confirm that these orders came from Milch?

A. They came from the GL. It was even ordered how we should proceed. As
far as I can recall we were ordered, among other things, that the
contents of their pockets should be taken away from the pilots and sent
to Oberursel with an accompanying letter.

Q. Did you know at that time that the Party wanted the pilots to be
treated in a different manner?

A. I did not know that for we in Rechlin had hardly any contact with the
Party.

Q. Therefore, you never corrected orders from the Party? Or would you
have done this?

A. No. We were subordinate to the GL, and, therefore, we could only take
orders from that superior office.

Q. Witness, what do you know within your office as to how concentration
camp inmates were treated?

A. I should say this: When labor was requested for the building of a
pillbox, we were given a detachment from Oranienburg. These prisoners
were housed by the evacuating of our testing station, that means our
German soldiers, in Laerz, and prisoners from the concentration camp at
Oranienburg were moved into the billets of the German soldiers. There
were about a thousand of these.

Q. Were the barracks in good condition?

A. They were not barracks in the bad sense of the word. They were the
best billets which we had at our disposal in Laerz. They were new
buildings and contained, apart from the living rooms, a theater room,
and a big kitchen with, I believe, four stoves. I know the camp because
I visited it repeatedly.

Q. Witness, what orders did you receive for treating of those people by
the GL?

A. I remember two orders that were to the effect that all those who
actually worked, whether foreigners or concentration camp inmates,
should be treated well in order to save their good health and in order
to increase their production.

Q. What has been done for that purpose?

A. As far as their health was concerned, under this order, I repeatedly
saw to it that I obtained medical supplies from the hospital [Revier] of
Rechlin.

Q. What you call the Revier is the hospital ward?

A. “Revier” is the sickroom which, considering the bigness of the
agency, is approximately the equivalent to a hospital * * *.

Q. Let us go back to concentration camp inmates. What has been done in
health matters?

A. Near Rechlin, there was an estate called Boek. This estate consisted
of several thousand acres and apart from potatoes and turnips also
produced wheat. On orders from the GL we received from that estate for
the commando in Laerz and for the concentration camp and for the foreign
workers large quantities of goods produced there.

Q. These concentration camp inmates; were they exploited unfairly?

A. I can say this—I myself was in the hall east from there up to the
building of the commander, which was about a kilometer and a half. The
foreign workers and concentration camp inmates lived in smaller and
bigger groups and worked in such groups, but I could always observe them
when I walked along the lanes. It seemed that when the civilian and
other employees there were still working, the concentration camp groups
had already stopped working because they had to be in their camp at a
certain time. The time they needed to march to and fro was part of their
working hours.

Q. Were they told to work particularly fast, or particularly heavy?

A. I can say this that I could really judge them because after all I saw
them almost daily. Their work was not particularly slow, it wasn’t
particularly fast. And one couldn’t say they were driven on.

Q. Were these people happy or did you hear complaints?

A. Should complaints have occurred I would have been the first to hear
about them for it would have been my job to hear them, because I headed
the particular office for food and treatment which was the liaison
office between ourselves and the Stalags. I even listened at times to
outbursts of joy. And from the liaison office we bought everything,
beginning from cigarettes and other small gifts, foodstuffs, etc. This
was used both in the camps and foreign workers, and the foreign workers
were always running about freely there.

Q. Did your office ask for concentration camp inmates or were they sent
to you by labor exchange on the basis of assignment of labor?

A. We had to use two ways, we had to use two channels here—one through
labor exchanges and the other through the GL who ordered labor for us
and on the basis of our application with the labor exchanges and the GL,
this special commando and attachment came, whether on the basis of our
application I really don’t know.

Q. Did you request concentration camp inmates or simply workers?

A. I may say quite frankly here I asked for German workers and I
expected they would turn up but as we were under orders to maintain
secrecy, neither did I think of foreign workers nor concentration camp
inmates.

                 *        *        *        *        *

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

MR. DENNEY: Just what was your job in Rechlin?

A. I was I B or I Bertha—that means an organization, and my job was
looking after the army.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Well, in your position having to do with figures you possibly were
concerned with labor in Rechlin?

A. From Rechlin we were ordered to build a shelter in Laerz, and to
carry this out we had to ask for labor.

Q. Didn’t they consolidate requests for labor and give them to you and
you would send them up?

A. Requests were sent on to the labor offices on the one hand, and on
the other hand to the GL.

Q. And they were sent by you?

A. They were sent by the commanding officer of the testing station, that
is, to say, my superior officer.

Q. But you got them up and gave them to him to send them on?

A. I worked on them and passed them on to my commanding officer.

Q. You said that you had concentration camp workers—you also had
foreign workers didn’t you?

A. There were about 1,000 concentration inmates and a certain number of
foreign workers—Russians, French, and Italians.

Q. Did you have any prisoners of war?

A. Yes. We had some prisoners of war.

Q. How many people were employed there altogether?

A. In Rechlin, prisoners of war and foreign workers, Germans, altogether
there were 4 to 5 thousand.

Q. Well, now we have got 1,000 concentration camp workers. So that
leaves 3 to 4 thousand. How were those broken down among prisoners of
war, foreign workers, and Germans?

A. Prisoners of war, roughly 500. There were about 300 foreigners, and
the rest were German civilians and German military personnel.

Q. Now, these concentration camp workers, were they guarded?

A. They were guarded in their own camps and in some cases on trucks were
taken to their places of work on the east Boek airstrip.

Q. And the foreigners, were they guarded?

A. I think they were at first a little guarded or, let us say, not at
all.

Q. How about the prisoners of war?

A. The prisoners of war were under a similar condition as there were not
very many guards at our disposal—guards were very few.

Q. You talked about the concentration camp people marching back and
forth. Were they marching under guard?

A. Yes. They marched under guard.

Q. In the stockade?

A. They were in large camps or huts under stockade and under guard.

Q. Was there barbed wire around it?

A. Yes. There was barbed wire.

Q. And guards walking around?

A. And guards, yes.

A. Armed guards?

A. Yes. They were armed.

Q. Now, you told about passing on these orders about the terror fliers
to the Buergermeister [mayor]. The order that you spoke of that you got
from the defendant?

A. From the GL.

Q. The GL was Field Marshal Milch?

A. That was Herr Milch.

Q. And you gave those orders on to the Buergermeister about the
so-called “terror fliers”?

A. The Buergermeister and county councillors.

Q. And then one day you heard about four fliers who had parachuted or
made a forced landing—anyway they came down—and you sent your soldiers
over there and you were told that they were not available?

A. No. The officer came back and said that the police had arrested the
four pilots who had made a forced landing, contrary to our order and
contrary to the regulations where the telephone number of our airfield
had to be passed on to the Buergermeister. The report to the
Buergermeister had the purpose to inform the airfield as quickly as
possible so that from there a truck could pick up the pilots.

Q. Which police had taken these four fliers?

A. Unfortunately, I do not know. The officer of the airfield came back
and reported that the police had fetched them. He didn’t see the police.
He merely was informed by the Buergermeister of this.

Q. And then what did you do? Did you call the Buergermeister up?

A. No. We passed this on to the airfield and the airfield reported this
to the Luftgau. The Luftgau is the next superior office above the
airfield.

Q. Did they ever get these four fliers back?

A. No.

Q. They never got them back?

A. I do not know where they were taken to.

Q. You were the second man at Rechlin. You know that these orders were
passed on to the Buergermeister that you received through your immediate
superior from the Generalluftzeugmeister?

A. I was not the second man. I was E commander—commander of that
office. I was purely an expert in I B. I was concerned in this because
Colonel Petersen of the SD commando ordered the airfield should make
investigations because of the Milch order to the effect that every pilot
should be at once taken to Oberursel.

Q. At any rate, you didn’t do anything about this after you heard it?

A. Oh, yes. The report was immediately sent to the Luftgau that the
pilots had been taken away.

Q. Did you send the report?

A. No. The report had to be sent by the competent office of the ground
organization—namely, the airfield.

Q. You never made any effort to find out what happened to these four
Allied fliers?

A. Oh, yes, that was passed on at once and the airfield having received
it sent it on to the Luftgau and continued to work on this matter. What
happened at the end I could not possibly find out because the Luftgau,
the next highest office, had to report on it through those channels of
command.

Q. You never tried to find out, did you? Did you ever call up anybody
over at the Luftgau and ask them what happened to these four fliers?

A. No. I could hardly do that because I belonged to the testing station
and there was a certain amount of dualism. It was rather like air
activity on the one hand and the ground organization on the other.

Q. You knew what the Hitler order was about terror fliers, didn’t you?

A. Yes. I learned about this much, much later after this emergency
landing in 1944. I heard about this in 1945 when I was interrogated in
Munich by the Reich Marshal Special Court.

Q. What nationality were these pilots?

A. I could not say that. I assumed they were Americans, but I could not
say that with certainty because we never saw the insignia of the
aircraft nor even the pilots themselves as we did not take them
prisoners.

Q. Were there any SD units around where you were?

A. In Rechlin itself, no, but my chief, Petersen, and I myself learned
later on that we were supervised by the SD service.

Q. You say that in your position you would have heard complaints from
any of the workers, of whom you had four to five thousand of whom
approximately two-thousand were made up of concentration camp workers,
prisoners of war, and foreign workers. You never got a single complaint
from any of those people, is that right?

A. No. I can only confirm that repeatedly the foreign workers gave
expressions of their gratitude for having this liaison office, which
consisted of a sergeant, and for the additional supplies which they thus
got from the Stalag. Strictly speaking, we would have been forbidden to
enter the concentration camp compound because it was part of
Oranienburg, and Oranienburg was an SS agency.

Q. So you never were inside, were you, in the concentration camp?

A. I went repeatedly there. I myself attended the hospital hours. That
is to say, I looked at the ill people before they saw the doctor and I
asked the doctor afterwards if he needed anything, and thereupon I got
the medical supplies from the airfield and for that purpose I was able
to do this because I was supported by the order of the GL.

Q. The Generalluftzeugmeister was able to arrange it so you could go
into the camp and look around?

A. On the basis of the order where it was my duty to look after the
people that they should be well-treated and well-looked after and,
therefore, I was admitted into their compound.

Q. And the compound was under the jurisdiction of the SS who had
jurisdiction over * * *.

A. (Interrupting) Yes. That was under the jurisdiction of the SS.

Q. And they had jurisdiction over all of the concentration camps?

A. I didn’t know that but all I know is that they came from Oranienburg
and that the regulations concerning that compound came from Oranienburg.

Q. You knew that Himmler was head of the SS?

A. I heard about that in 1945.

Q. In 1945 you found out that Himmler was the Reich Leader SS?

A. Yes.

Q. I have no more questions.

JUDGE MUSMANNO: Witness, you mean you did not know, before 1945, of the
power Himmler had in the SS?

A. No, your Honor. Particularly in the testing station we did not
discuss that nor did we receive many reports there. The attitude of my
chief—I may perhaps say here, of the GL himself—it was known what
their attitude was towards the Party. We ourselves were under the
Gauleiter of Mecklenburg who supervised us. Therefore, we went to no
trouble to look into other matters.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: This testing station was in Germany, wasn’t it?

A. Yes. Rechlin is roughly 120 kilometers northeast of Berlin on the
Muelef Lake [northwest of Berlin on Lake Mueritz].

Q. And an officer of the German army, 120 kilometers from Berlin, didn’t
know who Himmler was until 1945?

A. Of course, I knew that Himmler was a Party member but that Himmler
had all the concentration camps under him I really didn’t know until
very much later.

Q. But you knew he was head of the SS?

A. I knew that he was an SS commander. I did not know until then that he
was the head of the SS.

JUDGE PHILLIPS: How many concentration camp victims did you hear were
killed up to 1945, starved to death and killed?

A. I did not know that and I only learned it from press notices which
came out in connection with the Nuernberg trials.

Q. How many concentration camp workers were killed in your camp?

A. Nobody was tortured or killed in our camp; not even one man.

Q. Did any of them die a natural death while you were there?

A. Nobody died; I can confirm to the Court that both the health and the
individuals’ happiness was such that there was neither case of death nor
complaint.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: The name of this concentration camp I must know.
What was it?

A. The camp was near Rechlin and was an agency attached to Oranienburg.

Q. That was Oranienburg you were talking about?

A. It must have been a branch of Oranienburg. Up to my resignation on 31
January 1945, neither a torture nor a fatality occurred there. I said
that before, your Honor, and I should like to repeat it.

Q. Don’t repeat it.

JUDGE MUSMANNO: How many inmates were there in this camp; what was the
population of this camp?

A. The camp was roughly about 1,000 people strong.

Q. And how long were you there?

A. From October 1942 until 31 January 1945.

Q. And you say that in approximately three years’ time there was not one
death in this camp?

A. Your Honor, the camp was not founded in 1942; as far as I can
remember, it only came at the end of 1943 or early in 1944. I cannot
give you the exact figure of the arrivals. I think it must have been at
the end of 1943 or the beginning of 1944.

Q. And in all that time there was not one single death in the entire
camp?

A. Your Honor, I had not heard of one single case of death. Should one
case of death have occurred, it is possible that the SS in Oranienburg
would have been told. We ourselves had not heard of one case of death in
that camp, but during the day we assigned SS men in various groups.

Q. Do you mean this camp was functioning as a health resort?

A. On that, I can say, your Honor, that after the end of the war, I
heard that before the end of the war when people left, they left very
reluctantly, because there they were given food just as much as was
corresponding to their performance and, in turn, they were actually able
to work there.

-----

[134] Generalluftzeugmeister was translated as: Aircraft Master General,
Air Ordnance Master General, Chief of Supply for the Air Forces, Chief
of Air Forces Special Supply and Procurement Service, Director of
Supplies, and Director General of Air Force Equipment.

[135] Word is missing in German original document.

[136] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, 17 Feb.
47, pp. 1189-1204.




                         B. Medical Experiments

                            a. Introduction

The defendant Milch was charged with participation in criminal medical
experiments. On this charge he was acquitted. Both the judgment and the
concurring opinions deal extensively with this topic; also Volume I of
this series, and the first part of the present volume, contains
considerable documentation from Case I (the Medical Case) on the same
medical experiments for participation in which the defendant Milch was
indicted. Hence, only a small portion of the evidence on medical
experiments offered in the Milch Case has been included in the present
volume. Some of the prosecution documents which were directly related to
the defendant Milch have been included here as well as the testimony of
the defense witness SS General Wolff. Documents NO-285, NO-289, NO-224,
343-A-PS, and 343-B-PS, published as part of the Medical Case, were also
introduced in the Milch Case. Further defense testimony on this topic
may be found by consulting the official record.

The following defendants in Case I (the Medical Case) testified as
witnesses for the defendant Milch: Hans Wolfgang Romberg, Wolfram
Sievers, Hermann Becker-Freyseng, Georg August Weltz, and Rudolf Brandt.
In addition, six other defense witnesses testified regarding the medical
experiments: Erich Hippke, Walter Neff, Dr. Leo Alexander, Siegfried
Ruff, Karl Wolff, and Gerhard Engel. See list of witnesses for dates and
transcript page references on pages 889-90.

                              b. Evidence

                         PROSECUTION DOCUMENTS

    Doc. No.     Pros. Ex. No.       Description of Document         Page
 NOKW-041        113             Sworn statement by Hermann           626
                                   Goering, 27 September 1946,
                                   concerning Milch’s position
                                   as Inspector General of the
                                   Luftwaffe.

 NO-219          83              Letter from Dr. Rudolf Brandt        626
                                   to Dr. Rascher, 27 April
                                   1942, concerning medical
                                   experiment report for Himmler
                                   and Milch.

 NO-261          89              Letter from Milch to Dr.             626
                                   Hippke, 4 June 1942,
                                   concerning availability of
                                   low-pressure air chamber for
                                   experiments.

 1607-B-PS       115             Letter from Dr. Rascher to Dr.       627
                                   Brandt, 20 July 1942,
                                   concerning report on
                                   high-altitude experiments.

 1607-A-PS       115             Letter from Himmler to Milch,        628
                                   25 August 1942, concerning
                                   Dr. Rascher’s report on
                                   high-altitude experiments.

 1617-PS         111             Letter from Himmler to Milch,        629
                                   13 November 1942, concerning
                                   Rascher’s transfer to the
                                   Waffen SS.

 NO-262          119             Letter from Dr. Hippke to SS         631
                                   Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff, 6
                                   March 1943, concerning
                                   Rascher’s transfer to the
                                   Waffen SS.

                                        TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NOKW-041
                                        PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 113

         SWORN STATEMENT BY HERMANN GOERING, 27 SEPTEMBER 1946,
            CONCERNING MILCH’S POSITION AS INSPECTOR GENERAL
                            OF THE LUFTWAFFE

I, Hermann Goering, swear, depose, and state:

That I am the former Reich Marshal of the German Reich and the former
Commander in Chief of the Luftwaffe, that I have personal knowledge of
all the facts stated here, and that I know these facts because of the
position and responsibility which I had in the German Reich.

That in approximately 1939 the former Field Marshal Erhard Milch was
appointed Inspector General [Generalinspekteur] of the Luftwaffe and
that as such he was directly responsible to me for the performance of
his duties.

That the Inspector General of the Luftwaffe was in charge of all tasks
and responsibilities, with the exception of those which were concerned
with tactical operations (the latter were handled by my Chief of Staff).
The supervision of the inspections, as well as the affairs of the health
and medical inspections, was included in the tasks of the Office of the
Inspector General. Special questions, however, such as the number of
hospitals to be put at the disposal of the individual air fleets, fell
within the province of my Chief of Staff.

That Generaloberstabsarzt [Lt. Gen., Medical Service] Dr. Erich Hippke
was Chief of the Medical Service [Sanitaetswesen] of the Luftwaffe
during the years 1941 till 1944 inclusive; that the Office of the Chief
of the Medical Service was directly responsible for the execution of all
medical research and experiments; that the Office of the Chief of the
Medical Service, i.e., Hippke’s office, was directly subordinated to the
Inspector General, the former Field Marshal Milch.

I have read the foregoing deposition consisting of two pages, in the
German language, and declare that it is the full truth to the best of my
knowledge and belief. I have had the opportunity to make changes and
corrections in the above statement. I made this declaration voluntarily
without any promise of reward, and I was not subjected to any duress or
threat whatsoever. Nuernberg, 27 September 1946.

                                            [Signed]  HERMANN GOERING

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-219
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 83

LETTER FROM DR. RUDOLF BRANDT TO DR. RASCHER, 27 APRIL 1942, CONCERNING
            MEDICAL EXPERIMENT REPORT FOR HIMMLER AND MILCH

                               Top Secret

                                                                 XI a-59

                                     Fuehrer Headquarters, 27 April 1942

1198/42
Bra-N

To SS Untersturmfuehrer Dr. Sigmund Rascher

Munich

56 Troger Street

Dear Comrade Dr. Rascher:

The Reich Leader [Himmler] has seen your letter of 16 April 1942. He has
shown the same interest in this report as in the one you sent recently.
He would like you to make up for him an over-all report on the
experiments carried out to date, which he would like to present
personally to Field Marshal Milch.

Kind regards to your wife and yourself,

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours

                                      [initialed] R. Br.
                                                  SS Obersturmbannfuehrer

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-261
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 89

        LETTER FROM MILCH TO DR. HIPPKE, 4 JUNE 1942, CONCERNING
        AVAILABILITY OF LOW-PRESSURE AIR CHAMBER FOR EXPERIMENTS

The State Secretary for Aviation and Inspector General of the
Luftwaffe

                            Berlin W 8, Leipziger Street 7, 4 June 1942
                                                     Telephone 12 00 47
Dear Herr Hippke!

According to the agreement with the Reich Leader SS the low-pressure air
chamber for experiments in the neighborhood of Munich is still to be
available for two further months.

Moreover, Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher is, in addition to his tests in the
Luftwaffe, to be on duty for the present for the purposes of the Reich
Leader SS.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                                Yours

Generaloberstabsarzt Professor Dr. Hippke

Berlin-Tempelhof.

                                  Copy

SS Obergruppenfuehrer and General of the Waffen SS Wolff

Berlin SW 11.

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                    and kind regards,
                                                               Yours,
                                                     [signature]  MILCH

                               PARTIAL TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1607-B-PS
                               PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 115

 LETTER FROM DR. RASCHER TO DR. BRANDT, 20 JULY 1942, CONCERNING REPORT
                      ON HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS

Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher

Ahnenerbe RF-SS

                                                   Munich, 20 July 1942
                               Top Secret

SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Dr. R. Brandt

Berlin, RF-SS.

Very esteemed Dr. Brandt,

Enclosed please find a copy of the work of myself and Romberg,
“Experiments for Rescue from High Altitudes”.

On 14 July 1942, I was ordered by the Reich Leader SS to send you the
above-mentioned report. The Reich Leader wants that report to be
forwarded to Field Marshal Milch, accompanied by a letter from him,
asking Milch to receive Romberg and me for a lecture. I believe to have
understood correctly that the Reich Leader thought you would submit to
him a letter to that effect for his signature.

I was very glad to hear that the Reich Leader was satisfied with the
result of the work at Dachau and with the film, and that he ordered an
intensive continuation of the work in that field.

I recommended Romberg for the War Merit Cross 2d Class
[“Kriegsverdienstkreuz II. Klasse”] on the request of SS
Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers. SS Standartenfuehrer Dr. Wuest ordered me
to notify you hereof.

The Reich Leader furthermore decided on 14 July 1942 that the prisoner
Sobota and the two prisoners who work in the dissection room in Dachau
should be released and transferred to the group “Dirlewanger.” The exact
names are in possession of SS Obersturmbannfuehrer Sievers. The Reich
Leader has also issued an order to that effect to Major Suchaneck.

I thank you cordially for everything and remain

                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                [handwritten]  Very faithfully yours,
                                               [Signed]  DR. S. RASCHER

                                       TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1607-A-PS
                                       PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 115[137]

        LETTER FROM HIMMLER TO MILCH, 25 AUGUST 1942, CONCERNING
            DR. RASCHER’S REPORT ON HIGH-ALTITUDE EXPERIMENTS

                                     Field Headquarters, 25 August 1942

Field Marshal Milch

                                 Secret
Dear Milch:

Enclosed please find a report about experiments for rescue from high
altitudes, which have been carried out by Stabsarzt Dr. S. Rascher and
Dr. med. H. W. Romberg. I saw a film[138] produced by Dr. Rascher.

I consider the results of those experiments as so important for the air
force, that I beg you to receive Dr. Rascher and Dr. Romberg

I consider the results of those experiments as so important for the air
force, that I beg you to receive Dr. Rascher and Dr. Romberg that, after
having seen the film, you will also refer the matter to the Reich
Marshal because of its importance.

I would be obliged if you could let me know your opinion in time.

      Friendly greetings and
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                         H. H.  [initials of Himmler]
                                                          27 August 1942
                                                    [initial illegible]

1 Enclosure

                                         TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT 1617-PS
                                         PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 111

  LETTER FROM HIMMLER TO MILCH, 13 NOVEMBER 1942, CONCERNING RASCHER’S
                       TRANSFER TO THE WAFFEN SS

The Reich Leader SS

Berlin, SW 11, 8 Prinz Albrecht Street

Field Command Post

                                                       13 November 1942
                                 Secret

Dear Comrade Milch:

You will recall that through General Wolff I particularly recommended
for your consideration the work of a certain SS Fuehrer Dr. Rascher, who
is a medical officer of the air force reserve [Arzt des
Beurlaubtenstandes der Luftwaffe].

These researches which deal with the behavior of the human organism at
great heights, as well as with manifestations caused by prolonged
cooling of the human body in cold water and similar problems which are
of vital importance to the air force in particular, can be performed by
us with particular efficiency because I personally assumed the
responsibility for supplying asocial individuals and criminals, who
deserve only to die [todeswuerdig], from concentration camps for these
experiments.

Unfortunately, you had no time recently when Dr. Rascher wanted to
report on the experiments at the Ministry of Aviation. I had put great
hopes in that report, because I believed that in this way the
difficulties, based mainly on religious objections to Dr. Rascher’s
experiments—for which I assumed responsibility—could be eliminated.

The difficulties are still the same now as before. In these Christian
medical circles the standpoint is being taken that it goes without
saying that a young German aviator should be allowed to risk his life
but that the life of a criminal—who is not drafted into military
service—is too sacred for this purpose and one should not stain oneself
with this guilt; at the same time it is interesting to note that credit
is taken for the results of the experiments while excluding the
scientist who performed them.

I personally have inspected the experiments, and have—I can say this
without exaggeration—participated in every phase of this scientific
work in a helpful and inspiring manner.

We two should not get angry about these difficulties. It will take at
least another ten years until we can get such narrow-mindedness out of
our people. But this should not affect the research work which is
necessary for our young, splendid soldiers and aviators.

I beg you to release Dr. Rascher, Stabsarzt of the reserve, from the air
force and to transfer him to the Waffen SS. I would then assume the sole
responsibility for having these experiments made in this field and would
put the results, of which we in the SS need only a part for the frost
injuries in the East, entirely at the disposal of the air force.
However, in this connection I suggest that with the liaison between you
and Wolff, a “non-Christian” doctor should be entrusted who ought to be
not only a fully qualified scientist but also a man not prone to
intellectual theft and who could be informed of the results. This doctor
should also have good contacts with the administrative authorities so
that the results would really obtain a hearing.

I believe that this solution—to transfer Dr. Rascher to the SS, so that
he could carry out the experiments under my responsibility and on my
orders—is the best way. The experiments should not be stopped; we owe
that to our men. If Dr. Rascher remained with the air force, there would
certainly be much annoyance; because then I would have to submit to you
a number of unpleasant details caused by the arrogance and
presumptousness which Professor Dr. Holzloehner displayed in the Dachau
military post—which is under my command—during conversations with SS
Standartenfuehrer Sievers about my person. In order to save both of us
this trouble, I suggest again that Dr. Rascher should be transferred to
the Waffen SS as quickly as possible.

I would be grateful if you ordered the low-pressure chamber being put at
our disposal again, together with the differential pumps
[Stufenaggregatpumpen], as the experiments should be extended to even
greater altitudes.

      Cordial greetings and
                                                       Heil Hitler!

                                          TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NO-262
                                          PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 119

         LETTER FROM DR. HIPPKE TO SS OBERGRUPPENFUEHRER WOLFF,
               6 MARCH 1943, CONCERNING RASCHER’S TRANSFER
                            TO THE WAFFEN SS

The Inspector of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe

                           Berlin W 8, Leipziger Street 7, 6 March 1943

File No. 2299-43 secret Inspectorate

Dear Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff!

State Secretary Milch has given me your letter of 21 November last
year—Diary No. 1426/42 top secret—regarding the release of Stabsarzt
of the Luftwaffe Dr. Rascher to the Waffen SS.

I am prepared to release Stabsarzt Dr. Rascher from the Luftwaffe, even
after the Reich Physician of the SS, SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr. Grawitz
explained to me that he was unable to give me a replacement; I shall put
him at the disposal of the Waffen SS if Rascher himself desires this
release. I shall ask him about that.

Your conception that I, as the responsible director of all
medical-scientific research work, would have been opposed to the
chilling experiments on human beings and so retarded their development
is erroneous. I immediately agreed to the experiments, because our own
previous experiments on large animals were concluded and supplementary
work was necessary. It is also highly improbable that I, who is
responsible for the development of all possibilities for rescuing our
airmen, would not do everything possible to further such work. When
Rascher explained his wishes to me, I agreed with him immediately. The
difficulties, Mr. Wolff, lie in an entirely different sphere: it is a
question of vanity on the part of individual scientists, every one of
whom _personally_ wants to bring out new research results, and very
often it is only with great effort that they can be led to work
unselfishly for the common good. None of them is without guilt in this
respect; Rascher is not either.

If Rascher wants to build up his own research institute within the
framework of the Waffen SS, I have no objection. All research work
within the field of aviation medicine—that is, altitude—moreover, is
under my scientific supervision in my capacity as director of German
aviation medicine. This institute would then be under the supervision of
the Reich Physician of the SS, SS Gruppenfuehrer Dr. Grawitz.

Momentarily, however, this work _cannot_ be carried on because its
continuation would require a low-pressure chamber in which not only the
_altitude_ of the stratosphere, but also the stratospheric _temperature_
can be established. But there is no such chamber available in Germany as
yet; a large chamber is being built in the new Berlin Research Institute
for Aviation Medicine, and I hope I shall be able to have it completed
in the course of this year.

If Rascher, on the other hand, wishes to conduct other experiments not
concerned with altitude and chilling problems, these would not be under
_my_ supervision (_aviation_ medicine) but under the supervision of the
Medical Inspector of the Army (_military_ medicine), whom he would have
to contact.

I am going to talk over all these problems with Rascher in old
comradeship, and I shall again notify you.

      With respectful compliments and
                                                       Heil Hitler!
                                                     [Signed]  HIPPKE

-----

[137] When this document was introduced, Dr. Bergold made the following
statement (_Tr. p. 457_): “Please let me have the photostatic copy of
the original, so that I can make a statement.

“I merely wanted to find out on the copy, whether there was any
‘receiving’ mark. Later on, in the course of the introduction of
evidence, I shall prove that all letters which are not signed with a red
pencil and do not carry the initials ‘Mi’ were never seen by the
defendant Milch but were forwarded directly. This letter does not show
the initials ‘Mi’.

(Stepping forward and showing the Tribunal the document) “May it please
the Tribunal: Milch, whenever he received the letter, added his initials
‘Mi’; at all times, when Milch received a document, he indicated the
receipt with a date; he initialed with a date. These letters, which do
not show the initials, were received by his office but were not shown to
him. At a later date, I can prove this. I just wanted, at this time, to
call the Court’s attention to it.”

[138] When this document was read, Presiding Judge Toms asked (_Tr. p.
458_): “Mr. McMahon, do you know whether the film referred to in this
