letter is available?”

MR. MCMAHON: As far as we know, your Honor, it is not available. In
regard to the one [letter] just referred to, I would like your Honor to
understand that the copies which we have come from the secret files of
Mr. Himmler, therefore, cannot show the initials of Milch, and so, in
fact, would not show that Milch had seen that. This letter was received
from the files of Himmler and would not have the initials of Milch,
saying that he had received this particular letter.




          C. Curriculum Vitae and Excerpts from the Testimony
                         of the Defendant Milch

                                        TRANSLATION OF DOCUMENT NOKW-269
                                        PROSECUTION EXHIBIT 59

               _A SHORT CURRICULUM VITAE OF FIELD MARSHAL
                              ERHARD MILCH_

        Date                Position                   Activity
30.3.92                                     Date of birth.
24.2.10              Officer candidate      First Foot Artillery Regt.
18.8.11              Lieutenant             Recruit training.
1.8.14               Lieutenant             Adjutant, 2d Bn., Reserve,
                                              First Foot Artillery Regt.
2.7.15               Lieutenant             Air Force, Reconnaissance
                                              Observer.
18.8.15              First Lieutenant       Air Force, Reconnaissance
                                              Observer.
Winter 16-17         First Lieutenant       Air Force, Adjutant of a unit.
1917                 First Lieutenant       Chief of the Fifth Air
                                              Squadron.
1918                 First Lieutenant       Detached service, commander of
                                              an Inf. Company; Detached
                                              service, commander of a
                                              Field Artillery Battery.
18.8.18              Captain                Air Force, commander of 204th
                                              Air Squadron, commander of
                                              Sixth Fighter Group.
1919                 Captain                Commander of 412th Border
                                              Guard Squadron.
1920                 Captain                Detached service, commander of
                                              Police Air Squadron.
End of 1920          Captain                Resigned from military
                                              service.
1921                 Lloyd-Ostflug, later   Civilian air transport
                       Danziger Luftpost      company, Operation chief;
                                              Civilian air transport
                                              company, Manager.
1922                 Junkers-Luftverkehr &  Head of Traffic
                       Danziger Luftpost      Department—Organizer of air
                                              lines with Switzerland,
                                              Austria, Hungary, Latvia,
                                              Lithuania, Poland.
1923                 Junkers-Luftverkehr &  Id.
                       Danziger Luftpost
1924                 Junkers-Luftverkehr &  Head of air expedition to
                       Danziger Luftpost      South America. Business
                                              travel to the U.S.A.
1925                 Junkers-Luftverkehr    Head of General
                                              Administration.
Nov. 1925            Deutsche Lufthansa     Member of Technical Board.
Summer 1928          Deutsche Lufthansa     Id. and Business Director.
30.1.33              Id. and Deputy Reich   Id. concurrently with
                       Commissioner for       direction of aviation under
                       Aviation               supervision of Goering.
March 33             Deutsche Lufthansa and Id. in the Reich Ministry of
                       State Secretary        Aviation.
May 1933             Join NSDAP             Party member without
                                              assignment of tasks for
                                              Party.
Sept. 1933           Activated as Colonel   Party membership suspended.
1934                 Brigadier General      Reich Air Ministry and
                                              Deutsche Lufthansa.
1935                 Major General          Reich Air Ministry and
                                              Deutsche Lufthansa.
1936                 Lieutenant General     Reich Air Ministry and
                       (Air Force)            Deutsche Lufthansa.
                                            Inspector General of the Air
                                              Force
1938                 General
1.9.39               General                To operational Air Force.
11.4.-5.5.40         General                Commander of Fifth Air Fleet.
Since 10.5.40        General                Inspector General.
19.7.40              Field Marshal          Inspector General.
Nov. 41              Field Marshal          Id. and Chief of Air Force
                                              Material (Development,
                                              testing, procurement of Air
                                              Force material).
April 42             Field Marshal          Central Planning Board;
                                              Allocation of raw materials.
March 44             Field Marshal          Establishment of “Jaegerstab”.
                                              Raising output of fighter
                                              craft.
20.6.44              Field Marshal          Resign posts of State
                                              Secretary and Chief of Air
                                              Force Material.
Jan. 45                                     Resign post of Inspector
                                              General.
March 45             Field Marshal          Hitler declines my
                                              reinstatement.
4.5.45               Field Marshal          Taken into British custody in
                                              Holstein.

1 November 1946.                            [Signed]  ERHARD MILCH




          EXCERPTS FROM THE TESTIMONY OF DEFENDANT MILCH[139]

[March 11]

Erhard Milch, the defendant, took the stand and testified as follows:

JUDGE MUSMANNO: The defendant will raise his right hand and repeat after
me: I swear by God, the Almighty and Omniscient, that I will speak the
pure truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(The defendant repeated the oath.)

JUDGE MUSMANNO: You may be seated.

_DIRECT EXAMINATION_

DR. BERGOLD: Witness, I do not have to tell you the same thing I tell
all the other witnesses; namely, that you should speak slowly and all
that. You have heard that several times.

Give your full name.

DEFENDANT MILCH: Erhard Milch.

Q. When and where were you born?

A. On 30 March 1892, in Wilhelmshaven.

Q. Who were your parents?

A. My father was a clerk with the Kriegsmarine [navy], and my mother was
born Vetter.

Q. What education did you have?

A. I attended the Gymnasium in Wilhelmshaven, and then from 1905 on I
went to the Joachimsthalsche Gymnasium in Berlin.

Q. When did you matriculate?

A. In February 1910.

Q. What did you study then?

A. I didn’t study, but four days later I went to the First Foot
Artillery Regiment in Koenigsberg in East Prussia, and I joined that
regiment as a cadet.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, what was your position in the Third Reich in 1933?

A. I was State Secretary at that time; at first, it was not called a
ministry. It was called the Reich Commissar’s Office, because formal
measures for the formation of a ministry had to be considered both with
the Reich President as well as the Reichstag. At first, Goering was
Reich Commissar and I was Deputy Reich Commissar for Aviation. I think
it was in March that the Reich Ministry was formed; and at that moment I
became State Secretary.

                 *        *        *        *        *

[March 12]

Q. * * * Witness, is it correct to say that in your capacity as
Inspector General you had to make trips abroad too, that is, you had to
take care of the comradely relationship with the air forces of other
countries?

A. * * * Perhaps I can look up some notes to check the dates of my
trips. The visits which I made were only, some of them, in my capacity
as Inspector General. Some of them were made for purely personal
reasons, relations with people. For instance, the first visit which I
made at the request of Van Zeeland, the Belgian Prime Minister, that
must have been about 1936. I visited Belgium. The Belgian Ambassador in
Berlin, Count Kerkhove [Kerchove de Deuterghem], was a personal friend
of mine. One day he asked me to go to Belgium with him; the Prime
Minister Van Zeeland would like to see me. I was very astonished at this
idea and I asked him what the matter was. I then told him that I had to
have the permission of my superior officers. I received it. This was an
entirely private journey. The purpose of the trip, as I realized in
Belgium, was that Van Zeeland wished to come to terms with Germany, not
only formally but full-heartedly. Belgium, since the First World War,
had a treaty with France and was under an obligation to come to France’s
aid militarily by agreement with France. Van Zeeland wished to renounce
that treaty, and he wished to have similar terms with France as with
Germany. Belgium was also prepared in economic matters, which was a very
urgent point for Germany at the time, to make concessions, far-reaching
concessions. The visit started with a brief call on the King, who did
not refer to the purpose of the visit. This was purely a courtesy call,
but this call gave support to my trip. I saw that the Prime Minister
acted in accordance with his King. The plan as such—although as I
emphasized several times I am not a politician and it was not my
intention to interfere in foreign office matters, but here von Neurath
entirely agreed with my visit. He had not the bureaucratic mind—the
plan impressed me. Rather, I saw the possibility to create friendly
relations between Germany and Belgium, and via Belgium to France, and
later on via France to England itself.

I was convinced that the over-privileged policy of balance of power no
longer applied since the First World War. The powers in Europe had been
dislodged too much and joint friendship between France and Britain was
definitely a British interest in that sense.

When I returned I reported orally to von Neurath who entirely agreed
with that point of view. I also reported to Field Marshal von Blomberg,
who, apart from Goering, was my military superior. He took the same
line. I reported to Hitler and Goering. Both received my report but did
not express their own opinion. To my question whether and what I could
tell the Belgian Ambassador, I was told that would have to be done
through other channels, not through me. My orders had come to an end by
giving this report. This was my first visit and it was entirely
unofficial.

Then I went to Belgium in May 1987. At that time, as a Luftwaffe man, I
was officially received by the Commander in Chief of the Belgian Air
Force, General Duvivier; also by the Minister of War and other
officials. That was a very friendly visit which also led to very good
personal relations between ourselves and their pilots.

I was particularly interested in Belgium because in the First World War
Germany had marched through Belgium, had violated Belgian neutrality,
and had to make up for this now. I believed that the views as expressed
by Belgium on both occasions were aimed at finally burying the hatchet.
I assumed that there was a direct connection between my Belgian visit
and a visit by the French Ambassador Poncet who came to call on me in my
office and extended an invitation by the French Government on the
occasion of the International Exhibition. That visit took place from 4
to 9 October 1937 in Paris with the full approval of Goering and Hitler.
The visit was most impressive since I believe it was the first time
since 1867 that a German officer was able to pay an official friendly
visit to France. The French told me with the greatest satisfaction that
that was the first time the French Company of Honor had presented its
arms since the Prussian Crown Prince had visited Paris in 1867.

The French made great efforts to make the visit a success and I must say
they succeeded all along the line. The main point was joint military
inspections. Very cordial words were exchanged with the generals of the
French Air Force. I was accompanied by Udet and Count Kerkhove [Kerchove
de Deuterghem] who also had very good relations with France from other
times. The central point perhaps of the visit and its real purpose
occurred after a lunch given by Pierre Cot, the Minister of Aviation. On
my other side the Foreign Minister was sitting, and also the Minister of
the Navy was there. After lunch the three French Ministers, Wilmer, the
Commander in Chief of the French Air Force, Udet, and myself remained in
a special room and the French Foreign Minister asked me to take home
with me some propositions made by his office.

I should add that our German Ambassador in France was also there, also
in the smaller circle. When I said that I didn’t want to interfere in
his business, he himself did not take any notice of it. He said that the
most important thing was to report to Hitler on my impressions. He
himself could not approach Hitler. The Ambassador was then Count
Welczeck. I was extremely surprised; I had no idea. I couldn’t imagine
that the Head of State should not see his own Ambassador. On that basis
I said I would only act as a postman, and as such would transmit what I
would be told. I would give my very best own will.

The contents of the conversation were to have a far-reaching agreement
between the two countries, the main purpose being to establish a really
permanent and lasting peace between the two countries. I was able to
take over this assignment with the best conscience in the world. After
all, I said yesterday what I thought of military events in Europe in the
last thousand years. My impression was that the Foreign Minister was
very serious in this business, nor did I have any suspicions that this
might be a political trap and the Air Minister Cot who was always
described as communist in Germany, gave me a very good impression
indeed, and our conversations were very intimate and very frank.

The French Foreign Minister at that time was called Delbos. The farewell
on the Le Bourget Airfield led to fraternization between all of us, and
between ourselves and five or six of the highest French generals. I must
not forget that one of the oldest French generals, General Keller,
expressed with tears in his eyes that he was convinced that the thousand
years war between France and Germany was now a matter of the past. We
also were deeply moved.

On 9 October I flew from Paris to Berchtesgaden and reported to Hitler
at once. He ordered me to report to him as soon as I had returned. I may
perhaps say quite generally I could only see Hitler if Goering gave me
permission or ordered me to do so, or, of course, if Hitler himself
ordered me to come and see him. I myself could not go and see him as I
was merely a subordinate.

In the presence of Udet I gave a report to Hitler lasting over two hours
on the evening of the 9th of October, when my impression was still very
fresh. Hitler listened very attentively, asked a number of detailed
questions. I could tell him all about the various details which we saw
and heard, not so much the military ones, but the political details. I
could never talk enough about these things. After all, it was a fairly
long conversation with the Head of State. I recommended all these things
very warmly and I asked him to take this extended hand and he would
represent the greatest glory if he would succeed in coming to a lasting
agreement with France based on the very far-reaching economic community
between the two countries.

I compared this with the time of the German Customs League prior to 1870
when the German states were linked together only through this Customs
League. I recalled to his memory that both countries, France and
Germany, had been a unit and a community for centuries at one time, and
what was greatness at that time today merely meant a normal state. I
want to express in particular that nobody pleaded that the two countries
should be politically linked together but that political collaboration
was a necessity.

On 11 October, two days later, the Italian Ambassador called on me—

Q. Just a minute. I have to ask another question. Is it correct that
during this conversation you also offered to go as a special envoy to
France and to complete this task?

A. Oh yes, I told him that Count Welczeck should be called to Hitler in
order to give a report. Hitler said no, that is not necessary. I then
said that he must have somebody, if he wished to pursue this matter, who
enjoyed his confidence and also the confidence of the government to
which he was sent. I told him that I was prepared at all times to serve
under Welczeck as a special envoy only for that one task. I explained to
him that I regarded Welczeck as a man who enjoyed the confidence of the
French Government, and that it would be a pity if Hitler would not see
that man more frequently.

Q. Witness, did Hitler take a position on this question or did he keep
silent again as he did before?

A. Apart from putting questions to me he didn’t say anything decisive at
all. After all, I was not a Foreign Office official, and I could hardly
expect him to do so. Perhaps later on I can describe what I did as far
as Neurath is concerned.

Q. But before that I would ask you one more question. In Belgium and in
France were you told why you of all persons were approached by these
foreign countries and had the confidence of these countries?

A. The Belgians were explicit on that point. When I told Count Welczeck
that, after all, the Foreign Office was concerned here; that it would
not serve any useful purpose, he replied, “That will not be read higher
up. If you are the soldier coming to Hitler, he will listen to you, for,
after all, soldiers are your trump cards at the moment. Also we have
confidence in you, confidence that you will at least be able to see
Hitler; and he also has the confidence that you personally will do your
best in this respect.”

Q. Witness, at that time did others also approach you, other diplomatic
representatives, and lend you their confidence?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you have the confidence of Mr. Messersmith?

A. Oh, yes, Mr. Messersmith; but that was before all this. I think that
really took place in 1933, ’34 or perhaps in ’35. He visited me three
times. When he was the Consul General of the United States, he had some
difficulties with some American subsidiary companies in Germany. One was
Standard Oil, as far as I recall. I asked him why he wanted to see me
since that was not my business. Then he said that he had full confidence
that I would look after his interests. He had been told by other
diplomatic representatives that I was able to help him.

Q. All right. Now, Witness, we come to the steps you took after your
report to Hitler, the steps you took later on. I ask you to tell about
that briefly.

A. Perhaps I’ll do that. It was after my visit to England.

Q. Very well, go ahead.

A. On 11 October 1937, the Italian Ambassador came to see me. That was
Professor Attolico. He told me that the Italians had got very excited at
my Paris visit. It was believed that I had gone to make arrangements
there which were in contradiction to German-Italian agreements. I calmed
him down at once without giving him too many details; but he asked me to
pay a brief visit to Italy before going to England. We had been asked to
go to England on the 17th of October. An air force exhibition in Milan
was the occasion; and I was asked to open that exhibition on the 12th of
May. That, of course, was headlined by the Italian papers. Attolico came
and saw me after this and expressed his gratitude. He said that Delbos
had put a trap in front of me.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: The witness gives the date as the 12th of May. Is
that what he meant for the exhibition in Milan?

A. 12 October.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: What year?

A. In October 1937. I went to Italy and then to England. The visit had
been arranged by the Royal Air Force as a reply to the visit paid to us
by the Royal Air Force in January 1937. At that time figures were
exchanged between us on planned armaments, that is to say the figures
concerning bombers, fighters, and so forth, by agreement with Goering
and Hitler. Here again the intention existed to know exactly what the
other was doing. The other point was the intention to come to terms on
all these questions.

The visit to England lasted until 25 October. England had quite a lot to
show. The air force was very well organized and had first-rate
personnel. The visits were very cordial. Political conversations of an
official nature were not held; but unofficially we spent an evening in a
club, in a very small circle of ten people, perhaps less than ten. Lord
Swinton, who was then Minister of Aviation, took part, as well as the
leader of the opposition, Mr. Churchill, and Lord [Rt. Hon.] Amery,
Secretary of State for India, and from the British Air Force, Lord
Trenchard.

We had brought General Stumpff and of course General Udet. This was more
in the nature of a personal contact and political questions were not
touched upon. The other hosts had told me before, “Today you meet your
first and second best enemy. Don’t be confused by this; but if there is
an attack, hit back.” That is what happened; but it was a very jolly
evening.

Before we took off again, that is to say on 24 October, Mr. Eden, the
Foreign Secretary, rang me up. He said that he had been busy all the
time before, but could I see him now. I said that I should be delighted
but that a program had been arranged for us by the RAF to visit an
airfield tomorrow. I asked that if the program could be changed, would
he please contact the RAF. He told me that perhaps that would be a bit
too complicated and asked if perhaps I could see him later on. I could
be with him in two hours and thirty minutes since that was how long my
aircraft took from Berlin to London at that time. Unfortunately I never
saw Mr. Eden.

I reported about that trip to England on 2 November. The report took
over two hours. Hitler was much more accessible than when I talked to
him about France. I reported particularly my talk with Mr. Churchill and
drew his attention to the seriousness which was expressed. Hitler
immediately interrupted me. He said, “Please do not worry at all; never
in my life will I do anything against Britain. The basis of my whole
policy is collaboration with Britain.” These words calmed me
considerably. I immediately explained to him once more that the way to
come to terms with England would be by Brussels and Paris, and I
explained why.

I saw von Neurath on 11 October on the trip to France; and on 28 October
I reported to him on my trip to England in great detail. All I could
tell him at the time was what Hitler had said or had failed to say about
France. Neurath again was very impressed with me for having worked for
him in this sense. I was in agreement with him that without any further
invitations by him or Hitler I must not take any further steps.

Then on 1 November 1937 I went and saw Field Marshal von Blomberg who at
that time was Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, that is to say,
Goering’s military superior. I reported to him. Blomberg in all things
entirely agreed with me, as had Neurath. Goering at that time did not
have enough time to see me. I asked on several occasions to be allowed
to report to him on these very important matters; but this did not
happen because he simply declined.

Q. Witness, I think we can leave this field now. Will you only explain
briefly to the Tribunal whether you received foreign delegations, and of
which nations, and what happened at those occasions?

A. I said before that the British had visited us in January 1937. After
that I had perhaps five or six visits from Englishmen. The French paid a
return visit in 1938. On that occasion again we returned the very
cordial welcome which the French had given to us. We showed the French
our troops and factories. Yesterday, reference was made by the witness
Vorwald[140] to this, who said that we only showed what the troops had
at their disposal at the time and what expressly had been permitted to
be shown by Goering, after a request had been made by the competent
department of the General Staff. I know that somebody has alleged that
Hitler at the end of the war said I had shown secret methods to foreign
visitors and damaged Germany thereby. That is a slanderous statement. It
was alleged that I had shown radar instruments, and at that time we
didn’t have any radar at all.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, were you ever Goering’s deputy in this capacity, and how
long?

A. Until 1937 I was his deputy, and all offices in the Luftwaffe which
were subordinate to him were also subordinate to me. This applied to the
execution of orders. From 1937 onwards I was his deputy only in my own
sector, and this automatically as Chief of the General Staff in his
field, which applies also to the Generalluftzeugmeister. In any case it
was within my capacity to deputize for Goering in all matters as I was
the second senior officer of the Luftwaffe, and this was done only by
way of rank. But Goering reserved the right to appoint a deputy in
general, that is, especially always only for the Luftwaffe. This
authority he did not confer upon me. Even when he was on leave he kept
this right, he retained his command. I agreed with this arrangement
personally.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, what was the position at the beginning when you took over
the duties of GL? What measures did you take, and what was your aim?

A. I can be brief in this connection, at least in regard to the first
point. General Vorwald yesterday spoke at length about it. No useful
developments for the immediate future were available. No bomber aircraft
of a new type was in existence, and as to mass production we stood very
poorly, as I previously described to you. Painstakingly we had
reorganized on 1 September, and it was only because of the extreme
devotion of industry and because of the faithful service rendered by our
German workers and those who helped them that it was possible to, shall
we say, bring about a miracle.

The production figure in bombers was reached once more in the shortest
of time, in the spring of 1942. There was not a single individual
instance where our program as we had set it for ourselves was not
reached. This was something extraordinary. In the case of fighters,
there was a good type of fighter aircraft, or even two; namely, the
Focke-Wulf and the Messerschmitt, but there were no engines for those
fighters. We had to use incomplete engines to equip these aircraft, and
on the strength of my experience collected in my capacity as director of
the Lufthansa, I had to have tests carried out. My testing department in
Rechlin was excellently staffed, the commander being an excellent pilot
and technician, and it was due to their devotion that in a few months we
managed to get even these new engines ready although, according to human
estimate, we could not expect it. It was more through luck than
intelligence that we got that.

Now that was the situation as I found it. The new organization, of
course, had not been started up, and I had to collect a few new,
extremely good experts. The men who were working there independently
were rather downhearted for a long time. As experts they had lost any
doubt in the outcome of the war, and they did not believe that it would
be possible once again to start up our armament program.

The total number of aircraft in production was something in the
neighborhood of 800. That included trainer aircraft, transports, liaison
aircraft, such as the Storch; it even included towing aircraft which
were to be used for parachutists. As far as fighters were concerned,
production of those, when it was removed from under my care, had
increased by only about ten percent, although ’37, ’38, ’39, ’40,
’41—four years—five years—had elapsed. The saddest fact was that
among those 800 there were only 200 fighter aircraft, although both on
the British front and in the East, fighter planes were necessary. The
Russians had at their disposal a very large number of bombers, and even
if they were an elderly type, after all, we did have to have fighters to
keep them in check, and since the transport extended from the North to
the South over 2,000 kilometers, a large number of fighter units had to
be used in that campaign. This arm could not be supported with 200
fighters. We needed more.

The demand which I found from the General Staff, which of course made
all demands and had them confirmed by Goering, amounted to a total of
360 fighters which were to be obtained in 1942. It was said yesterday
that immediately I ordered a considerable increase. Several figures have
been mentioned by various witnesses. Actually, these increases were not
decided upon in one day. To begin with, it was to be doubled and a few
days later I said, “Let’s make it 1,000; that’s a round number,” and
later, in fact, there were 3,000 and later even we planned 5,000. We
knew at about that time just what we had to expect from our enemies. We
knew the types they had.

America, in the initial period, still published their production figures
correctly subdivided according to types, and we also had an excellent
intelligence, and from analyzing aircraft that had been shot down and
from the numbers which were coded, and which could be deciphered by an
expert right away, we could discover right to the very last number what
they had produced. That was production that had been actually carried
out, and the figures found in the United States were not fictitious.
Industry, although with a certain amount of reticence and difficulty,
but certainly afterwards quite clearly fulfilled these figures. I still
know exactly that the plan ran to about 8,000 aircraft, and was
achieved, and that figure included four-engine bombers. Production under
Britain’s rearmament, too, was learned in detail, and I remember at the
time Great Britain was either already producing 800 four-engine bombers
a month or was just about to produce that number.

You could calculate from that the number, the quantity of bombs which
could be brought to Germany, and regarding the function and size of the
bombs, of course we knew about that too. This was, of course, the reason
that previously as Inspector General I demanded that the entire force
should be built to defend our home country, this being the fundamental
principle of warfare, since without armaments and life at home, battles
at the front were unthinkable. I shall later have to come to this
question in more detail because I am probably the man who remembers this
most accurately, and as long as I am still about I would like to state
this clearly once again, because this is one of the most important
questions which probably existed in every war. This was the biggest
struggle that went on, and as I look back on it today I am surprised
that I did not despair over that struggle myself.

Q. Witness, those measures which you planned, were they dictated by the
thought that with the campaign against Russia the situation of Germany
would become desperate?

A. As I said earlier, the war on two fronts was the stab in the back of
this war as far as I was concerned, that I thought excluded victory once
and for all, and the only remaining question now was just how badly
fleeced we might escape from this whole affair. It was no longer
possible in my opinion to end this war by force of arms. It was only
possible by means of arms to attain a somewhat satisfactory final
position on the strength of which political and diplomatic steps would
have to take place. In order to achieve such a final position it was
necessary in the first place that Germany should be protected against
destruction, because once the war potential was destroyed it was
immaterial whether the fronts collapsed a little earlier or a little
later. They could not be held any longer. This thought, unfortunately,
was not understood by our leaders, or rather they did not agree with it
and turned it down and just did not come to it. The end did not come
until there was hardly one stone left intact.

Q. Witness, in this connection I should like to ask you to show the
correctness of your present report and to prove that from the very start
you had these thoughts, and to submit to the Tribunal the remark you had
made in your diary when the Russian campaign started.

A. I wrote in it, “The attack against Russia: the first day 1,800
aircraft destroyed, mostly on the ground. The Russians left them there.
They didn’t expect that we would attack. They overestimated our
intelligence.”

Q. What did you want to say by these words, “They overestimated our
intelligence?”

A. Well, the Russians might have thought that no opponent would be so
foolish and so stupid to attack them now and create a war on two fronts.

                 *        *        *        *        *

[March 13]

Q. Witness, do you know at what point the Central Planning Board was
ordered and how did the creation of this institute come about?

A. Its creation must have taken place during the last days of March
1942. It originated from a discussion which Speer had with Hitler in the
latter’s headquarters. At the time when Speer had taken over armament
there was no higher authority which was acting according to clear-cut
points of view when distributing raw material. Until then we had been
receiving raw material through a certain department of the OKW. This
department in turn had been getting it from the Four Year Plan. The OKW
was distributing to the army, navy and air force but this department had
no expert knowledge. Consequently the continuity of armament suffered
under this. Speer quickly recognized the state of affairs and without my
having previous knowledge of it he tackled this question when talking to
Hitler. As a result Hitler appointed Speer as the central planner for
this subject. Subsequently Speer made the request that I should take on
this task together with him, since Speer had been in the armament
business rather briefly and since he said I would be able to help
him—at least this was the way Speer discussed the matter with me
shortly afterwards; I, myself, hadn’t been at that conference. Following
this, on 2 April 1942, Speer and I together went to see Goering since
Speer considered that this task, which, after all, was connected with
the Four Year Plan, should be discussed with Goering. Goering expressed
agreement but he demanded that a representative of State Secretary
Koerner, who was in official contact with the Four Year Plan should
enter the Central Planning Board. I know that Speer said at this point:
“It seems to me three are rather too many for this job”, and I said
“Well, I am only too willing to drop out. I have enough work as it is,”
and Speer interfered and said that was out of the question. Goering
said: “No, it is my view that there can be three.” That is how the
composition of the Central Planning Board was realized. I can anticipate
at this point that very much later Minister Funk joined the Central
Planning Board as a force which was done at the instance when the
so-called “War Production”—and in this case we are not talking about
the armament business but civilian requirements and the like—was
transferred from Funk’s Ministry to Speer’s Ministry.

Q. Witness, did you, within the framework of the Central Planning Board
become the armed forces’ or air forces’ representative?

A. No, right at the very beginning that had been decided upon by Hitler
that, namely, that in no way was I to look after my own interest there,
that is to say, the interest of the air force, that I should be above
the Party. Later on there were demands from the navy, which had not
known about this arrangement. They, too, wanted to have a representative
in the Central Planning Board. * * *

Q. Witness, what were the actual tasks of this Central Planning Board?

A. The tasks had been communicated to me by Speer and had been confirmed
through Goering. There was only distribution of raw materials to all
holders of priority permits.

Q. Witness, what is what you call the “holder of a priority”?

A. Well, the armed forces are such priority holders, and within the
armed forces the navy, army, and air force are holders of these
priorities. The coal industry holds these priorities; the steel
industry; the textile industry; the German cities and municipalities,
for their municipal requirements; the power supplying industry.

Q. What about agriculture?

A. Most certainly agriculture, for agricultural machinery requires
steel, requires coal, requires all sorts of things. Altogether, the
forms according to which we used to distribute, and which contained the
word “armament” on the left, contained on the right all the civilian
purchasers, all the buyers. There were approximately 40 to 45 civilian
holders of these priorities.

Q. But then what did the Central Planning Board have to do with the Four
Year Plan, to which there seemed to be some sort of formal connection
through Speer?

A. The Central Planning Board as such had nothing to do with the Four
Year Plan; only Speer, in his capacity as Armament Minister.

Q. Did you ever report to Goering about the Central Planning Board?

A. No, with the exception of that first meeting on 2 April 1942, when
the matter was reported to him. Apart from that meeting, I have never
talked to him or with him about the Central Planning Board. * * *

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. From whom did the Central Planning Board have instructions?

A. Directly from Hitler.

Q. Through which channels were they given?

A. Speer was with Hitler practically every week, for the reason of army
supplies, or other questions, sometimes staying with Hitler for several
days. On such occasions Hitler would mention his most important
problems. For instance, he would mention the sequence of priorities of
the various armament branches, which I explained to you yesterday. Quite
automatically, through this, the approximate priority ratings were laid
down. However, within the individual spheres, because of the events of
the war, there were current changes: At one moment one type of tank, and
then at another moment, another type of tank; or first one type of gun,
and then another type of gun, would be more important. That, of course,
necessitated considerable rapid changes in the allotment of raw
materials. That was the case, and to an even stronger degree, in the
case of munitions, so that currently, probably during every such
conference which took place in his office, Hitler used to express
special wishes, which of course meant orders for us.

I personally took part in such conferences on nine occasions.
Occasionally Speer would take me along to have me appear on the stage
there, as he would put it. However, that ceased almost completely during
the last years. Anyway, I know for certain, according to my documents,
that I was there nine times.

Let me add at this point that State Secretary Koerner[141] was never
there. Speer did not think that it was necessary for him to be taken
along, and Koerner would not impose his presence either.

Q. So that during such a meeting for the receiving of orders of the
Central Planning Board, Koerner was never there?

A. No, he was not there, and he did not know about it either. He didn’t
know, therefore, how strongly Hitler interfered in this sphere by giving
orders.

Q. But didn’t you always report to him, either you or Speer, in the case
of the meetings of Central Planning Board?

A. It might have come as an aside during the meetings; one of us might
have said, usually Speer, “Hitler has given this or that order,” but
that wasn’t anything very noticeable to Koerner.

Q. Was it only because of the Central Planning Board that Speer went to
see Hitler?

A. No, that was one very small portion of all the other discussions,
because Hitler was interested, to an extraordinary degree, in army
armament, and even right down to the most minute detail. He himself
decided, on his own initiative, the thickness of armor on armored
fighting vehicles; he decided upon the caliber and type of gun which
should be fitted to tanks; he decided the thickness and the caliber of
antitank defensive armor; he himself laid down, personally, the supply
rate of ammunition for every type of gun. I had an awful lot of
difficulty with him over antiaircraft ammunition in that connection,
since Hitler would never depart during that time, from anything which he
had once laid down. He had changed a great deal from his prewar days.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, it is your opinion that even this first record of the
Central Planning Board meeting is inexact and does not correspond with
the true discussions which took place?

A. May I state quite basically in connection with this that I hardly
ever had my deputy with me when I went to the meetings; he had a lot of
other assignments and their meetings went on for several hours.
Koerner’s deputy, the representative whom he brought along, always kept
the minutes in the sense of observing Koerner’s meaning. Sometimes I did
read through these brief minutes, and I might say that I pointed out to
Koerner and Speer that facts always seemed altered considerably, but all
three of us used to laugh about it, and with a flick of the wrist we
used to consider it quite unimportant to have these minutes altered
afterwards because all of these minutes appeared of no importance
whatsoever. What was important were decisions of the Central Planning
Board, and they were taken down most exactly, and they contained to my
knowledge only contingencies of raw materials such as we had
distributed. * * *

Q. Witness, on this occasion we might touch upon the value or lack of
value of the so-called verbatim minutes, now that we have come to this
subject, don’t you think? These verbatim minutes, which are very
comprehensive, very voluminous, even with reference to one meeting,
there was a whole volume it seems. Were they examined?

A. No. That wasn’t possible. I might have examined one or the other
minutes at the beginning, and I did on one occasion try to make
improvements, but I found that it contained so many mistakes that the
time of reading and improving them would have amounted to fifty percent
more time than the actual meeting. These meetings often went on for four
or more hours or so, and I really did not have the time to sit down for
something like six hours afterwards in order to put the minutes right. I
know that there wasn’t any one who read through them, and I didn’t
really know why these records, these verbatim records, were prepared. I
thought perhaps it was a question of supervision for us, and I had no
cause to state that I would not allow myself to be supervised. If you
went to the pains of having one stenographer who would do nothing but
write, but who was stumped by the fact that we sometimes spoke too
quickly or not too clearly; a stenographer who often sat far away from
the man who was speaking, or who didn’t know the name of the man who was
speaking, there was bound to be a lot of muddle in that respect. He
didn’t know whether the man who was sitting on the left was talking or
his neighbor on the right, and one mistake after another occurred. I
gave it up pretty quickly after looking through these minutes. I once
asked the others whether they read through the minutes and they just
laughed at me, and said that they had more and better jobs on hand, and
I said so had I.

Q. Witness, you have just said that these stenographers who sat on the
side could quite often not even distinguish between the speaker, whether
it was he or his neighbor. What was the custom; did you remain seated
while you were speaking, or did one always rise?

A. No, no, we all stayed seated; we all remained seated and the
stenographer couldn’t always see who was speaking because on certain
occasions a lot of people were there. If you invited one man to a
meeting in Germany, then possibly he always brought his entire staff
along so that he could answer all the questions; and if you invited one,
sometimes fifteen or twenty showed up. I sometimes asked whether these
men didn’t have anything else to do because we were not really concerned
with details, only with the basic, larger points, and they used to say,
well, everybody is invited.

Q. Witness, did it happen that specific orders were given to
stenographers to alter certain points or omit them? So that apart from
accidental mistakes, deliberate mistakes were being made?

A. I have recollections of many occasions that Speer, who used to sit
next to me, would shout to the stenographer across the room and say,
“Leave that out, what the Field Marshal just said.” Unfortunately,
notorious before this Tribunal are the expressions and words I used,
which were not always too carefully chosen. I have always said during my
entire life what came to my mind at the moment, and I, as a soldier, was
never taught to hide my opinion. But sometimes, in order to refreshen
sometimes boring meetings, I used rather forceful language to shake up
the others a bit so that they would at last come out with their true
opinions, because many of the people were only there as experts on
individual points. Quite often ministers were there; even in Germany a
minister and a field marshal have a fairly high-ranking position; and
the German is rather more inclined to speak too much than too little.
Now, if they found that I too would use strong expressions on one
occasion, or another, then they would loosen up a bit and they would
start talking, since they felt that I had let go too. I was keen to have
clarity, and that the cat wouldn’t always run around the hot porridge,
because, after all, we had to know the truth and the real background.

Since Speer was much more cautious and much more courteous, never having
been a soldier, I could allow myself the exhibition of freedom, and
unfortunately I did.

Q. Yes, unfortunately. So that statements of that kind of yours were
either stricken or they were altered?

A. That warning of Speer’s only came into force if I stated my criticism
of the higher leaders too severely. If, for instance, somewhere Hitler
had given assignments or orders which, to my view, were wrong, or even
as to orders coming from Goering or other people, the Minister of the
Interior or the Minister of the Police or some other person, then I even
here would state my frank criticism amongst these people. Usually I
didn’t have any other possibility to state my deviating opinion, and I
had the inner urge to say it out aloud. Speer, in my interest, would
have it struck out, and he told me a few times afterward, “For heaven’s
sake, do be careful. They will hang you one day.” But of course he meant
by the German side. Sometimes when I myself became aware of the fact
that in my criticism of these high-ranking gentlemen I had gone too far,
I would say to the stenographer, “Leave that out.” And on one or two or
three occasions I said, “Change it. Put someone else in there as having
been referred to,” because I myself discovered—mind you, I wasn’t
always aware that I criticized too severely, but since Speer told me so
a few times, I controlled myself a little more—that I had said too much
and that it was a mistake, and so I intervened myself.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, after our discussion concerning labor questions, in
connection with the decree concerning the Central Planning Board, I want
you to answer my question now, whether and what powers the Central
Planning Board had with reference to the Plenipotentiary General for
Labor, Sauckel?

A. The Central Planning Board had no power to issue orders to Sauckel.

Q. Who was it that gave Sauckel’s orders?

A. Sauckel’s office had been formed by Hitler’s Decree. However, after
that it was taken into the Four Year Plan, so that formally Sauckel was
under Goering immediately. However, he received his orders from Hitler
himself.

Q. As you said, the Central Planning Board had no powers toward Sauckel?

A. None whatsoever.

Q. However, don’t you know that Speer tried to win influence over
Sauckel? Did that occur in his capacity as a member of the Central
Planning Board, or did that occur in his capacity as Armament Minister?

A. It only occurred in his capacity as Armament Minister.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, on this occasion I would like to ask you, what then do you
know about these concentration camps during the war?

A. I only knew of two concentration camps, namely, Dachau and
Oranienburg. I visited Dachau personally in 1935; in other words, before
the war. That was the only time that I visited a concentration camp,
except for now as a prisoner of war. What there was inside the
concentration camps I do not know. In 1935 there were only Germans in
there; and I was very much surprised to learn after the collapse of
Germany that there were also foreigners in the concentration camps. I
did not know that. I am quite convinced that none of my collaborators
knew about these things in the concentration camps. We had been told at
the time that in these concentration camps criminals of various
categories were being detained. What I saw in 1935 were habitual
criminals. I thought it a very good idea that these people be not
allowed to walk around freely. When we were there these people had to
tell us their sentences; and there were several barriers full of people,
and there the average criminal record was twenty to thirty times rape of
small children. Therefore, I, being a father, believed that it was best
for these people to be locked up.

However, I know that there were political people there; and I saw them,
too. There my opinion differed. But I was told that those people were
there on a temporary basis and would only be kept in there for a longer
period of time if they actually committed active sabotage against the
state. At Dachau most of the political people who were being detained
there as prisoners in 1935 were members of the SA, on account of the
Roehm Putsch in 1934, and that was the basis and reason for their being
there.

I should like to add that I asked to be allowed to visit that
concentration camp at the time, together with other officers of my
branch, in other words, of the Luftwaffe, because during my meetings and
conversations with foreigners, I repeatedly heard the statement,
particularly from the British, “We understand your Hitler’s system very
well. There was no other way for you to go. However, we do not
understand your concentration camps.” That is why I decided to get some
sort of a picture for myself by seeing the camp. It took a little while,
but finally I got the permission to visit the concentration camp. That
at the time was my only contact with the question.

Q. What was your impression of the camp? Was it clean?

A. In 1935, well, yes, at that time it looked very well. There were good
barracks, absolutely waterproof, with two cots, one above the other. Our
barracks always had the same system anyway; and I was the only one to
get that principle in the Luftwaffe, so that there was quite a
revolution among the soldiers in the army. I witnessed one of their
meals. There was a good portion of food, meat, vegetables, potatoes,
quite a lot of soup. The people were thus well-fed. Of course, they had
to work. The work they did was not an easy task. Cleanness was
noticeable. The beds had sheets with a special design on them. The
entertainment of the people was taken care of. There was recreation.
They had a special room where they could hold speeches. They had
facilities for writing and reading. There was an excellent library there
which even according to its size and contents was very interesting. I
looked through the index one time. The man in charge of the library was
a Gruppenfuehrer of the SA and also a concentration camp inmate. I saw
the bakery, saw the butcher shop.

At that time I am sure that there were no cruelties and no inhumane
equipment of any kind. Of course, I could not speak to these same
individuals and ask them how they like it in there. We were allowed to
talk to these people; but each of them was allowed only to say what his
sentence was.

Q. Did you see what kind of work these inmates had to do?

A. That was very hard. They worked on their own equipment, I believe,
not only for the camp but for all sorts of purposes and for the SS. In
other words, they made furniture for themselves and for the Waffen SS
for instance, cupboards, chairs, stools, tables. They also had a
locksmith shop there. As far as I know they did work outside the camp as
well.

I believe there were special commands for cutting down trees; there were
special commands for splitting stones. However, I cannot go into detail
because I inserted this visit into one day—it was in the afternoon
after I had an inspection of the troops in Munich, which inspection I
finished about 9:30 in the morning, and at four o’clock in the afternoon
I had another inspection to carry out of the Luftwaffe, and in between I
saw the camp. I myself ate or tasted the food which the German inmates
had, and I thought it was very tasty, good, and sufficient.

Q. Witness, at a time following that, did you ever hear, even if only
rumors, that inhumane acts were being committed in the concentration
camps?

A. I cannot remember that anything had been mentioned in that
connection—anything that had anything to do with the truth or that
seemed like the truth. I can confirm the fact that there were quite a
few rumors during the war. However, all our efforts to find where these
rumors originated were not successful. We were not able to find out
anything at all. I had very few connections with the SS itself.

Q. I shall come back to the SS later on. Now, Witness, as witnesses have
said, you yourself saw to it that persons in concentration camps were
freed, or were not committed to the concentration camps. Can one not
draw the conclusion from that that you were of the opinion that it was
not very good in the concentration camps; that bad things were happening
there, because in general one who has committed a criminal offense is
not protected from imprisonment?

A. At the beginning I was quite convinced that these concentration camps
were just a temporary measure. I knew from the press that they had done
the same thing in Italy under the Mussolini regime, and that then, after
a few years, these institutions had been dissolved—at least that’s what
I heard at the time—and, since many things were being imitated here in
Germany which Mussolini’s Italy had done, I saw at that concentration
camp nothing but such an imitation. That certain abuses would occur
there, I could understand, because, after all, the National Socialist
movement itself, in its early beginnings, was a revolutionary group.
Even if it weren’t so, at least that’s what people said. I thought that
these things were only the childish diseases of the new regime. However,
if I ever heard anything, if anything was brought to my own personal
attention, then I thought it my human duty to help. That the parents of
anybody who is sent to a concentration camp or something are always
convinced of his innocence, can be understood and every one of us today
knows how unpleasant that is. However, certain other reasons prevailed
at the time, when a family wrote: that is probably the case with one of
the cases which was submitted here in an affidavit. The main reason was
not that the man was a Social Democrat leader. No. He was blamed for
other things, and they had to be cleared up. That is why my help took a
little bit longer here, and I believe that the man was vindicated. The
reproaches which they made to him, and which came from those greatest
pests whom we had at the time, the informers, had to be refuted by
bringing counter-evidence.

Q. That’s enough, Witness. Now such people were taken out of the camp by
you. Then I’m sure that they came to see you and thanked you for it?

A. No. They didn’t do that and I did not pay too much attention to that.
I told their parents and their relatives to restrain them from doing
that. Maybe they wrote a letter though, sometime, but I did not do it in
order to get their thanks and appreciation.

Q. Witness, didn’t you ever speak to anybody who had been released from
a concentration camp and who then would have given you more details
about the concentration camp?

A. I never spoke with anybody who had been released from a concentration
camp—at least, not that I know of. I never spoke with anybody about his
experience in a concentration camp. However, during my captivity, I
heard through other people that no one else ever heard about such things
either, because these people were not only prohibited from speaking, but
they were also so scared that they followed that order to the very
letter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, you also visited factories, didn’t you, and you saw eastern
male or female workers there, didn’t you?

A. Yes.

Q. What was your opinion about these people. Didn’t they complain to you
or anything?

A. I regarded it as absolutely natural that whenever I visited a factory
it was natural for me to talk to these workers, even if, in my official
capacity, I had nothing to do with that question. However, as a soldier
I was accustomed to act in that way. On each occasion I asked them how
they were, how the food was; I looked at the people and I saw how they
were clad and what kind of an impression they gave, generally speaking,
whether they looked healthy, whether they looked satisfied or not. I saw
Russians, and also Russian prisoners of war. Then I saw Russian female
civilian workers, namely, Ukrainians. I saw Frenchmen, namely French
civilian workers. There could have been prisoners of war among them, but
they were wearing protective overalls over their clothes. There could
have been workers from Slovakia, who considered themselves our allies,
but they were very, very few. Then there were quite a few Italian
workers there, those who had come on a voluntary basis at the time;
those so-called “Imis” (Italians who revolted against Mussolini and were
sent as prisoners of war to work in Germany) I did not see.

Q. Did eastern workers, male or female, ever complain to you concerning
their work?

A. No, they did not. On the contrary, the general impression of these
female Ukrainians who worked on the Junker 52’s was a very pleasing one.
The girls were singing; they were well fed; they were well dressed; and
they answered my questions in a nice, cheerful way. I spent about 20
minutes with these girls. There were quite a few pretty ones among them,
and towards the end they flirted with me, and the girls were laughing
all the time.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, I will now enter into the question of what the Central
Planning Board has to do with labor questions at all?

A. The Central Planning Board had considerable difficulties connected
with the question of getting raw materials. The acquisition of raw
materials was originally the tasks of the Ministry of Economics and then
of Speer in the Armament Ministry. On such raw materials depended the
armament program.

The pacemaker among all these raw materials for the armament program was
steel, but the pacemaker in turn for steel was coal or coke production.
That was the biggest bottleneck, since, unfortunately, during the first
years of the war the youngest and strongest age groups of miners had
been called up for military service. Hitler had given us the order to
develop a steel production program amounting to 3.2 million tons per
month. This was to be done by Speer, and Speer had succeeded in reaching
the figure of 2.6 million tons, but that was the maximum. Hitler’s
armament program, however, had been based on the figure of 3.2 millions.
Hitler had demanded these armament programs and the experts had
calculated the amount of steel they needed for those programs.

We in the Central Planning Board discussed the possibilities of getting
up to 3.2 million tons of steel, and Speer being the man for that part
of the production, ordered the men from the steel manufacturers’ union
to come and see him in a conference in which all steel problems, through
the self-administration of the industry, were dealt with. Speer was in
agreement with me, this is an aside which I must add, to the effect it
was a mistake to direct industry through the state, but that industry
ought to govern itself through committees of their own, coming from
their own ranks, and in this sense of course, these main committees and
rings which we have talked about must be understood.

These gentlemen from the Reich Association Iron stated that the
possibilities existed that 3.2 million tons of steel could be
manufactured, subject to certain conditions. In that connection the main
prerequisite was a very much larger allocation of coke. Apart from that
they wanted certain additional matters for their own production, some
labor too. I remember the question of smelters which was submitted at
the time. I am not an expert, but at that time I did gather that we were
concerned with specialists with very considerable ability and knowledge,
since otherwise a few handful of men wouldn’t have been brought into our
conversation. At any rate, the main problem was coal.

Speer, anyhow, during one of our conferences, sent for the men
representing the coal industry. Such a Reich Association Coal had
existed for some considerable time. These people stated that there was
enough coal in the mines but that human manpower was lacking to bring it
up. Speer in his capacity as Armament Minister now asked them to tell
him in writing what was needed. Now, these men apparently reported the
figures regarding workers they had, and during those conferences with
the coal representatives, always, of course with reference to the
question of steel, it was stated that all efforts on the part of the
Armament Ministry would have to fall down because of the labor shortage.

Speer, as he told me, mentioned this to Hitler dozens of times. It was
here for the first time that various controversies arose between Speer
and Sauckel.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The first difficulties between Speer as Armament Minister and Sauckel
came to Hitler for decision. Speer said, “I’m short of workers”. Sauckel
said, “I have fulfilled all your demands”, and as proof he submitted his
figures. Between the figures which Speer had and those which Sauckel
had, no comparison was ever possible. They were based on different
suppositions. Speer was unable to obtain the basis for the figures which
were at Sauckel’s disposal. In their conflict Hitler took the side of
Sauckel. He wished thereby to exercise pressure on Speer to increase
armament. Speer was unable to do so because he did not have the workers
who had to produce coal.

This struggle went on through the years. At first Speer still hoped that
Sauckel would still bring the workers into his factories until in the
summer of 1943 he gave up this hope. In the Central Planning Board this,
of course, was discussed, and it was also discussed how much steel we
could obtain for the next three months and how we could distribute it.
Always there was this contrast between the figures—Hitler wishes to
have 3.2 million tons of steel; we can only distribute 2.6 millions
because Speer is quite unable to produce more. The consequence was again
that Hitler reproached Speer for not producing more steel although
Sauckel had supplied the workers. The Central Planning Board was not
responsible for the quantity of raw materials at his disposal. Speer
asked me to give him my support in this question. I did so quite
frequently in the meetings and also when I reported to Goering because
we wished to convince Goering that we did not have the workers so that
Goering would intervene with Hitler in that sense.

But I was unable to obtain Goering’s support. Goering took Hitler’s
side, and he said, “The workers are there”. All that was left now was
for Speer in the first line and we ourselves who wished to help him in
the second line to attack Sauckel. Sauckel escaped all meetings for a
long time. Sometimes he sent a representative, and in some cases he
himself appeared, but he and his representative pursued the same policy
by giving us a lot of figures and alleging they had fulfilled
everything. Our doubts in these figures increased. Hitler became more
and more impatient and the reproaches for Speer towards the end of 1943
became insufferable. Whereas Hitler supported Speer until roughly the
middle of 1943 and regarded him as one of the first collaborators, the
relations became much more cool later on, and I explain that mainly
through this conflict. I myself had the same annoyance both with Goering
and with Hitler, who maintained in opposition to me that I had been
given all of the workers.

Our mood wasn’t very nice about this, obviously because although we had
no personal ambition we did not wish to be blamed for something that we
were not responsible for, bad armament, and to have stated that because
of bad armament the war had been lost. That reproach, of course, we
could foresee, and it was obvious that we fought against it with every
means within our disposal. We felt ourselves to be quite innocent in
this field, but in order to prove our innocence, we were missing one
link in the chain, and that was to show beyond doubt that Sauckel’s
figures were untrue. They were not wrong by accident; they were
deliberately forged, in our opinion, because Sauckel wished to impress
Hitler with his own efficiency in his ability to fulfill all the demands
of Hitler in the sphere of labor.

Sauckel pursued that policy up to 4 January 1944. Only when there was a
conference with Hitler on 4 January 1944, of which I was a participant,
did he there say for the first time to Hitler, “Up to now I always
fulfilled all your demands, my Fuehrer. Whether that will still be
possible with the new demands of four million workers, I can no longer
guarantee.”

Q. Witness, we will come later to this conference. Now, I ask you to go
back to answer one question. Did the Central Planning Board have
authority to request labor and to distribute it?

A. A clear “no” to both parts of the question. The question of labor was
discussed in the Central Planning Board only in the interest of Speer
because Speer needed help and knew I would always give him my support. *
* *

* * * I may claim, for example, that throughout my activities, anyway
shortly after the beginning of the war, that is to say, on 9 November,
there were about sixty production managers of factories—no, not
managers but so-called men of trust [Vertrauensmaenner], elected by
workers—these men came to me and I found out they wanted to ask me to
get their rations increased. At that time the whole nutrition was based
upon lower rations; these people in our high industries were not
entitled to the supplementary rations for heavy workers, and these
people explained to me that now that there was a war, and they were
forced to work in different factories from peacetime, their housing was
much further away from their places of work, and in the morning and at
night they had to travel longer; and, therefore, their food was
insufficient. That gave me the idea to apply for a new supplementary
ration and as we became very set in this question, it became possible to
achieve that supplementary ration which was now for the benefit of all
workers. And I have now gotten hold of documentary evidence that
supplementary rations were also given to foreign workers; that was a
supplementary ration for foreign workers working long hours. As this
documentary evidence shows it is an affidavit actually the food of
German and foreign workers was the same. But I also wanted to say that
it is quite possible that there are cases where this principle was not
observed, but that was against the will of the German Government if it
happened.

Q. Witness, that means that neither the labor office nor the Armament
Inspectorate were under your supervision, as the GL.

A. Yes that is quite correct.

Q. But Speer has testified that until the very end you did not renounce
the command of the air industry. What could you say to this effect?

A. If Speer should mean that my personnel official, in the way I
described before, talked with his, Speer’s armament office, once a
month, then it is quite correct; but my officials might have used these
occasions, and how far he worked with my name on these occasions I do
not know. I hope he did so in order to get his point through. I was
never present. I never heard how these negotiations went on. Should
Speer mean, however, that my work in that field was the same as his in
his field, then he makes a mistake, for I did not have that organization
nor did I have the task. My field was only a very specialized one
compared to Speer’s field. * * * I might add perhaps, that Speer did not
know my organization; of course we never discussed it. He knew, of
course, that I had a technical office; he knew that I had a planning
office, and he also knew that I had an economic department for the
contracts of industry. After all, he fought a battle to take the whole
economic department into his sphere, and when I said he couldn’t
possibly do it, he waited until the whole armament industry came under
his charge. We two always settled everything in a friendly manner after
that up to the last moment. Even if there were a certain amount of
conflicting interests, which sometimes were quite considerable,
particularly between our subordinate officers—there were quite severe
battles between those subordinate officers at times—but we always
poured oil on the troubled waters, Mr. Speer and I.

Q. Witness, but couldn’t it be, that in the sphere of the Central
Planning Board in presenting the labor demands of your industry, you
spoke for your own interests?

A. I cannot recall, and I have read some of the records, but in not one
of them, there is not one word said that I had any special demands for
the Luftwaffe. Apart from the fact that once or twice I remarked that I
was equally badly off, that I didn’t get anything, but that doesn’t mean
that I was looking after my interests in the GL. If I talked about
workers at the Central Planning Board, I did so at Speer’s request, to
give him in the armament industry all the support. Speer was
particularly pleased when I played the wild man and became a little
strong. He once told me, “you are much better at this than I am; I am
only a civilian; I can’t do it as well as you can”. And sometimes he
pepped me up and said “Speak a little more fiercely, please”, which I
was only too delighted to do for him. That was meant to achieve
something which you may wish to ask me about a little later on: How we
could get Sauckel to speak clearly. How we could get rid of the
suspicion that we through our inefficiency cannot bring German industry
up to the high level, to the right level.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, during these conferences of the Central Planning Board did
it happen that the bulk of the workers was discussed, or was it rather a
question of bringing new workers into Germany?

A. No, it was only the labor question as such, only inasmuch as it was
important for the increase of raw materials in accordance with Hitler’s
order, and indeed always as an attack on Sauckel in order to get him to
give us the people or to say he cannot do it. As we knew he could not
supply them, our main demand which we wished to achieve was an open
statement by Sauckel, “I haven’t got the workers whom you need”.

Q. Witness, but if your air force industry, for instance, either the
labor offices or the Armament Inspectorates had made requests to Speer,
and when your planning office had checked these demands in order to find
out what was really necessary and what was unnecessary, was it a matter
of proposing what kind of workers you wanted to have and what kind of
workers should be distributed into these different production programs?
Was it a question of deciding whether you needed German workers or
rather more foreigners?

A. We did that in one sense, that for certain factories we simply had to
have skilled workers, which we asked for, but never did we ask, “Give us
foreigners; give us prisoners of war”, and so forth. Our wishes were to
the effect to have Germans, but it was quite clear to us that there
weren’t enough German workers to fulfill the demands. Had they been
available, one needn’t have used prisoners of war or recruited foreign
workers or sent the prisoners of war to work unless they volunteered for
it.

                 *        *        *        *        *

[March 14]

JUDGE PHILLIPS: The Tribunal understands you to say that Polish
prisoners of war were changed into civilian workers and that you no
longer considered them to be prisoners of war. How were they changed
into civilian workers from prisoners of war?

A. Personally I cannot give you many details about this because that
happened as early as 1939, and at that time I was not connected with the
armament question. How it was worked I do not know. All I can imagine is
that there was no longer a Polish Government and that the Governor
General gave the order; whether any Polish office was asked, I don’t
know; it is only in the files here that I found something about some
Polish regional authority. I cannot give you any more clear details.

DR. BERGOLD: May it please the Tribunal, perhaps I can clarify the
matter.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Let’s let the witness clarify it. Witness, you are
an old soldier. You have been a soldier for many years. How do you
transfer a prisoner of war into a civilian, by discharging him?

A. Yes, he must be released from being a prisoner of war, and then there
are various possibilities. One possibility would be—and this was
resorted to by Germany—to make him a free worker and tell him that “You
are being released, but you must do some work. That is the conditions
which we put to you. You are being paid properly, and otherwise you live
as a free man.”

There is also another possibility, which was the way chosen by the
Americans, by which a prisoner of war is released and then regarded as
an internee. I think that that procedure is not quite so favorable for
the man concerned.

Q. You just transposed them from prisoners of war to civilian prisoners,
then?

A. No, they were no longer prisoners. They were properly released, but
they signed a document which obliged them to do some work for Germany.

Q. You imprisoned them by a document instead of in a stockade?

A. They were no longer locked up, Sir. The Polish workers—I saw them in
the country, for instance—live quite freely.

Q. Could they go where they liked?

A. They could not change their places of work without permission. For
instance, if they were allocated to a farmer, they had to stay with that
farmer. Only if there were special reasons could they change their place
of work. Then they were transferred.

Q. That is what you call freeing them?

A. It was not complete freedom, but it was a better status than
previously when they were prisoners of war.

Q. What would happen to one of these free workers if he walked away from
his place of employment?

A. Sir, that is what I do not know myself. But may I say something else?
A German worker was not allowed to change his place of work either.
Freedom for a German was not any bigger than freedom for a Pole, as long
as the war lasted.

Q. The German went home to his family every night, did he not?

A. These Polish soldiers—I cannot speak comprehensively because I am
not particularly well informed here—but those I saw were young people,
and they lived with the farmer’s family.

Q. Witness, you don’t mean to tell this Tribunal seriously that the
Polish worker, the former prisoner of war, had the same freedom of
movement that the German civilian had?

A. I cannot speak on all fields of life because I do not know. All I do
know was that he was under the obligation to remain with his employer,
but, as I said before, the German worker had to remain with his
employer.

Q. Oh, well, we had that in the United States, for that matter. I still
don’t remember your answering my question: What would happen to a Polish
worker who chose to walk away from his place of employment?

A. I am unable to answer that. I know of no such cases, nor was I told
about one.

DR. BERGOLD: May it please the Tribunal, the defendant cannot know,
because he was a soldier, what the Polish worker had to do. Like the
German worker, the Polish worker would have been punished and brought
before a tribunal because he broke his contract, and he would have
received a small punishment. Thousands of German workers have been
punished for the same reason, and I have defended many a German worker
for the same charge. That would have happened—nothing else.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Let me ask you, Dr. Bergold. Did you ever defend a
Polish worker for walking away from his employment?

DR. BERGOLD: Yes, I did.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: I have no inclination to dispute you.

DR. BERGOLD: I defended quite a few foreign workers in wartime, not only
Poles, but Frenchmen, Belgians, and Dutchmen.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Oh, maybe Belgians, Dutchmen, but Poles—?

DR. BERGOLD: Yes, definitely. I am prepared to make that statement on
oath, Sir.

DEFENDANT MILCH: May I supply an observation of my own on the Polish
question? Shortly before I was taken prisoner, I was in the country in
Schleswig-Holstein. In that region the only foreigners there were Poles.
Those Poles on the estate where I was, perhaps 30 or 40 of them, said
that they did not wish to return home, that they would ask to be allowed
to remain on the estate just as did their colleagues in the
neighborhood. These people were dressed very neatly on Sundays. They
looked very clean and healthy. They could not be told from any German in
the neighborhood there except for certain racial distinctions. All of
them had bicycles. On that bicycle they went on Sundays to the nearest
pub and met their girl friends and danced, and they told me themselves
that never before had they been so happy as they were in Germany. That
was at a time when the British were 50 kilometers away from their
village.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Perhaps that is why they were so happy.

A. No. They said that they did not want to leave there now. They wished
to remain.

Q. I think you misunderstood my point. Perhaps their happiness arose
from the fact that the British were only 50 kilometers away.

A. No. I understood what you were trying to say, Sir, but I also talked
to the German employers there. I was there in a totally private
capacity, and I knew these people quite well. They were friends of mine,
and they told me that they were quite satisfied with their Poles, and
they also said that the Poles had done very good work and that the Poles
had asked to be allowed to remain after the collapse, because in those
days they did not wish to return to Poland and they were quite well
looked after here.

May I ask the Court to believe me that we in Germany were not all of us
hangmen and people who delighted in other people’s misery. I may say
here that I think that the majority of the German people are
good-hearted and that they treat other people well and that these people
did not know that in some isolated places there were isolated criminals
who polluted our good name for a long time to come. The people are
suffering from that now, and they will suffer in the future. That is
what depresses all of us the most. Otherwise, one has to take the point
of view that all Germans are criminals and then it might be justified to
hang the lot. Then, please start on me.

                 *        *        *        *        *

DR. BERGOLD: Witness, after this question was discussed, you received
information that this employment of foreign workers was admissible.
Could you tell me now what you knew before, prior to that moment,
concerning this question?

A. I know that after the First War, the question of deportation of
Belgium workers had been examined by a committee of the German
Reichstag. I know that this parliamentary committee examined people like
Hindenburg, Ludendorff, I think also Mackensen and others; and that many
questions were discussed, including that of Belgian civilian workers. As
far as I can recall, that committee was presided over by a man who had
been given the Nobel Prize, Professor Schuecking; I think that was his
name. However, I was very interested in it, and closely followed it
because Hindenburg whom I worshipped, was put before a court; and as far
as I can recall, no sentence was passed upon that score; and nobody was
reproached that international law had been violated. At that time the
Hague Convention existed and the first Geneva Conference had taken
place. I am not very well informed, but I think that was so.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, I shall now come to the 54th meeting, concerning two points
there. Witness, during that meeting[142] Sauckel mentioned that only a
very small percentage of those sent to Germany came on a voluntary
basis. This statement has been mentioned repeatedly in this trial and I
want you to say something about that.

A. I might say that I do not remember having heard these words from
Sauckel. It is possible that I was not there at the moment when he said
that. However, it is possible that I overheard that remark, because
during those long meetings, we had discussions among each other. We were
also interested in other questions. During those long meetings there was
at least one meeting, probably more, during which our concentration was
not quite what it should have been. Had I heard it, I would have
believed Sauckel just as little as I believed all the figures he gave
us, because Sauckel had stated the contrary not long before. I know
exactly it was not so long before that he had declared how well his
system functioned and how he brought all these laborers on a voluntary
basis.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, I shall now leave the meetings of the Central Planning Board
and come to single questions in that connection. What do you know about
the use of British and American prisoners of war?

A. According to my opinion and as far as I know, they went into the
respective camps and they were not used for labor. I never saw such a
prisoner of war any place.

Q. * * * What orders did you have toward the middle of January 1943?
What orders did you receive from Hitler?

A. On 15 January 1943, in the evening I was called up and summoned to go
to Hitler’s Headquarters the next day for a special mission. As far as I
know, I believe that it was General Bodenschatz who called me to the
Fuehrer’s Headquarters. The following morning I reported to Goering, who
happened to be in Berlin at that time. Goering knew that the question of
food for Stalingrad was involved. Stalingrad had been encircled for
months, and the whole Sixth German Army was in it. On the 16th, in the
morning, I flew to Hitler’s Headquarters in East Prussia; and then
Hitler either in the afternoon or in the evening gave me the information
that I should proceed to Czechoslovakia immediately by air in order to
supervise Stalingrad’s food supplies from there.

Q. Witness, make it a little more brief, please.

A. Yes. I tried to carry out this mission. When I received the mission,
the last airfield had been lost. The Russians had taken them. We looked
for smaller places which were rather difficult to find there in those
mountainous areas; and within the next few days we succeeded in carrying
out a considerable air lift of supplies. However, it was too late. The
resisting force of the defenders had broken down; the people were
starving; they had hardly any vehicles or horses. They could not get the
food from the landing places for the planes because they were too weak
to do so. They could not carry the containers so that the air lift of
supplies in the case of Stalingrad could not be kept up after the end of
January or the beginning of February.

Q. Did you have a serious accident then?

A. Yes. At that moment when I wanted to fly into Stalingrad, before I
hit the airfield, I was hit by a railroad engine, and I was seriously
injured.

Q. Then you went back to Hitler?

A. I carried out the mission first. Then when Stalingrad had fallen, I
withdrew and went to see Hitler and told him that I could not complete
my mission. He told me, however, that it was not I who had not carried
out the mission but that it was his fault. He said he gave me the orders
too late; he had wanted to give the orders to me much earlier but had
been talked out of it.

Q. Witness, during that occasion, did you tell Hitler your opinion about
the war and the general situation of the war?

A. It was on 4 February when I reported back to Hitler. Hitler on that
particular day was very crushed due to the loss of Stalingrad. It was
not possible to have a quiet talk with him. He did not receive me at
first, or my chief of staff, namely, General of the Tank Corps Model,
who had a corps within that fortress. We both were under the impression
that day that we would not be able to speak to him. However, he told me
in a few words, “Now, go right ahead to your GL task, manufacturing. Now
we will have transport planes in the first line, transport planes, and
more transport planes.” He was talking about Stalingrad. He thought that
had he had more transport planes he would have been able to keep
Stalingrad.

With respect to Stalingrad, I had a long discussion with him on 5 March.
That was the last time I saw him. That was about a month later. I was
ordered to see him because he wanted to give me the mission to build
high-altitude and fast bombers and put them in the first line of
production. Those now were more important than transport planes. I
availed myself of that opportunity on that day and had prepared myself
in order to tell him my opinion about the general situation. That
discussion took place in the evening. I had dinner with him alone. That
was shortly before 9:00 o’clock; and it lasted until 3:15 a.m. Then in
contrast to all other discussions I had with him, I was the one who was
speaking all the time.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I told him first of all the truth about Stalingrad; and I told him that
the question of leaving an army was a military mistake, when according
to military and strategical points of view it should have withdrawn,
something which had been suggested both by myself and by the army. It
was a mistake; and it did end with the loss of 350,000 men on the German
side. However, a withdrawal in time would have saved the greatest part
of these soldiers. I told him that, after all, the Russians were not as
anxious to attack as that; that in the winter they themselves were in a
difficult position for attacking a German army and they would not have
dared. I told him then that that point was the last turning point in the
fate of the war. I told him that I had tried to reach him before the
Russian campaign. However, I had been unable to do so because it had
been forbidden. I said that the time was now five minutes past twelve.
We use that expression in Germany when something is completed; when it
is finished. I told him that by that I meant that the war was lost. I
apologized for not considering his nervous condition. There was no time
for that any more. I thought it my duty to tell him my sincere opinion;
as a field marshal I thought myself entitled to do so.

I knew that he did not want to hear this. However, I wished that he
would hear me in spite of that. He could do with me whatever he wanted
to afterwards. I remembered, however, that he himself before the war had
used strong words against the bad advisers of Wilhelm II, who out of
cowardice, had not told him the truth. In no case did I wish to stand
before my own conscience with such a reproach on myself. He told me
then, “Yes, you can say today whatever you wish to say.”

I told him then that he was no more in a position to attack in the East.
That those attacks which had already been developed, he should stop.
That he could only defend himself, and I was of the direct opinion that
instead of building great fortification works in France and Norway, that
during the whole of the spring, summer, and autumn, he should
concentrate on fortifying the Dnieper position, which lay about 800
kilometers behind the Russian front, with all the means at his disposal,
with fortifications of concrete, etc., in a great width, between
two-hundred and three-hundred kilometers depth, and in that way there
would be strong fortifications and good shelter for soldiers, with good
equipment and food and ammunition, and that then he should take the
troops back to that position for the winter, and that he should give up
the whole territory in front of that fortification, out of which he
would not get anything at all, neither oil, coal, nor ore. By doing that
he would shorten the length of the Russian front, and in such a way that
the maintenance of those soldiers on the line would be much easier.
Apart from that he should take more care of the eastern forces, and I am
quite sure that on the whole eastern front of two-thousand kilometers,
of about ten million German soldiers, not one million of them were
fighting and he should take measures to change that. That was the only
point he carried out later on, and unfortunately only towards the end of
November of that year and the result was that the fighting infantry
units on the whole eastern front amounts to 265,000 men of the army. It
was impossible to hold that front with such a small number.

I furthermore suggested to him that a great personnel change should be
made, namely, he himself should give up command over the army, that he
should place a simple general in that position. As it was, he held
before the German people a responsibility, which he could not bear. He
was no soldier in that sense, since he was not trained for that. I
suggested to him to dissolve my own branch as an independent Wehrmacht
unit and to put the Luftwaffe entirely under the Wehrmacht, since there
was no strategic air force any longer.

Now what I had to say was special for the army, and this was certainly
of a personal nature, namely, to remove Reich Marshal Goering from the
Luftwaffe, and give him a different task. I said also that it was now
the opportune moment for the Reich Foreign Minister also to be removed
from his position.

Q. Would you give the name?

A. Von Ribbentrop. I suggested to him that the Field Marshal be put in
charge of the units at the front, and I gave as a reason that Keitel was
too lenient in reference to Hitler, and did not know how to get his
ideas across to Hitler; that he should have somebody who would force him
to observe correct military measures. I told him then that the most
important task in my opinion was the home defense of Germany; the air
home defense of Germany, and to consider as having the highest priority;
and also the fighter production should be placed in the first place, and
armaments. I showed him the figures of the English, the American and the
Russian armaments explicitly, and I showed him how these armaments would
have their effect over Germany, and also at what point, or at what time
this would happen. I reported to him that many false reports were made
to him, and I gave him an exact instance. I told him that he
overestimated himself, and his allies, and that he also underestimated
the Russians, and the attitude of Stalin personally, and that that had
led to the Stalingrad collapse, and he should be quite clear as to the
facts if the attack was continued in the East; that he could hold the
Dnieper position, and that if he held that position, the air defense
would be able to prepare a military preparation for peace if the enemy
would see that this crushing of Germany from the air was no longer
possible and if the Russians would see that they would not be able to
cross the Dnieper without being crushed; that I am sure with that
preparedness which should be started at once, we ought to be coming to a
peace. It might be possible to get away with bearable peace terms if
they would act immediately.

Then I also discussed the peace question, and I told him he might make a
real peace with France without taking territory, and I was sure that
France would still consider that. The same applied to Belgium, and also
Holland, as well as Norway. A peace with these countries would then
induce the greater powers of the Western countries to be able to
conclude peace with Germany which would be endurable.

Those were the main points of my opinion. I do not wish to recite
details. He listened to and interrupted me only once, and that was on
the question whether he could or could not attack in 1943, and I
remember exactly that I said to him more than twenty times, “You cannot
attack” and first he said in a quiet way, then got more excited and more
excited until he was very cross, and knocked on the table, “I must
attack.” I told him at the end, “I know I am very impolite, I don’t want
to discuss this question of attacking anymore. But be convinced I shall
not change my opinion.”

Then he waited for a short while, and I began to speak of something
else, and then suddenly he said, “What would you say, Milch, if I would
only make a short attack in order to be able to push through the Russian
preparations before they can start developing.” I answered, “Wait a
minute, it is a defensive measure, because a soldier carries out his
defense by attacking in turn,” and he said, “Then we agree on that
point.” I said, “No, I don’t think we do. If you are successful you will
continue. I would say all the troops should go back after forty-eight
hours that no matter what. Think of Verdun in 1916 when the same mistake
was made; when they did not succeed in getting through on a surprise
attempt, they went doggedly on.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, what was the development after Stalingrad of your
relationship to Hitler and Goering?

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Before you go on, will you ask for the date of
this conference of Hitler’s again?

A. It was on 5 March 1943.

                 *        *        *        *        *

On the question of how my relationship to Hitler and Goering developed
later on I have to say the following: It became worse and worse from
time to time. It was due to a struggle which I had about the German air
defense which contradicted Hitler’s idea of waging war, for this was the
specific field of the Luftwaffe and I as Inspector General of the
Luftwaffe was forced to make suggestions. I did not let this matter
drop, and I repeatedly brought it to the front, in contrast with
political proposals or proposals in the field of the army and navy,
which were outside of my field of tasks and which I could not bring to
anyone’s attention unless Hitler gave me his permission or if he wished
me to.

Q. With respect to this conference, did you inform him of the fact that
you wanted to have Goering gone?

A. Yes. I did. I told Goering about that. I did not want to stab him in
the back.

Q. Then, what happened to your relationship with Goering?

A. I do not believe that this single incident had any influence on our
relationship, which was bad anyway. Goering was not the kind of a man
who would hold it against me. He had a certain understanding of the
circumstances. There were other things that he did not like about me.

                 *        *        *        *        *

[March 17]

Q. Witness, the last time you were giving us a description of the
suggestions you made with Hitler with regard to achieving a change. What
was the impression you had afterwards as to whether he was going to
follow your suggestions or not?

A. At that time I first of all hoped that he would somehow react to my
suggestion, because in the case of the Stalingrad assignment which had
been given to me although too late, I saw indications that at that time
he still had confidence in me, and also in my military ability. During
the following weeks and months I waited for something to happen, but
nothing did. In the spring of 1943, after my conference, new attacks
were ordered by him on the eastern front. He was not making an attack
for the purposes of defense, he was going to try to reestablish the
front along the Volga River. He was also going to try again to advance
towards the Caucasus. It was only in November 1943 that he followed one
of my suggestions, namely, to ascertain how many men were fighting in
the East, as I said last Friday, and I need not repeat it. The attack
was catastrophic, but in spite of that, no basic changes were made after
that. All the other suggestions, political, military, and those
regarding the personnel, were not followed. Through that I lost my last
hope, namely, that a final basis favorable to Germany could be
established to bring an end to this war through political means, in
other words, peace negotiations, which might have had certain prospects
of success.

Q. Witness, now I shall have to put to you this question. Why, after you
recognized that fact did you continue your activity at all. What were
the reasons which made you place your service at their disposal at all?

A. The main reason was that I was responsible to my people, and even if
all the plans failed to materialize, I, nevertheless, still had one last
hope at least, that a proper air defense could be arranged for Germany
in order to protect our home country and the people from the worst, and
the destruction of their homes and places of culture. That was my main
reason.

Q. What then are the steps that you took in order to achieve your last
final aim for the German people?

A. After 1941 I had a constant struggle, I would like to say, with
Goering and with Hitler in order to achieve an air defense which I
considered necessary. My last effort then was the foundation of the
Jaegerstab.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, you have just testified that you had founded the Jaegerstab
in order gradually to leave your post. Did that further have any other
purpose, for instance, the removal of existing difficulties outside your
own department?

A. Yes. Air armament within the entire armament program had very small,
very negligible powers. As Hitler especially demanded army and naval
rearmament, Speer’s Ministry for years had encroached on a large scale
in all matters which were important for my industry. As a result experts
and other workers had been simply taken away from us. The armament
inspectors and district military administrative authorities, both of
whom were under Speer, were able to carry this through. It was merely by
accident that I learned of this in individual cases, when, for instance,
one of the industrialists happened to come to see me. We raised
objections but we could not alter the situation, I mentioned this the
other day. I wanted to use the Jaegerstab in order to transfer part of
this responsibility for air armament to Speer and his ministry so that
such encroachment, which was particularly noticeable where materials
were concerned, should no longer happen.

The man who had approximately the same task as my own in Speer’s
Ministry was Mr. Saur. Saur was a very clever man, very able, very
energetic, and since he was always sent to report to Hitler personally,
he knew Hitler and his intentions very well, and he knew therefore that
Hitler was not so keen on air armament, and from that he drew the
conclusion which led to these encroachments into our sphere. I was very
anxious to have him join the Jaegerstab so that there too he would share
in the responsibility. There was a struggle about this with Speer until
it finally came about that Saur joined the Jaegerstab. I did not want to
found the Jaegerstab without him, and it turned out that Saur now
tackled this new task very energetically and he did in fact succeed to
some extent in bringing Hitler at least to a standstill. But Hitler’s
views and Hitler’s orders he could not change. Apart from that it was
necessary, if I wanted to transfer armament work to Speer, for the final
armament would have to go through Saur’s hands eventually, so it was
essential that Saur should be included right from the start.

Q. Thank you. Did you give him responsibility to a small or a large
extent within the Jaegerstab?

A. Let me answer that like this: I gave him as much freedom of action as
possible, since he was going to take it over later, and it was his
nature that when any matter was placed in his hands he took it up very
energetically, and I was happy to see that he was going ahead so
vigorously.

Q. Witness, you have made notes about everything you did during the war.
Can you tell this high Tribunal whether you gradually withdrew from the
Jaegerstab and how many meetings you participated in each month?

A. In March, I participated in 15 meetings—they took place daily—and
two trips. In April, I participated in eight meetings, and one journey.
In May, I attended five meetings and took part in two journeys. In June
I attended two meetings only, and had also two journeys. In July, I
didn’t attend any meetings at all, neither did I participate in any
journey. I took more active interest in the journeys, totaling seven, in
order to go into the provinces and show that the handing over of my task
to Saur was taking place with my agreement. These are the figures: March
15, then eight, then five, then two.

Q. You mean the meetings?

A. Yes; that applies to meetings. In other words, I participated in a
total of 30 meetings.

Q. But there was one more on 1 August 1944, wasn’t there?

A. That was after my retirement. It was a meeting when Speer was in the
chair, in which the Jaegerstab was now finally discontinuing its work,
as the tasks of the Jaegerstab were now being incorporated with ordinary
armament under Speer in the armament staff. It was a purely formal
meeting of handing over, and I deliberately took part, so as not to
create the impression that I was leaving reluctantly or that I was angry
about anything, for, of course, the exact opposite was the case.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, did the Jaegerstab have anything to do with workers?

A. Do you mean building workers?

Q. I mean generally speaking, for the moment.

A. I see. Well, you have to draw a clear dividing line. There were two
completely different conceptions for us, armament workers and building
workers. Armament workers came through the existing channels; in other
words, requests were made to Sauckel by the industries, and Sauckel
fulfilled, or did not fulfill such requests. Information about this
first of all went to Speer’s Ministry through the Armament
Inspectorates, and secondly, there were statistical reports monthly from
industry to air force. Building workers, on the other hand, did not
concern any of us at all, not even statistically speaking; that is,
insofar as the GL was concerned and his representatives on the
Jaegerstab. This was entirely a problem for Todt’s Organization. We knew
absolutely nothing about this problem as far as we were concerned.

Q. Witness, did the Jaegerstab include a representative of the GBA, the
Plenipotentiary General for Labor, Sauckel, on its board?

A. I cannot at this moment recollect that accurately, but I believe not.
As far as I know, for these questions there was only a representative
from Speer’s Ministry. That was Mr. Schmelter, who has been a witness in
this trial, and who on his part used to hear our requests and take our
requests to his ministry to help as far as he could.

Q. In order to help in labor problems did Schmelter have to go to
Sauckel on his part?

A. Yes, quite decidedly. He, on his own initiative, could not distribute
workers because he did not have any workers reserves of any kind.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, the construction work which Hitler stated had to be
constructed either by Kammler or Dorsch, was that all for the purpose of
the Jaegerstab or also for other armament purposes?

A. I know that these constructions were meant for many other purposes
because if these questions were discussed in the Jaegerstab I repeatedly
heard Saur or some of his representatives saying, “We wish to change
this; we want to use this for making tanks; or here, for instance, we
will have V-2 rockets.” That is how it fluctuated. In any case, I know
that the subterranean constructions or tunnels were meant for other
armament purposes.

Q. Witness, did you ever hear about the fact that for the construction
of the surface concrete factories concentration camp inmates were to be
used?

A. I heard about that in the Jaegerstab, I believe; and that is how we
can explain Kammler’s task.

Q. Witness, in your capacities as GL, as member of the Central Planning
Board, or member of the Jaegerstab, what did you have to do with the
concentration camp inmates? Did you apply for those?

A. No, we had nothing whatsoever to do with it. But they were
requisitioned for industry through channels which I did not know at the
time. At that time I knew from a conference that in Oranienburg, at
Heinkel’s, people were being used from the concentration camps which
were near there. I heard one of my men say that the work that was being
done over there was good work, I myself did not see these inmates
working. However, at that time I was convinced of the fact, through my
visit to the concentration camp of Dachau in 1935, that these were, in
the main, only German criminals.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, did you hear in connection with labor for concrete
construction work, that Hitler gave orders for the use of one hundred
thousand Jews, or did the Jaegerstab request this?

A. I am sure that the Jaegerstab did not do that. I cannot say for sure
if before the collapse I knew anything at all about this matter. I know
from the record that Hitler is said to have had a conference on 4
January 1944 about this question. However, I know that that conference
lasted for quite a few days, I believe, from 1 to 4 January. I
participated for a very short time in that conference on 4 January. I do
not know, or I cannot recall, if during the time I was there they
discussed that point.

Q. Did you later on find out that Jewish concentration camp inmates were
used in this construction?

A. I never found out for sure.

Q. However, in the sessions of the Jaegerstab they had discussed that
point?

A. I cannot remember anything about it. Many things were discussed there
every day, so that it is not quite possible to remember every detail
that they discussed.

Q. During those conferences or meetings, the number of which you had
mentioned, did you always participate in these conferences?

A. No. I was called out very often. I left on my own initiative
sometimes in order to make certain arrangements in connection with my
other fields of work; otherwise, I should not have been able to do any
work whatsoever in my other spheres. At that time I had the whole set-up
of General Foerster under my orders, and also the entire training of the
Luftwaffe; on top of that were the questions of the Inspectorate General
and his problems.

Q. Witness, I shall come now to your speech of 25 March 1944, which has
been repeatedly mentioned here, Document NOKW-017, Prosecution Exhibit
54. It is your speech to the chief engineers of the Luftwaffe and the
chief quartermasters. It says here at one point that for construction a
few hundred thousand laborers were being used who had been withdrawn
from other places. By that don’t you mean those 100,000 Jews we just
mentioned?

A. No. Under no circumstances. At that time workers had been transferred
for these purposes from many other constructions which were already
under way.

Q. Witness—

A. May I add to that, this: I could not possibly imagine why Jews should
be used as construction workers. Therefore, I am sure that it would have
struck me if I had heard that, for Jews are not used as carpenters and
bricklayers. They are mostly people who work in offices, and one could
hardly expect construction work from them. I don’t believe that I
myself, as a man who has never done that kind of work, would be of any
use for it.

Q. Witness, explain to us now the purpose of this speech of yours, which
uses rather strong language.

A. During the severe air raids we had lost many stocks of material,
mainly of parts. The new output of these parts could not possibly keep
pace with the destruction. There was only one way left, namely, to take
these parts from troops’ stocks. The troops had large stocks over which
the GL himself had no power of disposal whatsoever. He just gave the
orders for the manufacture of them. The requests of the troops, in my
opinion, were always too high—4.2 billion marks’ worth of parts were
being ordered at that time, that is proof of it. If we wanted to have
these planes, which were half ready, in time, it was possible only if
the troops would give us some of their parts. Prior to this conference
many attempts to that effect had been made, but the Quartermaster
General, because of the veto of his chief quartermasters and chief
engineers, had refused my wishes. I was very annoyed about that. Saur
came to see me and stressed once more that the completion of the planes
was impossible. He thought that in the army that would have been taken
care of long ago, but in the Luftwaffe there did not seem to be any
definite power to give orders, and he would take this matter up with the
higher authorities. That, for the second time, made me very cross, and
when this conference took place immediately after these things, I spoke
in very strong terms in order that the Quartermaster General with his
staff should give me the parts that were needed. That was the purpose
and the aim of the whole thing, and contrary to what had happened
before, when they had refused me those parts, the harsh military speech
I made was crowned with success.

Q. Witness, in this speech there are certain passages which in
themselves have nothing to do with those aims you just mentioned. I
would like to show you these passages. At one spot you come to the
question concerning labor, and you say that the portion assigned to the
Luftwaffe in the allocation of labor had been constantly diminished,
that the foreigners were running away and not keeping their contracts,
and that if a foreman reprimanded or beat one of these young laborers
who was engaged in sabotage, he, the foreman, got into trouble; and that
the international law could not be applied here and that you would see
to it yourself that the prisoners, with the exception of the Americans
and British, were removed from the power of the military
organization—then, if a man committed sabotage, he should be hanged in
his own factory or workshop. What does that have to do with this speech
and these aims that you mentioned?

A. As far as prisoners of war were working with the Luftwaffe itself,
the Quartermaster General and the Chief Quartermaster had something to
do with it. This was to be a threat to that department, namely, that
certain rights would be withdrawn from them. Of course, I could not do
that. I don’t believe that Goering would have followed such a suggestion
of mine either.

I have no excuse whatsoever for these words which I used. I have now had
the time to read this passage in peace, and I cannot understand it
myself. I can only repeat that I myself was in an impossible position. I
could see what was coming, and I could no longer help my people. At that
time—I do not wish to say this as an excuse, but just in order to
explain—I was still suffering very badly from my accident, and I could
not quite get over the concussion, because at that time I could not
possibly be absent for one minute. I knew that because my doctor was
worried about me and he tried to help me with all sorts of drugs and
medicines.

Q. Witness, a number of witnesses who were here have stated that very
often you had outbursts of rage. At the time when you made that
statement did you have the sincere wish to carry through these measures?

A. No. I can say that with a good conscience. Never, never in my life
did I do such a thing, and I believe that he who really knows me knows
exactly that, on the contrary, I was different. However, at that time I
simply had to give vent to my feelings, and I could not use strong words
to the people I really wanted to use them on. That was not consistent
with the discipline you have in an army. I also have to say that
immediately after such a discussion I myself no longer knew what I had
said during one of those outbursts of rage. Even today I could not say
for sure that I said that. However, I cannot deny it.

Q. Witness, did you at that time use such wild expressions with
reference to these Luftwaffe gentlemen, and did you threaten them as
well?

A. Yes. I did. I read now that I did so. I am very sorry even today that
I used such strong words against my comrades.

Q. Later on in another place you said that people who acted as if they
were sick ought to be whipped to work and that the whip should be used
as a medicine. That is a similar statement?

A. That was just silly talk, so to speak, and I also used strong words
about myself and called myself an idiot once in a while.

Q. Did you ever issue orders to drive people to work with the whip?

A. Never, and I am sure that I myself would have intervened in such a
case.

Q. Did you ever have anybody hanged because of sabotage at any time.

A. No. First, I did not do it. Second, I could not do it. I never had
anybody punished for sabotage in any way because that was not within my
competency, not even in the few instances where sabotage had actually
taken place.

Q. Witness, weren’t you afraid, however, that if you spoke like that
before this circle of men, that those people would actually act
according to your words?

A. In this circle there was nobody who could possibly have the power to
carry out such things, and second, I believe that everybody knew me,
because my friends even at that time had told me that I had lost my
control over myself. It was a very good thing that nobody took me
seriously at such a time. I also always promised myself that I would not
burst into rage again. However, at that time I did not have full control
over myself because the situation was becoming more serious every day.
Moreover, I knew that all this could have been avoided, that it had
never been necessary to go to war, but if so, that the war could have
been terminated long ago, and apart from all this, if nothing else, the
destruction of Germany could have been avoided. That thought did not
leave me alone day or night, and that actually contributed to these
explosions. When everything was over, from that day I became more quiet.

Q. Witness, those people you spoke to were soldiers, were they not?

A. Yes.

Q. Could those soldiers, according to your knowledge, have possibly been
led to carry out these orders which were against international law?

A. No, never. They quite rightly thought, as people often told me, that
I was crazy during such outbursts. I myself was in no position to judge
that, however.

Q. Witness, however, a certain number of measures in contradiction to
international law were carried out in Germany. Did you know anything
about that, could you have thought then that maybe you were also causing
such measures against international law?

A. No. I did not know about that, with the very few exceptions that were
discussed here. However, I never connected them with myself. There never
was any connection at any time.

                 *        *        *        *        *

[March 18]

Q. Witness, after you received the Knight’s Cross in 1940, did you
receive any distinctions from Hitler, any decorations?

A. Yes, I did, in 1940 I received the promotion to a field marshal, and
that was also in 1940. After 1940 I did not receive anything which I
considered a distinction as a soldier, because the bonus I received in
1942—yes, I will refer to that later—I couldn’t see any distinction in
that as a soldier.

Q. Will you now talk of this bonus which you received? Give us some
details about it.

A. Hitler sent his adjutant on my 50th birthday, with a picture of
Hitler, that is, a photograph, with a dedication, and a letter in which
he congratulated me, and there was a check inside to the amount of
250,000 marks. Hitler wrote in his letter that he knew I was leading a
very modest life and he would like to give me in this way the
possibility of making it a little pleasanter.

I thanked Hitler, and I told him that I gladly accepted the money,
because after all I could not refuse it, as a compensation for the fact
that I had earned a little less by this amount than I would have earned
if I had remained with the Lufthansa, because my salary in the Lufthansa
was twice as high, and even later on, three times as high as the money I
received from the State. Consequently, I did not consider that as a gift
exceeding my merits.

Q. Witness, did the Air Ministry not offer you a bonus, also?

A. That was not a bonus but the President of the Air Ministry told me
that the industry wanted to give me a present to the value of 50,000
marks. I told him that I rejected this present; it looked to me like
bribery. He immediately withdrew the offer, especially as he knew that
never in my life had I accepted a present from industry while I was in
government service.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Was it possible for you to remove directors of industry, or to
appoint them?

A. No. Either there were limited companies [G.m.b.H.], or shareholder
companies, and they had their own organizations, their own
administrations. The shareholders appointed the board of directors and
the board of directors decided who was to be the general manager, and we
never interfered with that.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Witness, will you explain to the Tribunal how overburdened you were
with work during all these years?

A. May I refer to my field of tasks which is shown in one exhibit?

DR. BERGOLD: May I ask this Tribunal now to see the charts which are in
the document book—the first document?

                 *        *        *        *        *

A. Until the end of 1941 my main task was that of Inspector General of
the Luftwaffe. From that point onward, the work as GL took the first
place, while in my capacity as Inspector General I was continuously
travelling by plane. But as Inspector General I was tied more closely to
the Berlin ministry. Oh, I beg your pardon, I mean to say as GL. There
we had meetings every day; and in my capacity as GL I took over a
technical staff in the Ministry of over four thousand. I reduced this
staff to about half; but in spite of that the number of conferences and
meetings could not be reduced. Therefore, I had to go through the
incredible amount of papers which were to be read and also the papers
which had to be signed; and I had to take them home in the evening. I
think that always amounted to two large suitcases and sometimes even
three of them. On the average I would work at home until 2:00 o’clock,
a.m. The reading was the main task because in all technical matters I
had to be up to the mark myself; and that was not very easy for me
because, after all, I had not studied technique but rather was a
self-taught man as a soldier who had been a pilot. In the morning I
would start my duties at 9:00 o’clock or at 9:15. Generally I would eat
my lunch at my desk, and often I even ate my dinner at my desk, so that
I had the impression that I was overburdened with work. Even apart from
these two functions, as GL and Inspector General of the Luftwaffe, the
direction of the different other offices in the Ministry made quite a
lot of work for me, though in my last position the excellent General
Foerster took most of the work off me.

Q. Witness, are the offices correct as they are shown on this chart
which I have submitted to the Tribunal, and can you confirm them as
such?




[Illustration: _CHART OF MILCH’S POSITION SUBMITTED BY DEFENSE_]




A. Yes.

DR. BERGOLD: May it please the Tribunal, this concludes my
interrogation; and I make room now for the prosecution.

_CROSS-EXAMINATION_

MR. DENNEY: You testified as a witness before the International Military
Tribunal on behalf of the defendant Goering, did you not?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And in the course of your testimony before the Tribunal you stated
that you were the second highest officer in the air force?

A. Yes, that was my rank.

Q. So that the only one who ranked higher than you was Goering?

A. Yes.

Q. And that continued up until the time when you told us this morning
that you completely withdrew, which, I believe was some time in January
of 1945?

A. Yes. May I remark here that from 1937 several officers were in the
second place. That is to say, the chief of the general staff, the chief
of the personnel office, and also the GL. We were all of the same rank,
as it were, but I was the most senior officer among them.

Q. And under Goering there were really four echelons; that is, the chief
of staff, the inspector general, the GL, and the director of the
personnel office?

A. Yes. They were all equal to each other.

Q. Goering was on top, and then came these four in a parallel line below
him; is that right?

A. Yes, under Goering.

Q. And you, from 1941, November, following Udet’s death until sometime
in the middle of 1944, held both the office of GL and inspector general?

A. That is correct.

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. DENNEY: If your Honor pleases, I ask that this be marked Prosecution
Exhibit 133 for identification. This is a letter, dated 1 April 1943.
The writer of the letter is Sauckel, and the letter is addressed to the
defendant.

    “Most honored Field Marshal,

    “I take the liberty of enclosing in confidence three copies of
    the speech I gave in Poznan on 5 and 6 February 1943, on the
    occasion of the Reich and Gauleiters meeting and beg you kindly
    to peruse it. The figures contained in this speech refer to the
    end of the year 1942. Of course, the figures given concerning
    utilization of labor have again increased in the meantime. I
    would ask for your continued sympathetic understanding of the
    interests of manpower utilization, and your understanding and
    assistance in my task as far as possible. On my side, I can
    assure you that I always have asked the offices of the labor
    allocation administration subordinate to me for close and
    successful cooperation with all departments, and that I will do
    so for the future too.

                                                  “Heil Hitler,
                                             “Yours respectfully,
                                                 [Signed] “Sauckel”

And, on the 7th, the last page, the defendant acknowledges receipt of
this letter:

    “Most esteemed Gauleiter,

    “I thank you most cordially for kindly transmitting to me the
    speech you made in Poznan on 5 and 6 February 1943 on the
    occasion of the Reich and Gauleiters meeting.

    “Heil Hitler! Yours.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Do you recall receiving it from Sauckel on 1 April 1943?

A. No. At the beginning of April I wasn’t there the first few days. I
see a remark, by somebody else, on this document. It probably says—I
can’t read it very well—“for the files of the Central Planning Board”.
Perhaps this letter may have been submitted to me later on—I do not
know whether I replied myself. I certainly did not read the report
because otherwise I would be able to recall the figures.

Q. But you did initial the letter, didn’t you?

A. I do not know. I do not recall it at all.

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. DENNEY: On the copy that your Honors have, I believe it’s apparent
in the upper left-hand corner of the first page, the defendant’s
initials appear there, as well as on the original letter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. Now, do you ever recall saying that you would put the German workers
into concentration camps, the ones who did not work well?

A. When I talked about slackers, I referred to education by Himmler, but
not to sending them into concentration camps. Himmler had other training
places for workers where such people who were disinclined to work were
being trained by making their supplementary rations dependent on their
production.

Q. Don’t you recall that you asked that certain camps be set up
especially to take care of these German workers who weren’t doing well?

A. I did not say that we should make a special camp, but that they
should go to the training camps which already existed and we could get
them back from there. I do wish to emphasize here these were people,
Germans, who did not do their duty towards their Fatherland. I thought
it justified that such people should be trained.

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. DENNEY: Witness, I believe you said you kept a diary?

A. A diary? You could not call it exactly a diary, I only took some
short notes concerning my stay, and I jotted down a few key words which
conveyed generally the most important matters.

Q. That was lost, was it, or destroyed, when you were captured?

A. It has not been lost. I still have it here.

Q. That is what you are referring to?

A. If I look up where I was at a particular day or what personalities I
met, I refer only to the most important questions, not to everything, I
can see whom I was with. Sometimes there is a table of contents, too,
which is more detailed, according to the interest I had in those
questions. For instance, for 28 October, which you referred to a while
ago, I only have the following: My dispute with Goering he had reported
to Hitler; he had not obtained anything, and now he started to vent his
bad humor on me. Then comes a short note again that there was a
conference afterwards with Goering. That was in Karinhall. It went on
for the whole day. It was one hour from Berlin by car. I noted down that
Speer was there, that Sauckel was there, Grawitz, von der Heyde, and
some others. There is no mention what subjects were discussed, but the
attendance of Sauckel clarifies the matter for me. That is an example of
how I would enter these notes in this book.

Q. Insofar as you recall, you were at that meeting on 28 October?

A. Yes, indeed. I have found it here in my book.

                 *        *        *        *        *

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Mr. Denney, let’s get an unequivocal answer to
this. Did you put the initials on the letter from Sauckel?

MILCH: The “Mi”, yes, indeed.

Q. You wrote that?

A. Yes, I did. I wrote it. Somebody else wrote “to the files—”

Q. Never mind what somebody else wrote. Now, on the first page of the
pamphlet, the printed speech, there are some initials. Did you write
those?

A. On the cover, yes; I did, “Mi, 6/4”, that is what I wrote.

Q. All right.

MR. DENNEY: Do you recall saying that Americans were never assigned to
work in any of the airplane factories?

MILCH: Yes, I said that.

Q. This is Document NOKW-364, which is a partial translation of the
minutes of the Jaegerstab, held on 19 June 1944. The cover page, which
is photostated here in the German, which will be given to the Secretary
General, bears the initials of the defendant.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Is this a new exhibit?

MR. DENNEY: Yes, your Honor. This will bear Prosecution Exhibit Number
135 for identification, if your Honor pleases. Document NOKW-364, a
partial translation of the minutes of the Jaegerstab of a meeting held
19 June 1944. On the covering page there appear the initials of the
defendant. Perhaps the Secretary General would be good enough to let Mr.
Blakeslee have the original so the cover page can be shown to the
defendant. Just show it to him, Mr. Blakeslee.

    (The document was handed to the defendant.)

                 *        *        *        *        *

MR. DENNEY: Do your records show that you attended a conference of the
GL on 4 August 1942?

A. Yes, indeed. These discussions were twice a week. (_NOKW-409, Pros.
Ex. 140._)

                 *        *        *        *        *

JUDGE MUSMANNO: Curiosity consumes me as to what would happen if an
officer inferior in rank to yourself took you at your word and actually
executed a number of these workers or prisoners of war. Would that
officer then be punished?

A. No one was there who would have been in a position to do that. Apart
from that, all those who were under my orders knew me and my way of
handling things. They knew that I didn’t mean it, and apart from that
they always laughed about my remarks when I let myself go, as they said.

Q. In other words the comment of the Field Marshal in a matter of this
seriousness was really of no value?

A. Because the people knew that I got excited very easily about certain
things, and these incidents here have been selected and produced. From
every one of these meetings which took place twice a month, there was a
long report and owing to one or other of these reports, maybe once or
twice, there would be a certain outburst or explosion, and then, as we
soldiers were accustomed to do, we would just get mad, that is all.
However, I didn’t intend to do anything about it and I spoke to those
under my orders when the opportunity offered. They pointed the matter
out to me. They knew exactly from my words that this was not meant
seriously. They knew exactly that no such order had been given and that
I myself would never cause anybody to be punished, not even then when it
might have been justified, for the very simple reason that I did not
have the power to administer punishments.

JUDGE PHILLIPS: Mr. Denney read this paragraph to you, Document
NOKW-409, Prosecution Exhibit 140. I understood you to say this, that
the paragraph did not contain your attitude there, that you never gave
such an order, that when you were worried you sometimes used strong
language as a soldier would. Didn’t you say that?

A. Yes.

Q. Well, now whether you meant it or not, you would say these things,
and by so doing you counseled and advised others under you at a meeting
over which you presided to do such things. Whether you meant it or not
you did that, didn’t you?

A. No, I never gave an order by using these words, because my people
spoke with me, and they knew afterwards from my words that I never meant
it earnestly.

Q. Didn’t you say, “I would band the workers together and have fifty
percent of them shot. I would then publish this fact and compel the
other fifty percent to work by beating if necessary.” Did you say that
or not?

A. I do not remember having said that. However, three days ago I believe
I said that, when I had such a rush of blood to my head, due to that
injury I had, and I couldn’t remember what I had said at that particular
moment. I just burst out with rage.

Q. Well, if you did say that, you were advising and counseling others to
do that, were you not?

A. No, that was not a counsel or an advice to anybody else. On the
contrary, it was known that if someone had done such a thing I would
have intervened myself.

                 *        *        *        *        *

[March 20]

JUDGE MUSMANNO: Since we are on the subject of Jews, I would like to
refer to something which occurred at the first trial. Now you are not
compelled to discuss this matter if for any reason you prefer not to,
but you will recall that you were cross-examined by Justice Jackson on
the subject of your being Aryanized. Do you recall that?

A. Yes, I recall it.

Q. Now you gave an explanation at the trial which, however, was not
definite, it seems to have left something in mid-air, and since you have
given us quite a long autobiographical sketch of yourself, if you would
care to enlighten us on this point, you are free to do so.

A. My point of view is as I stated at the time.

Q. Yes.

A. That point of view I still adhere to.

Q. Let us see. You were asked certain questions and gave certain answers
as follows:

    “Question: At that time” (Goering had referred to 1933) “Goering
    had you—we will have no misunderstanding about this—Goering
    made you what you call a full Aryan; was that right?

    “Answer: I do not think he made me one; I was one.

    “Question: Well, he had it established, let us say.

    “Answer: He had helped me in clearing up this question, which
    was not clear.

    “Question: That is, your mother’s husband was a Jew; is that
    correct?

    “Answer: It was not said so.

    “Question: You had to demonstrate that none of your ancestry was
    Jewish; is that correct?

    “Answer: Yes, everybody had to do that.

    “Question: And in your case that involved your father, your
    alleged father, is that correct?

    “Answer: Yes.” [There the inquiry rested.]

A. Yes.

Q. Just what had to be done to demonstrate that you were a full Aryan,
and why did the question arise?

A. The first time that question arose was in 1933, and the occasion was
the following: The president of the German Aero Club was reported as
being adverse to the Hitler regime, and I protected that man. Following
that, a man who was a member of the SA sent a letter to Goering, and I
may add that this was a man who was trying to become a state secretary
in the Air Ministry, and he had been deeply hurt when he, an old Party
member, had to take second place to me. In this letter he said that
State Secretary Milch was not a full Aryan. This happened in the summer
of 1933. Goering forwarded this letter to me, and I went to Goering.
Following that I was asked to submit my family tree. That is how this
matter arose.

Q. In other words, you had to establish that no Jewish blood flowed in
your veins, is that correct?

A. Yes, that is what I was supposed to do.

Q. And you established that to their satisfaction?

A. That was established.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. * * * Now, I understand you to say that the first time you learned of
the proposed war against Poland was on 21 August, and even then it was
not very clearly indicated that a war could actually be unleashed, and
that further it was not until the very end of the day, that is to say,
at five o’clock in the afternoon of 31 August that you were directed to
put the Luftwaffe, or all your forces, in readiness for the attack. Is
that correct? Is that what you said?

A. On 31 August, not to get ready, but I received the order: “The attack
starts tomorrow,” that was the order for an attack, whereas, over-all
preparations had been made previously at the meeting which took place
with Hitler on 22 August, only then there was still the possibility of
negotiations which were still going on. These negotiations came to an
end on 31 August at 1700 hours.

Q. Did you not tell this Tribunal that after the meeting of 23 May 1939
you were convinced that war was not intended?

A. 23d of May?

Q. Yes, 23 May 1939?

A. Yes.

Q. That you had no intimation that Hitler intended an aggressive war on
Poland?

A. Yes, because at that time, according to my recollection, Hitler
stated again and again that he was certainly going to settle the Polish
problem, but that he would not allow war to break out.

Q. And that you had called to his attention the necessity of
manufacturing bombs, because you believed that hostilities might break
out?

A. That was before that date, before the 23d, and also after the 23d,
because I myself did not share Hitler’s optimism. Although he may not
have intended to wage war, his policy might nevertheless have led to
war, for he alone was not the deciding factor, the others would have
something to say as well.

Q. And that assumption lulled you into the conviction that there would
be no war, since he refused you authority to manufacture bombs?

A. Today I must assume that, at that time I was not aware of it.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Q. When did you first learn that an attack on Russia was intended?

A. At the beginning of January 1941—I beg your pardon—yes, that is
right, 1941, on 13 January actually. It was then that Goering, during a
conference with a large circle of commanding officers, informed us that
one’s attention should be turned to the East, as Hitler was fearing an
attack by the Russians.

Q. Yes, and you finally came to the conclusion that the declaration of
war, or rather, the undeclared war against Russia was a crime against
Germany.

A. Yes.

Q. Did you think it was a crime against Russia?

A. Yes, against Russia also.

Q. Also?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, you endeavored to see Hitler to persuade him not to enter this
war.

A. Yes.

Q. And your immediate circle, your military friends, realized that it
was foolhardy to provoke a war with Russia and thereby establish two
fronts?

A. Exactly the way I saw it, yes. My immediate circle were of the same
opinion as I was.

Q. And all the generals were of the same impression—that it was
hopeless for Germany, and that further it was tragic and suicidal to
Germany to allow Hitler to take over the control of the armed forces?
You were practically unanimous in that belief, were you not?

A. This was never discussed in any larger circles.

Q. But you have testified—it is in the record—that you were all of
that belief.

A. It transpired at a later stage, when it was discussed, that they were
all of the same opinion.

Q. When was that?

A. Later on in the course of the war.

Q. When did you realize that it was a mistake to have Hitler as
Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces?

A. I, personally?

Q. When was it thoroughly recognized, even though not expressed at a
public meeting among the generals, that it was suicidal, a great
mistake, to have Hitler as Commander in Chief?

A. That was the general point of view after Stalingrad. That is when it
became general.

Q. And when was that?

A. That was the end of January 1943.

Q. Yes. You still had two and a half years of war ahead of you?

A. Yes.

Q. Why didn’t you do something about having Hitler removed?

A. It was my duty toward my people to keep allegiance to him. I had
sworn an oath of allegiance to Hitler. I am only a human being who can
see this world subjectively and I cannot presume to be an impartial
judge on such questions. Moreover, I believe that in the whole of
Germany’s history there is not one instance of soldiers rising against
their military commander. I certainly do not know of one.

Q. Even though you realized that Hitler was leading Germany into stark
annihilation and unspeakable hardship, and even though all the generals
were of that same belief, yet you upheld this fetish of an allegiance
which was destined, and very clearly so, to bring unparalleled misery to
the people that you professed to be faithful to?

A. Your Honor, I personally did not presume to say that my judgment was
right, and that Hitler’s judgment, and the judgment of all those around
him, was wrong.

Q. Then, you modify your statement that Hitler was wrong? You say that
he might have been right?

A. No, no, I am not saying that. What I am trying to say is that it was
my point of view that the question whether the head of the state was to
be overthrown or not was a matter for the constitution, and that for
this eventuality the constitution and the state must surely have powers,
means through which in such cases there could be intervention; but then
it could not be the task of any individual general to take steps in such
questions, which were, after all, unlawful.

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[139] The defendant Milch testified in his own behalf on eight full
trial days (March 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, and 20, 1947). His
testimony is recorded in 581 mimeographed pages (_Tr. pp. 1696-2276_).

[140] Wolfgang Vorwald, former Commander of Luftgau (Air Force
Administrative Command) VII, Munich.

[141] Defendant in case of United States _vs._ Ernst von Weizsaecker, et
al. See Vols. XII, XIII, XIV.

[142] Doc. R-124, Pros. Ex. 48-A, Conference of 1 March 1944, pp.
484-498.




                         V. CLOSING STATEMENTS


              A. Closing Statement of the Prosecution[143]

MR. CLARK DENNY: We close today the trial of a major war criminal—a
leader in a slaving operation, the enormity of which is without
historical parallel; a principal in a crime of murder in the ironic
masquerade of scientific progress which has shocked alike the world of
medicine and the world of laymen. The evidence set forth before the
Tribunal has shown that Erhard Milch was primarily implicated as a
leader in a program to bring laborers into Germany by force, of
allocating them to the various segments of the German war economy, and
of munitions.

We deal here with a top military and economic planner who at all times
was fully informed as to the aims and objectives of the Nazi plan.
Unlike his colleagues Speer and Sauckel, Milch entered the conspiracy
early. The defendant was one of a small group of men who constituted the
leadership of the Reich.

Before dealing directly with the responsibility of the defendant for the
crimes charged in the indictment, as shown by the evidence, we should
like to review, briefly, the law applicable to these crimes.

                               _THE LAW_

The indictment charges and the evidence has connected the defendant with
a wide variety of crimes incident to the enforced labor program of the
Nazi regime. In themselves, these crimes are not new except in their
enormity. In domestic law they have, from ancient times, borne such
familiar titles as assault, battery, murder, kidnapping and pillage. In
international law the principles which protect the individual from undue
interference with his person and his personal freedom have given rise to
a series of kindred precepts governing the conduct of a nation which has
gained factual control over the citizens of another state. We shall
consider briefly some salient precepts and prohibitions of international
law up to, and including the provisions of Control Council Law No. 10.

Much of the labor which supplied Germany with the tools of total war was
exacted from people who had been uprooted from their homes in occupied
territories and imported to Germany. Displacement of groups of persons
from one country to another is the proper concern of international law
insofar as it affects the community of nations.

The law has recognized that some conditions may justify the transfer of
people from one country to another. Correspondingly, and with much more
relevance to the present case, international law has enunciated certain
conditions under which the fact of deportation becomes a crime.

If the transfer is carried out without a legal title, as is the case
where people are deported from a country occupied by an invader while
the occupied enemy still has an army in the field, the deportation is
contrary to international law. The rationale of this rule lies in the
supposition that the occupying power has prevented temporarily the
rightful sovereign from exercising power over its citizens.

Articles 43, 46, 49, 52, 55, and 56 of the Hague Regulations, which
limit the rights of the belligerent occupant, do not _expressly_ specify
as a crime the deportation of civilians from an occupied territory.
However, Article 52 states the following conditions under which services
may be demanded from the inhabitants of occupied countries:

   1. They must be for the needs of the army of occupation;
   2. They must be in proportion to the resources of the country; and
   3. They must be of such a nature as not to involve the inhabitants in
        the obligation to take part in military operations against their
        own country.

Insofar as this section limits the conscription of labor to that
required for the needs of the army of occupation, it is clear that the
use of labor from occupied territories outside of the area of occupation
is forbidden by the Hague Regulations.

The illegality of the deportation of civilians in territories under
belligerent occupation was demonstrated in the First World War when the
Germans attempted a deportation program of Belgian workers into Germany.
This measure met with world-wide protest and was abandoned after about
four months.

Among the voices raised in protest against the deportation of Belgians
by Germany in 1916-1917 was that of Lansing, Secretary of State. He
wrote:

    “The Government of the United States has learned with the
    greatest concern and regret of the policy of the German
    Government to deport from Belgium a portion of the civilian
    population for the purposes of forcing them to labor in Germany,
    and is constrained to protest in a friendly spirit but most
    solemnly against this policy which is in contravention of all
    precedent and all principles of international practice which
    have long been accepted and followed by civilized nations in
    their treatment of noncombatants in conquered territory.”

Other protests were lodged with the German Government by Spain,
Switzerland, Netherlands, and Brazil, all neutral countries.
International lawyers all over the world condemned Germany’s action in
the strongest terms.

The opposition in the German Reichstag accused the government of
violating the Hague Convention and refused to vote for the war budget.

It is worthy of note, in passing, that the defendant has testified at
this trial that he knew of this effort at deportation of labor on the
part of Germany in the First War and that he was much interested in the
investigation conducted by a Reichstag Committee concerning this matter.
He could not have followed this investigation, as he admits he did,
without learning that the deportation in question was a violation of
international law.

The second condition under which deportation becomes a crime occurs when
the purpose of the displacement is illegal. A conspicuous example of
illegality of purpose is found when the deportation is for the purpose
of compelling the deportees to manufacture weapons for use against their
homeland or to be assimilated in the working economy of the occupying
country.

An attempt has been made by the defense in this trial to show that
persons were deported from France into Germany legally and for a legal
purpose, by pointing out that such deportations were authorized by
agreements between Nazi and Vichy French authorities. This defense is
both technically and substantially deficient. Many of the Vichy
Government’s highest officials, who held office by reason of and under
the protection of Nazi power, have been punished for treason by the
present legitimate government. And, too, the agreements themselves were
illegal—because they were exacted under duress, and because they were
void _ab initio_ because of their immoral content. It is common
knowledge that even the puppets of Vichy did not of their own accord
agree to the Nazi deportation measures. It is equally clear that these
agreements were _contra bonos mores_. Then, too, it was illegal for any
French Government to conclude agreements which provided for the
compulsory mass deportation of French workers to aid the enemy’s war
effort. At the time of the agreement between Germany and Vichy there was
merely a state of suspension of hostilities. French resistance had not
ceased, and the outcome of the war continued to be uncertain. Lastly,
the deportation agreements were invalid because their manifest purpose
was to aid Germany in the commission of the crime of aggressive war.
That an agreement in furtherance of an act which is illegal in
international law is invalid has been stated by various authorities. For
example, Professor Charles Cheney Hyde, of Columbia University, defines
as internationally illegal “agreements which are concluded for the
purpose of, and with a view to, causing the performance of acts which it
(international law) proscribes.”

Professor Hall, page 382 of the 8th Edition of International Law (1924),
declares:

    “The requirement that contracts shall be in conformity with law
    invalidates, or at least renders voidable, all agreements which
    are at variance with the fundamental principles of international
    law and their undisputed applications * * *.”

Lauterpacht on International Law by L. Oppenheim, in volume I, page 706,
states:

    “It is a unanimously recognized customary rule of international
    law that obligations which are at variance with universally
    recognized principles of international law cannot be the object
    of a treaty.”

The final condition under which deportation becomes illegal occurs
whenever generally recognized standards of decency and humanity are
disregarded. This flows from the established principle of law that an
otherwise permissible act becomes a crime when carried out in a criminal
manner.

A study of the pertinent parts of Control Council Law No. 10 strengthens
the conclusions of the foregoing statements, that deportation of the
population is criminal whenever there is no title in the deporting
authority or whenever the purpose of the displacement is illegal, or
whenever the deportation is characterized by inhumane or illegal
methods.

Article II (1) (_b_) lists under war crimes “ill-treatment or
deportation to slave labor or for any other purpose, of civilian
population from occupied territory.” It is clear that Law No. 10
establishes the following separate and distinct crimes: ill-treatment of
civilians from occupied territories; deportation to slave labor of such
civilians; and deportation for any other purposes of such civilians.

The prohibition of deportation of civilians from occupied territories
irrespective of the purpose, as stated in Control Council Law No. 10, is
a recognition of the principle of international law that a power in
belligerent occupation has no right or authority (title) to deport the
citizens of the occupied territories. The separate specification as a
war crime in Law No. 10 of ill-treatment of civilians from occupied
territories is a recognition of the rule of international law, as
heretofore discussed, that even an otherwise lawful deportation (by an
authority having title and for a legitimate purpose) is rendered illegal
where the deportees are ill-treated.

Without entering into a detailed discussion of the evidence, it should
be pointed out at this point, that all these conditions for criminal
deportation were abundantly present in the enforced labor program of
Germany during the 2d World War, and that the _knowing connection_ of
the defendant with all phases of illegal deportation has been
established.

Article II (1) (_c_) of Control Council Law No. 10 specifies certain
crimes against humanity. Among these is listed the “deportation * * *
(of) any civilian population * * *”. The general language of this
sub-section, as applied to deportation, indicates that Control Council
Law No. 10 has indeed unconditionally condemned, as a crime against
humanity, every instance of the deportation of civilians. Under this
sub-section, there would seem to be no room for argument as to the
legality of any agreement on the part of any government, legitimate or
illegitimate, which allows deportation of its subjects in time of war.

We come now to a consideration of the crime of enslavement. Whereas
Article II (_b_) names deportation to slave labor as a war crime,
Article II (1) (_c_) states that the “enslavement * * * (of) any
civilian population” is a crime against humanity. Thus, Law No. 10
treats as separate crimes, and different types of crime, “deportation to
slave labor” and “enslavement.”

Article II (_b_) does not specify as a crime the detention (as
distinguished from the deportation) of civilians for use as slave labor
or for any other purpose. However, the section does stipulate that any
atrocities or offenses against persons which constitute violations of
the laws or customs of war, _including but not limited to_ deportation
to slave labor, are war crimes. Use or detention of persons from
occupied territories for slave labor or for any other purpose, in and of
themselves, _do_ constitute violations of the laws and customs of war.
Ergo, such use or detention is a _war crime_ within II (1) (_b_) of Law
No. 10.

The _crime against humanity_ which is termed “enslavement” in Article II
(1) (_c_) of Law No. 10 is susceptible of two meanings. It can be
understood to embrace the initial act of deprivation of the freedom of
another, and an act whereby such deprivation is continued, or either of
them, or it may be interpreted as referring only to the initial measures
whereby a person is deprived of his freedom.

It is the contention of the prosecution in this case that all phases of
the slave labor program, the taking, the transportation, the detention,
the use and the inhuman treatment of foreign workers as practiced by the
Nazi state and participated in by the defendant, constitute enslavement
within the meaning of Article II (1) (_c_). No sufficient reason appears
for the limitation of the crime to the mere initial act. In every true
and complete sense a person is enslaved from the moment when his liberty
is taken from him until the time when it is restored to him. It is more
than probable that if Law No. 10 is intended to limit the crime of
enslavement to the initial measures under which a person was deprived of
his liberty, there would have been some definite indication, either in
the language or in the context of the statute.

Even if we were to concede the narrowest possible meaning for the term
“enslavement” in Article II (1) (_c_), so as to understand by it only
the first acts of deprivation of liberty, all acts under which such
people were kept in an enslaved status would be crimes against humanity,
because the same section defines as such any atrocities and offenses
committed against the civilian population. By express proviso
“enslavement” and “deportation” are only illustratively mentioned, and
“other inhuman acts committed against any civilian population”
constitute crimes against humanity.

The result is that whether we adopt the broad interpretation of the term
“enslavement” or the narrower one, the deportation, the transportation,
the retention, the use and the inhuman treatment of civilian populations
are crimes against humanity. The prosecution charges that the defendant
was criminally connected with all the phases of the slave labor program,
whether these divisions be comprehended within the technical term
“enslavement” or be divided between the crime of “enslavement” and that
of “other inhuman acts.”

We shall now make brief comment on the subject of the treatment and use
of prisoners of war. The Hague and Geneva Conventions merely codify the
precepts of the laws and usages of all civilized nations. Article 31 of
the Geneva Convention provides that “labor furnished by prisoners of war
shall have no direct relation to war operations.” Thus the Convention
forbids:

    1. The use of prisoners of war in manufacture or transportation
    of arms or munitions of any kind, and

    2. The use of prisoners of war for transporting material
    intended for combat units.

The Hague Regulations contain comparable provisions.

The essence of the crime of the misuse of prisoners of war derives from
the kind of work to which they are assigned—in other words, to work
directly connected with the war effort. The prosecution would like to
recall to the court the evidence which connects the defendant with both
the _illegal employment_ of prisoners of war and with their abusive
treatment. The Tribunal will recall that the defendant ordered the
murder of prisoners of war who attempted to escape. We will discuss this
crime more fully later. It will be remembered that there never has been
a substantial denial of the fact that prisoners of war were used to man
German antiaircraft batteries. Nor is it subject to doubt that prisoners
were used in air armament industries over which the defendant exercised
supervisory control.

We now come to the consideration of the basic charges and the law
governing the defendant’s complicity in, and responsibility for, the
Medical Experiments Program. The fundamental crime with which the
defendant is charged in this connection is murder. Also involved are
various atrocities, tortures, offenses against the person, and other
inhuman acts.

The applicable provisions of Control Council Law No. 10, Article II, are
(_b_) war crimes, (_c_) crimes against humanity. In connection with the
criminal Medical Experiments Program, the prosecution submits that the
defendant is guilty of—

    (_a_) War crimes, namely violations of the laws and customs of
    war, as the medical experiments performed upon involuntary
    persons, some of them nationals of countries at war with the
    German Reich, involved the commission of murders, tortures, and
    other inhuman acts.

    (_b_) Crimes against humanity, namely medical experiments
    performed upon involuntary German nationals and nationals of
    other countries, in the course of which, brutalities, murders,
    and other inhuman acts were committed.

Before we pass from the law involved in this case to a consideration of
the evidence, we wish to mention the legal basis for the prosecution’s
contention that the defendant must share the guilt which attaches to the
slave labor program and the conduct of medical experiments upon
unconsenting human beings. Control Council Law No. 10 defines for us the
theory upon which this trial proceeds in Article II, paragraph 2, when
it says:

    “Any person without regard to nationality or the capacity in
    which he acted, is deemed to have committed a crime as defined
    in paragraph 1 of this Article, if he was (_a_) a principal or
    (_b_) an accessory to the commission of any such crime, or
    ordered or abetted the same or (_c_) took a consenting part
    therein or (_d_) _was connected with plans or enterprises
    involving its commission or_ (_e_) _was a member of any
    organization or group connected with the commission of any such
    crime_. * * *” [Emphasis added.]

Without wishing to limit the scope of the testimony in this case, the
Tribunal’s attention is directed to the evidence which has established
that the defendant, as a member of the Central Planning Board, and the
Jaegerstab, and as Generalluftzeugmeister, and in every one of his
capacities, was connected with “plans and enterprises” for the
commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity, and was a “member
of organizations and groups”, within the meaning of subdivisions (_d_)
and (_e_) of paragraph 2, “connected with the commission of such
crimes”.

Count One, paragraph 6, of the indictment charges the defendant Milch
with guilt in the murder of prisoners of war who had attempted to escape
from enforced labor in German war industry. The gist of this crime is
murder, which is, and always has been, prohibited by every country which
laid any claim to civilization. It was specified as a war crime under
the Hague and Geneva Conventions and under the provisions of Article II
of Control Council Law No. 10. The evidence which connects the defendant
with this crime will be discussed in another part of this summation.

Law Number 10, Article II, paragraph 3 provides that the death penalty
or lesser sentences may be prescribed for the commission of war crimes
and crimes against humanity as defined in the statute.

We turn now from the law to the evidence. In the presentation of its
case in chief, the prosecution first offered evidence to describe the
slave labor program in Germany in all its stark terror. It then turned
to a presentation of the proof which connected the defendant with the
slave labor program in two of his principal capacities, as member of the
Central Planning Board and as member of the Jaegerstab. Next there was
put in evidence the documents which established the defendant’s
connection with the medical experiments, and finally, after the defense
had put in its case, the defendant was confronted with the evidence of
additional documents which connected him with the detention and
mistreatment of slave labor in his capacity as Generalluftzeugmeister.
In summing up the evidence the prosecution wants to keep roughly the
same order. It will deal in turn with the evidence of the defendant’s
activities as member of the Central Planning Board and as member of the
Jaegerstab. The documents relating to the defendant as
Generalluftzeugmeister will then be dealt with and, in conclusion, the
defendant’s implication in the criminal medical experiments will be
discussed.

When, in the course of presenting the evidence, we first turned our
attention from the general documents which established the body of the
crime of slave labor to the documents which were to prove the
defendant’s connection with that crime, we asked the Court’s attention
to certain key words which we said would run like small threads through
our proof. These words were cited to be “procurement, allocation and
use”. It was stated that we would often use them. We offered many
documents to prove Milch’s connection with each of the functions
described by these key words. Once again, we ask the Tribunal to keep
these words in mind.

The Central Planning Board, which was established in April 1942, served
as a means of consolidating in a single agency all controls over German
war production. The minutes of the Central Planning Board which have
been submitted to the Tribunal reflect the dominant role played by the
defendant at meetings of the Board.

The best evidence of the scope and authority of the Central Planning
Board is contained in the Board’s own minutes. The first conference of
the Central Planning Board was held on 27 April 1942. The duties and
responsibilities of the Board were announced in these words:

    “The Central Planning in the Four Year Plan (decree of the Reich
    Marshal of Greater Germany [Goering] of 22 April 1942) is a task
    for leaders. It encompasses only principles and executive
    matters. It makes unequivocal decisions and supervises the
    execution of its directives. The Central Planning does not rely
    on anonymous institutions difficult to control but always on
    individuals and fully responsible persons who are free in the
    selection of their working methods and their collaborations, as
    far as there are no directives issued by the Central Planning.”

Then, six months later, on 20 October 1942, the statutes of the Central
Planning Board were published and distributed. A portion of these
states:

    “The Central Planning Board created by the Fuehrer and Reich
    Marshal in order to unify armament and war economy deals only
    with the decision of basic questions. Professional questions
    remain the task of the competent departments which in their
    field remain responsible within the framework of the decisions
    made by the Central Planning Board.”

It is addressed to: “The highest Reich authorities, the Reich Protector,
the Governor General and the executive authorities in the occupied
countries.” The letter of transmittal stated in part:

    “Enclosed I send you for your information the statutes of the
    Central Planning Board with the request to support the office of
    the Central Planning Board in every possible way in its work,
    and to direct, more particularly, your section chiefs and
    reporters to forward all information requested orally, or by
    writing, in the shortest possible time. By this collaboration by
    your section chiefs and reporters, the building up of larger
    machinery in the framework of the Central Planning Board is to
    be avoided.”

The International Military Tribunal found that the Central Planning
Board “had supreme authority for the scheduling of German production and
the allocation and development of raw material”.

It needs no emphasis that the effective performance of these functions
necessarily involved the Board in the requisitioning and distribution of
labor, and the records of the Board, which have been submitted, leave no
doubt that the Board exercised the authority conferred upon it in the
field of labor. The International Military Tribunal in its opinion found
that the Board requisitioned labor from Sauckel with full knowledge that
the demands could be supplied only by foreign forced labor, and that the
Board determined the basic allocation of this labor within the German
war economy.

In assessing the guilt of the defendant Funk, the Court said:[144]

    “In the fall of 1943, Funk was a member of the Central Planning
    Board which determined the total number of laborers needed for
    German industry, and required Sauckel to produce them, usually
    by deportation from occupied territories. Funk did not appear to
    be particularly interested in this aspect of the forced labor
    program, and usually sent a deputy to attend the meetings, often
    SS General Ohlendorf, the former Chief of the SD inside of
    Germany and the former Commander of Einsatzgruppe D. But Funk
    was aware that the Board of which he was a member was demanding
    the importation of slave laborers, and allocating them to the
    various industries under its control.”

Bearing in mind the fact that Funk was a minor member of the Board, how
much greater is the responsibility of the defendant who was a dominant
figure on the Board throughout its existence.

There is no need to review in historical detail the defendant’s personal
participation in the criminal activities of the Board. A few references
to the pattern for 1944 will suffice. The Tribunal will recall that
Albert Speer, the other dominant member of the Board, was ill during
most of this period.

On 4 January 1944, demands were made at a Hitler conference that Sauckel
produce four million new workers from the occupied countries. The
defendant was present at the conference, and at this meeting, Sauckel,
in pledging himself to perform his recruitment tasks, indicated that the
demands could be met only by Himmler, and the promise of assistance was
forthcoming from the Reich Leader SS.

The allocation of this labor to the various sectors of the German
economy was determined by the Board at its 53d meeting. The defendant
was the presiding officer at this meeting. The chart compiled by Milch
and found in his files shows his personal knowledge of the sources of
the labor being allocated.

Sauckel was, however, unable to satisfy completely these demands. He
reported this inability at its 54th meeting. This meeting of the Board
was presided over by the defendant, and the minutes which we have
submitted show the subordinate position occupied by Sauckel with respect
to the Board. The Tribunal will recall Sauckel’s opening statement:

    “Field Marshal, gentlemen, it goes without saying that we shall
    satisfy as far as possible the demands agreed upon by the
    Central Planning Board.”

And then later on in the meeting:

    “If I am to fulfill the demands which you present to me * * *.”

We shall not review in detail the minutes of this meeting, but the
Tribunal’s attention is again directed to the fact that Sauckel was
questioned closely by the defendant who suggested that the Wehrmacht be
assigned to the task of assisting in the recruitment drive. The
defendant suggested that French workers be coerced by a system of
premeditated starvation. In dealing with the problem of Italian
laborers, the defendant suggested that only those who went to Germany or
worked in protected factories be given food.

As a further means of meeting the manpower shortage, consideration was
given to possible measures for increasing the productive power of
prisoners of war. Accordingly, on 5 March 1944, a conference was held at
the Fuehrer Headquarters. It is evident from the minutes which have been
submitted to the Tribunal that the defendant was in attendance. The
Tribunal will recall that the decision was made to give the direction of
the Stalags to the SS, in order to increase the production power of the
prisoners. This was not to apply to the Americans or the English. The
Tribunal will take judicial notice of the methods of the SS.

On 7 July 1944, Sauckel issued a report showing new manpower placed at
the disposal of German war industry during the first half of 1944. We
shall not review in detail this report, but merely state that it is
proof of the Board’s directive to Sauckel.

This report, however, showed a deficit, and on 11 July 1944 a further
conference was held to solve the question of how greater compulsion
could be exerted on persons to work in Germany. The defendant has
testified that he was in virtual retirement from production matters
since late June 1944. Yet the record of this conference shows that he
was present. The result of this conference was the greater utilization
of the Wehrmacht in the recruitment of forced labor. The directive of
Field Marshal von Kluge, which has been submitted in evidence, makes
specific reference to the results of this conference.

Here, in brief, we have the picture. The defendant and the Board, of
which he was a dominant member, requisitioning forced labor from
Sauckel, allocating this labor to the various sectors of the German war
economy, and later improvising new and more brutal techniques of force
and terror for the recruitment of new labor.

The defense, besides denying the power and authority of the Central
Planning Board, has challenged the authenticity and accuracy of its
transcripts. The prosecution has been compelled to rely upon these
minutes for much of its proof.

In this connection, it might be said that these same transcripts
constituted the basis for findings of fact by the International Military
Tribunal. They are quoted in the decision of that Court.

The statutes of the Central Planning Board, mentioned a few minutes ago,
show the extreme care taken to insure the accuracy of reporting these
meetings, as well as action taken or ordered to be taken. The statutes
of the Board provide in part:

    “In order to have the conferences properly prepared and to have
    the execution of the decisions supervised, the Central Planning
    Board appoints an office. This office consists of the deputies
    appointed by each of three members of the Central Planning
    Board; one of these three deputies shall be appointed chief of
    the office.”

Then follows a handwritten marginal note which I shall omit.

    “In accordance with the attached distribution of work the office
    appoints reporters. These reporters are at the disposal of all
    members of the Central Planning Board. The office appoints one
    reporter to keep the record.”

And then, tasks of the office:

    “The office prepares the meetings of the Central Planning Board
    in such a manner that the members of the Central Planning Board
    have the agenda and the material of discussion 24 hours in
    advance. For this purpose the office conducts preliminary talks
    with the competent departments, etc.

    “On the strength of the record made by the reporter, the office
    sees to the execution of the decisions of the Central Planning
    Board by the competent agencies, and sees to it that the
    deadlines fixed are complied with.

    “The members of the office keep the members of the Central
    Planning Board informed between the sessions.”

The minutes of these meetings which have been submitted to this Tribunal
show that these proceedings were recorded and transcribed with
characteristic German detail and accuracy. We need only refer to the
charts and tables, and the remarks quoted in the transcripts. Of the 59
meetings fully covered by these official reports, 41 were prepared and
signed by Ministerialrat Steffler, who was personally responsible for
the accuracy and completeness of these reports.

Without the Central Planning Board the slave labor program could not
have functioned.

                           _THE JAEGERSTAB._

Here we have the defendant in immediate contact with the slave labor
program at its peak. By the testimony of the defendant, it was he who
conceived and instigated the formation of the Jaegerstab. Speer and the
defendant constituted its leadership. Speer’s participation was nominal
and it was the defendant who directed its activities and acted as its
chairman. Speer was ill during part of the Jaegerstab’s existence and
has stated to the Court that he did not preside at a meeting.

The Jaegerstab assumed control over fighter production when the
exploitation of foreign forced labor in air armament had already reached
unparalleled heights. On 16 February 1944, the defendant had told his
colleagues in the Central Planning Board that “our best new engine is
made 88 percent by Russian prisoners of war.” On 25 March, he told his
engineers that soon the percentage of foreign personnel in the aircraft
industry would reach 90 percent. Reich Leader SS Himmler, reporting to
Goering on 9 March 1944 on the employment of concentration camp
personnel in the aircraft industry, stated that nearly 36,000 prisoners
were employed and that an increase to 90,000 was expected. The formation
of the Jaegerstab is partly explainable in terms of the battle to
increase the manpower resources available for fighter production.

The Jaegerstab was assigned top priority. Projects for the recruitment
and commitment of manpower were discussed by the Jaegerstab. The
evidence presented before the Tribunal has shown that questions of
manpower were time and time again referred to the defendant. We have
seen him agreeing to use his prestige and influence upon Sauckel in
efforts to obtain new workers for aircraft production. When manpower in
sufficient numbers was not forthcoming through normal channels, the
Jaegerstab did not shrink from other methods of obtaining its labor.
When necessary the Jaegerstab recruited its own labor, either directly
or by engineering “snatching” expeditions for the seizure of manpower
arriving on transports from the East.

The defendant’s frank admission to his subordinates that “international
law cannot be observed here” characterizes best his own participation in
the activities of the Jaegerstab. Where, as was the case with France,
transfers of production facilities were concerned, the defendant
advocated the stripping of the country and the deportation of its people
as prisoners of war. When the discussion turned to PW’s, the defendant
was quick to suggest their transfer to places under air attack. When the
transportation of Italian civilian conscripts directly recruited by the
Jaegerstab for service in Germany was in question, it was the defendant
who advocated the shooting of those who attempted to escape.

The Jaegerstab was no mere discussion group. As an agency with absolute
authority over fighter production, the Jaegerstab acted by orders and
directives. The Jaegerstab fixed hours of labor and conditions of work.
It was the Jaegerstab, for example, which established the 72-hour work
week in the aircraft industry.

In addition to its jurisdiction over fighter production, the Jaegerstab
was charged with the program for the decentralization of the German
aircraft industry, both to above ground bombproof installations and to
subterranean locations. Much of the labor employed in both phases of the
project was concentration camp labor. The defendant must have known this
fact.

One phase, the transfer to new installations underground, was under the
immediate supervision of SS Gruppenfuehrer Heinz Kammler. Kammler was a
member of the Jaegerstab. Where, as was the case in some instances,
labor was not forthcoming in sufficient quantity, Kammler informed the
Jaegerstab of his intention to take large numbers of persons into
protective custody for use on his projects. Members of the Jaegerstab
knew that manpower shortages on the construction projects were at least
in part due to the high death rate. The conditions of employment on the
projects have not been substantially disputed. The Jaegerstab was well
informed of these conditions. While on trips with the Jaegerstab,
Kammler visited these projects and his fellow members of the Jaegerstab
were well advised as to the manner in which workers employed on them
were treated. Where it was necessary to hang thirty people merely as an
example to others, Kammler reported this fact to the Jaegerstab.

A second phase of the program, the transfer of fighter production to
bombproof factories above ground, was carried out for the Jaegerstab by
Stobbe-Dethleffsen and later Xaver Dorsch. While Stobbe-Dethleffsen and
Dorsch were immediately in charge, it was the Jaegerstab which received
the funds and raw materials necessary for the carrying out of this
project. When sufficient progress had not been made under
Stobbe-Dethleffsen, the Jaegerstab demanded that Dorsch carry out this
program. The defendant was a leader in the planning which preceded
Dorsch’s appointment.

By the testimony of Dorsch, Milch was one of a small group which worked
out with Goering the details of the project, including the question of
manpower. Dorsch was represented on the Jaegerstab by Schlempp, and
later Knipping, deputies designated for this particular purpose.
Schlempp informed the Jaegerstab on the progress of the work, both
orally and in writing. Dorsch received manpower from the Jaegerstab.
This was the immediate concern of Schmelter.

Early in April 1944 the defendant represented the Jaegerstab at
conferences with Hitler where the decision was first taken to carry out
deportations. Shortly thereafter, the defendant received written
confirmation of the results of this conference, as did Himmler, who was
to procure the workers. Progress reports were made and delivery dates
agreed upon. Then came the disappointing news that the first transports
arriving at Auschwitz consisted primarily of old men, women, and
children. Later on there were reports as to the successful allocation of
this personnel. The testimony of Dorsch shows that these Jews were used
on the construction projects, that the conditions under which they lived
were intolerable, and that the death rate on the project was excessive.

In closing this phase of the case, it is submitted that the defendant
never resigned from the Jaegerstab. While it is true that the defendant
at Goering’s behest was removed from certain offices in the Air Ministry
in the summer of 1944, he retained his membership in the Jaegerstab
until its dissolution, the prosecution contends.

As Generalluftzeugmeister the defendant had complete control over
aircraft production. In this field his authority was unlimited. In
particular it has been shown that the defendant requisitioned labor for
the aircraft industry with knowledge of the brutal and inhumane
techniques employed in recruiting these laborers, and that he gave
directives for the criminal treatment of these laborers at the centers
of production.

There is evidence that the defendant presented the labor demands of the
aircraft industry to Sauckel. The Tribunal will recall that in his
affidavit Sauckel stated that it was the defendant who produced the
manpower figures for aviation. In view of the position occupied by
Sauckel in the slave labor program, this statement is of special
importance.

The statement of Sauckel is in agreement with the statements of Hermann
Goering, the defendant’s superior in the Luftwaffe. In his interrogation
the former Reich Marshal stated that the defendant was in charge of the
division for labor employment in the Air Ministry and that the industry
demands for labor in air armament were made by the defendant.

Even the defendant’s collaborator Albert Speer testified to the same
effect when he stated:

    “The requests of the air armament industry for laborers were
    presented by Milch and he did not permit anyone to take this
    right away from him until March 1944.”

The defendant as Generalluftzeugmeister was acquainted with the methods
employed in recruiting this manpower. In fact, many of the practices
indulged in by Sauckel were formulated at conferences at which the
defendant was in attendance. The Tribunal will recall that the defendant
was present at a conference in which Goering announced his plan to use
the Luftwaffe in the recruitment drive to capture laborers in Holland.
The Tribunal’s attention is also drawn to the Generalluftzeugmeister
meeting of 25 January 1944 in which methods for the more expeditious
deportation of young Czechs for work in the Luftwaffe were discussed.

The defendant also knew that prisoners of war and concentration camp
personnel were included in the manpower he was requisitioning and
distributing to the aircraft industry. We have seen him trying to
increase their numbers in the industry under his control, and we have
seen him ordering and abetting the inhumane treatment of this labor.

As chief of aircraft production, the defendant regulated the treatment
of foreign forced labor in the German aircraft industry. The defendant
fixed hours of labor and conditions of work and by directives to his
subordinates set basic policies for the handling of this labor within
the industry.

Where foreign workers refused to work, the defendant ordered that they
be shot. When these wretched slaves attempted to revolt, the defendant
directed that some of their numbers be killed, regardless of personal
guilt or innocence. In the case of prisoners of war who attempted to
escape, the defendant ordered that they be shot.

When the “contracts” of workers under his control expired, the defendant
ordered their compulsory extension, and when workers attempted to change
jobs, he advocated that they be put in concentration camps.

In the case of Italians who refused to work, the defendant ordered that
they be beaten and so informed his chief, Goering. And where Frenchmen
refused to work in French factories under his control, the defendant
stated that he would deport them by force and bring them to Germany or
to the East. Similar policies were applied by the defendant in the case
of Polish workers.

No more need be said about the Generalluftzeugmeister. The Tribunal has
seen the documents containing the minutes of the meetings. The documents
dealing with this phase of the case are particularly revealing in
showing the fanaticism of the defendant and the enthusiasm with which he
recommended ruthless treatment of the hapless victims of German
occupation policies.

We will now restate the pattern originally presented in terms of the
proof brought forward at the trial in order to ascertain to what extent
the defendant’s culpability has been established with reference to the
medical phase.

First, the body of the crime. The prosecution contends that in violation
of the laws of war and all the laws of humanity criminal high-altitude
and freezing experiments were carried on by Luftwaffe physicians.

The testimony of Dr. Erich Hippke, the Medical Inspector of the
Luftwaffe, is of interest on this subject. Hippke stated that Dr.
Rascher, a Luftwaffe physician at the time, came to Hippke with a
proposal to use prisoners as high-altitude experimental subjects in May
1941.

Hippke was in a receptive frame of mind, for it was essential that the
scope of these experiments be widened and new human subjects were
needed. The researchers working on the tests had developed a certain
immunity so that results of self-experimentation did not give a true
picture of the reactions.

With the aid of Himmler and the SS, the Luftwaffe was able to proceed
with the experiments which were allegedly necessary in the interests of
German military aviation medical knowledge. But lest one be inclined to
believe that these pressure experiments were considered as minor
nuisances to the subjects concerned, with no real dangers, note the
words of Dr. Hippke:

    “I asked him,” speaking of Rascher, “how he would be able to
    obtain such persons for experimentation, and he justified
    himself by saying that he had connections with the SS who had
    charge of such penal prisoners. There were such penal prisoners
    in Dachau and he would be in a position to obtain them for these
    purposes. I myself, because of my inner personal feelings on the
    matter, was very much against these experiments and could not
    make up my mind whether I should approve such experimentation.”

From the very beginning of the plan to conduct these experiments, Dr.
Hippke had strong mental reservations concerning the moral principles
involved in the task which the Luftwaffe doctors were about to
undertake. During the coming year Hippke weighed the problem, and it was
with some misgiving that he finally allowed his doctors to begin the
experiments, saying to them: “Please, children, go carefully.”

But, tragically enough, his “children” did not go carefully. Instead,
they ran amuck with their scientific apparatus and tests. The pressure
experiments which were supposed to have been helpful to fliers of the
Luftwaffe degenerated into so-called “X-experiments”, which meant
“execution” experiments.

Seventy to eighty persons were murdered during the spring and summer of
1942 when the pressure experiments were carried on at Dachau.

During the subsequent freezing experiments a comparable number of
concentration camp inmates forfeited their lives to the sadistic Dr.
Rascher and his Luftwaffe associates.

Dr. Romberg himself admits having seen three persons die in the
low-pressure chamber and concedes that at least nine other deaths may
well have occurred when he was absent from his post at Dachau.

Wolfram Sievers,[145] the manager of the Ahnenerbe, the SS Research
Institute, witnessed the death of an experimental subject in the
freezing tank.

There is adequate evidence that the low-pressure and freezing
experiments were carried out by Luftwaffe physicians for the benefit of
the Luftwaffe. There has been no valid denial of the fact that the
defendant was the Luftwaffe official responsible for the deaths and
cruelties suffered in these twin torture chambers, the pressure chamber
and the freezing tank.

Now, let us examine in more detail the second basic charge of the
prosecution, namely, that the defendant was officially connected with
these experiments which violated the laws of war and humanity.

We have the “Wolffy” letter of 20 May 1942 in which the defendant tells
Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff of the SS that “the altitude experiments
carried out by the SS and the Luftwaffe at Dachau have been finished.”
In this same letter Milch announces that experiments in connection with
perils on the high seas would be important; that the necessary
arrangements have been made and, since the low-pressure chamber is no
longer needed, it must be moved from Dachau. Thus the defendant has
entered the picture and established his official connection with the
high-altitude experiments and the low-temperature experiments, which
proved to be considerably more than mere harmless chilling tests.

If, as the defendant contends, he was not officially responsible for
these Luftwaffe medical experiments, then it should follow that other
persons connected with them would not take cognizance of the defendant
in this matter. The contention is ridiculous.

The witness Wolff had the following to say regarding a meeting he had
with Milch in August or September 1942:

    “Thereafter, we had discussed our official questions. I inquired
    about how he was, and if everything between the Luftwaffe and
    the SS was all right. During that occasion we also spoke about
    these experiments very shortly, if at all, and we spoke of the
    invaluable help which the SS was giving us by providing these
    voluntary inmates, which was helping us with our medical
    material which could be used at the front.”

It is to be noted that they talked about the experiments and Wolff asked
how the Luftwaffe SS relations were. It is submitted that this
demonstrates that Wolff regarded the defendant as the top man in the
Luftwaffe Medical Experiments Program, as indeed he was.

Then there are the two letters addressed to Milch by Himmler and Wolff,
substantially alike in content; Himmler’s, dated November 1942, in which
he cites the opposition that exists among “Christian medical circles” to
conducting experiments on helpless, involuntary concentration camp
inmates. He refers to the narrow-mindedness of such medical men, which
“will take at least another ten years” to remove. But this
narrow-mindedness did not trouble the consciences of Himmler or the
defendant Milch. Decidedly not. In the words of the Reich Leader SS: “We
two should not get angry about these difficulties.”

The prosecution submits that Himmler would not have written a letter in
this tenor unless he was certain that his good friend Milch would be in
complete agreement with his views.

And how did Himmler regard Milch in connection with the experiments? As
a casual onlooker, with a purely academic interest in the results
obtained? No, Himmler knew that Milch possessed the over-all command,
the ultimate authority in the Luftwaffe; that the Inspector General of
the Luftwaffe was the man to refer to whenever a question arose as to
the disposition of the pressure chamber or the status of Dr. Rascher.
Witness Himmler’s request in his letter:

    “I beg you to release Dr. Rascher, Stabsarzt in the reserve,
    from the air force and to transfer him to me to the Waffen SS. I
    would then assume the sole responsibility for having these
    experiments made in this field and would put the results, which
    we in the SS need only for the frost injuries in the East,
    entirely at the disposal of the air force.”

The logical corollary to this statement is inescapable. _If_ Rascher was
not transferred to the SS and remained with the air force, the
responsibility would not be Himmler’s alone. And we must remember that
Rascher did not leave his Luftwaffe post until the year 1943 _after_ the
experimental atrocities had been largely completed. Then where did this
responsibility rest? Himmler had no doubts; it was on the shoulders of
the defendant.

Nor did Karl Wolff, Himmler’s right-hand man, have any doubts as to the
responsible person in the Luftwaffe, with reference to the medical
experiments. He, too, wrote to Milch requesting that Rascher be released
from the Luftwaffe and transferred to the SS. Here was a man, who, by
his own testimony, “had a good comradely relationship” with the
defendant. On the direct examination, Wolff testified regarding his
connection with Milch:

    “Q. In your position during the war did you have any official
    dealings with Milch?

    “A. Yes.

    “Q. In what connection?

    “A. During peacetime—that is, from 1933 on, until 1939—there
    was a personal cooperation between Milch and me. _All
    difficulties between the Luftwaffe and the SS were handled at
    personal conferences in a very comradely way. This usage also
    took place during the war._”

It is because of the situation above described, that the prosecution has
called Wolff the liaison man between Himmler and the SS on the one hand,
and the defendant and the Luftwaffe, on the other.

The testimony and affidavit of Walter Neff, the Dachau prisoner who
later became a block leader in Dachau, is of interest. This man saw
Rascher often. Was Milch’s name mentioned by Rascher in connection with
the medical experiments? It was. In his affidavit, which he did not
repudiate when testifying before this Court, Neff said:

    “The name of Field Marshal _Milch_ was frequently mentioned in
    Dachau. Every time I asked Dr. Romberg how long the cars and the
    low-pressure chambers would remain in Dachau, he assured me that
    _Milch_ would attend to everything. Dr. Rascher said to me that
    he had communicated with Milch personally and that the cars
    would remain in Dachau as long as he specified.”

Dr. Siegfried Ruff,[146] an important figure in the medical experiments
program, head of the research section of the DVL, recognized the
defendant Milch as the supreme authority in the experimental program. In
his affidavit Ruff said:

    “The entire medical research for aviation was under General Dr.
    Erich Hippke, in his capacity as Chief of the Medical Service,
    until 1944, and subsequently under Professor Dr. Schroeder. As
    Chief of the Medical Service, General Hippke was immediately
    subordinate to Field Marshal Milch * * *. The chain of command
    for these experiments was Milch—Hippke—Ruff—Romberg.”

Again there is the chart drawn up by Dr. Oskar Schroeder,[147] outlining
the official Luftwaffe channels through which orders flowed from Milch
to Hippke, and from Hippke to the various doctors engaged in the actual
process of experimentation. Schroeder thus knew definitely that Milch
was the Luftwaffe Chief in the medical experiments program. He later
succeeded Hippke as Medical Inspector. Consequently, his chart is
entitled to material weight in the proof offered by the prosecution.

Rudolf Brandt,[148] adjutant to Himmler, often had occasion to deal with
correspondence between the Luftwaffe and the SS, regarding the
experiments. In referring to Himmler’s request that Milch order Dr.
Rascher to be transferred to the SS, Brandt wrote a letter to Wolfram
Sievers, of the Ahnenerbe Society, stating—

    “I assume that the _Field Marshal will of himself give the
    necessary orders_, and then confine himself to sending a brief
    answer to the Reich Leader SS.”

And Sievers writing to Brandt about the use of the low-pressure chamber
says—

    “The putting at our disposal of the low-pressure chamber,
    however, will be possible then _only if the Reich Leader SS
    writes in person to Field Marshal Milch concerning this_.”

These two men, Sievers and Brandt, were not uninformed of the course of
the medical experiments nor of the competent personnel in the Luftwaffe
and SS in this matter. On the contrary, Sievers admitted witnessing the
death of an experimental subject in the freezing tank, and the
subsequent autopsy, while Rudolf Brandt stated in his affidavit—

    “Field Marshal E. Milch and Professor Hippke, Inspector of the
    Medical Service of the Luftwaffe, were fully informed about the
    low-pressure experiments. Actually these experiments could not
    have been conducted without the knowledge and approval of these
    men, as they were conducted for the benefit of the Luftwaffe and
    the experimenting persons were mostly Luftwaffe physicians.”

In the eyes of other persons, the defendant was the dominant force
behind the Luftwaffe participation in the Medical Experiments Program.
The defense has brought forward no adequate proof to show that they were
mistaken. It is the conviction of the prosecution that no such proof
exists.

The Commander in Chief of the Luftwaffe, Reich Marshal Hermann Goering,
was thoroughly familiar with the organization which was his brain child,
the Luftwaffe, and the way it functioned. What importance did Milch’s
position have in Goering’s mind?

His affidavit reads—

    “Included among the responsibilities of the Office of the
    Inspector General was the conduct of all research and
    experiments and of all matters pertaining to health and
    sanitation inspection * * *.

                 *        *        *        *        *

    “That Generaloberstabsarzt Erich Hippke was the Sanitation
    Inspector of the Luftwaffe during the period from 1941 through
    1944; that the Office of the Sanitation Inspector was directly
    responsible for the conduct of all research and medical
    experiments; that the Office of the Sanitation Inspector, of
    which Generaloberstabsarzt Erich Hippke was the head, was
    directly subordinate to the Inspector General, former Field
    Marshal Milch, and that former Field Marshal Milch was
    responsible for all action taken by Generaloberstabsarzt Hippke,
    or by the Office of the Sanitation Inspector or its
    subordinates.”

It has been established that criminal experiments, high-altitude and
freezing, were carried on at Dachau by Luftwaffe physicians, working
under the orders and supervision of competent Luftwaffe authorities.

We have shown that all Luftwaffe personnel connected with, or knowing
about these experiments, from those closest to the place where the
experiments were conducted—Dr. Rascher, and Walter Neff—to those high
up in the positions of command—Goering and Schroeder—looked to Milch
as the ultimate authority in the Medical Experiments Program. An
investigation of the attitudes and convictions of the SS officials
concerned in this program discloses the same picture.

Could all these men have been mistaken? Were they writing to and
referring to the wrong man when they contacted the defendant? To put
forward such a proposition is to deny the facts. There was no error, the
facts are indisputable.

The defendant was and is officially responsible for the Medical
Experiments Program of the Luftwaffe.

Lastly, we come to the question of the defendant’s knowledge of the
experiments which were being carried out at Dachau for the Luftwaffe.

Throughout direct examination by his defense counsel, the defendant has
consistently denied receiving reports authored by Rascher or in any
other way being informed of the criminal nature of those experiments,
until the time of this trial.

However, he was very much interested in altitude experiments as such.
The following excerpt is from his testimony under questioning by Dr.
Bergold:

    “Q. Witness, how far were you interested in these high-altitude
    experiments in question as GL?

    “A. We were interested in the real altitude tests as I know it
    exactly, because I want to state this figure as 13,500 meters,
    and we added 500 meters in order to get a square figure.
    However, we knew that this last 500 meters, which I have
    mentioned, we were not too interested in that. We were only
    interested in the first place in cabin planes, too, after a
    certain test had been carried out on 388-cabin suits, whether it
    did not succeed or fail, because a person could not move
    properly the way those suits were, due to low pressure up there
    in the air is felt much more than here on the ground.”

The Tribunal’s attention is directed to this figure of 14,000 meters,
which is approximately ten miles. Milch wanted that altitude simulated
in the pressure chamber and the human reactions studied.

It was on 20 May 1942 that Milch wrote his letter to Wolff. Here he said
that Hippke had reported to him that the altitude experiments carried
out by the SS and Luftwaffe at Dachau were finished. Mention was made of
Rascher’s availability for the forthcoming experiments dealing with sea
perils. And Milch stated that the low-pressure chamber could no longer
remain at Dachau. In this one letter, the defendant demonstrates his
knowledge that the SS and the Luftwaffe were conducting, and had
completed, altitude experiments at Dachau and that Dr. Rascher was
involved.

There is the letter of 4 June 1942 to Hippke, wherein the defendant
exhibits his authority in regard to the low-pressure chamber and the
tasks of Dr. Rascher.

On 25 August 1942, Himmler wrote to the defendant enclosing the report
on the high-altitude experiments. Moreover, he asked Milch to receive
Drs. Rascher and Romberg for a lecture and presentation of the film on
the experiments. Himmler suggested that Milch refer the matter to the
Reich Marshal “because of its importance”.

This last statement should dispel any possible doubts as to the
attention accorded these experiments by official German military
circles. In fact, the defendant himself admitted discussing the
experiments with Goering on 13 September 1942. The defendant spoke of
Himmler’s interest in the program, and the apprehension felt by the
Medical Inspector Hippke, although “he did tell me that everything was
all right.” The disposal of the pressure chamber was settled in this
talk with Goering.

The defendant has said that the experiments, reports, and other aspects
of the matter were not known to him, partly because he had no time for
this, and partly because he had no technical knowledge of the subject.
He would have this Court believe that the experimental program was a
minor matter—one that the Inspector General of the Luftwaffe would not
pay close attention to. Yet we have seen that it was important enough so
that Himmler was frequently corresponding with the defendant or others
on the subject. It was important enough for the defendant to bring the
matter to Goering’s attention, even to the details of the disposition of
the low-pressure chamber.

On 31 August 1942, the defendant wrote to Himmler, acknowledging receipt
of the report on altitude experiments, and telling Himmler that he was
“informed about the current experiments”.

While on the stand the defendant attempted to explain this letter by
referring to the usage of German Ministries, where the form “I” means
the Ministry as such. But he admitted that he had written the closing
sentences of this letter “I remain yours, as ever, etc.” Here he did not
deny that “I” was used in its ordinary sense. It is neither logical nor
capable of belief that in the same letter to Himmler, defendant would
use the word “I” in two different senses.

It was also on 31 August 1942 that Hippke discussed the experiments with
the defendant, expressing _doubts_ and _misgivings_. In reply to Milch’s
question, Hippke told him that these doubts had not been substantiated.

Thus it can be seen, from Milch’s testimony itself, that a cloud of
suspicion and evil hovered over the entire Medical Experiments Program.

It is useless, indeed futile, to punish the perpetrators of criminal
acts on the one hand, and to ignore those in high positions who have
made possible the commission of the crimes. The defendant has belabored
the term “duty” in the course of his testimony. He has spoken of his
solemn oath to Hitler and to the German people. It would seem that it
was incumbent upon the defendant to acquaint himself with the activities
of his subordinates, at least to the extent that he should have known
that people were being murdered in experiments, which from the evidence,
were useless as far as the advancement of the knowledge of aviation
medicine is concerned.

The present case is not without judicial precedent. A close analogy can
be drawn between it and a recent case decided by the Supreme Court of
the United States, _in re Yamashita_ [U. S. Reports, Vol. 327, October
term 1945, Nos. 61 and 672]. The procedural and jurisdictional questions
therein decided are of no moment to us now, but the facts of the
Yamashita case are similar to those of the Milch case, and the opinion
rendered by the Court is particularly in point in the matter of
responsibility for senior officers.

General Yamashita was the Commanding General of the 14th Army Group of
the Imperial Japanese Army in the Philippines.

Upon surrendering to United States Forces, he was indicted and tried as
a war criminal before a Military Tribunal on the following
charge—“while commander of armed forces of Japan at war with the United
States of America and its Allies, unlawfully disregarded and failed to
discharge his duty as commander to control the operations of the members
of his command, permitting them to commit brutal atrocities and other
high crimes against people of the United States and of its Allies and
dependencies, particularly the Philippines, and he * * * thereby
violated the laws of war.”

The Court summed up the issue as follows:

    “The question then is whether the law of war imposes on an army
    commander a duty to take such appropriate measures as are within
    his power to control the troops under his command for the
    prevention of the specified acts which are violations of the law
    of war and which are likely to attend the occupation of hostile
    territory by an uncontrolled soldiery, and whether he may be
    charged with personal responsibility for his failure to take
    such measures when violations result.”

The Court cited Articles 1 and 43 of the Fourth Hague Convention of
1907, Article 19 of the Tenth Hague Convention, and Article 26 of the
Geneva Red Cross Convention of 1929. It then stated—

    “These provisions plainly imposed on petitioner, who at the time
    specified was Military Governor of the Philippines, as well as
    commander of the Japanese forces, an affirmative duty to take
    such measures as were within his power, and appropriate in the
    circumstances, to protect prisoners of war and the civilian
    population. This duty of a commanding officer has heretofore
    been recognized and its breach penalized by our own military
    tribunals.”

The Court thereupon denied the petition for certiorari and leave to file
petitions, for writs of habeas corpus, and prohibition.

In the case of the medical experiments, we have a much less complex
situation. There is no question of a senior officer in an occupied
country, rather we are faced with a simple direct chain of command
problem: Milch—Foerster—Hippke. Had Milch given the order, the
experiments would have been terminated, but no order of termination was
given—people were murdered and Rascher remained in the Luftwaffe until
he was transferred to the SS in March 1943. The defendant had an
affirmative duty to know what was going on, and an affirmative duty to
act so as to stop the experiments. That he was ignorant of the true
state of affairs is unbelievable in view of the letters and the
testimony of those who were below him. Field marshals are not made as
are noncommissioned officers. The road is a long one in any army from
the position of private to the lofty peak of a field marshal. The
defendant would have you believe that his powers were similar to those
of a private first class. Yet we have seen him, high in the councils, a
confidant of Hitler, one who could disagree with Goering, whose deputy
he was on occasion, a man who was so thoroughly skilled a soldier that
he seriously requested an assignment as a division commander, although
his service had been in the air force for a decade prior to the request.
If the defendant was not the responsible officer in connection with the
medical experiments, then the scourge of the Wehrmacht has not touched
the continent of Europe. There is no one who knows better than the
defendant the principle of responsibility in any army. By holding the
office which he held, he had the duty to control the activities of those
who were his subordinates, to insure that they conducted themselves as
soldiers and not as murderers. He has failed woefully in the task.

We have concluded now our remarks regarding the criminal activities of
the defendant in his various capacities with respect to the slave labor
program and the medical experiments. It remains only for us to deal
briefly with the defendant’s participation in the murder of two Russian
escapees, to discuss his defense of irresponsibility because of a bad
temper, to discuss the use of PW’s, and to touch upon the testimony of
some of the witnesses who appeared in his behalf, and the record of the
meeting of 23 May 1939.

The defendant has maintained that he knew nothing about the shooting of
the two Russian officers who attempted to escape in February 1944. We
have his own statement, made at a time when the general situation, from
the Wehrmacht’s point of view, was acute but not forlorn. The
International Military Tribunal has stated in its judgment concerning
Fritz Sauckel,[149] speaking of a statement made by Sauckel at a Central
Planning Board meeting, “Although he now claims that the statement is
not true, the circumstances under which it was made, as well as the
evidence presented before the Tribunal, leave no doubt that it was
substantially accurate.” The word “circumstances” as there used refers
to a meeting of the Central Planning Board on 1 March 1944. Milch made
his statement at the prior meeting held on 16 February 1944 (53d). The
letters submitted by the defense in connection with this episode are
interesting. The first and second from Schmidtke on 10 January, and from
Gangolf on 13 January, refer to a similar incident other than that with
which we are here concerned. The third letter from Winterstein on 12
January says nothing about the deaths. The affidavit of Prell, other
than stating that the deaths occurred on a Saturday, is of no value. The
witness Barthelmess, who made an affidavit though a resident of
Nuernberg, was not called. The affidavits of Klein and Popp were
offered; each is in a prison camp in the American Zone, yet neither was
called. The letter of Janko recites the facts in a context suggestive of
the words used by the defendant when he described the incident in the
53d meeting of the Central Planning Board on 16 February 1944. Here,
too, it is submitted that the circumstances under which the statement
was made leave no doubt that it was substantially accurate. The
defendant boasted of his prowess as a commander who ordered executions
when he would impress those who curried his favor at the Central
Planning Board meetings, but now he says he had no authority to give
orders and if he had given them, they would not have been obeyed.

The defendant has offered, as a plausible reason for the employment of
Russian, French, and Italian prisoners of war, the fact that various
historical events made it unnecessary to abide by the terms of the
convention concerning prisoners of war. The witness von Neurath
testified that Russia had renounced the conventions in question, and
hence Germany could renounce them as to Russia. As for France, it is
contended that the alleged government headed by Pierre Laval had
concluded an arrangement with the Reich which made it legal to employ
prisoners of war in tasks forbidden by the Conventions. A similar reason
is advanced for the use of Italian prisoners, the concluding of an
arrangement between the Reich and Mussolini. The International Military
Tribunal made a finding with respect to this matter.[150]

    “The argument in defense of the charge with regard to the murder
    and ill-treatment of Soviet prisoners of war, that the U.S.S.R.
    was not a party to the Geneva Convention, is quite without
    foundation. On 15 September 1941 Admiral Canaris protested
    against the regulations for the treatment of Soviet prisoners of
    war, signed by General Reinecke on 8 September 1941.”

I might add that Admiral Canaris was a member of the German Navy.
Resuming the quotation—

    “He”—Canaris—“then stated, ‘The Geneva Convention for the
    treatment of prisoners of war is not binding in the relationship
    between Germany and the U.S.S.R. Therefore only the principles
    of general international law on the treatment of prisoners of
    war apply. Since the 18th century these have gradually been
    established along the lines that war captivity is neither
    revenge nor punishment, but solely protective custody, the only
    purpose of which is to prevent the prisoners of war from further
    participation in the war. This principle was developed in
    accordance with the view held by all armies that it is contrary
    to military tradition to kill or injure helpless people * * *.
    The decrees for the treatment of Soviet prisoners of war
    enclosed are based on a fundamentally different viewpoint.’

    “This protest, which correctly stated the legal position, was
    ignored”.

The defendant was a soldier of some experience, he knew it was improper,
even criminal, to have the Russian prisoners work in the Luftwaffe
factories, but he paid no attention to the breach of this duty of the
soldier. The manner in which the Reich bludgeoned a treaty from the
French is too well known to warrant discussion. It cannot be contended
with any seriousness that the French prisoners of war, who were
negotiated into slavery by a puppet government, were voluntary employees
of the Germans. Indeed the witness Le Friec has testified that when he
was taken to work in the airplane factory, he was told that he would
“work on baby carriages”. The position of the defendant with reference
to Italian prisoners of war and their illegal employment is still more
absurd, if that is possible. The Wehrmacht had moved into Italy early in
the war, and in 1943, when the Badoglio government concluded an
armistice with the Allies, the Wehrmacht continued to occupy the
northern part of Italy as an occupying power. They allegedly made a
treaty with the by then tottering shadow of the former sawdust Cæsar and
proceeded to bring the Italian prisoners of war to the Reich to work.
Here again the soldiery had been sold into bondage by their former
chief. The record shows that the Russian, French, and Italian prisoners
of war were used to work in airplane factories. Whether they made the
fighter plane, Me 109, or the jet fighter, Me 262, or the transport
plane, Ju 52, is of little moment. In the total warfare in which the
Reich was engaged, there is one certainty, that nothing was being
constructed which was not part of the war armament program.

The International Military Tribunal stated in this connection—[151]

    “Many of the prisoners of war were assigned to work directly
    related to military operations, in violation of Article 31 of
    the Geneva Convention. They were put to work in munitions
    factories and even made to load bombers, to carry ammunition and
    to dig trenches, often under the most hazardous conditions. This
    condition applied particularly to Soviet prisoners of war. On 16
    February 1943, at a meeting of the Central Planning Board, * * *
    Milch said: ‘We have made a request for an order that a certain
    percentage of men in the Ack-Ack artillery must be Russians;
    50,000 will be taken altogether. Thirty thousand are already
    employed as gunners. This is an amusing thing, that the Russians
    must work the guns’”.

That every aircraft factory in the Reich had antiaircraft batteries to
protect it goes without saying. Who would know better than the defendant
that such use was made of the Soviet prisoners of war? Further, this
type of artillery was a part of the Luftwaffe and not a separate branch
in the ground forces, as it is in the U.S. Army. The witness Foerster
has testified that Soviet prisoners of war worked at the gun positions.
If the number two man in the German air force could not have done
anything toward arranging that the prisoners of war did not work in the
factories, or work the guns, then no one in the Wehrmacht could have
done anything about the situation.

We have heard much of the defendant’s violent temper and the resulting
statements which, witnesses assert, were never taken seriously by those
who heard them. The explanations offered by the defense are as frivolous
as the alleged outbursts were frequent. It would have been difficult, if
not impossible, for one who occupied the positions held by the
defendant, to accomplish anything if his subordinates had to sift all of
the strong statements he made, in an effort to determine which of them
were seriously said. Further, his strong statements about the
procurement and treatment of laborers are closely aligned with the grim
reality as we have seen it. We submit that this man of violent temper
believed in, and consciously advocated, the ruthless measures he
recommended, and that his subordinates, to the best of their ability,
complied with his recommendations. It is not reasonable to assume that
one with his power could have made statements, of the kind of which we
have heard here, and that he would then rely on the good offices of
those who were around him to insure that nothing was done as a result of
these statements. The Reich was not a country of innocent victims of one
tyrant, but rather it was composed of a series of tyrants, each like the
master tyrant, each with his own group of subordinates, who carried out
the wishes and whims of their respective chiefs. If all men who held
positions of authority in the Reich are to be believed when they say
that they were personally opposed to criminal excesses, then we have the
fantastic conclusion that these crimes were committed in the face of
influential and unanimous opposition.

The witnesses produced by the defense left a little to be desired.
Without indulging in exhaustive detail, a few statements made by some
are worth comment.

The witness Koenig said that he didn’t know Himmler was head of the SS
until 1945.

The witness von Brauchitsch did not know families were broken up and
sent to concentration camps. It was this man, the aid to Goering, who
passed on the Terboven letter of May 1942 to the defendant. The Court
will recall that the letter told of the attempted escape and the
resulting concentration camp detention of the Norwegians. It was the
defendant who said that an attempt to escape by a prisoner of war is an
honorable thing. Would not a similar effort on the part of some
Norwegians merit something less than a concentration camp? Brauchitsch
had said a little earlier that he did not know that foreigners were in
concentration camps.

The witness Felmy has stated that some Yugoslav partisans were sent to
Germany as laborers.

The witness Schniewind, who was present at the conference of 23 May
1939, did not under any circumstances gain the impression that
aggression was announced.

The witness Vorwald, a subordinate of the defendant and hence his
concern for these proceedings, may be assumed as being something short
of disinterested, was thoroughly glib and exceptionally agreeable. He
even agreed with the statement, on cross-examination, that the forces of
the Reich were no longer in Africa in 1943. It is a matter of historical
record that the invasion of that Continent began in November 1942 and
that the campaign was concluded in the spring of the following year.

The witness Koerner, still laboring under the spell of the former
leaders, stated that he believed Goering to be the last great man of the
Renaissance.

The last witness of whom we shall speak is Karl Wolff. In his affidavit
he spoke of meetings between Himmler and Milch over coffee and cigars.
He spoke of the great cultural works of the SS. Was he speaking of
Dachau and Mauthausen? With some vehemence, he insisted that he had
deported only 1,050 Jews from all of Italy. He knew nothing of Dachau
that led him to believe that anything unusual was happening there;
although he did say that, in his visit there in 1942, the place was so
clean that one could have eaten from the floor.

These represent a fair cross section of the witnesses, all of whom had
roles of varying importance in the tragedy with which we are here
concerned. Even as the defendant contends that he knew nothing of what
went on, so do they echo the same refrain.

Much time has been spent in attempting to discredit the Schmundt record
of the 23 May 1939 meeting. The Court is familiar with the findings
which have been made by the International Military Tribunal on this
subject. There has been no additional light thrown on the matter by the
evidence here presented to indicate that the Schmundt record is anything
other than a correct record of the events which transpired at the
meeting.

We wish to discuss now in conclusion one document offered by the
prosecution. This we have saved until the last because we believe that
of all the evidence presented by the prosecution it is most typical of
the defendant as a man and as a Nazi. We refer to the minutes of the
conference of air force engineers and others which was presided over and
was addressed by the defendant on 25 March 1944. This document, like so
many others in this case, was initialed by the defendant.

The defendant stated that, as of the date of the conference, “We have in
our employ today approximately 60 percent foreigners * * *.”

He continued, “The ratio is gradually approaching 90 percent foreigners,
with 10 percent German managers.”

These are statements by a man who said he did not know about the extent
to which foreign labor was used in his own industry, let alone in
Germany. He stated that—

    “The Fuehrer order provides clearly that the fighter plane
    program, which the Jaegerstab is starting, has priority over all
    other fields of armament * * *.”

He showed knowledge of the production of tanks and infantry munitions.
He spoke of having the air force production “to an extent safely
underground” in four months’ time. It is here that he stated that he was
head of the Jaegerstab and that Saur was his deputy and Chief of Staff.
Touching on his conferences with the various plant officials, he
stated—

    “On the spot the individual gentlemen are then told—supported
    by the combined authority of the State, the Wehrmacht, and the
    Party, that is Saur and me, Speer is unfortunately still on sick
    leave, otherwise he would also be present—what it is all
    about.”

He commented on labor—

    “Thus, all pertinent questions are dealt with in the conferences
    about the commitment of labor and all competent men, who have
    anything to do with the commitment of labor, meet, especially
    the president of the competent provincial labor office. Thus it
    is determined on the spot, in the individual spheres, what the
    factory lacks.”

This is the man who has constantly maintained that he had nothing to do
with labor. One can readily imagine a session between the Luftwaffe
field marshal and a labor office chief.

We have heard the defendant deny and re-deny any knowledge of the slave
labor program as such, let alone the extent to which it went. It is our
contention that anybody who walked the streets of Germany could not have
failed to have become aware of the activities which were being carried
on by Sauckel and his henchmen.

He makes an interesting reference to bureaucracy:

    “It is an error to believe that civilian offices are more
    bureaucratic than military offices. On the basis of my
    continuous and extensive experience, I can assure you exactly
    the opposite is true.”

This from one who would have the Tribunal believe that his staff and
officers were one big happy family who ran things in a rather casual
catch-as-catch-can fashion.

Speaking of the arrival of laborers, he said—

    “In brief, the people arrive there and are put to work there. If
    any doubts exist as to whether a request is justified—for the
    people are not requested by numbers, but as electricians,
    blacksmiths, fitters, turners, as unskilled laborers, as
    foreigners—then this is settled. If the result shows that the
    request for people is not justified, then the matter is referred
    to a commission and this commission examines the facts within 48
    hours. If it becomes apparent that dirty dealings are going on,
    my special court martial is called into play, and it hands down
    a quick decision.”

This from a man who has stated that he had no power to give orders. He
stated further, “the normal work week in our industry is 72 hours.” The
witness Krysiak testified that they worked 84 hours at the factory where
the Mauthausen inmates were employed.

Speaking of the difficulties that resulted from the hoarding of spare
parts by the various foremen, he said—

    “Now it is your task to teach these people some sense and to put
    the entire system of hoarding on a sensible basis. I therefore
    ask you, as the senior authorities in the field: teach that to
    these people by force. There is no sense in writing letters.
    Such letters are not read. They would not understand them
    anyhow.”

The wish of a field marshal is as an order, and he advocated the use of
force on his own people. The extent to which he urged that they go was
expressed a few lines further on when he stated—

    “Whoever hoards supplies must be punished immediately. By
    punishment I also mean shooting. For if these people are told
    what is at issue here, and they still try to hide parts of their
    supplies or to cover them up, that is dirty dealing and a crime
    against Germany. I want to say that very clearly and I want to
    say it in very sincere words, so that you yourselves will
    realize that we are dealing here with a question which is of
    decisive importance for Germany’s well-being, that we are not
    dealing with an ordinary point of discussion but with a question
    which decides about the life and death of Germany.”

He advocated killing Germans, not slackers but hoarders. He consciously
used strong language, yet he would have it believed that he never spoke
harshly except in a rage and that nothing ever came from his outbursts.
He indicated knowledge of the overall figures on the breakdown of
working hours.

    “In considering the figures one has to know that 52 percent of
    the total man-hours are spent in equipping a plane and only 48
    percent in building the aircraft frame and engine.”

He has said that he was powerless to do anything about requests from
industry, yet he stated—

    “If I want something from industry, then industry comes and
    says, ‘Yes, I have those and those requests.’ Only then can I do
    what you want.”

He again speaks of the death penalty when he says—

    “Gentlemen, in this connection I may call your attention to
    another important point. If I visit an office and find out that
    something is being hidden there, then I ask for the death
    penalty for such a crime today. That is fraud. That is sabotage
    of the German armament industry.”

Can it be seriously contended that these words were regarded by the
listeners as mere outbursts?

Next we have another illuminating passage on his attitude toward
prisoners of war.

    “Then there is still the human factor. We often had considerable
    difficulty with the human factor. The fluctuation there is very
    considerable. The quota of the Luftwaffe in the distribution of
    manpower was considerably lowered. The foreigners run away. They
    do not keep any contract. There are difficulties with Frenchmen,
    Italians, Dutch. The prisoners of war are partly unruly and
    fresh. The people are also supposed to be carrying on sabotage.
    These elements cannot be made more efficient by small means.
    They are just not handled strictly enough. If a decent foreman
    would sock one of those unruly guys because the fellow won’t
    work, the situation would soon change. International law cannot
    be observed here. I have asserted myself very strongly and, with
    the help of Saur, I have represented the point of view very
    strongly that the prisoners, with the exception of the English
    and the Americans, should be taken away from the military
    authorities. The soldiers are not in a position, as experience
    has shown, to cope with these fellows who know all the answers.
    I shall take very strict measures here and shall put such a
    prisoner of war before my court martial. If he has committed
    sabotage or refused to work, I will have him hanged right in his
    own factory. I am convinced that that will not be without
    effect.”

These words are strangely reminiscent of his speech at the 53d meeting
of the Central Planning Board. He knew he had advocated and participated
in flagrant violations of international law and here he went on record
on this subject.

We see the defendant making a “big request” of the Quartermaster General
and calling for “energetic action” by the chief of supply. This was a
meeting of considerable moment and these statements did not go unheeded.

He spoke of the laborers.

    “* * * We in the Luftwaffe armament industry have Russians,
    French prisoners of war, Dutch, and members of 32 other nations.
    The obtaining of interpreters alone presents a big difficulty
    there.”

Then he adds—

    “We, the Quartermaster General and Generalluftzeugmeister, have
    already agreed that we are to balance the personnel also. Above
    all it is necessary that the member of the troops be treated in
    exactly the same way as the industrial worker.”

We have a strong statement concerning the feelings of the German worker.
He said—

    “By unjust treatment the German worker means that the treatment
    is not the same for all. That is what makes the German worker
    indignant. He wants everyone to be treated the same way. He
    wants justice and does not want to be ill-treated in words or
    any other way. He cannot stand it and he is right in not being
    able to stand it.”

The defendant advocated that the German worker be carefully handled. The
Tribunal has heard from the witnesses Ferrier, Le Friec, and Krysiak how
the foreign workers were handled.

He outlined the working program for the Easter week end—

    “Finally I ask that the troops receive the fundamental order to
    work on Good Friday, the Saturday before Easter, and on Easter
    Monday in the same way as the people in the factories. The
    soldiers just do not have to go on furlough either. They must be
    told why.”

Are these the words of a man who is without authority to issue orders
concerning the troops?

He acknowledged his employment of Russian prisoners of war and advocated
that shirkers among the factory laborers be whipped back to their jobs.
He said—

    “I further ask for support by the Luftwaffe physicians. With all
    the rabble that we have among the foreign workers there is of
    course a lot of shirking. At the moment the Russians—that is,
    the Russian prisoners of war—are feigning a lot of fatigue and
    illness. The incidence of sickness of one and a half to two
    percent which we have had up to now has at least doubled, and in
    some factories it has been increased to eight, nine, and ten
    percent. That is, of course, done by previous agreement. There
    the official physicians must undertake an examination and if the
    physicians, who have to be very strict, find out that it is not
    true, then we return the fellows to work by means of the whip.
    Then the whip serves as cure.”

He again spoke of orders that have been given.

    “If the factory knows: Now we are going to be attacked, and it
    has a few trench shelters but does not have a bombproof shelter
    or the like, then the people simply ran away from the factory
    automatically at each raid after the first one, and they could
    usually not be caught the next day either. That applies
    particularly to the foreigners. We have therefore now issued the
    following order, and have equipped the superiors accordingly
    with weapons and pistols: As soon as a factory which has already
    been attacked a few times can count on the raid’s being aimed at
    that particular factory again, then the personnel leave the
    factory, but in closed groups by shops, under the leadership of
    the man in charge of the shop, and, to the extent that they are
    German personnel, they leave singing military songs.”

Are superiors armed with weapons and pistols to lead contented German
workers away from a factory in case of an air-raid? Little wonder that
the foreigners who had been brought in like chattels ran away when the
opportunity presented itself. Were these workers who were fleeing,
voluntary workers?

Commenting on the gravity of the task of fighter production, and the
importance of the months of April and May 1944, he said—

    “That will be decided in six to eight weeks. If we succeed in
    this, then we will once again have time to carry out all the
    other tasks and jobs of this war and can also achieve greater
    successes in other fields.”

Were the “other fields” tasks to be accomplished in the sowing of seeds
of the Reich’s culture?

The defendant has said that he knew nothing about the living conditions
of the foreigners. It is obvious that he knew something, for he said—

    “I also ask you to be of considerable assistance in the question
    of lodging in connection with the question of the relationship
    between our military personnel at the airfields and the workers.
    If we bring the people over to work, we also have to provide
    them with places to live. As far as foreigners are concerned,
    this has to be done in some suitable way. They cannot be put
    together with our people, just like that. But they should not be
    so far away from the airfield that one cannot get them to work
    at all.”

No, don’t let them live with the native workers, but be sure that they
live close enough to the factory so that they can put in their 72 hours
a week!

The importance of the fighter program is emphasized when he said—

    “There are no laws of bureaucracy, there are no regulations,
    there is nothing at all as important as the task of winning the
    war.”

The defendant could not agree with anything that Hitler stood for after
March 1943. He was trying to get out, but here he speaks of Hitler and
his henchmen—men who, he said, were leading Germany to certain
catastrophe:

    “It is quite surprising how the population has endured this
    thing so far and how it always gets on its feet again when it is
    led in the proper way by true leaders who, thank God, are
    present among the people through the Party and the rest of the
    leadership. But you must not forget, gentlemen, war nerves have
    reached a point which cause us in the leadership group worry.”

He has said that he was not a wholehearted Nazi, but here he referred to
himself as one of the true leaders and this at a time when the hands on
the clock tolling the hours of the Reich were approaching twelve. Yet he
would have you believe that he was a minor man.

He did not confine his speaking efforts solely to the Luftwaffe; he was
one of the leaders, and as such it was natural that he should address
the armament feeder industry. On that subject he said—

    “What I am telling you today was told the other day to the
    entire armament feeder industry—that includes the blacksmiths,
    foundries, crankshaft workers of the iron producing industry,
    etc. They were likewise exhorted to produce the maximum. In the
    same way the Gauleitungen, all of the provincial offices,
    wherever we were, were addressed by us to that effect. But
    everyone considers that if he does not do his duty, we do not
    ask whether there is a law, we ask only that he is the
    responsible one, and that we will seize him no matter who he
    is.”

His first peroration is indicative of his attitude.

    “Please go wherever you are going and knock everybody down who
    blocks your way! We cover up everything here. We do not ask
    whether he is allowed to or whether he is not allowed to. For
    us, there is nothing but this one task. We are fanatics in this
    sphere. We do not even consider letting anything at all distract
    us from that task. No order exists which could prevent me from
    fulfilling this task. Nor shall I ever be given such an order.”

Yes, the defendant was a fanatic. Too, he was one who could cover up. It
was a willful man who could say that.

There is an interesting statement concerning the number of employees of
the Luftwaffe. The defendant set it at 1.8 million. This is somewhat in
excess of the .5 million figure that one witness mentioned.

It has been insisted that he had nothing to do with labor, it has been
insisted that he could give no orders, yet in his second peroration to
the same speech, he said—

    “We have given orders that will make you laugh. Some labor
    control office or other suddenly declared that the Jaegerstab
    was not entitled, according to paragraph so-and-so, to establish
    a 72-hour workweek; it was not valid. I said: The gentleman is
    herewith informed, if he should say such a thing once more, he
    will be picked up; I have excellent cellars in this house. Then
    the opposition disappears immediately. But you have to count on
    such things, and the difficulty for you is that, in order to get
    through all the junk, one should clean out, first of all, a
    whole lot of little pigsties. Something will come out of this
    whole affair with us, yet. Whoever of my technical people from
    the Ministry does not earn his keep with the Jaegerstab now, and
    does not cooperate, I guarantee that he will never appear again
    in this Ministry, in the machine where I give the orders.”

Is this the man who said he could not have people sent to concentration
camps? The witness Krysiak was “picked up” for having said in 1940 that
Germany would lose the war. He was arrested by the Gestapo as the result
of a private conversation. It is unbelievable that a field marshal could
not, and did not, exercise the same power.

Today is the third anniversary of the speech of 25 March 1944 made by
the defendant. His closing remarks on that day detail decisively the
philosophy of the then field marshal of the Luftwaffe. Those assembled
had been listening to their chief since midmorning. The hour was late.
The hands of the clock were past twelve. Germany was in the fifth year
of war. The defendant was concluding his speech. He said—

    “Gentlemen, I know, not every subordinate can say: for me the
    law no longer exists, but he has to have someone who covers up
    for him. Not out of cowardice, but if you act according to the
    spirit of the old field service regulation, ‘Abstaining from
    doing something hurts us more than erring in the choice of the
    means’, and if, moreover, you keep in touch and immediately
    clarify difficult points so that something can be done, then we
    are willing to accept the responsibility, whether this is the
    law or not. I see only two possibilities for me and for Germany;
    either we succeed and thereby save Germany, or we continue these
    slipshod methods and then get the fate that we deserve. I prefer
    to fall, while I am doing something that is against the rules
    but that is right and sensible, and be called to account for it,
    and, if you like, hanged, rather than be hanged because Papa
    Stalin is here in Berlin or the Englishmen. I have no desire for
    that. I would rather die in a different way. But I think we can
    accomplish this task, too. We are in the fifth year of war—I
    repeat: The decision will come during the next six weeks. Heil
    Hitler!”

The time is at hand for another decision, a decision which will follow
the dictates of sound reason. The record which will be made by this
Tribunal and its judgment will be one that shall give courage to
peaceful free men everywhere. Indeed, the defendant is fortunate that
the decision in the present case is in the hands of those who do believe
that the law exists and will continue to exist. There is no place for
passion or for prejudice in the ceaseless tasks, the seeking of truth
and the establishing of justice.

-----

[143] Mr. Clark Denney delivered the closing statement before the
Tribunal on 25 March 1947, Tr. pp. 2436-2488.

[144] Trial of the Major War Criminals, vol. I, p. 306, Nuremberg, 1947.

[145] Defendant in case of United States _vs._ Karl Brandt, et al. See
Vol. I.

[146] Defendant in case of United States _vs._ Karl Brandt, et al. See
Vol. I.

[147] Same as preceeding footnote.

[148] Same as preceeding footnote.

[149] Trial of the Major War Criminals, vol. I, p. 321, Nuremberg, 1947.

[150] Ibid., p. 232.

[151] Ibid., p. 246.




                B. Closing Statement of the Defense[152]

DR. FRIEDRICH BERGOLD: May it please the Tribunal. In my opening
statement I drew a picture of the defendant Milch which differs
considerably from the description given by the prosecution. It is my
hope that in the long course of producing evidence I have given proof
that my conception is the full truth.

According to the testimony of the witness Richter, the affidavit of the
witness von Mueller and according to the defendant Milch’s own
testimony, nobody can doubt that Milch has never been a good National
Socialist. His love for peace and his longing for a final understanding
between the nations of Europe, especially between Belgium, France,
England, and Germany, became completely obvious. No one who believes in
justice would refuse to believe him if he states that he regarded the
war as a misfortune. He was also one of the few intelligent men to admit
Germany’s defeat in the First World War. There was no proof supplied
that in any way prior to 1933 he supported any armaments. His testimony
and military affidavit from von Mueller have shown that under his
management the Luftwaffe was always a peaceful instrument of
communication among the nations. It is to be regretted that the
examination of foreign politicians, such as Van Zeeland, Pierre Cot, and
Delbos, were not permitted, because only then the personality of Milch
would have been shown in its true light. He must have been a peaceful
and just man; otherwise, all these statesmen would not have had
confidence in him. Even the witness delegate Messersmith, whose
affidavit, Document 1760-PS, was introduced in the International
Military Tribunal proceedings, affirmed that Milch condemned the
coercive methods of the Nazis. He was different from the other Party
members, so that after 1937 he lost Goering’s confidence. At that time
he asked to be allowed to retire but in spite of his threat of suicide,
he did not obtain that permission.

Such a man of such a past must be believed when he testified that even
in 1939 he had no knowledge of Hitler’s aggressive intentions. Milch had
misgivings about Hitler because he regarded the measures taken against
Czechoslovakia as a breach of peace, and he was sufficiently intelligent
to see that Britain would no longer tolerate such violations. Hitler was
dishonest with him and always put before him his intentions for peace,
even forbidding him the manufacture of bombs. The defendant never
requested the manufacture of bombs because he intended to lead a war of
offense, but only because, understanding the international situation, he
was convinced that England would fight against the Nazi regime.

Up to that time, your Honor, nobody can find any inconsistency in the
defendant’s outlook. It was no offense if he requested a Wehrmacht for
his country in view of the world situation, and therefore he favored a
reasonable rearmament. As long as all nations were peace-minded and
maintained armies, Germany had the right to maintain armed forces as
well. I beg you to remember that the defendant demanded from his
superiors that rearmament should be effected in a slow and reasonable
manner and that he had differences with them on account of this.

It was not for nothing, your Honor, I repeat that. Only for one to keep
all these things in mind will it be possible to judge whether or not the
defendant’s statement regarding the conference of 23 May 1939 is
correct. A man who loves peace and works for peace was present at that
conference and states today, or testified that the speech in question
did not contain any mention of aggressive war against Poland or any
other country. He even testified in this courtroom that this speech did
not have the contents as it is laid down in the Schmundt protocol.

I realize that the International Military Tribunal came to the
conclusion that the Schmundt protocol is correct. All defendants and
witnesses who were heard at that time declared that the contents of the
speech were not of so aggressive a nature as it is laid down in the
minutes. The defense counsel made a mistake at that time of not calling
all the witnesses which I requested. Nobody went to the trouble of
critically examining the text of the record. I can understand why the
IMT reached a different conclusion, having heard only the defendants’
general objection, which remained unsubstantiated in detail. Nowhere is
it yet permissible in law to maintain the verdict of a previous court
when new and better evidence has been submitted.

The witnesses Warlimont, Schniewind, Engel, and Raeder stated that
several passages of the Schmundt record contained a number of false
assertions regarding Hitler’s words. Warlimont testified that he was not
present, although he is listed as among those present. Milch’s testimony
made it absolutely definite that Goering was not present. If there were
only so few persons present and there were mistakes made concerning the
presence of persons, the record must have been made up a long time after
the event, otherwise no faults of that kind would have been possible.
Schniewind testified that a number of points contained in the Schmundt
record were never discussed at that time at all. He had the opinion that
many ideas laid down in the record were borne out at a later period,
that is to say, 1940. These ideas concerned, for example, the use which
could be made of war production after the defeat of France, the
importance of aircraft carriers for convoys, the collaboration of Italy,
and the break-through of the Maginot Line by this force, about Japan,
and last but not least, the so-called Fuehrer Decree. By the statement
of Felmy it is proved forever that the so-called Fuehrer order was given
only on 12 December 1940. Even Raeder stated that the principles of the
Fuehrer order were laid down at another occasion and that they were
accordingly carried out afterwards. This other occasion was given by the
statement of Felmy. Also Raeder did not hear anything about Japan; he
considered it impossible that Italy and the break-through of the Maginot
Line were discussed and he also states that nobody mentioned a better
production of cruisers. He also testified that in that meeting a
two-front war was not mentioned because he, as an officer, would have
noticed that. Furthermore, he testified that Belgium and Holland were
not referred to and that after the speech Goering did not open a debate.
Even though the witness was not present at all times, it is rather
strange that he should not have heard mention of any of the very points
not heard by the other witnesses. The defendant Milch gave you the
precise details of those points of the speech which were not mentioned
at the time, and he was even in a position to tell you when these
various points were first conceived.

Who, assuming responsibility for justice, can still seriously maintain
the findings of the IMT now that these precise statements have shown us
the errors of the Schmundt record? A record containing so many grave
mistakes is no longer of probative value and can never be made the basis
for any judgment. I am convinced that after this trial the historians of
the whole world will regard the Schmundt record as the product of a
later period, i.e., between the fall of 1940 and the spring of 1941 and
that they will regard it as the result of time, drawn up to make Hitler,
then regarded as the victor, seem possessed of a prophetic gift which in
reality he never had.

The conference did take place on 23 May 1939; that is true. Its real
topics, however, can no longer be stated on the basis of the Schmundt
record. Thus, the statements made in the first Nuernberg trial gain a
different and greater significance. Never again, therefore, will it be
possible for anyone to say that on that occasion Hitler preached war and
the enslavement of Europeans.

There is yet another argument possible against this record, which, it is
alleged, also contains the plan for slave labor. Document EC-194,
Exhibit 8, and 016-PS, Exhibit 13, submitted by the prosecution, show in
all clarity that the use of European peoples in German armament works
was a measure forced by the emergencies of the war and that the idea was
born and realized only by the military difficulties resulting from the
war with Russia.

With clean hands and a pure heart, Milch entered the war in August 1939
having previously advised Goering to fly to Britain to prevent the war.
He himself became the victim of Hitler’s deception, and he himself
believed that the war had been forced upon Hitler. Who can disregard
justice to such an extent as to reproach Milch with having held that
belief? It is his misfortune, but not his guilt, to have been deflected
from the truth by misleading propaganda. Who would so misinterpret
patriotism, heretofore regarded as one of man’s noblest instincts, as to
reproach Milch for having done in 1939 his duty as a soldier?

He never prepared any aggressive wars. In every case he was informed
shortly before the event, and nothing is more typical of the opinion his
superiors held of him than the fact that he chanced to hear about the
preparations for the war against Russia through a subordinate, who had
been told of Hitler’s plan before the field marshal was told. The first
Nuernberg trial has already shown that Milch saw Goering at once in an
effort to prevent that war. Goering himself admitted this. Milch’s good
intentions were of no avail because Goering turned him down. As Milch’s
superior officer, he even went so far as to forbid Milch to see Hitler
and to tell him that he, Goering, would prevent Milch from being
admitted to Hitler’s presence.

One of your Honors, in putting questions to the defendant, aimed to show
that it might be regarded as incriminating to the defendant that he did
not resign in 1941 or at least in 1943. Your Honors, only if one has
lived in Germany these last years is it possible truly to judge that
problem. As I said in my opening speech, one can judge the man only
against his background, through his upbringing, from which usually
nobody can escape no matter in what country he lives. Milch was brought
up as a soldier. He absorbed ideas which for centuries were regarded as
true and inviolate laws. It is no guilt for him not to have freed
himself from them. I have said this once before.

At that time nobody in Germany was in a position to protest against
certain events, against certain aims of the Party. All that one could do
was to criticize things within one’s own immediate circle and tell one’s
intimate collaborators how to improve matters. If in Germany anybody had
attempted at any time to express criticism publicly, either by word or
by publicly resigning, nobody would have been the wiser for it. This
system was so ruthless and its stranglehold over public opinion so great
that it would and could suppress anything.

You need only remember that during the first IMT trial it was shown that
von Papen’s criticism in his Marburg speech was completely withheld from
the German public. Had Milch done anything, nobody would have heard
about it, and his action would have been useless, perhaps senseless, as
nothing would have been changed for the better. Your Honors may not know
that six to eight generals, including General von Falkenhausen, once
Commander in Chief in Belgium, and Colonel General Halder, one of
Germany’s highest and best leaders, were thrown into concentration camps
because they had deviated from Hitler’s line. This is not connected with
20 July 1944. Nobody in Germany knew about this. Pictures of General
Count Sponeck were sold as of a hero two years after this man had
vanished into a concentration camp. Such were the lies and the
deceptions of Goebbels’ propaganda. We have learned since the end of the
war that prior to 20 July 1944, there were 50 to 60 generals in Moabit
prison, without anyone in Germany knowing anything about that. You will
understand the full falsehood of propaganda when you recall the base
distortions by which the dismissals of Generals von Blomberg and von
Fritsch were announced to the German public.

Believe me, your Honors, protests in Germany were not possible at that
time. The only result would have been the futile death of the protesting
person. If Milch had attempted to fly abroad, his whole family—such
were the detestable methods of those in power—would have been put to
death on the basis of what was known as family responsibility.

Milch cannot be reproached with not having refused service and
allegiance. No soldier could do this. Should a member of the
Anglo-American Air Forces suddenly have refused to go out on an
operation which would bring death to innocent women and children, he
would not have been regarded as a hero. He would have been put before a
court martial.

That Milch did not participate in an attempt on Hitler’s life, who would
accuse him of that? Although he was an energetic man, the defendant was,
because of several concussions of the brain which he suffered, inclined
to terrifying fits of rage, or ranting speeches, but the evidence has
shown that in his heart of hearts he was kind and soft. He would
ameliorate sentences already passed, and as the witness Richter
testified, he compensated for a fine, which he inflicted himself, by
secretly passing into the family of the punished man a very large sum of
money, larger than the fine itself. The witness Vorwald expressly stated
that basically Milch was a man soft of heart, who conducted himself
*self soft, who only in a rage caused by disease and worry utters harsh
words never followed by action, is not capable of murder. Thus, no just
man will charge him with not liquidating Hitler, and Milch did what in
his conscience he felt to be possible and necessary. He had the courage
of telling the dictator to his face what he thought of the situation. He
demanded that Hitler desist from his plans, dismiss the most important
men, such as Goering, Ribbentrop, and Keitel, give up the supreme
command, and establish a cabinet of equal powers, and he finally desired
that peace should be brought about.

Your Honors, it would be easy to say that as a field marshal he did not
thereby endanger himself. The statement of the next witness Krysiak, the
fate of the generals which I mentioned to you, show what was done in
Germany to men who did such things, but the defendant went one step
further. He succeeded in inducing Goering also to demand the end of the
dictatorship and the instituting of a Reich cabinet. Your Honors, this
means that this defendant thereby risked his life. He could not foresee
that nothing would happen to him. That nothing did happen to him was not
due to his rank, but to Hitler’s opinion that this man was not yet
dispensable. Everybody can only be sentenced according to his
potentialities. Your Honors must not compare conditions in your free and
noble country to those in Germany. Only the German world as it was
should be the basis of your judgment here. It is not true to say that
Milch gave his continued support to the objectionable aims of the Party.
He continued to do his duty because, as he testified, he wished to
prevent the worst from happening to his people, the total destruction of
the cities and of Germany’s culture. It was his constant hope to
organize the defense in such manner as to prevent bombing warfare from
taking its full effect, that same bombing warfare which is the scourge
of mankind, whatever one may think of its military value. Would it be
for us to judge him on the fact that he did not obtain his aim because
of the stupidity and failings of his superiors? Milch furthermore
testified before you that by an improved defense he hoped to achieve
better peace terms for his people. I can assure your Honors that since
1941 Goebbels’ propaganda told the German people time and again of the
horrible terms the enemy would impose on them in the event of peace.
That included an item to the effect that the whole of the German male
population would be castrated should Germany lose the war so that the
German people would perish. Who has the courage to say it is despicable
for a man of battle to organize a defensive system under the news impact
of such items in order to obtain better peace terms?

It would be a distortion to say that Milch thus believed Hitler’s aim of
destroying Europe, for he knew that the war was lost. He was intelligent
enough to see that with the lost war the end of Hitler’s ideology would
come. It was not the Party he wanted to serve when he hoped for less
severe peace terms with a better defense, but a lost war that would not
mean the loss of the legal rights of a whole nation as is the case
unhappily today. Only he who comprehends and understands all these
things can appreciate Milch’s actions and judge them fairly. And later,
when he saw that his objective of saving the German people from the
worst would fail, Milch withdrew from the regime. He could not resign on
his own. That, for a soldier in Germany, was an impossibility. He did
not choose to act dishonorably, which no one can expect from a decent
man. In Germany soldiers are removed from their offices only by their
superiors. Thus, as he put it himself, Milch could only organize his own
elimination from office by gradually transferring his tasks to Speer’s
Ministry. As his superiors thereupon regarded him as superfluous and
were glad to be rid of this man, Milch was finally free. Then began the
scheme on the part of his superiors to liquidate him. Such was the
position of Milch, the man, and such by and large were his motives. For
him to have acted in this and no other way is not dishonorable, and only
he can cast the first stone who never in his born days gave in to public
opinion in defiance of his better judgment, who has never considered his
superiors, and who proved himself to be above his upbringing, and had
the courage of fighting for his convictions even with the most brutal
methods.

Before dealing with the details of the indictment I should like to make
these basic points. The prosecution created the impression that under
the conspiracy count it would hold Milch responsible for everything in
totality that was done in connection with labor assignments and
experiments within the confines of the Luftwaffe, nay, within the
confines of the German government departments. This is not admissible.
The indictment may be referred to Control Council Law No. 10. Nothing is
mentioned there that conspiracy to commit crimes against humanity or war
crimes constitutes a punishable offense. Only conspiracy against peace
is punishable. The way the law is formulated, particularly count 2 of
Article 2, makes it clear beyond doubt that activities listed therein
only concern participation but no independent types of crime. Where
there is an independent crime then also in the case of war crimes and
crimes against humanity there would have to be a provision similar in
count 1-A, Article 2 of the Control Council law where a crime is defined
as “participation in a common plan or conspiracy for the purpose of
committing one of the crimes above set forth.” In this connection the
verdict of the IMT must also be considered. At the end of the sixth part
of the verdict it states:[153] “Count one, however, charges not only the
conspiracy to commit aggressive war, but also to commit war crimes and
crimes against humanity,” but the Charter does not define as a separate
crime any conspiracy except the one to commit acts of aggressive war.
Article 6 of the Charter provides: “Leaders, organizers, instigators,
and accomplices participating in the formulation or execution of a
common plan or conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing crimes are
responsible for all acts performed by any persons in execution of such
plan.” In the opinion of the Tribunal these words do not add a new and
separate crime to those already listed. The words are designed to
establish the responsibility of persons participating in a common plan.
The Tribunal will therefore disregard the charges in count 1, that the
defendants conspired to commit war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and will consider only the common plan to prepare, initiate, and wage
aggressive war. And under figure 8, the IMT states further:[154] “As
heretofore stated, the Charter does not define as a separate crime any
conspiracy except the one set out in Article 6(a) dealing with crimes
against peace.” The verdict was so formulated because the Charter was
unclear at this point. As above stated, the Control Council law contains
no such provisions, so much the less because in this case conspiracy
does not constitute a separate crime. The provision set forth in Article
2, paragraph 2, No. 6, “whoever was connected with this planning or
execution”, is only a form of individual defense and cannot be put on a
par with the concept of the common plan or conspiracy. Article 2 defines
clearly the type of crime referred to in paragraph 1, namely (1) the
individual crime of violation of peace; (2) conspiracy against peace;
(3) individual war crimes; (4) individual crimes against humanity; and
finally, the form of participation in paragraph 2. Therefore, it is
rendered that a so-called conspiracy to commit war crimes and crimes
against humanity is not a punishable offense.

It has to be examined therefore whether Milch made himself guilty of any
individual type of participation. It would have to be shown that either
as a principal or accessory he participated in a crime or that he
especially ordered or initiated it. It would have to be proved that he
gave his approval for a definite crime. That approval, however, cannot
refer to a general approbation but can only be considered as
participation in crime if, by his approval, he strengthened and
stiffened the criminal will of the perpetrators. It must therefore be
made clear that he knew of the individual crimes and that he intended to
put them into action by means of his approval. Even in that case his
subsequent approval would not suffice; since still nowhere in the world
is anyone punished because of an inner or moral attitude. Finally, it
must be examined whether Milch was connected with the planning or
commission of such crimes. Here again it must be understood, of course,
that this connection must be capable of causing the crime, and that
Milch knew about the connection and therefore the crime. The question of
membership in any organization or association which was connected with
the execution of crimes requires special examination. It is clear that
mere membership, as such, in any organization wherein any member may at
one time have committed a punishable act cannot make every other member
of that organization punishable. Otherwise a monstrous situation would
arise where the commander in chief of a large army was punishable if any
member of that army committed a war crime. Where in this world in all
time has it happened that in such a huge organization as wartime armies’
soldiers did not at one time or another commit punishable acts? This is
inevitable and it occurs in all armies. It can therefore only be a
question here whether the organization or the association of which the
defendant was a member had as its particular purpose the commission of
war crimes or crimes against humanity.

Letter (_f_) of Article 2, paragraph 2, must be considered here. Since
Milch is not charged with a crime against peace, it would also have to
be especially proved that he participated in the common plan of
conspiracy for the commission of crimes against the peace. That he held
high office cannot of its own make him punishable. This is also evident
from the Tribunal of the IMT who acquitted three persons who held
equally high office in Germany.

Bearing in mind these points of view, one has to examine the individual
counts of the indictment. In answer to the prosecution’s charge that
Milch in February 1944 had ordered two Russian officers to be shot,
Exhibits Milch 40 to 44, and the testimony of the witness Vorwald have
proven that the said officers were shot on the basis of an expressed
order by Hitler who received, through political channels, the report of
the incident earlier than Milch. Exhibits Milch 40 to 44 and the
testimony of Vorwald have made it clear that Milch, first of all, had no
possibility of issuing such an order, and secondly, that he did not
cause its being ordered, and thirdly, that he only gained knowledge of
the incident after the officers had been shot.

The witness Vorwald was in a position to testify that Milch even angrily
protested against such an order.

The passage in the record of the 53d meeting of the Central Planning
Board of 16 February 1944 contained in Defense Exhibit 11, can therefore
not be made the basis for a judgment. Whoever, knowing the German
language, reads the text critically must realize that the utterances of
Milch recorded therein are contradictory in themselves and, therefore,
cannot possibly contain the real statements made by Milch. They are
contradictory to the true course of events; they are contradictory to
Milch’s real authority, and finally, they are contradictory to the inner
attitude of the defendant who himself angrily described this act as a
crime.

It is significant for the question of the probative value of all
verbatim records submitted to consider that such recording of the true
events is found here. Such records containing such mistakes cannot be
made the basis for a judgment. If we assume, however, that Milch really
made these utterances which are so wrong, then this passage would remove
all doubt that Milch during moments of excitement was no longer master
of his thoughts and words and, therefore, cannot be held responsible for
them. It would be a serious offense against justice, however, if
judgment was to be pronounced on the basis of such stenographic notes
taken by an unknown person who may have been in error.

Milch is furthermore accused of having abetted, participated in, and
been connected with cruel and inhuman experiments carried out on
concentration camp inmates at Dachau. I believe that here, too, evidence
has shown that Milch is innocent. It has been proved by the clear,
although long-winded, deposition of the witness Hippke that the
defendant had heard for the first time on 31 August 1942 that human
experiments were being carried out on others than the volunteering
members of the Luftwaffe; that is, at a moment when the high-altitude
experiments were already completed and when the freezing experiments
were about to be completed.

In this connection I recall that the final report on freezing
experiments was available in print already on 10 October 1942, so that
these experiments too must have been completed by a considerably earlier
date. On 31 August 1942, the defendant learned merely from Hippke that
human experiments had been carried out on criminals who had been
sentenced to death and who had volunteered to obtain a pardon. He was
told expressly that nothing had happened so far during these
experiments. It is obvious that experiments as such do not in themselves
constitute an offense against humanity, whether or not they are in use
in some foreign countries. At any rate much evidence has already been
submitted by the defense in the medical trial, proving that, also in
democratic states of the world, experiments have been carried out and
are being carried out on volunteering criminals, experiments which
constitute a danger to the life and health of the experimental subject.

The prosecutor has submitted in evidence his last exhibit, Document
1971-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 161, showing irrefutably that Himmler too
had ordered that only men sentenced to death are to be used for these
experiments. Hippke did not even misinform Milch. That, besides the
experiments which were of importance to the Luftwaffe, Himmler had also
started secret experiments is shown from this very Exhibit 161 because
therein Himmler directs Rascher to continue these special experiments on
which he had reported to him and even to carry out revival experiments.

Both witnesses Ruff and Romberg have testified unanimously that nothing
has happened during these experiments. Death casualties had occurred
during Rascher’s own experiments which he carried out on Himmler’s
behalf. Only the aim of these experiments remained unclear to the
witness, which is now being clarified by Exhibit 161, but Milch had no
knowledge of all this. He fully believed what Hippke told him, nor did
he ever have any cause to distrust Hippke and he could not distrust him
more as he knew that high-altitude experiments had already previously
been carried out on Luftwaffe personnel of his own air force without any
danger being involved. Not even Hippke has had any knowledge of
cruelties and death casualties. How much the less can be proved that the
defendant could have had any knowledge. It does not say anything against
the defendant that he had signed already before 31 August 1942 some
letters which had been submitted to him by his offices. Nobody has been
able to state that Milch had dictated these letters at all. It could not
even be proved that he had seen or read the letters from the SS to which
these letters refer. It is impossible for a man who has such a burden of
work and such a large sphere of tasks as the defendant to take care of
every trifling matter in his office, that these letters—which to
anybody who has no knowledge of the underlying facts appear harmless and
unimportant—could also not arouse the defendant’s suspicion. Should he
be charged with responsibility for them then, this would be a
responsibility which could not be borne by anybody. This would mean to
overestimate human working capacity. It is the very idea of any great
organization to relieve the chiefs or the heads of attentions to details
in order to make them free for the main tasks. If such a man were to be
asked to take care of everything, then the organization would be
unsuccessful and no man in the world could form a great work comprising
many people, and no man in the world would be willing to head such an
organization if the chief of the organization should be held responsible
for everything that his subordinate agencies commit. Everybody has the
right generally to trust his subordinates as long as he has no reason to
distrust them.

Hippke’s descriptions were unimpeachable and gave no reason for
misgivings. His tenure of office at that time was irreproachable so that
Milch had not to distrust Hippke’s activities and all the less so
because already at an earlier date human experiments had been carried
out by the Luftwaffe in a manner above reproach. Milch has testified to
the effect that he had not read the report on high-altitude experiments.
Evidence has shown that he has not seen the film nor could he have cause
for this film to be shown, only if he would have stayed in Berlin, but
he was not even in Berlin on that day; therefore, he could not become
suspicious from what occurred. Likewise Milch never received the report
on freezing experiments nor did he ever get a final report on this
matter.

Finally, Milch had no reason to distrust the fact that the SS
participated in the experiments. He knew that Hippke was part of it and
was therefore entitled to believe that everything was in order.
Therefore, Milch was neither a principal in nor an accessory to, nor has
he ordered or instigated these experiments. He has never given his
consent to the crimes committed because he had no knowledge whatsoever
of them nor was he connected with their planning or their execution, nor
was he a member of any organization aiming at the commission of such
crimes. It is not the aim of the Luftwaffe to carry out such criminal
experiments, and with the DVL he had nothing to do at all. It is
irrelevant that at that time Rascher was a member of the Luftwaffe.
Exhibit 161 proves that Rascher received the orders to execute the
crimes as a member of the SS from Himmler himself and also carried them
out in that capacity. Finally, it must be said that the Wolff letter of
November 1942 was only written after the crimes were committed. It has
not been proved that Milch ever saw this letter. He was not in Berlin
when the letter arrived. That he has testified. The letter was sent to
the Medical Inspectorate which only answered it in 1943 as Hippke has
testified. Also, the fact that Rascher was transferred to the SS had
nothing to do with the defendant. That was a matter settled outside of
his competency. The personnel chief of the Luftwaffe was at no time
subordinated to him, and it must also be taken into consideration that,
according to the evidence, Milch had no knowledge of Rascher’s having
committed any crimes. One cannot charge Milch with the fact that Rascher
referred to him. The testimony of Neff and Defense Exhibit 56, the
affidavit of Punzengruber, have shown to this Tribunal that Rascher was
a confirmed liar whose statements have no probative value and,
therefore, I believe that Milch in this matter too has shown to this
Tribunal his complete innocence.

Before I go into the charges against Milch for his participation in the
so-called slave labor program, I must make a few fundamental statements.
I shall begin by examining the question as to what extent the Hague
Convention on land warfare and the Geneva Convention of 1929 were valid
for the treatment of Russian prisoners of war. By the statements of
witness von Neurath, it has been confirmed that the U.S.S.R. in 1919
specifically withdrew from the Hague Convention on land warfare as well
as the former Geneva Convention. Jurists will not dispute the fact that
a formal withdrawal from agreements is of greater importance in the
relations between states than the act of joining such a convention. Even
if one were of the opinion that the Hague Convention on land warfare and
the Geneva Convention represented merely the codification of already
existing international law, so that the state that did not join the
conventions would also be bound to this already existing international
law in all details, even in such a case the expressly stated withdrawal
from such a convention must mean also a withdrawal from the natural
international law. If this were not the case, the withdrawal from such
conventions would be an act without meaning which such intelligent
politicians as those found in the U.S.S.R. would never undertake. Nor is
this conception of mine contradicted by the expert opinion offered in
the first Nuernberg trial (_Canaris Doc. No. EC-338_)[155] because this
expert opinion is only concerned with the order of Hitler and Keitel
regarding the killing and cruel treatment of prisoners. It is, of
course, clear that inhumane acts do not become permissible because of
withdrawal from conventions. What we must examine here, however, is
purely the question whether or not, and for what activities, such
prisoners of war may be used. Detailed regulations of international law,
which in themselves do not contain atrocities, can in my opinion be
nullified by expressly withdrawing from a convention codifying existing
international law. Finally, we wish to draw attention to Article 82,
paragraph 2, of the Geneva Convention of 1929 which contains the
following regulation: “If in wartime one of the belligerents is not a
member of the convention, the regulations of this convention remain
valid, nevertheless, for the belligerents who have signed the
convention.” This does not mean that the signatories are bound to the
Geneva Convention also with regard to the treatment of soldiers of a
nonsignatory power, but only with regard to soldiers of the signatories
who are at war. Article 82, paragraph 2, of the Geneva Convention,
therefore, states that with regard to the relations of nonsignatories
the convention is not valid. The regulation was made so that it should
not be thought that if a nonsignatory participated in the war the Geneva
Convention would not apply to that war.

That my opinion was shared by the U.S.S.R. becomes clear beyond doubt
from Defense Exhibit 49 presented by me, which contains the decision of
the Council of the Peoples Commissioners of the U.S.S.R. of 1 July 1941.
This decision does not mention any limitation with regard to the use of
prisoners of war for labor except for the regulations under number 25.
According to this, prisoners of war may not be used as workers in the
battle zone nor for the personal needs of the administrations, or by
other prisoners of war (orderly services). Defense Exhibit 51,
concerning employment of German women prisoners of war in Russia, also
reveals the same conception of the U.S.S.R.

The objections that not Russia’s conception but that of the United
States of America matters here is not justified. Existing regulations
between two states can only be judged on the legal relations valid for
those two states. If both states regulate a given question in agreement
with conclusive acts in the same way, that regulation becomes
international law valid for the relations of those two states and must
be taken into consideration by all other states. It is the right of
sovereign states to regulate their relations as they wish. Other states
have no right to interfere in the right of sovereignty and they must
acquiesce in the legal conception existing between those two states
regarding any issue concerning their citizens. Therefore, legal opinions
of another state must not be taken as a basis for the judging of actions
which occurred between the nationals of these two states.

As in Milch’s sphere of competency Russian prisoners of war were used
neither at the front nor as orderlies, he cannot be found guilty so far
as the treatment of Russian prisoners of war is concerned.

All this also applies to the treatment of the Russian civilian
population whose rights could have been cared for by the Hague
Convention for land warfare alone. Here, too, Russia’s express
withdrawal from the convention is of great importance.

In my opinion it cannot be argued that Germany attacked Russia and that,
for the reason, employment of the civilian population would be illegal
even if this were not illegal in itself. That alone would mean that
Germany would be bound to the regulations and that Russia was not. From
the point of view of international law, this is an impossible situation.
For two belligerent states, there cannot be a different international
law.

Moreover, the validity of the regulations laid down in the Hague
Convention for land warfare can be cancelled by a special factor which
precludes lawlessness. In all codes of law of the civilized world, the
law of so-called emergency situations exists. This conception of law
must also be applied to international law. That Germany was in an
emergency situation in the sense that the use of the civilian population
for labor in the occupied territories was only caused by the emergency
situation, I showed in detail a little while ago. Modern war means total
war and as such has suspended, in several points, international law as
it existed up to now. It is uncontested that according to the Hague
Convention for land warfare actions of combat against the civilian
population are forbidden. Modern air warfare, having as its aim total
annihilation of armament and production of the enemy, brought with it to
a great extent warfare against the civilian population without any of
the belligerents regarding such combat actions as forbidden according to
the Hague Convention on Land Warfare. This also applies to the total
blockade of a country which aims at starving the population of that
country. These comprehensive ways of waging war which hit all classes of
the population permit, in my opinion, to a state which is at war,
especially on account of the fact that its civilian population is
brought into the strife, to use for its purposes labor from occupied
countries so as to maintain its production and armament.

Concerning the relations of the other nations involved in the war, there
is no doubt that for the above the Hague Convention on Land Warfare and
the Geneva Convention of 1929 are valid. But it is just as clear that it
is left to the nations to change and abolish these regulations by
special agreements between one another. A good example here is the
Armistice Treaty signed in 1944 between the Russian and Romanian
governments according to which Romania had to pledge itself to put at
the disposal of Russia a large number of people for reconstruction
purposes. Complying with this agreement, in January 1945 many thousand
members of the Romanian state were deported to Russia by compulsion and
against their will. This case shows what, in such matters, may be legal
and valid. Moreover, that agreement was made under some force of
bayonets, as in all history is usually the case with every treaty
between a conquered and conquering state. The Defense Exhibit 47 proves
that in the case of Germany the Control Council (_see sec. VI, number 19
of the Proclamation No._ _2_) imposed on the German authorities even
without a treaty, but simply on unilateral orders, the same obligation,
i.e., to put at disposal labor for personal services inside and outside
Germany. That such orders could naturally only be fulfilled by the
German authorities by means of a labor service law will not be contested
by anybody.

These one-sided orders given by the victor to the vanquished, whether
they be issued on the basis of an armistice brought about by force of
arms or on the basis of command or law following the unconditional
surrender of a state, are not contrary to law.

It should, therefore, be stated that the rules of the Hague Land Warfare
regulations can be suspended between two states. I have given proof for
the fact that there were between Germany and France agreements whereby
the French population had to make themselves available for work in
Germany, first, by volunteering, and later, on the basis of a law for
compulsory labor issued by the French Government. No restrictions were
laid down to what extent and for what purpose these people were to be
employed.

The objection has been raised that the Vichy Government was a government
of traitors, but it was that government which concluded the armistice
with Germany, and throughout the war all Frenchmen, including those in
de Gaulle’s camp, would raise passionate protests when they thought that
one of its articles had been violated. Thus, they all acknowledged that
an armistice could be concluded and was concluded. Once you acknowledge
the existence of an armistice agreement, you cannot, logically or
legally, deny the legality of the government which has concluded the
armistice. You must eat your cake as it is and you must not pick out the
plums alone.

As for the situation in Holland and Belgium, both those countries
surrendered unconditionally. According to international law Germany was,
therefore, in a position in its dealings with the authorities of these
countries to regulate the labor commitments of the civilian population
unilaterally in the same manner as this has now been handled in regard
to the German population by the Control Council.

As far as Poland is concerned, that country, on the basis of the
partitioning agreement between Russia and Germany, had lost its
sovereignty. That such partitioning agreements can abrogate the
existence of a state has already been historically proved by the former
partitioning agreements of the bordering countries in regard to the
Polish state. Moreover, the agreements concluded between the victorious
nations after this war have abrogated the sovereignty of the German
state over very large areas in the East and thus have created new
sovereignty for the population of these territories. Germany released
the Polish prisoners of war and could at any time issue legal labor
directives as regards the Polish civilian population since the latter
were under German sovereignty.

So far as the Italian prisoners of war are concerned, the evidence has
shown that the Mussolini Government, which at the time was the covenant
government in that part of Italy not occupied by the allied forces, made
them available for work in the armament industry, especially after
Germany had to manufacture armaments for Mussolini’s Italy. Here it
should also be mentioned that Milch’s opinion that Italian prisoners of
war who fled from a transport should be shot does not mean a cruelty.
All countries of the world have prisoners shot who attempt to escape as
proved by me in Defense Exhibit 26. So far as the civilian population of
other southeastern states are concerned, they were only recruited and
employed as free workers based on approval by the legally existing
governments of these countries.

In addition, it is interesting to point out that the agreement between
France and Germany, according to which France was supposed to allocate
French civilians for the labor commitment in exchange for the release of
prisoners of war, had a parallel in the discussion of the question
regarding the fate of German prisoners of war still in allied countries.
In France, in particular, the request has been made to make possible the
release of German prisoners of war by making available German civilians
as workers in place of the prisoners of war. This, too, is evidence to
the effect that such an agreement is not contrary to international law.

That, your Honors, is the legal position as I must present it.

In regard to the question of guilt, a special point has still to be
considered. All legal theories consider that the defendant is not liable
for punishment if after careful consideration and careful inquiries he
has gained the conviction that his action was permissible. It has been
shown that in Germany prisoners of war and foreign civilians were being
employed within the war production even at the time when Milch had not
yet taken over the office of the GL (Generalluftzeugmeister—Air
Ordnance Master General). In other words, he was already confronted with
the situation, the exploitation of which he is being reproached for
today.

The testimony of the witness Vorwald and that of the defendant himself
showed that Milch made inquiries from the competent authority as to
whether the employment of prisoners of war and foreign civilians which
he planned to use was admissible under the existing regulations. He has
testified here that he received an affirmative answer. Furthermore, he
testified that the admissibility of the utilization of foreign civilian
workers was discussed soon after the First World War in a large staff
committee of the German Reichstag. The chairman of that staff committee
was Prof. Dr. Schuecking, a legal authority of repute, who had become
known throughout the world as a passionate champion of pacifism and
democracy. This committee, as the defendant gathered from the
discussions held at the time, could not and did not find that employment
of foreign civilian workers in armament industry was inadmissible.

Impressed by his earlier experience, the defendant had the right to
believe the information given to him by his superior office that
employment of foreign manpower and of prisoners of war was admissible.
Moreover, this information was not issued without reason. The reasons
given for it were rather in accordance with the reasons which I have
described in detail above. How should Milch, who is not a legal expert,
who as a layman did not understand anything about applicable
international law, how could he form a different opinion? It is the
right of every citizen to believe the legal information supplied by his
superior and the concomitant authorities, for no one can impose upon a
citizen the duty to undertake on his own independently an examination of
the legal questions involved. In a modern state this would result in an
untenable situation whereby every one of the citizens would acquire his
own conception of law. Differing opinions abroad Milch was not in a
position to hear since he was not allowed to read foreign newspapers nor
listen to foreign broadcasts, nor did he do so.

He acted in good faith, and that has to be considered in his favor
today, the more since he knew and may well have assumed that these
measures were only temporary and were forced by the necessities of war.

[At this point the following discussion took place:]

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Is it a principle of the German law that ignorance
of the law is an excuse for violating it?

DR. BERGOLD: It is a principle inasmuch as if somebody has been misled
by his superiors on the significance of the law. Everybody must inquire
what the law is, but if his superior authorities give him certain
information, he can rely on that.

Q. Suppose a person is advised by his own counsel as to the law, and
counsel is wrong, does that excuse the client?

A. The client’s lawyer is not sufficient. The authority must be a
government official.

Q. Well, suppose a high government official, a man in high authority who
was not a lawyer, advised his subordinate as to his legal rights and
duties, and that advice was wrong?

A. That would mean that there would be an excusable error, an excusable
legal error.

Q. If, for example, Goering, who was a person in high authority, advised
Milch that he had the legal right to go out and shoot a person, would
that be justification for Milch’s doing so, legally?

A. No. Because as to the question of whether you can commit murder or
not everybody knows about that; but the point as to whether the
employment of foreigners was admissible under international law is a
very tricky legal point, and there, of course, there is a difference.

Q. You mean that every one is supposed to know that he cannot shoot a
man.

A. Yes. Everybody knows that.

Q. But everyone is not supposed to know that he can force a man to
unwilling labor?

A, No. He is not obliged to know that. That is why Milch applied to
receive this information about international law.

Q. You make a distinction between homicide and slavery?

A. Yes. I make a difference not, perhaps, as in this exact example, but
I make a difference between the natural knowledge of law, which
everybody has, and special questions and special knowledge not shared by
everybody in the state. The point whether you can kill or steal is
common knowledge, but the question whether international law permits the
employment is not something which everybody knows. This question is one
which only specialists and legal experts can decide, and if any man
concerned tries to obtain information as to whether it is permissible,
and obtains that information from a specialist of a governmental
department who says, yes, then it does not become permissible in itself,
but we have what is known as an excusable legal error.

Q. Would you take the same position as to enforced civilian labor?

A. Yes, on the whole question whether anyone can employ foreign workers
or prisoners of war.

Q. I would like to get this straightened out.

A. There are a number of other difficult legal points which I need not
go into here. This is certainly an example of what occupies us here.

Q. That is true. I want to get your position perfectly clear. I think it
is—

A. Let’s take, for example, the question whether, in any foreign country
which is occupied, the occupier may issue occupation money; let’s assume
that this is punishable according to some international regulation which
is difficult to interpret and which a layman is not in a position to
know. Now, if the Reich Bank, as expert, told the governor of the
occupied country that it was permissible, then the chief of this
occupied country, the military authority, would have an erroneous
opinion for which he could not be held guilty.

Q. Now, that theory of law becomes a very uncertain guide, does it not?
It depends upon interpretation of not the lawyers, nor the professors,
but of high government officials; they make the law.

A. No. My client inquired of the competent offices, not of Goering, but
of the competent offices, namely the legal departments. In all the
ministries there were legal departments, also in the Reich Air Ministry
and in the Wehrmacht itself. They employed specially trained experts. I
draw your attention to—

Q. Just a minute. Then the head legal experts make the law as far as the
defendant is concerned?

A. No, no, he does not make the law but he tries to, and that is, of
course, the legal error that—

Q. He makes the law by which the defendant may govern himself?

A. Yes, for this special case, as long as he does not hear an opinion to
the contrary, let’s assume.

Q. Oh, what happens after he does hear the opinion to the contrary, then
which law does he abide by?

A. In that case he can act no longer at all. If he acts, he acts on what
is known from the Roman law as “eventual dolus”, an evil intention, in
case he comes up against the law. I assume that the term “eventual
dolus” is known to your country, too.

Q. Supposing that he gets two conflicting opinions from the legal
ministry, or one of the legal advisers in a high place tells him he may
do a thing, and another in an equally high place says he may not, how
does that solve the dilemma?

A. In that case he must not commit the act, because his attention has
been drawn to the difference in the legal opinions, and that is where we
have the “eventual dolus”. If he does not depend on it, and does it on
his own risk, then in that risk he committed a wrong.

Q. I am frank to say that this is a new and startling legal theory. Did
you understand that?

A. Yes. I understood.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Well, we have your position.

[Dr. Bergold continues.]

His good faith, however, was reinforced by the fact that all the
measures against English and American prisoners of war, which are being
objected to, were not carried out. That the reasons expressly stated for
this were that no agreement except a change in the regulations had been
conveyed normally to the British and American prisoners of war. Whoever
has the least psychological insight will understand that the observing
of the Geneva Convention principles towards those two countries must
have made the deviation from them in respect to other countries appear
to the defendant as authorized, all the more as this deviation had been
based on presence of other agreements, or the lack of other protective
measures.

As far as the question of actual recruiting and using of manpower is
concerned, a differentiation must be made between recruiting, bringing
foreign laborers to the country, and their treatment on the whole on the
one hand, and on the other hand their use within Germany in the labor
assignment.

May it please the Tribunal, the case in chief, and the submitted
documents of the prosecution, especially the Exhibits No. 13, 14, 14-A,
15, 15-A, and 17 eliminated any doubt as to the fact that Sauckel alone
was competent for the recruiting of foreign laborers and their transport
to Germany and for the treatment of the foreign workers, and that Hitler
over and over again confirmed against the attacks of Speer that he was
the only competent man. Not one single document has been submitted which
would show that Milch participated in the recruiting, transfer to
Germany, and treatment of the workers. The witnesses Speer, Koerner,
Richter, Hertel, Eschenauer, Pendele, Vorwald, as well as Milch himself,
have testified under oath that neither they nor the defendant knew
anything about all the abuses which have become evident in the sphere of
Sauckel’s work.

I call your attention to Document 407-II-PS, Defense Exhibit 3, which
reveals how Sauckel always and everywhere emphasized that he took care
of the foreign workers to the best of his ability. In this exhibit he
makes the assertion that foreign workers have never in the history of
the world been treated as well as they were treated by him in this most
severe of all wars. The testimony of the witness Schmelter and of Milch
has shown that Sauckel had made the same declarations and told the same
lies to them also. There is no need for any further statement to the
effect that the recruitment and even the forced transport of the workers
into the Reich on the basis of an order could have been carried out in
an absolutely humane manner and that all these atrocities, murders, and
tortures which took place need not have occurred. Such actions are not
of necessity connected with such events. The fact that in the East and
in France, parts of the population were called up and drafted by classes
by means of labor service decrees could not and did not have to make
Milch suspicious. Forced drafting of people occurs in all countries
which have a compulsory military service or labor service. Examples of
the latter are Germany and Bulgaria. The latter state had ordered
service according to each group before the Hitler regime existed, and
how could Milch, after all, have found out about the inhuman acts in the
recruitment and transport into the Reich and the treatment within the
Reich? Obviously, only if he had observed such incidents himself or if
complaints reached him through his subordinates or through these foreign
workers themselves.

Milch testifies here in a creditable manner that during the entire
course of the war he had never observed such conditions. During all
these years he made his trips by plane and, in some exceptional cases,
by special train; that in this way he could naturally not observe such
facts is quite clear. The witnesses have confirmed that they never
reported abuses to him. The only things he heard were isolated
complaints that the food was inadequate at times or that there was a
lack of clothing and shoes. In themselves, these were conditions which
resulted at the time from the wartime emergency and applied also to the
German civilian population. All of the above-mentioned witnesses and
Milch have, however, confirmed that Milch on his own part immediately
ordered that the conditions should be remedied.

These incidents, however, cannot be called inhuman acts or atrocities,
cannot be called crimes. The witnesses Pendele, Hertel, and Vorwald, as
well as the defendant himself, have testified that the foreign workers
never brought any complaints to the defendant. They all expressed their
happiness. It may be that they shied away from complaining to Milch.
That, however, was not Milch’s fault. He had the right to believe the
assurances of the persons he questioned, the more so because his
conversations with them were carried out in the friendliest, even the
most cheerful manner.

Now, how could Milch have found out about these incidents? I have
already mentioned that he could not obtain knowledge about that from
foreign reports, because he did not receive such reports. Thus, it
should be established that Milch was not responsible, first, for the
directive for the so-called slave labor; secondly, the recruitment of
manpower; third, the inhuman acts perpetrated in connection with this,
the transport to Germany, and the crimes connected therewith, and
finally, fifth, the treatment of foreign workers in Germany and the
atrocities committed in connection therewith.

He knew nothing at all about them. He did not commit these crimes;
neither as a principal nor as an accomplice. He neither ordered such
crimes nor instigated them. He did not take a consenting part in them
either. On the contrary, he always eliminated minor abuses and
constantly saw to it that the conditions of the foreign workers were
ameliorated by special gifts. He was in no way connected in a causative
manner with the planning or execution of these crimes, and here I refer
you to my earlier legal statement, for he would have had to know about
them, that such atrocities, murders, and other inhuman acts occurred in
connection with the recruitment, transfer to Germany, and treatment
within Germany if he is to be held responsible for them. Neither did he
belong to the organization which was connected with the recruiting,
transport, and treatment, namely, the Organization Sauckel. If at all,
he could be charged only with the utilization of foreign workers.

No just man who values that name can, by virtue of knowledge
subsequently acquired, condemn the actions which a defendant committed
at an earlier time in ignorance of what later became known. Today the
whole world is full of the horrors which have been brought to light. It
is not true, however, that these horrors were desired by the supreme
leadership. That Sauckel acted independently here and that he alone
bears the guilt is shown by Defense Exhibit 3, in which Sauckel lied to
Hitler, saying that workers had never been treated so well as by him.

I do not wish to defend Hitler. As a German, I myself have every reason
to raise the most bitter and serious charges against the man whose
account of guilt can never be paid up, but here it must be said that
Hitler could hardly have included the commission of atrocities and
murders in his plan for the foreign workers, for if that had been the
case, Sauckel would not have had to lie as he did. Then he would not
have had to pretend to his lord and master that he was treating the
foreign workers so well. Such lies, such deceit, are practiced only by
the subordinate who is aware that he has violated instructions and that
he can be punished by his superior.

Document R-124, Defense Exhibit 32 shows clearly that in two cases
Sauckel acted against Hitler’s instructions in committing his crimes.
Therefore, even Sauckel’s labor organization was not created for the
purpose of committing atrocities, murders, and other inhumane acts.
Sauckel and a number of his subordinates made themselves guilty on their
own accounts, and as guilty persons they strove to keep secret and to
cover up their crimes. That the defendant cannot be responsible for
these secret acts is hardly to be doubted.

I realize that in answer the prosecution will remind me of all the
documents with severe statements by Milch which have been submitted to
the Tribunal. This is a serious count of the indictment, but one can
achieve clarity on the complex of questions thus brought up only if one
considers whether Milch made these severe statements only against
foreign workers and prisoners of war or whether they were simply a part
of his nature.

The witnesses Richter, Foerster, Hertel, Eschenauer, Pendele, and
Vorwald have confirmed that Milch in his tantrums threatened even his
German subordinates, his best workers, with hanging and shooting, and
here in this room several men have appeared on the witness stand whom
the defendant shot or hanged in words. This clearly shows that the
defendant was not one-sidedly filled with hatred of the members of
foreign nations; besides, this was hardly to be expected in the
character of a man who for years energetically worked for peaceful
collaboration with other peoples and who despised the racial doctrine
and the idea of the “master race”. Rather, it makes it clear that he
threw out such wild expressions only when he was excited, so that his
subordinates acquired the habit of laying bets on the number of people
who would be shot, when they knew that exciting matters were up for
discussion. I read a number of passages to you from the notorious speech
before the quartermasters and fleet engineers, in which he raged against
those present and against himself in the same terms as he used against
the foreigners. And in other documents submitted by the prosecution, one
can find such expressions used against Germans, against members of the
leading class of the German people, and against German workers. All this
proves that an unfortunate inclination of Milch is here expressed for
which, like a sick person, he cannot be held responsible, especially
since he never carried out the punishments which he threatened. All the
witnesses whom I have called to the stand from Milch’s entourage have
testified that he used such terms only in tantrums. These tantrums
occurred frequently, and always when he had met with major difficulties
in the way of his work to save Germany from complete destruction. He was
a sick man. He suffered several very serious accidents, all with severe
brain concussions. It is an old experience of medicine that such people
are easily excitable, and you must not forget how much this man had on
his mind. He was a clairvoyant. He knew that the war was lost for
Germany. He realized what horrors Germany was doomed to through the
increasingly violent air war. He knew what help was possible in the
distress of his people, and he had to stand helplessly by while his
short-sighted and perhaps malevolent superiors frustrated, hampered, and
prohibited all his precautions. In such severe physical distress, even a
healthy man would become so irritable that he would be subjected to
violent outbursts of anger. How much more violent would these outbursts
be in the case of the sick defendant. His distressed soul housed in a
suffering body, helplessly exposed to its worries, reacted in this way
to relieve the tension.

Many witnesses, in particular the witness Vorwald, have told you that
when such excitement occurred the defendant even changed physically,
that the back of his neck became red and swollen and that afterwards he
no longer knew what he said while he was in such a state. That this
testimony, especially that of the witness Vorwald is true, is shown with
actual certainty by the incidents between the defendant and Goering on
the occasion of the report on the crimes committed by Terboven in Norway
on the civilian population, and Document R-134, Exhibit 159 of the
prosecution. The prosecution without justification bitterly reproached
the defendant for failure to protest against this monstrosity. The
defendant in his defense was not able to answer that he had done so.
Vorwald has testified that this process took place in connection with an
outburst of anger about precisely that incident, and because the
testimony of Vorwald that the defendant did not remember afterwards what
had happened during his period of excitement is true, the defendant was
not able to carry out a full answer in his own defense because of his
excitement. He did not remember. Your Honors, it is clear you have
achieved deep insight into the souls of men. Therefore, surely you are
able to judge that this incident has revealed the truth of what the
defendant and his witnesses have told you. Otherwise he would be able to
cite his protest as a defense against the charge of the prosecution.

Now, I assume that the prosecution will object that these fits of rage
occurred much too frequently and that they are therefore not a
pathological symptom but a normal expression of his character. Your
Honors, this can be disputed by a very simple consideration. The
so-called GL (Generalluftzeugmeister—Air Ordnance Master General)
meetings took place twice a week. That means that from the time when the
defendant took office there were a total of about 160 meetings. In
addition, there were 60 meetings of the Central Planning Board. Finally
there were about 30 Jaegerstab meetings, altogether about 250 meetings
in which the defendant participated. The meetings lasted many hours.
According to my concept the average number of pages of verbatim
transcript of the GL was about 200 for a single meeting, or about
30,000-32,000 pages for the GL alone. If one includes the transcripts of
other meetings then one comes to figure approximately at least of about
35,000 pages for all the transcripts at a conservative estimate. This is
an enormous figure from all these many meetings. From all these many,
many pages of transcript, the prosecutor has been able to submit only a
very few pages with only very occasional extravagant statements.
Therefore, the question is asked whether this was the normal tone of the
defendant. It is also significant that in the meetings of the GL, such
outbursts occur much more frequently than in the transcripts of the
Jaegerstab or the transcripts of the Central Planning Board. In the GL
meetings the defendant was in his own realm among us “parson’s
daughters”, as the witness Vorwald said. Such outbursts naturally
occurred there more often because according to experience a human being
can let himself go more easily among his most intimate friends than
among his subordinates. Nevertheless the outbursts remained isolated.

How curious is it that the emotional disturbances of the defendant
occurred repeatedly in connection with the same subjects of discussion,
for example, in the question of the work done by the French industry,
the French people, the question of so-called slackers, or the discussion
of threatening and inciting remarks made by foreigners. Sometimes
several outbursts occurred at brief intervals, one after the other. Why,
your Honors? Because the matters that excited the defendant were not
settled. But this leads us to the question of whether the defendant
followed up these wild words with deeds. He never did. Just consider,
for example, the question of slackers or the question of the work done
by the French industry, the French people. These apparently so
malevolent orders issued in anger were not carried out. These stones
were repeatedly laid in the path of the defendant. Here, your Honors, I
ask you to penetrate into the depth of the circumstances with the
understanding that characterizes a legal person. The defendant
repeatedly became excited, for example, over the so-called slackers,
Germans unwilling to work whom he considered to be traitors. Each time
he issued strict orders, expressed wild threats, but would it not have
been the most natural thing for this excitable man on all these
occasions, which followed one on the heels of the other, to shout at his
subordinates and to reproach them, to ask them why the orders which he
had given and supported before in anger and which he had advanced
repeatedly had not long since been carried out? Would that not have been
the most natural and the first thing that he would have done in his
anger if he had really expected and wanted his wild orders carried out?
Your Honors, look at it from the human point of view. Revive all the
experiences of your long and no doubt rich lives and examine with me
whether I am not right in what I say.

I challenge my learned opponent to show me in all these instances, which
are really appalling, one single expression indicating that the
defendant objected to the failure to carry out his earlier threatening
orders. Not a single word can be found and here, your Honors, the truth
becomes so obvious that no intelligent man can ignore it. It sounded
incredible in the mouth of the witnesses when they said again and again
that no such orders were carried out. It has been put to the defendant
that it is improbable that a field marshal did not expect his orders to
be carried out and that all his subordinates did not immediately rush to
carry out his orders, but the man who is sitting before you told the
truth in spite of all appearances to the contrary, for if he as a field
marshal had expected his orders issued in anger to be carried out then
he would surely at one time or another have expressed dissatisfaction
because they had not been carried out. But he did nothing except to get
angry from his sickness and his anxiety about his people. It is clear
not only from the Terboven case that he actually knew nothing about what
he had screamed out and that he never seriously pressed home his
demands. The Court has questioned him repeatedly about these
expressions. He always supplied that he did not remember them and he did
not believe that he had said so. He has often had to tell you that what
he shouted was wrong if he had actually said it. That too seemed
incredible at first, but as this man afterwards no longer knew what he
said in these attacks then he cannot testify about them. It is also
clear that a man in such a fit speaks many untruths and one cannot
assert that he lied deliberately. The man, as I say today, has told you
the truth as far as he can know it to the best of his knowledge and
belief. These transcripts cannot convict him of untrustworthiness.
Moreover, in many cases the transcripts are no doubt full of mistakes,
distortions, and errors. I have shown you a number of passages which
must be wrong. I have shown you transcripts such as NOKW-359, Exhibit
75, which speak of Milch’s presence and statements although on that day
he could not have been present in the Jaegerstab. This is also true of
some records of ostensible GL meetings. I have also proved that other
transcripts make no logical sense in German and that several statements
must have been run together there. Today, of course, no one can say
whether these various statements were all made by the defendant. Many
witnesses which I have examined on this matter, for example, to name but
a few, Richter, Pendele, Hertel, Speer, and Vorwald, have testified that
the transcripts contained many errors and that they were never
corrected, that they were sometimes even intentionally distorted when
the defendant attacked his superiors. Such passages were either left out
or changed in such a way that the attacks on the person in question were
no longer recognizable. But who would seriously consider it permissible
to use such faulty transcripts as evidence?

All the witnesses from the entourage of the defendant have told you
finally that in these Central Planning Board, as well as in the
Jaegerstab and GL meetings, that in addition to transcripts reproducing
the individual speeches and opinions so-called records of results were
drawn up which contained only the really important decisions, orders,
and regulations. They alone were valid for the subordinates. Those
concerned acted according to them alone. It is noteworthy that the
prosecution has not submitted a single one of those records of results
containing any inhuman orders issued by the defendant. I beg of you,
your Honors, not only to give severe consideration to the weaknesses of
the defense, I beg you to draw your severe conclusions from the
weaknesses of the prosecution as well. The fact that no incriminating
records of results have been submitted proves once more that these
threats were never carried out.

Your Honors, in disturbed times other men, too, sometimes say things
which cannot be taken seriously. Men can be charged only according to
their deeds, not according to their chatter. If you have access to
Churchill’s speech made in his first excitement after Dunkirk, you can
see what violations of international law he recommended to the civilian
population of England when he called upon them to prevent a German
airborne landing. But he never actually issued any such orders, and so
no one will try him for that. When the late General Patton said at one
time that he intended to continue to collaborate with such of the German
Nazis as were specialists, some excited American newspaper ran this
headline: “Patton Should Be Shot.” Who would be so stupid as to call
these newspapers inhuman? No one in the world; no one takes such excited
words seriously. No one can say that these outbursts of anger meant that
Milch approved the atrocities which occurred elsewhere in Germany.

The affidavits of Kruedener, Defense Exhibit 37, Lotte Mueller, Defense
Exhibit 38, the testimony of witnesses Koenig, Vorwald, Pendele, have
all shown that this man always and everywhere tried to help people in
distress. He, who ostensibly wanted to force the foreign workers and
concentration camp inmates to work by means of starving them, had the
concentration camp inmates supplied with food from his estate near
Rechlin in order to improve their diet. Thus, in his actions, he did the
opposite of what he shouted in his anger. But one could raise a very
serious charge to the effect that Milch by his thoughtless manner of
speaking incited the elements throughout the country which committed
such misdeeds. But this again, your Honors, is untrue. You have not
heard one single example here of anyone having acted according to
Milch’s words and having referred to having done so. These displays of
fury only occurred among people who knew Milch and knew that he could
not be taken seriously in such moments. All witnesses have stated for
you that these fits only became known to the circle of intimates.

I lived in Germany throughout the war. Although the sins of the
high-ranking leaders of the Reich were eagerly discussed among the
people, I never heard one word about Milch’s fits of rage. In reply to
my question the witness Vorwald stated convincingly that nobody spoke
about these incidents to other persons because they did not wish to
expose their superior to whom they were attached. His loyal followers
surrounding him with a cordon of silence. Nothing could be more
understandable, and every decent person who respects his superior will
and must act in the same manner, for, in spite of his occasional
fierceness, Milch was popular with his subordinates. The witnesses
Richter, Hertel, Pendele and Vorwald, among others, testified before you
that Milch was highly esteemed. Richter actually called him the best and
fairest superior whom he had ever met in all his life. Here, your
Honors, in this praise Milch’s true nature appears before our eyes.

I believe, therefore, to be justified in saying that one cannot and must
not judge Milch by his wild talk. To infer guilt from that would mean to
pass a judgment which could never be upheld before justice. Nobody may
be judged by empty phrases. I would like to tell you a true story here
which occurred in Germany during the discussions about a new, more
stringent National Socialist penal code. At that time the Party took the
point of view that criminal intent in itself was punishable, and thus,
during a meeting of the Penal Law Commission in connection with the
question of the meaning of murder, a long debate developed as to whether
a person who intended to bring about the death of an enemy by prayer was
to be punished by death for murder. The majority of Party members
concurred with this mad opinion on the punishment of criminal intent.
The sensible ones protested against it for a long time. When the debate
was nearing its end, Dr. Guertner, the Reich Minister of Justice at the
time, a clear-sighted man, rose and with one single sentence made reason
prevail. These were his words: “Gentlemen, I do not understand you. All
my life a corpse has been part of a murder.” The narrow-minded Party
doctrinaires had to give in to the scornful laughter that followed these
words. And in that way I should like here to think of Milch’s wild talk
and exclaim, “Where is the corpse?”

In my opinion the only remaining question which needs serious discussion
is merely that of the employment of foreign workers, of PW’s, and of
concentration camp inmates. To begin with, it must be mentioned that the
prosecution in its opening speech maintained that Milch more than
anybody else in Germany was occupied with the employment of forced labor
in Germany. That statement, however, is in no way correct. That, at
least, has been clarified by the evidence beyond all doubt, it seems to
me. There can be no doubt that Sauckel and Speer had considerably more
to do with so-called forced labor than Milch, quite apart from Hitler
and Goering themselves.

It is necessary to visualize clearly the scope of Milch’s sphere of
activities and of his authority. Your Honors, even if you were only to
check the three part Defense Exhibit 55 which I submitted, even to a
superficial scrutiny only, you would realize immediately that Speer
alone had a great deal more to do with this work than Milch. Speer was
in charge of all armaments for the army and navy which, measured in
human beings, by far exceeded the Luftwaffe, and alone exceeded the
volume of the Luftwaffe armament many times, in particular as Milch only
dealt with the construction of airplanes and as all equipment for the
crews, in fact were part of the army equipment. Furthermore, Speer was
in charge of all other productions in the German Reich. Finally, after
the establishment of the Jaegerstab, Speer was also placed in charge of
all armaments for the Luftwaffe. This Defense Exhibit 55, to which the
defendant has sworn and which is based on the prosecution’s own Exhibit
58, reveals a much greater and more comprehensive scope of Speer’s
organization. It was he, who as the central authority, not only
controlled an apparatus with considerably more tasks, he alone also had
at his disposal the executive authorities in the country, who dealt with
all matters which had to be taken, whereas Milch had no executive organs
at his disposal. He had, therefore, no executive powers whatsoever.
Speer alone was in charge of the powerful main committees, the main
industrial rings, in which the captains of industry exerted their
influence and power.

He was also in charge of the armament commissions and armament officials
of the armament inspectorates and armament detachments in the defense
districts. And lastly, the Gau plenipotentiaries and provincial economic
offices in the whole country listened to him. He was with Hitler almost
every week, and therefore, he possessed much more influence to which
Sauckel’s power—

    [At this point, the following discussion took place:]

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: May I ask you what was Koerner’s special interest?

DR. BERGOLD: I am not speaking about Central Planning Board here. I am
only speaking about the GL.

Q. I know, but in the Central Planning Board what particular field was
Koerner interested in—the navy?

A. Koerner? No. He was mainly in charge of agriculture. He testified to
that effect.

PRESIDING JUDGE TOMS: Very well.

[Dr. Bergold continues.]

Speer was with Hitler almost once a week and had therefore much more
influence to which Sauckel’s power set the only limit. The man, Milch,
never possessed such a machine. The GL was nothing but a technical
agency in the Reich Air Ministry which generally, as the witnesses
Vorwald and Hertel confirmed, was told by the General Staff of the
Luftwaffe what was to be constructed. If Milch had really been the
powerful man as the prosecution describes him, it would have been
possible for him to carry out his plan for Germany’s air defense. But
the achievement of this goal for which this man worked with unbelievable
effort and with all energy was denied to him simply because he was only
in charge of a technical office which could not make any decisions
whatsoever. Hitler, Goering, and the General Staff of the Luftwaffe
decided what this man had to construct and what plans he was to carry
out. He carried them out within the framework of the task with which he
was entrusted, always being suspended in the middle, without ground
under his feet, without the direct authority to give orders to industry,
without influence on the supply of manpower and materials; he could only
get influence through the Central Planning Board, and there too the
fundamental decisions were made by Hitler, by the latter himself, on the
advice of Speer. It is not necessary for me to name all the witnesses.
All his collaborators have testified to that effect.

May it please the Tribunal, if you examine the statements made by Hertel
and Vorwald, you will gather from them beyond any doubt that the GL had
nothing to do at all with the question of labor, with the recruiting,
transportation, and assignment of workers. The GL, and this cannot
possibly be doubted by anyone after hearing all these witnesses and
especially after Milch’s testimony, had merely to make the blueprints
for airplanes and the construction necessary for this purpose, and then
to place the orders with the completely independent industry, following
in all this the instructions of the General Staff and the orders given
by Hitler and Goering. All witnesses from the GL have confirmed before
you that the GL had nothing to do at all with the labor question; that
he did not request one single worker or exert any influence on Sauckel.
It is true that requests for labor passed, for statistical reasons as
well as for control purposes, through the GL office. But it is important
to remember and never to forget that industry submitted its real labor
requests throughout the country to the labor exchange offices which were
Sauckel’s agencies and to the armament inspectorates and armament
detachments which were Speer’s agencies.

Vorwald and the defendant himself have shown you with unmistakable
clearness that the only thing which the GL had to do with these requests
was merely that he examined these requests of industry concerning the
material point as well as the labor point, and that he then reported to
the Speer Ministry whether and in how far the requests of industry were
exaggerated and false and if the GL considered fewer material and less
manpower to be adequate.

Now, what does such an activity actually mean? Surely not, as the
prosecution submits, the enslavement of new workers, but exactly the
contrary; namely their reduction. If the GL had not exercised this
activity, Sauckel would have got much larger requests from industry and
he would have procured this labor by means of more forceful methods than
he actually did. That industry had to request workers in order to carry
out its tasks assigned by Hitler, Goering, and the General Staff of the
Luftwaffe, who were the authorities who decided on the extent of the
construction program of air armaments, was however not caused by the GL.
He was nothing else but an executive organ in the chain of command from
Hitler, Goering, and the General Staff. He was merely the technical
agency which had to make the blueprints and constructions, and then,
after approval by higher authorities, had to submit them to industry for
the undertaking of the orders.

This, your Honors, is the recital of the evidence produced on the
activity of the GL, and the only thing which the GL did in the framework
of this activity was to reduce to the lowest level the requests for
labor made by industry, for the many reasons that he was sufficiently
expert to look through the exaggerated requests of industry which could
never get enough workers. It is significant that the GL minutes which
have been submitted nowhere reveal a discussion of real manpower
guidance, but, at the utmost, that once a few questions were discussed
for information purposes. It is furthermore highly significant that
among the entire organizations of the GL there were no offices for labor
assignment and labor research as was the case in the Armament Ministry
of Speer (_see Defense Exhibit 55_), but merely for statistics of the
personnel. There is nothing to clarify the real situation better than
this fact.

Has the fact that industry, which had to carry out Hitler’s construction
program, employed foreign workers, prisoners of war, concentration camp
inmates, been caused by the defendant? Industry had employed these
people before the beginning of Milch’s tenure; it employed them because
Hitler had ordered through Sauckel that industry had to employ these
people—not in order to obtain slave labor for slave labor’s sake—but
only for the reason to be able to throw still more Germans into the
greedy jaws of the fiendish war and thus surely causing disaster for
Germans as well as for other peoples.

As far as the GL is concerned—the least reproach can be cast upon
Milch, of all the reproaches that can be cast upon him. It only consists
in that he passed orders on to the air armament industry (and where did
this not occur during the war?), and that he saw to it that no
exaggerated requests for material and manpower were made.

The prosecution has proved nothing which could contradict these
statements. But Milch has—and this, too, has been proved—not only
curtailed exaggerated labor requests of industry by means of his
statistics, thus preventing the increase of foreign labor, but in
addition to that, as was stated by the witnesses Brauchitsch, Pendele,
Hertel, Vorwald, and others, he always endeavored seriously and
successfully to maintain the German workers in the factories; and in
doing so he even saved German workers who should have been drafted, at
least to the amount of 70,000 for the air armament factories, keeping
thus on a lower level further requests for foreign workers and their
assignment. A man who, as the prosecution means, is keen on slave labor
does not act in that way.

Finally, there is another point to be mentioned in this connection. The
International Military Tribunal—which, by the way, states expressly in
its verdict against Sauckel that there is no doubt of Sauckel having had
the over-all responsibility for the slave labor program—that Tribunal
stated in its verdict against Speer that it has to be considered as a
mitigating circumstance in his favor, that by setting up protected
factories Speer had kept many workers in their homelands. Your Honors
will remember the depositions of Hertel, Vorwald, and Milch, of which it
results that as early as 1941 Milch, first together with Udet and later
on alone, had factories working in France on the basis of a free
agreement with the French plants in order to employ French workers in
their home country. These agreements were, as has been testified to by
Foerster, completely free, because in 1941 the industry of that part of
France which at that time had not yet been occupied had concluded them.
Therefore, Milch was the inventor of the idea to have labor employed on
the spot in foreign countries. It was not only in France that he, being
the first, carried that out. You have heard that this occurred also in
Holland and in Hungary. Now, if the International Military Tribunal
counted this circumstance as a mitigating one for Speer, it must all the
more be credited to the defendant who acted that way not merely from
1943 onward, as did Speer according to his own statement in this trial,
but already as early as 1941, and was the first to do so. In this
instance again the defendant proved to be a man who endeavored to
mitigate as much as possible the difficulties which had arisen from the
prevailing emergency. That much as far as the defendant’s activity as GL
is concerned.

When I come to consider in how far Milch’s activity on the Central
Planning Board could be charged against him, I am aware that some of the
minutes of the Central Planning Board could, in themselves, be
interpreted as a charge against Milch. But if your Honors consider that
out of sixty meetings of the Central Planning Board the prosecution
could only list fifteen meetings in which labor questions were
discussed—this being done in some instances in a perfunctory and casual
way—it results from this fact already that the Central Planning Board,
as to its aim, was not charged with the guiding of manpower, which at
that time was the focal point of many schemes in all countries and,
above all, in Germany.

In this trial there was much argument between the prosecution and the
defense as to the significance and the essence of the Central Planning
Board until, eventually, with the help of the key Document NOKW-245,
Prosecution Exhibit 157, the argument was decided. There it says
literally, “Speer and I (that is, Milch) are of the opinion that he
(Sauckel) has to be incorporated somehow in the Central Planning Board
in order to get the labor assignment, as well as the material, into our
hands. At the present time we have no possibility to steer it.” These
words were voiced on 23 February 1943 after the Central Planning Board
had been in existence for already one year. These words were not voiced
at that time for the purpose of _ex post facto_ whitewashing, but they
expressed the complete truth and have characterized the situation in
quite simple and clear words for always and unmistakably. No decree has
been submitted, nor order of Hitler has been proved, to show that this
situation was changed. At no time, indeed at no time, was Sauckel a
member of the Central Planning Board. If the prosecution wants to
consider the wish Milch uttered at that occasion as incriminating, they
are at liberty to do so. However, this is not a punishable deed, and
nobody can tell what amount of good Milch could have done if he had
factually been in charge of the labor assignment. His other deeds
account for the assumption that he would certainly have stopped abuses
and would have mitigated all that was necessary as far as possible. The
members of this trial would not believe, at first, in the depositions of
all the witnesses who have been heard here, including Koerner, stating
that the Central Planning Board dealt with labor questions merely for
reasons of information. The wording of the speeches seemed to contradict
it. But, your Honors, the witnesses have also testified before you that
the speeches could only be understood if they are read. Prosecution
Exhibit 157 has put an end to all such doubts. Whoever wants to
pronounce here the verdict with all the necessary seriousness cannot
bypass this document. Nobody can contend any longer that the defendant
has not told you the full truth. Therefore, his statement under oath is
to be believed, which agrees with Speer’s statement in that the
so-called labor assignment meetings were held with Sauckel always with
the sole aim to obtain from Sauckel, who had reported so many false
figures and was not scrupulous about telling the truth, eventually and
for once, clear figures. Likewise, Document NOKW-195, Prosecution
Exhibit 143, the report on the meeting of 28 October 1943, held at
Goering’s place, shows a constant struggle with Sauckel in order to
obtain true figures because Hitler would not believe that Sauckel’s
figures were completely false. It has been proved that factually both
Speer and Milch have been reproached because they did not fulfill the
program made by Hitler, although many millions of workers had allegedly
been at their disposal. Alone for air armament, according to Goering’s
calculation based on Sauckel’s figures, five million workers should have
been available—whereas the entire air armament employed a much lower
total of people. As Hitler was a dangerous man and his reproaches could
have disagreeable consequences, Speer and Milch cannot be blamed for
wanting to get this subject clear; consequently, if they discussed this
problem in detail—especially during the 53d and 54th meetings of the
Central Planning Board—this has nothing to do at all with labor
procurement. That these meetings have not been summoned by Milch—that
they have been summoned by Speer and his ministry—has been proved.
Milch presided over these meetings only because Speer was ill. But he
only carried through the order of his friend Speer. But even these
discussions do not alter the fact that the Central Planning Board as
such had nothing to do with labor procurement. These very discussions
were of a purely informative nature. By them the Central Planning Board
did not obtain any influence on the carrying out of labor procurement
nor on its distribution. How characteristic it is, however, for the
personality of Milch that he used even this discussion about Sauckel’s
figures in order to reduce the millions of new workers whom Hitler had
ordered in January 1944 to quite a considerable extent.

In all the discussions submitted there is nowhere a word to be found,
either to the effect that Milch had requested workers for his air
armament. If the need for workers was under discussion, then always
only, as the defendant himself confirmed, in regard to the basic
industries—that is, mining and the iron industry and in regard to
agriculture. It was always a question, as the records show, of the
commitment of prisoners of war. But even according to the Geneva
Convention prisoners of war may be employed in mining, in the production
of iron, and in agriculture. These places of work are not actual
armament industries.

That Milch did not have anything to do with the commitment of Russians
in antiaircraft defense, which was not under him at all; that, on the
contrary, he even opposed it, and that that part of the minutes of the
33d meeting of the Central Planning Board must be incorrect here, too,
has been stated by the witnesses Hertel, Koenig, as well as others
equally incontestably. It has now been proved that this order was issued
by the OKW directly via Goering.

Thus Milch, in his capacity as member of the Central Planning Board, was
neither perpetrator of, nor accomplice in, crimes; nor did the Central
Planning Board have as its purpose the commission of such crimes. Its
sole purpose was the distribution of raw materials—an activity which is
not prohibited under any conditions.

The third activity of Milch which could bring him in connection with the
so-called slave labor was the activity on the Jaegerstab. Were one to
view this membership in the Jaegerstab from the point of view of the
prosecution, one could perhaps maintain the previously formed opinion
that this activity was limited to the increased use of slave labor. The
testimony of Speer, Vorwald, and Milch, however, have shown that the
Jaegerstab had two main aims, namely, first, to raise the production of
fighter planes and, secondly, to facilitate Milch’s resignation from his
office by transferring the entire air armament industry to the ministry
of Speer.

Formerly, to be sure, Milch was one of the chairmen of this Jaegerstab,
but the witnesses—among them Schmelter, Hertel, Eschenauer and
Vorwald—have testified that the actual chairman of this Jaegerstab was
Saur. Milch very soon withdrew from the Jaegerstab; in March 1944 he
still participated in fifteen meetings, in April only eight, in May only
five, and in June only two. Nothing proves the veracity of the testimony
of the defendant more than the quite obvious decrease in his
participation. If one considers the fact that the Jaegerstab held its
meetings daily one realizes how rapidly the decrease in the activity of
the defendant was. If one considers furthermore that he was not always
present at the meetings at all, that he did not hear most of the details
of the discussions at these meetings, one can say with certainty that he
was really not the man who had the biggest influence in the Jaegerstab,
and who performed the practical work there. The expression “breakfast
director”, which the witness Dorsch applied to the defendant,
characterizes the situation excellently. The Jaegerstab was concerned
with labor questions only insofar as it guided the so-called transfer of
workers who were already working in industry, in the event changes in
production occurred, especially effecting, as far as possible, their
transfer from closed down bomber factories to fighter plane factories.
However, in this connection it is almost exclusively a question of
so-called skilled workers, as the witness Schmelter, a specialist in
this field, has confirmed. In this process no new workers of any kind
were introduced into industry. The witness Schmelter, however, finally
expressly confirmed that no real influence was exerted on Sauckel and
his offices. Wishes regarding the transfer were merely referred to the
Organization Sauckel. This fact in particular was emphasized in the
statement of Schmelter with all the clarity desirable.

Thus, it has been proved in regard to this committee, too, that it had
nothing to do with the bringing of workers into Germany from abroad, nor
dealt with their redistribution. Thus, it was also not the purpose of
the Jaegerstab to decide labor questions. Finally, it has thus been
clarified that the ministry of Speer was the office which handled labor
questions, insofar as it was necessary in the framework of the
transfers. On the basis of the submitted documents, it seems at first as
though the Jaegerstab had initiated and carried out the building of
underground factories or of concrete protected factories above ground.
The witnesses Speer, Hertel, Eschenauer, Koenig, Pendele, as well as
Milch, himself, however, all clearly and decisively confirmed that these
constructions were ordered directly by Hitler and Goering, and that the
defendant had opposed these orders because he considered them senseless.
It has furthermore been declared that Hitler himself, handled the needs
of workers for these undesirable constructions. The Jaegerstab was
connected with these constructions, according to all the testimony, only
to the extent that it had to examine which ones of the fighter plane
factories had to be installed in them. In this connection it must be
remembered that a number of these constructions were also allocated for
armament factories of the Wehrmacht. Thus, Milch also cannot be charged
with any responsibility in this count. He was neither formally nor
actually in a position to prevent Hitler’s and Goering’s orders.

Nor had Milch anything to do with the allocation of Hungarian Jews to
these factories, quite apart from the fact that it has been made clear
that these Jews were allocated only in the summer of 1944, which was
stated by the last prosecution witness, Krysiak, that is, at a time when
Milch had withdrawn from his office for some time. It has been proved
that Hitler issued relevant orders here and that the Jaegerstab trip to
Hungary was entirely unconnected with this matter because it was
undertaken solely for the purpose of a conference with the legal
Hungarian government. These consultations were merely concerned with
agreements regarding aircraft production by the Hungarian industry in
the large caves near the Danube. Not one single document has shown that
Milch either agreed to or welcomed the employment of Hungarian Jews.

To sum up, I may say then that even within the Jaegerstab Milch was
neither a principal nor an abetter in the crimes listed in the
indictment. I might add that it was not the purpose of the Jaegerstab to
carry out such crimes. In any case he was by no means the leading man on
that board. It has been found with certainty beyond all doubt that the
Jaegerstab served the purpose of helping the defendant to withdraw from
office.

Mention must also be made of the question of concentration camp inmates
working. Before going into details, I should like to make a few basic
remarks. From all the trials in which I acted as counsel, from the
questions asked in this courtroom, from various discussions I have had
with citizens of your country, I have, your Honors, attained the
certainty that in your circles no one believes in the truthfulness of
the defendants’ and all other witnesses’ statements, namely that the
average German knew nothing about the happenings in the concentration
camps and that the defendant did not know of the existence of such
camps, with the exception of Dachau and Oranienburg. As most Germans
certify to this and as all witnesses swear to this under oath, it is
first of all difficult to understand why such statements are not
believed. It can only be explained by the fact that the citizens of your
country have been so much influenced by press propaganda and the newly
discovered facts that they put more trust in the reports of their
newspapers than in the assurances of the citizens of a country which is
now known throughout the world as the place of origin of many
atrocities.

But should such prejudice which does not originate from [one’s] own and
actual experience influence the judgment? I believe and always have
believed that it is one of the essential laws of justice to base one’s
judgment strictly on facts which have become evident during a trial. It
is a proven fact that in Germany no one was allowed to write about
concentration camps; that the rules of secrecy which had been imposed by
the dictatorial regime had to be kept very strictly; and that even the
German authorities in case of their violating these rules of secrecy,
were threatened with death, as I have proved by the submission of
Defense Exhibit 36.

From the statement of the witness Roeder, who, incidentally, explained
that the defendant had neither the power of passing a death sentence nor
of sending people to concentration camps, you have learned that the
concentration camp inmates spoke to nobody about their condition. Even
the prosecution witness Krysiak has told you that the prisoners did not
dare to lodge complaints to anybody. How could the Germans generally
learn about conditions in concentration camps? Milch, too, could not and
did not learn about them, as he has told you, for the secrecy was kept
even among the highest authorities. May the propaganda of your country
insist on the contrary as much as it likes, what I have stated here
still remains true, and I can certify it myself.

I myself who during the time of the so-called Third Reich often enough
defended men who were accused because of their political views, I, who
was watched by the Gestapo, who was attacked in the public newspapers of
Nuernberg and especially was mentioned with name in the notorious
“Stuermer” on account of my defense of unhappy Jews, I, too, didn’t
learn anything about these camps, although clients came to me after
their release from the concentration camp Dachau. I always asked them
and I always received the answer that they had nothing special to
report. It was, of course, no pleasant life, but they reported that it
was not so bad.

I would ask you, your Honors, to consider how we could have learned of
these conditions.

May I remind you in this connection that deeds have been committed in
the east of the former German territory, in the Sudeten-German border
territories of Czechoslovakia, and other countries, deeds which, even if
one imagines them at their worst, remain far behind the truth. About
these atrocities the international press has kept silent although one
day history will speak and one will learn about them with horror. I have
refused to give proof of the events which were brought about by your
armies after the collapse. I could have mentioned many deeds which can
be called nothing but grave infringements against the Geneva Convention.
I could have given you a picture of how in the prisoners’ camps in the
early days hundreds of German prisoners died of starvation. I am not
accusing anyone. Shortcomings of organization and of human nature but
not express orders and rules account for it.

I only mention this, your Honors, in order to point out that you did not
learn about this and that it is only our unhappy and wretched people who
know about it. But we who have had the bitter experience of the power of
propaganda and of the force of secrecy know that ignorance of such
matters can be excused and believed. Therefore, no one may say from the
outset that all the unanimous statements by witnesses and the
declarations of Milch are to be disbelieved. They have been sworn to;
and the verdict must take them into consideration.

According to these it is certain that Milch only knew of the employment
of concentration camp inmates in the Heinkel plant in Oranienburg and
that he was of the opinion that these were German criminals and German
political prisoners, of whose mistreatment, however, he had no
knowledge. The use of prisoners and convicts is not a crime against
humanity. This, however, should not have to be mentioned. In all
countries in the world it is customary for prisoners to be obliged to
work. In Germany this was even regulated by law to such an extent that
the prisoners who were condemned to prison, that is, not to the
penitentiary, also had to work. For a prisoner to have to work is not an
atrocity. An atrocity can be seen only if the prisoner has to do this
work under conditions which injure his health or which are inhuman.

But Milch did not know that the food, the housing, and the treatment of
the prisoners were inhuman. One would have to prove such knowledge
before one could punish him for it. You have heard, on the contrary,
that he always did everything possible when he heard of individual cases
of abuse. He even tried to help, as the Kruedener affidavit, Defense
Exhibit 37, proves, in a case where he was not competent. As the
testimony of Kruedener revealed this was a case of inadequate
accommodations. Moreover, as the witness Koenig has testified, he
instituted an improvement in the food given the prisoners at Rechlin on
his own initiative, and he generally saw to it that workers got better
rations.

But that does not mean that he knew that those prisoners were starving.
It was unfortunately so that because of the total blockade of Germany by
the Allied forces the food available to the civilian population of
Germany was very poor. I myself had only had the minimum ration card;
and I could tell you a long story about how difficult it was to work on
such rations. Milch, however, obtained better food for everyone working
under him for armament. It was he who was the first to obtain extra
rations for his air armament industry because the workers worked
overtime. As a number of records of the Central Planning Board and the
Jaegerstab show, he obtained additional rations for the prisoners of war
and, for example, sent the Russians into agriculture so that they might
get better food there and be padded a little. He had an office set up in
the Jaegerstab in order to obtain additional food and clothing for the
workers, as the witness Schmelter has testified.

The improvement in the food of the inmates of Rechlin concentration camp
was part of these measures. If he did this through his estate, it was
because he had no influence with the administration of the concentration
camps in respect of the issue of additional ration cards.

It would not correspond with justice if he was pronounced punishable for
the employment of concentration camp inmates under these conditions. The
compulsory labor of prisoners has always been lawful in Germany even
before the Third Reich. He knew nothing of cruelties and atrocities or
inhuman treatment. Therefore, his consent to these cannot be proved.

If I may summarize then, I believe that my opening statement for the
defense had correctly revealed that Milch was not a slave holder,
moreover that he never aspired to be one, that he was of the opinion
that the employment of such workers was permitted, and finally that he
had done everything to keep down the employment of foreign workers as
much as possible and to make it as humane as possible. At any rate the
prosecution’s description of him is in no way accurate, and could only
originate from a misunderstanding of the man, his speeches, and of his
background. Sauckel and Speer had far greater responsibility in this
connection. It was they who had real influence, and not Milch, but even
in the case of Speer who was higher than Milch in his position, the
International Military Tribunal has granted extenuating circumstances in
connection with the manpower issue. I am convinced that Milch thought
employing such labor was permissible, and that he did everything in his
power to keep such employment to the lowest level and as human as
possible.

I am conscious of the fact that the verdict of the International
Military Tribunal is a great obstacle for me, and nevertheless the
Tribunal was merely composed of human beings, and it had passed judgment
under particularly difficult circumstances, and in composition it opened
the door to politics into the courtroom. I do not need to remind you
that in the English speaking countries, several verdicts of the Tribunal
were subjected to very serious criticism. I myself here attacked one
point of this verdict with better witnesses and better evidence, that
with regard to slave labor, for example, the International Military
Tribunal based itself upon a wrong assumption. Nobody stated there that
the U.S.S.R. had called off the Hague Convention of Land Warfare. I
checked up on those features of defense, and I found that all the time
it was only talk that the U.S.S.R. had not become a partner of the
convention. The statement of von Neurath revealed that notice of
withdrawal was expressly given.

Here we not only pronounce penalty verdicts or judgment, but also
political judgments, whether we want to or not. Especially in politics
there is always some fluctuation. Every day new facts turn up, which
throw different light upon things. The distance of time which always
grows greater and greater and separates us from the irritating events of
the past allows an ever clearer judgment. The man who returns from
battle is always confused. The more he becomes calm the more he admits
justice towards his enemy.

Honorable Judges of this Tribunal, when you judge please don’t forget
the whole personality of Milch. He always concerned himself as a good
and noble man, and I am not only convinced of that as his counsel but
also as a human being. The world would have a different outlook if his
superiors had listened to his advice, which was intended to serve the
people of this world, and the common will of the people, and peace. In
his heart he always took the side of the fighter who fought for united
Europe, which now has been joined also by his former enemy number one,
Churchill. May this statement of Milch which has thrown new light upon
things serve this aim. Poor and tortured Europe needs an enduring peace.
May his statements also open the eyes of those among the German people
who still cannot give up their misconceptions of many years, and show
them what crime has been committed against them.

But you, Honorable Judges, must recognize from the attitude of the
defendant Milch that he never became unfaithful to himself, and even if
he had been perhaps under the spell of erroneous conception, he has
always wanted the best for his and other people.

I have profound confidence in you, Honorable Judges, that you, equally
detached from your own people, will find an independent, true and
righteous judgment that corresponds to the truth. I shall consider it as
an honor for my person if I have contributed to this through my
painstaking labor.

-----

[152] Defense Counsel Dr. Friedrich Bergold delivered the closing
statement before the Tribunal on 25 March 1947, Tr. pp. 2377-2435.

[153] Trial of the Major War Criminals, vol. I, p. 226.

[154] Ibid., p. 253.

[155] Memorandum of 15 September 1941 from Canaris to Keitel concerning
an OKW order regulating the treatment of Soviet prisoners of war,
contained in _Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression_, vol. VII, p. 411, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, 1946.




                 VI. FINAL STATEMENT OF THE DEFENDANT,
                           25 MARCH 1947[156]


DEFENDANT ERHARD MILCH: Since I became a soldier in 1910 my work has
been devoted to my German people. In the First World War I was at the
front from the first to the last day. Then with others I built up the
German air lines, and when in 1933 the government asked me to enter the
Air Ministry, despite many misgivings, I could not refuse to take up
that task because it was pointed out to me that I could not turn a deaf
ear to this call of the German people.

I have remained faithful to the idea which I conceived at the time of
the air lines, that all nations must collaborate, particularly the
European nations. Pressed together in a small area, and whenever
possible, mostly outside my actual sphere of work, I dedicated myself to
that task. I was opposed to war because my experiences from the First
World War showed me that the living standard of any people would not be
improved by war, and on the contrary everybody would be grievously
harmed.

It was for me a matter of course, even in the late great war, the
planning of which was unknown to me, to do my duty in my post. My full
effort was dedicated to the air defense of the German homeland. This I
conceived to be the only possibility to obtain bearable peace terms.
Even though I had nothing to do with the employment of workers,
including foreign workers, I considered it to be my duty to make precise
investigations into the admissibility of work by foreigners,
investigations which were answered in the affirmative; I also made
efforts to keep the numbers as low as possible and to see to it they
would work in protected factories in foreign countries.

I always made efforts to improve the living conditions of all types of
workers.

My statements made to the best of my knowledge and conscience to this
Tribunal were directed to the world at large, and above all to the
German people, in order to show that only by peaceful understanding of
the nations among each other could life and civilization be secured in
future and that understanding was not only necessary but also possible
if good will prevails. But I also wanted to show my fellow Germans quite
clearly that an autocratic government which is not controlled must end
in disaster.

My personal fate is of no consequence in this connection. I am
interested only in one thing—that the German people should, as soon as
possible, be relieved of their untold suffering and should join the
community of nations as an equal partner.

-----

[156] Tr. pp. 2489-90.




                             VII. JUDGMENT


              A. Opinion and Judgment of the United States
                        Military Tribunal II[157]

The indictment in this case contains three counts, which may be
summarized as follows:

    _Count One_: War crimes, involving murder, slave labor,
    deportation of civilian population for slave labor, cruel and
    inhuman treatment of foreign laborers, and the use of prisoners
    of war in war operations by force and compulsion.

    _Count Two_: War crimes, involving murder, subjecting
    involuntary victims to low-pressure and freezing experiments
    resulting in torture and death.

    _Count Three_: Crimes against humanity, involving murder and the
    same unlawful acts specified in counts one and two against
    German nationals and nationals of other countries.

For reasons of its own, the Tribunal will first consider counts two and
one, in that order, followed by consideration of count three.

                               COUNT TWO

More in detail, this count alleges that the defendant was a principal
in, accessory to, ordered, abetted, took a consenting part in and was
connected with, plans and enterprises involving medical experiments
without the subjects’ consent, in the course of which experiments, the
defendant, with others, perpetrated murders, brutalities, cruelties,
tortures, and other inhuman acts. The so-called medical experiments
consisted of placing the subject in an airtight chamber in which the air
pressure is mechanically reduced so that it is comparable with the
pressure to which an aviator is subjected at high altitudes, and in
experimenting upon the effect of extreme dry and wet cold upon the human
body. For these experiments inmates of the concentration camp at Dachau
were selected. These inmates presented a motley group of prisoners of
war, dissenters from the philosophy of the National Socialist Party,
Jews, both from Germany and the eastern countries, rebellious or
indifferent factory workers, displaced civilians from eastern occupied
countries, and an undefined group known as “asocial or undesirable
persons.”

In approaching a judicial solution of the questions involved in this
phase of the case, it may be well to set down seriatim the controlling
legal questions to be answered by an analysis of the proof.

    (1) Were low-pressure and freezing experiments carried on at
    Dachau?

    (2) Were they of a character to inflict torture and death on the
    subjects? (The answer to these two questions may be said to
    involve the establishment of the _corpus delicti_.)

    (3) Did the defendant personally participate in them?

    (4) Were they conducted under his direction or command?

    (5) Were they conducted with prior knowledge on his part that
    they might be excessive or inhuman?

    (6) Did he have the power of opportunity to prevent or stop
    them?

    (7) If so, did he fail to act, thereby becoming _particeps
    criminis_ and accessory to them?

The periods during which these experiments were conducted become
extremely significant in determining the responsibility of the
defendant. The evidence is uncontradicted that the low-pressure
experiments were inaugurated in March 1942, and were concluded by the
end of June 1942. The cold water experiments extended from August to
October 1942, and the freezing experiments from February to April 1943.
During all of these periods the defendant was Under State Secretary of
the Reich Air Ministry, Inspector General and Second in Command under
Goering of the Luftwaffe, to which post he was appointed 19 November
1941. In these various capacities, certain military duties devolved upon
him, especially as Inspector General. For example, he was ordered by
Hitler to take an air squadron to Norway on a purely military
expedition, and during the siege of Stalingrad, early in 1943, he was
ordered by Hitler to attempt to transport into Stalingrad by air food
and supplies for the beleaguered German Army. His high military standing
is indicated by the fact that he was one of the twelve field marshals of
the German armed forces. The major part of his duties, however, revolved
around the production of aircraft for the Luftwaffe. He was primarily a
production man, charged with the duty of keeping military airplanes
supplied in sufficient quantity to the air arm of Germany’s military
machine. This naturally involved the procurement in large quantities of
the two essential ingredients of production—labor and raw material—and
an over-all supervision of any efforts having to do with that arm. One
of the defendant’s immediate subordinates was Professor Hippke, who held
the post of Inspector of the Medical Services of the Luftwaffe. Hippke
was a physician, and had supervision of all matters involving the health
and physical welfare of the personnel of the Luftwaffe.

The low-pressure experiments at Dachau were conducted by three
physicians, Dr. Romberg, Dr. Ruff, and Dr. Rascher. It is quite apparent
from the evidence that Dr. Rascher, who was attached to the Luftwaffe
but made frantic efforts to have himself transferred to the SS, was
principally responsible for the nature of the experiments. Dr. Ruff and
Dr. Romberg were also attached to the Luftwaffe and were, therefore,
remotely under the command and control of the defendant, but the
evidence is persuasive that, although they were interested in and helped
conduct the experiments up to a certain point, the excesses which
resulted in torture and death are attributable to Dr. Rascher. It is
quite apparent that the actual activities of these three physicians were
far removed from the immediate scrutiny of the defendant even though
their activities were conducted within the orbit of the Luftwaffe, over
which the defendant had command.

Approaching now the determinative questions listed above, some progress
can quickly be made in arriving at judicially satisfactory answers.

    (1) As to the first question, the evidence is overwhelming and
    not contradicted that experiments involving the effect of low
    air pressure and freezing on live human beings were conducted at
    Dachau from March through June 1942.

    (2) Approaching the second question, it is claimed by the
    defendant that only legitimate scientific experiments were
    conducted which did not involve pain or torture and could not
    ordinarily be expected to result in death. It is remotely
    possible that so long as the experiments were under the guidance
    of Dr. Ruff and Dr. Romberg some consideration was given to the
    possible effect upon the subjects of the experiments. But it is
    indisputable that the experiments conducted by Dr. Rascher
    involved torture and suffering in the extreme and in many cases
    resulted in death. Under the specific guidance of Dr. Rascher,
    the air pressure was reduced to a point which no flier would
    ever be required to undergo (14,000 meters). The photographs of
    the subjects undergoing these experiments indicate extreme agony
    and leave no doubt that any victim who was fortunate enough to
    survive had undergone a harrowing experience. The Tribunal does
    not hesitate to find that these experiments, performed under the
    specious guise of science, were barbarous and inhuman. It has
    been urged by the defendant that the only persons used as
    subjects of these experiments were habitual criminals who had
    been sentenced to death and who were given the dubious option of
    offering themselves for the experiments and receiving as a
    reward, if they survived, a commutation of the death sentence to
    life imprisonment. This claim scarcely merits serious
    consideration. A number of witnesses stated that they had a
    vague understanding that this was the case, but the record is
    entirely barren of any credible testimony which could possibly
    justify such a finding of fact.

    (3) The prosecution does not claim (and there is no evidence)
    that the defendant personally participated in the conduct of
    these experiments.

    (4) There is no evidence that the defendant instituted the
    experiments or that they were conducted or continued under his
    specific direction or command. It may perhaps be claimed that
    the low-pressure chamber, which was the property of the
    Luftwaffe, was sent to Dachau at the direction of the defendant,
    but even if this were true it could not be inferred from that
    fact alone that he thereby promulgated the inhuman and criminal
    experiments which followed. The low-pressure chamber was
    susceptible of legitimate use and, perhaps, had Dr. Rascher not
    injected himself into the proceedings, it would have been
    confined to that use.

    (5) Assuming that the defendant was aware that experiments of
    some character were to be launched, it cannot be said that the
    evidence shows any knowledge on his part that unwilling subjects
    would be forced to submit to them or that the experiments would
    be painful and dangerous to human life. It is quite apparent
    from an over-all survey of the proof that the defendant
    concerned himself very little with the details of these
    experiments. It was quite natural that this should be so. His
    most pressing problems involved the procurement of labor and
    materials for the manufacture of airplanes. His position
    involved vast responsibilities covering a wide industrial field,
    and there were certainly countless subordinate fields within the
    Luftwaffe of which he had only cursory knowledge. The Tribunal
    is convinced that these experiments, which fell naturally and
    almost exclusively within one of his subordinate departments,
    engaged the attention of the defendant only perfunctorily, if at
    all.

    (6) Did the defendant have the power or opportunity to prevent
    or stop the experiments? It cannot be gainsaid that he had the
    authority to either prevent or stop them insofar as they were
    being conducted under the auspices of the Luftwaffe. It seems
    extremely probable, however, that, in spite of him, they would
    have continued under Himmler and the SS. But certainly he had no
    opportunity to prevent or stop them, unless it can be found that
    he had guilty knowledge of them, a fact which has already been
    determined in the negative. As early as 20 May 1942, the
    defendant wrote to Wolff, Himmler’s Adjutant, stating:

    “* * * our medical inspector [Dr. Hippke] reports to me that the
    altitude experiments carried out by the SS and Luftwaffe at
    Dachau have been finished. Any continuation of these experiments
    seems essentially unreasonable * * *

    “The low-pressure chamber would not be needed for these
    low-temperature experiments. It is urgently needed at another
    place and therefore can no longer remain in Dachau.”

    Certainly the defendant did not have the opportunity to prevent
    or stop the experiments if he had been told and was convinced
    that they had terminated on 20 May 1942, and there is no reason
    to believe that he did not rely upon Dr. Hippke’s report as to
    their termination. Considerable emphasis is laid upon the
    testimony that a motion picture of the experiments was brought
    to Berlin and exhibited in the Air Ministry Building, where the
    defendant had his office. It may even be said that the picture
    was brought to Berlin for the defendant’s edification. But it
    appears that he was not present when it was shown and that, in
    any event, the showing was long after the experiments were
    concluded, at which time the defendant certainly could do
    nothing toward preventing them or stopping them.

    (7) In view of the above findings, it is obvious that the
    defendant never became _particeps criminis_ and accessory in the
    low-pressure experiments set forth in the second count of the
    indictment.

    As to the other experiments, involving subjecting human beings
    to extreme low temperatures both in the open air and in water,
    the responsibility of the defendant is even less apparent than
    in the case of the low-pressure experiments. The same letter of
    20 May 1942 to Wolff does indicate that the defendant was aware
    of the proposed sea-water experiments. In it he says—

    “* * * the carrying out of experiments of some other kind, in
    regard to perils at high seas, would be important. These have
    been prepared in immediate agreement with the proper offices;
    Oberstabsarzt Weltz will be charged with the execution and
    Stabsarzt Rascher will be made available until further order in
    addition to his duties within the medical corps of the
    Luftwaffe. A change of these measures does not appear necessary,
    and an enlargement of the task is not considered pressing at
    this time.”

It is true that Rascher wrote interminable reports as to the results of
these experiments, but there is no proof that they ever reached the
defendant. On the contrary, they were addressed to Himmler and to Rudolf
Brandt, his adjutant. At the Nuernberg conference in November 1943,
which was held after all experiments had been finished, reports were
made which even to a mildly curious lay person might have indicated that
the experiments had been tinged with excesses and fatalities. But two
facts are striking. First, the defendant was not present at the
conference and only received a report of it later; and, second, the
experiments were at that time all over.

It must be constantly borne in mind that this is an American court of
justice, applying the ancient and fundamental concepts of Anglo-Saxon
jurisprudence which have sunk their roots into the English common law
and have been stoutly defended in the United States since its birth. One
of the principal purposes of these trials is to inculcate into the
thinking of the German people an appreciation of, and respect for, the
principles of law which have become the backbone of the democratic
process. We must bend every effort toward suggesting to the people of
every nation that laws must be used for the protection of people and
that every citizen shall forever have the right to a fair hearing before
an impartial tribunal, before which all men stand equal. We must never
falter in maintaining, by practice as well as by preachment, the
sanctity of what we have come to know as due process of law, civil and
criminal, municipal and international. If the level of civilization is
to be raised throughout the world, this must be the first step. Any
other road leads but to tyranny and chaos. This Tribunal, before all
others, must act in recognition of these self-evident principles. If it
fails, its whole purpose is frustrated and this trial becomes a mockery.
At the very foundation of these juridical concepts lie two important
postulates (1) every person accused of crime is presumed to be innocent,
and (2) that presumption abides with him until guilt has been
established by proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

Unless the court which hears the proof is convinced of guilt to the
point of moral certainty, the presumption of innocence must continue to
protect the accused. If the facts as drawn from the evidence are equally
consistent with guilt and innocence, they must be resolved on the side
of innocence. Under American law neither life nor liberty is to be
lightly taken away, and, unless at the conclusion of the proof there is
an abiding conviction of guilt in the mind of the court which sits in
judgment, the accused may not be damnified.

Paying reverent attention to these sacred principles, it is the judgment
of the Tribunal that the defendant is not guilty of the charges embraced
in count two of the indictment.

                               COUNT ONE

Count one of the indictment charges the defendant with the commission of
specified war crimes, as defined by Article II of Control Council Law
No. 10, in that he was a principal in, accessory to, ordered, abetted,
took a consenting part in and was connected with, plans and enterprises
involving slave labor and deportation to slave labor, resulting in the
enslavement, torture and murder of civilians of foreign countries. The
indictment further charges that he similarly participated in the use of
prisoners of war in war operations and work having a direct relation to
war operations, resulting in inhuman treatment and death to captured
members of the armed forces opposed to Germany. The indictment alleges
that these acts were in violation of international law and the
recognized principles of civilized warfare and in specific violation of
numerous treaties and conventions to which Germany was a party.

It is claimed by the prosecution that the defendant’s responsibility for
these alleged crimes arises from his activities in three capacities (1)
as Aircraft Master General (Generalluftzeugmeister); (2) member of the
Central Planning Board; and (3) chief of the Jaegerstab. The Central
Planning Board was established by a decree of the Fuehrer, dated 29
October 1943. That decree fitted the task of production of material
goods of every kind into the framework of the Four Year Plan and charged
the Central Planning Board with the procurement and distribution of
material of every description. The Board consisted of Reich Minister
Speer, Under Secretary Koerner, and the defendant. On 1 March 1944, the
Jaegerstab was established, consisting of Speer, Saur (a subordinate of
Speer), and the defendant. The Jaegerstab concerned itself exclusively
with the material needs of the Luftwaffe, and was headed, naturally, by
the defendant. It became apparent that neither of these two bodies could
adequately deal with the problems of production without constantly
dealing with the question of labor supply. Meetings of the Central
Planning Board were held at least weekly and the minutes of those
meetings which were offered in evidence show a constant and unremitting
concern with the problem of labor. Fritz Sauckel was in supreme command
of the procurement of labor for the entire war effort, and his conduct
in carrying out his task has been vividly portrayed in the judgment of
the International Military Tribunal:[158]

    “* * * As local supplies of raw materials and local industrial
    capacity became inadequate to meet the German requirements, the
    system of deporting laborers to Germany was put into force. By
    the middle of April 1940 compulsory deportation of laborers to
    Germany had been ordered in the General Government; and a
    similar procedure was followed in other eastern territories as
    they were occupied. A description of this compulsory deportation
    from Poland was given by Himmler. In an address to SS officers
    he recalled how in weather 40 degrees below zero they had to
    ‘haul away thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands.’
    On a later occasion Himmler stated:

    “‘Whether ten thousand Russian females fall down from exhaustion
    while digging an antitank ditch interests me only insofar as the
    antitank ditch for Germany is finished * * *. We must realize
    that we have 6-7 million foreigners in Germany * * *. They are
    none of them dangerous so long as we take severe measures at the
    merest trifles.’

    “During the first two years of the German occupation of France,
    Belgium, Holland, and Norway, however, an attempt was made to
    obtain the necessary workers on a voluntary basis. How
    unsuccessful this was may be seen from the report of the meeting
    of the Central Planning Board on 1 March 1944. The
    representative of the defendant Speer, one Koehrl [Kehrl],
    speaking of the situation in France said: ‘During all this time
    a great number of Frenchmen were recruited, and voluntarily went
    to Germany.’

    “He was interrupted by the defendant Sauckel: ‘Not only
    voluntary, some were recruited forcibly.’

    “To which Koehrl [Kehrl] replied: ‘The calling up started after
    the recruitment no longer yielded enough results.’

    “To which the defendant Sauckel replied: ‘Out of the five
    million workers who arrived in Germany, not even 200,000 came
    voluntarily.’ And Koehrl [Kehrl] rejoined: ‘Let us forget for
    the moment whether or not some slight pressure was used.
    Formally, at least, they were volunteers.’

    “Committees were set up to encourage recruiting, and a vigorous
    propaganda campaign was begun to induce workers to volunteer for
    service in Germany. This propaganda campaign included, for
    example, the promise that a prisoner of war would be returned
    for every laborer who volunteered to go to Germany. In some
    cases it was supplemented by withdrawing the ration cards of
    laborers who refused to go to Germany, or by discharging them
    from their jobs and denying them unemployment benefit or an
    opportunity to work elsewhere. In some cases workers and their
    families were threatened with reprisals by the police if they
    refused to go to Germany. It was on 21 March 1942 that the
    defendant Sauckel was appointed Plenipotentiary-General for the
    Utilization of Labor, with authority over ‘all available
    manpower, including that of workers recruited abroad, and of
    prisoners of war’.

    “The defendant Sauckel was directly under the defendant Goering
    as Commissioner of the Four Year Plan, and a Goering decree of
    27 March 1942 transferred all his authority over manpower to
    Sauckel. Sauckel’s instructions, too, were that foreign labor
    should be recruited on a voluntary basis, but also provided that
    ‘where, however, in the occupied territories, the appeal for
    volunteers does not suffice, obligatory service and drafting
    must under all circumstances be resorted to.’ Rules requiring
    labor service in Germany were published in all the occupied
    territories. The number of laborers to be supplied was fixed by
    Sauckel, and the local authorities were instructed to meet these
    requirements by conscription if necessary * * *.

    “* * * the evidence before the Tribunal establishes the fact
    that the conscription of labor was accomplished in many cases by
    drastic and violent methods. The ‘mistakes and blunders’ were on
    a very great scale. Manhunts took place in the streets, at
    motion picture houses, even at churches and at night in private
    houses. Houses were sometimes burnt down, and the families taken
    as hostages, practices which were described by the defendant
    Rosenberg as having their origin ‘in the blackest periods of the
    slave trade.’ The methods used in obtaining forced labor from
    the Ukraine appear from an order issued to SD officers which
    stated:

    “‘It will not be possible always to refrain from using force * *
    *. When searching villages, especially when it has been
    necessary to burn down a village, the whole population will be
    put at the disposal of the commissioner by force * * *. As a
    rule no more children will be shot * * *. If we limit harsh
    measures through the above orders for the time being it is only
    done for the following reason * * *. The most important thing is
    the recruitment of workers.’

    “The resources and needs of the occupied countries were
    completely disregarded in carrying out this policy. The
    treatment of the laborers was governed by Sauckel’s instructions
    of 20 April 1942 to the effect that—

    ‘All the men must be fed, sheltered and treated in such a way as
    to exploit them to the highest possible extent, at the lowest
    conceivable degree of expenditure.’

    “The evidence showed that workers destined for the Reich were
    sent under guard to Germany, often packed in trains without
    adequate heat, food, clothing, or sanitary facilities. The
    evidence further showed that the treatment of the laborers in
    Germany in many cases was brutal and degrading * * *. They were
    subject to constant supervision by the Gestapo and the SS, and
    if they attempted to leave their jobs they were sent to
    correction camps or concentration camps. The concentration camps
    were also used to increase the supply of labor. Concentration
    camp commanders were ordered to work their prisoners to the
    limits of their physical power. During the latter stages of the
    war the concentration camps were so productive in certain types
    of work that the Gestapo was actually instructed to arrest
    certain classes of laborers so that they could be used in this
    way. Allied prisoners of war were also regarded as a possible
    source of labor. Pressure was exercised on noncommissioned
    officers to force them to consent to work, by transferring to
    disciplinary camps those who did not consent. Many of the
    prisoners of war were assigned to work directly related to
    military operations, in violation of Article 31 of the Geneva
    Convention. They were put to work in munition factories and even
    made to load bombers, to carry ammunition and to dig trenches,
    often under the most hazardous conditions. This condition
    applied particularly to the Soviet prisoners of war. On 16
    February 1943, at a meeting of the Central Planning Board, at
    which the defendants Sauckel and Speer were present, Milch said:

    “‘We have made a request for an order that a certain percentage
    of men in the ack-ack artillery must be Russians; 50,000 will be
    taken altogether, 30,000 are already employed as gunners. This
    is an amusing thing, that Russians must work the guns.’”

And on 4 October 1943, at Poznan, Himmler, speaking of the Russian
prisoners, captured in the early days of the war, said:

    “‘At that time we did not value the mass of humanity as we value
    it today, as raw material, as labor. What, after all, thinking
    in terms of generations, is not to be regretted, but is now
    deplorable by reason of the loss of labor, is that the prisoners
    died in tens and hundreds of thousands of exhaustion and
    hunger.’

    “The general policy underlying the mobilization of slave labor
    was stated by Sauckel on 20 April 1942. He said:

    “‘The aim of this new gigantic labor mobilization is to use all
    the rich and tremendous sources conquered and secured for us by
    our fighting armed forces, under the leadership of Adolf Hitler,
    for the armament of the armed forces, and also for the nutrition
    of the homeland. The raw materials, as well as the fertility of
    the conquered territories and their human labor power, are to be
    used completely and conscientiously to the profit of Germany and
    her allies * * *. All prisoners of war from the territories of
    the West, as well as the East, actually in Germany, must be
    completely incorporated into the German armament and nutrition
    industries * * *. Consequently it is an immediate necessity to
    use the human reserves of the conquered Soviet territory to the
    fullest extent. Should we not succeed in obtaining the necessary
    amount of labor on a voluntary basis, we must immediately
    institute conscription or forced labor * * *. The complete
    employment of all prisoners of war, as well as the use of a
    gigantic number of new foreign civilian workers, men and women,
    has become an indisputable necessity for the solution of the
    mobilization of the labor program in this war.’”

Continuing with the quotation from the IMT decision:[159]

    “* * * As the dominant member of the Central Planning Board,
    which had supreme authority for the scheduling of German
    production and the allocation and development of raw materials,
    Speer took the position that the Board had authority to instruct
    Sauckel to provide laborers for industries under its control and
    succeeded in sustaining this position over the objection of
    Sauckel. The practice was developed under which Speer
    transmitted to Sauckel an estimate of the total number of
    workers needed. Sauckel obtained the labor and allocated it to
    the various industries in accordance with instructions supplied
    by Speer.

    “Speer knew when he made his demands on Sauckel that they would
    be supplied by foreign laborers serving under compulsion. He
    participated in conferences involving the extension of the slave
    labor program for the purpose of satisfying his demands. He was
    present at a conference held during 10-12 August 1942 with
    Hitler and Sauckel at which it was agreed that Sauckel should
    bring laborers by force from occupied territories where this was
    necessary to satisfy the labor needs of the industries under
    Speer’s control. Speer also attended a conference in Hitler’s
    headquarters on 4 January 1944, at which the decision was made
    that Sauckel should obtain ‘at least 4 million new workers from
    occupied territories’ in order to satisfy the demands for labor
    made by Speer, although Sauckel indicated that he could do this
    only with help from Himmler.

    “Sauckel continually informed Speer and his representatives that
    foreign laborers were being obtained by force. At a meeting of 1
    March 1944, Speer’s deputy questioned Sauckel very closely about
    his failure to live up to the obligation to supply four million
    workers from occupied territories. In some cases Speer demanded
    laborers from specific foreign countries. Thus, at the
    conference 10-12 August 1942, Sauckel was instructed to supply
    Speer with ‘a further million Russian laborers for the German
    armament industry up to and including October 1942.’ At a
    meeting of the Central Planning Board on 22 April 1943, Speer
    discussed plans to obtain Russian laborers for use in the coal
    mines, and flatly vetoed the suggestion that this labor deficit
    should be made up by German labor.

    “Speer has argued that he advocated the reorganization of the
    labor program to place a greater emphasis on utilization of
    German labor in war production in Germany and on the use of
    labor in occupied countries in local production of consumer
    goods formerly produced in Germany. Speer took steps in this
    direction by establishing the so-called ‘blocked industries’ in
    the occupied territories which were used to produce goods to be
    shipped to Germany. Employees of these industries were immune
    from deportation to Germany as slave laborers and any worker who
    had been ordered to go to Germany could avoid deportation if he
    went to work for a blocked industry. This system, although,
    somewhat less inhumane than deportation to Germany, was still
    illegal. The system of blocked industries played only a small
    part in the over-all slave labor program, although Speer urged
    its cooperation with the slave labor program, knowing the way in
    which it was actually being administered. In an official sense,
    he was its principal beneficiary and he constantly urged its
    extension.

    “Speer was also directly involved in the utilization of forced
    labor as Chief of the Organization Todt. The Organization Todt
    functioned principally in the occupied areas on such projects as
    the Atlantic Wall and the construction of military highways, and
    Speer has admitted that he relied on compulsory service to keep
    it adequately staffed. He also used concentration camp labor in
    the industries under his control. He originally arranged to tap
    this source of labor for use in small out-of-the-way factories;
    and later, fearful of Himmler’s jurisdictional ambitions,
    attempted to use as few concentration camp workers as possible.

    “Speer was also involved in the use of prisoners of war in
    armament industries but contends that he utilized Soviet
    prisoners of war only in industries covered by the Geneva
    Convention.

    “Speer’s position was such that he was not directly concerned
    with the cruelty in the administration of the slave labor
    program, although he was aware of its existence. For example, at
    meetings of the Central Planning Board he was informed that his
    demands for labor were so large as to necessitate violent
    methods in recruiting. At a meeting of the Central Planning
    Board on 30 October 1942, Speer voiced his opinion that many
    slave laborers who claimed to be sick were malingerers and
    stated: ‘There is nothing to be said against SS and police
    taking drastic steps and putting those known as slackers into
    concentration camps.’”

Under the provisions of Article X of Ordinance No. 7, these
determinations of fact by the International Military Tribunal are
binding upon this Tribunal “in the absence of substantial new evidence
to the contrary.” Any new evidence which was presented was in no way
contradictory of the findings of the International Military Tribunal,
but, on the contrary, ratified and affirmed them.

The next question to be answered is whether or not the defendant Milch
in this case knew that foreign slave labor and prisoners of war were
being procured by Sauckel and used in the aircraft industry, which the
defendant controlled. The defendant’s own words, as gleaned from the
minutes of the Central Planning Board and from his own testimony,
conclusively answer this question in the affirmative. He testified that
he knew that prisoners of war were employed in the airplane factory at
Regensburg and that some twenty thousand Russian prisoners of war were
used to man antiaircraft guns protecting the various plants. He stated
further that he saw this type of war prisoners manning 8.8 and 10.5
[centimeter] antiaircraft guns at airplane factories in Luftgau 7 near
Munich. Sauckel, the Plenipotentiary for Labor, sat in on at least
fifteen meetings of the Central Planning Board, over which the defendant
presided, and discussed at great length and in elaborate detail the
problems involved in procuring sufficient foreign laborers for the
German war effort. He frankly disclosed the cruel and barbarous methods
used in forcing civilians of the eastern countries into the Reich for
war work. He related the difficulties and resistance which confronted
him and the methods which he used and proposed to use in forcibly
rounding up and transporting foreign workers. The advisability of using
prisoners of war and inmates of concentration camps in the Luftwaffe was
frankly discussed, with the defendant offering advice and suggestions as
to the most effective methods to be used. In the face of this
overwhelming evidence, disclosing page after page of discussion between
Speer, Sauckel, and the defendant in which the defendant urged more
severe and coercive methods of procuring foreign labor from the East, it
would violate all reason to conclude that he had no knowledge of the
source of this labor or of the methods used in procuring it. His voice
is constantly heard, pleading for more laborers from this source and
clamoring for a larger share in Sauckel’s labor pool. Hildebrand and
Sagemeier for the coal mines, Rohland for the foundries, Kehrl for the
coal and iron industries, Bruch and Becht for the rubber industry, Speer
for the armament industry, and Milch for the aircraft industry—all
these and others joined in a pagan chorus, in which the harmony was
frequently strained, but all singing the same song, “We need laborers,
men and women. We don’t care where you get them, but give us more.”

At the 54th meeting of the Central Planning Board, Sauckel stated in the
defendant’s presence:

    “* * * Thereupon I even proceeded to employ and train a whole
    batch of French male and female agents who for good pay, just as
    was done in olden times for ‘shanghaiing’, went hunting for men
    and made them drunk by using liquor as well as words, in order
    to dispatch them to Germany. Moreover I charged some able men
    with founding a special labor supply executive of our own, and
    this they did by training and arming, with the help of the
    Higher SS and Police Fuehrer, a number of natives, but I still
    have to ask the Munitions Ministry for arms for the use of these
    men. * * *.

    “* * * I and my assistants in fact have sometimes seen things
    happen in France that I was forced to ask, is there no respect
    any more in France for the German lieutenant with his 10 men? *
    * * We Germans must make an example of one case, and, by reason
    of this law, if necessary put Prefect or Burgomaster against the
    wall, if he does not comply with the rules; otherwise no
    Frenchman at all will be dispatched to Germany.”

The defendant contributed to the discussion by saying:

    “* * * As soon as you arrive the men run away to protect
    themselves from being sent to Germany * * *. The men even then
    will be whisked away unless quite another authority and power is
    on the watch, and this can only be the army itself. * * * I can
    find no remedy but that the army should assert itself
    ruthlessly.”

As indicating that the defendant was not indifferent to the problem, at
the same meeting, in referring to procuring labor from Italy, he offered
the following suggestion:

    “We could take under German administration the entire food
    supply for the Italians and tell them: only he gets any food who
    either works in a protected factory (that is, a factory in Italy
    manufacturing German war material) or goes to Germany.”

Later in the same conference, the defendant made another contribution to
the solution of the problem of foreign labor, saying:

    “Now during the transfer it is necessary to see that the people
    really do arrive and do not run away before or during the
    transfer. If a transport has left a town and has not arrived,
    500 to 600 persons from this place must be arrested and sent to
    Germany as prisoners of war. Such a thing is then talked about
    everywhere. If actions like this and other similar ones are
    carried out often, they would exert a certain pressure. The
    whole thing would be made easier, if we had control of food.”

At the 53d meeting of the Central Planning Board (16 February 1944), the
defendant stated:

    “Our best new engine is made 88 percent by Russian prisoners of
    war and the other 12 percent by German men and women.”

Instances could be multiplied in which the defendant not only listened
to stories of enforced labor from eastern civilians and other prisoners
of war and thereby became aware of the methods used in procuring such
labor, but in which he himself urged more stringent and coercive means
to supplement the dwindling supply of labor in the Luftwaffe. As
Germany’s plight became more desperate, her loss of military personnel
presented an alarming dilemma, resulting in the defection of thousands
of workmen to the armed forces. This resulted in a shifting of the
dilemma to industry, and spurs were put to the labor procurement
officers to fill the widening gap in the industrial labor ranks. Every
branch of war industry constantly clamored for replacements and each
vied with the others for a greater quota from the labor pool. Confronted
by the desperate situation, the labor procurement officers, headed by
the implacable Sauckel, cast aside all restraint and set out
systematically to herd into the Reich any human being who could
contribute to Germany’s war effort. Under Sauckel’s whip, no means
however harsh were overlooked, and no person however exempt was spared.

The defense on this count is ingenious but unconvincing. As to the use
of prisoners of war, the defendant testified that he had been advised by
some unidentified person high in the National Socialist Councils that it
was not unlawful to employ prisoners of war in war industries. The
defendant was an old and experienced soldier, and his testimony revealed
that he was well acquainted with the provisions of the Geneva and Hague
Treaties on this subject, which are plain and unequivocal. In the face
of this knowledge, the advice which he claims to have received should
have raised grave suspicions in his mind. Presenting an entirely
different aspect to his defense, he testifies that many of the Russian
prisoners of war volunteered to serve in the war industries and
apparently enjoyed the opportunity of manufacturing munitions to be used
against their fellow countrymen and their allies. Other Russian
prisoners of war, he states, were discharged as such and immediately
enrolled as civilian workers. The photographs introduced in evidence,
however, show that they still retained their Russian army uniforms,
which makes their status as civilians suspect. Be that as it may, it
does not adequately answer the charge that hundreds of thousands of
Polish prisoners of war were cast into concentration camps and parceled
out to the various war factories, nor the further fact that thousands of
French prisoners of war were compelled to labor under the most harrowing
conditions for the Luftwaffe.

As to the French civilian workers who were employed at war work in
Germany after the conquest of France, it is the contention of the
defendant that these workers were supplied by the French Government
under a solemn agreement with the Reich. It is claimed with a straight
face that the Vichy Government, headed by Laval, entered into an
international compact with the German Government to supply French
laborers for work in Germany. This contention entirely overlooks the
fact that the Vichy Government was a mere puppet set up under German
domination, which, in full collaboration with Germany, took its orders
from Berlin. The position of the defendant seems to be that, if any
force or coercion was used on French citizens, it was exerted by their
own government, but this position entirely overlooks the fact that the
transports which brought Frenchmen to Germany were manned by German
armed guards and that upon their arrival they were kept under military
guard provided by the Wehrmacht or the SS.

It was sought to disguise the harsh realities of the German foreign
labor policy by the use of specious legal and economic terms, and to
make such policy appear as the exercise of conventional labor relations
and labor law. The fiction of a “labor contract” was frequently resorted
to, especially in the operations of the Todt Organization, which implied
that foreign workers were given a free choice to work or not to work for
Germany military industry. This, of course, was purely fictitious, as is
shown by the fact that thousands of these “contract workers” jumped from
the trains transporting them to Germany and fled into the woods. Does
anyone believe that the vast hordes of Slavic Jews who labored in
Germany’s war industries were accorded the rights of contracting
parties? They were slaves, nothing less—kidnapped, regimented, herded
under armed guards, and worked until they died from disease, hunger, and
exhaustion. The idea of any Jew being a party to a contract with Germans
was unthinkable to the National Socialists. Jews were considered as
outcasts and were completely at the mercy of their oppressors.
Exploitation was merely a convenient and profitable means of
extermination, to the end that, “when this war ends, there will be no
more Jews in Europe”. As to non-Jewish foreign labor, with few
exceptions they were deprived of the basic civil rights of free men;
they were deprived of the right to move freely or to choose their place
of residence; to live in a household with their families; to rear and
educate their children; to marry; to visit public places of their own
choosing; to negotiate, either individually or through representatives
of their own choice, the conditions of their own employment; to organize
in trade unions; to exercise free speech or other free expression of
opinion; to gather in peaceful assembly; and they were frequently
deprived of the right to worship according to their own conscience. All
these are the sign-marks of slavery, not free employment under contract.

The German nation, before the ascendancy of the NSDAP, had repeatedly
recognized the rights of civilians in occupied countries. At the Hague
Peace Conference of 1907, an amendment was submitted by the German
delegate, Major General von Guendell, which read:

    “A belligerent is likewise forbidden to compel the nationals of
    the adverse party to take part in the operations of war directed
    against their country, even when they have been in his service
    before the commencement of the war.”

The German manual for war on land (Kriegsbrauch im Landkriege, Edition
1902) stated:

    “The inhabitants of an invaded territory are persons endowed
    with rights * * * subject to certain restrictions * * * but who
    otherwise may live free from vexations and, as in time of peace,
    under the protection of the laws.”

During the First World War, an order of the German Supreme Command (3
October 1916) provided for the deportation of Belgian vagrants and
idlers to Germany for work, but specified that such labor was not to be
used in connection with operations of war. The order resulted in such a
storm of protest that it was at once abandoned by the German
authorities.

It cannot be contended, of course, that foreign workers were entitled to
comforts or luxuries which were not accorded German workers. It is also
recognized that, especially during the latter part of the war there was
a universal shortage of food and fuel throughout the Reich and in the
discomforts arising therefrom foreign workers were bound to share. But
it is an undoubted fact that the foreign workers were subjected to
cruelties and torture and the deprivation of decent human rights merely
because they were aliens. This was not true in isolated instances, but
was universal and was the working out of the German attitude toward
those whom it considered inferior peoples. If any decent human
consideration was shown these workers, it was merely to maintain their
productivity and did not stem from any humanitarian considerations.

The Tribunal therefore finds the defendant guilty of the war crimes
charged in count one of the indictment, to wit, that he was a principal
in, accessory to, ordered, abetted, took a consenting part in and was
connected with, plans and enterprises involving slave labor and
deportation to slave labor of the civilian populations of countries and
territories occupied by the German armed forces, and in the enslavement,
deportation, ill-treatment and terrorization of such persons; and
further that the defendant was a principal in, accessory to, ordered,
abetted, took a consenting part in, and was connected with, plans and
enterprises involving the use of prisoners of war in war operations and
work having a direct relation to war operations.

                              COUNT THREE

Count three of the indictment charges the defendant with crimes against
humanity committed against “German nationals and nationals of other
countries.” Sufficient proof was not adduced as to such offenses against
German nationals to justify an adjudication of guilt on that ground. As
to such crimes against nationals of other countries, the evidence shows
that a large number of Hungarian Jews and other nationals of Hungary and
Romania, which countries were occupied by Germany but were not
belligerents, were subjected to the same tortures and deportations as
were the nationals of Poland and Russia. In count one of the indictment
these acts are charged as war crimes and have heretofore been considered
by the Tribunal under that count in this judgment. In the judgment of
the International Military Tribunal (_Vol. I, Trial of the Major War
Criminals, p. 254_), the court stated—

    “From the beginning of the war in 1939, war crimes were
    committed on a vast scale which were also crimes against
    humanity.”

This is a finding of law and an interpretation of Control Council Law
No. 10, with which this Tribunal is in full accord.

Our conclusion is that the same unlawful acts of violence which
constituted war crimes under count one of the indictment also constitute
crimes against humanity as alleged in count three of the indictment.
Having determined the defendant to be guilty of war crimes under count
one, it follows, of necessity, that he is also guilty of the separate
offense of crime against humanity, as alleged in count three, and this
Tribunal so determines.

In exculpation, the defendant states that he was a German soldier and
that whatever was done by him or with his knowledge or consent was done
in pursuance of a national military policy promulgated by Hitler and in
obedience to military orders. He protests that, no matter how violently
he disagreed with the methods used by the German Reich in the furthering
of its policy of aggressive war, he was helpless to extricate himself
and had no alternative except to stay with the venture to the bitter
end. It is true that withdrawal may involve risks and dangers, but these
are incidental to the original affiliation with the unlawful scheme. He
who elects to participate in a venture which may result in failure must
make his election to abandon the enterprise if it is not to his liking
or to stay as a participant, and win or lose according to the outcome.

Much significance must be attached to the meeting of 23 May 1939, at
which the defendant was admittedly present and in which Hitler spoke at
great length as to his plans for the subjugation of friendly minor
nations and the ultimate conquest of Europe. A purported record of the
events at this meeting has been introduced in evidence and has been
found to be reliable and accurate by the International Military
Tribunal. The defendant has throughout insisted that this record is
spurious and was made by Schmundt long after the occasion which it
records. Of course, it was never anticipated that this record, which was
marked “Top Secret, To be Transmitted by Officer Only,” would ever be
captured and its contents become known. It is not surprising that those
who sat and listened to the astounding program of the Fuehrer now wish
that they had been absent. It cannot be denied that there was a meeting
of some kind which the defendant attended and at which the Fuehrer
spoke, and further that it was held a few short months before the actual
invasion of Poland, as forecast in the report of the meeting. The
Schmundt paper does not pretend to be a verbatim report of Hitler’s
exact words, but certainly all of the diabolical plans which it reveals
were not manufactured by Schmundt out of thin air, attributed to Hitler,
and then marked “Top Secret”. Even if Hitler said only a small part of
what is attributed to him by Schmundt, there was enough said to advise
and warn a man of the defendant’s intelligence and experience that
mischief was afoot. Every sentence shrieks of war. The record hints at
nothing else, and, if all references to conquest and war and world
domination are eliminated, Hitler did not speak at all. At this early
date, the defendant must be charged with knowledge that a war of
aggression, to be ruthlessly pursued, was planned. This, then, was the
time for him to have made his decision—the decision which confronts
every man daily—to be honorable or dishonorable. Life consists quite
generally in making such decisions. As an old soldier, schooled in the
code of war and well aware of the principles to which an honorable
soldier must adhere, he sat complacently and listened to a proposed
program which violated national honor, personal integrity and the moral
code of an honest soldier. He made his choice and elected to ride with
the tyrant.

When the defendant joined the National Socialist Party in 1933, Germany
was in the throes of dire economic and political distress and was
burdened by a myriad of political parties, each with its separate
program and all functioning at cross-purposes. The defendant elected to
affiliate with the NSDAP because, he testified, he believed it offered
the most likely agency for bringing order out of chaos. But very soon he
must have realized that he had joined a band of villains whose program
contemplated every crime in the calendar. The Nazi code was not a
secret. It was published and proclaimed by the Party leaders in long
harangues to the people; decrees and directives were broadcast; the
infamous Streicher was spreading anti-Jewish obscenities throughout the
Reich in “Der Stuermer”; Roehm and a large number of the SA were
murdered by Hitler’s orders; hundreds of German citizens were cast into
concentration camps for “political re-education,” without hearing or
opportunity for defense; the iniquitous Gestapo stormed through the
land, with power over life and liberty which could not be questioned; in
public view Jews were beaten and killed, their synagogues burned and
their stores destroyed. The Party proclaimed its objectives from the
house-tops and verified them by open public conduct throughout the
Reich. The significant fact which must not be overlooked is that all
these things happened _before_ the war was launched, at a time when
there was no claim upon the loyalty of the defendant as a soldier to
protect his homeland at war. He protests that he never subscribed to the
master race philosophy, but 18 years before he joined the Party in 1933,
its precepts and demands had been proclaimed, among which was Point 4—

    “Only a member of the race can be a citizen. A member of the
    race can only be one who is of German blood, without
    consideration of creed. Consequently no Jew can be a member of
    the race.”

The humblest citizens of Germany knew that the iniquitous doctrines of
the Party were being implemented by ruthless acts of persecution and
terrorism which occurred in public view. Thousands of obscure German
citizens were only too well aware that they were living under the
scrutiny of an army of spies and saw their friends and relatives
summarily dispatched to concentration camps for the slightest suspicion
of dissidence. The defendant did not live in a vacuum. He was not blind
nor deaf. Long before 1939, long before his military loyalty was called
into play, long before the door of withdrawal was closed, he could have
seen the bloody handwriting on the wall, for murder and enslavement of
his own countrymen was there written in blazing symbols. But he had
taken on the crimson mantle of the Party, with all its ghastly
implication, and he wore it with glory and profit to himself to the end.
Others with more courage and higher principles and with more loyalty to
the ancient German ideals rebelled and withdrew from the brutal
crew—von Clausewitz, Yorck von Wartenburg, Schlegelberger, Schmitt,
Eltz von Ruebenach, Tesmer. These men in high positions had the
character to repudiate great evil, and if in so doing they took risks
and made sacrifices, nevertheless, they made their choice to stand with
decency and justice and honor. The defendant had his opportunity to join
those who refused to do the evil bidding of an evil master, but he cast
it aside and his professed repentance now comes too late.

What a sordid picture of a civilized nation—the nation of Goethe and
Heine, of Beethoven and Schubert, even of Bismarck and von
Hindenburg—fawning and cringing at the feet of a small man with
delusions of grandeur. Even when madness crept in to intensify his
frenzy and fear of defeat put spurs to his ferocity, they still said,
“We are his people. He is our immaculate leader.” Men of large
capacities, even of genius, prostituted their talents before a puny
renegade who used them impiously and paid off his puppets with medals
and pelf. But the strutting menials stayed with him. So long as success
was on the horizon, they bowed and scraped and sought to outdo each
other in supine adulation. They tell us now, “Hitler was wrong.” But
they never told him that. Right or wrong, their only concern was, “Can
he win the war? And what will it mean for me?” They heard him proclaim
as early as November 1937, “The question for Germany is where the
greatest possible conquest could be made at the lowest possible cost,”
and they nodded and shouted, “Heil Hitler,” and maneuvered to get closer
to him. Before the invasion of Poland, they heard this bloodthirsty
tyrant say, “In starting and making a war, not the right is what
matters, but victory.” And this defendant, as part of the unholy array,
rolled up his sleeves and said, “Let me help. Give me men and more men,
no matter where you get them.”

In a civilized state which recognizes the sanctity of human lives and
human rights, no man—no group of men—should be endowed with
omnipotence. The history of human relations, from Herod to Hitler, has
repeatedly demonstrated this to be true. Omnipotence is only for God. Be
a man ever so wise, ever so benevolent, ever so trustworthy, there still
exists in him the frailty, the fallibility, the susceptibility to
temptation that is inherent in every man. If the only protection against
the tyranny of an autocrat is his own self-restraint, that is not
enough, for power feeds on power, and the temptation to stretch
authority to its limit is irresistible.

What, then, of the responsibility of those who bask in the reflected
radiance of omnipotence, who get their sustenance from it and who
arrogantly carry out its mandates and crush any resistance to it? Are
they not the hands and limbs of the monster, carrying out the orders of
the head? Surely, they cannot be allowed to detach themselves from the
corpus by saying, “These arms and legs are innocent—only the head is
guilty?”

In an authoritarian state, the head becomes the supreme authority for
woe as well as weal. Those who subscribe to such a state submit to that
principle. If they abjectly place all the power in the hands of one man,
with no right reserved to check or limit or repudiate, they must accept
the bitter with the sweet. This is especially true of those in high
places in the state—those who choose to enjoy the honor, the emoluments
and the power of such high stations. By accepting such attractive and
lucrative posts under a head whose power they know to be unlimited, they
ratify in advance his every act, good or bad. They cannot say at the
beginning, “The Fuehrer’s decisions are final; we will have no voice in
them; it is not for us to reason why; his will is law,” and then, when
the Fuehrer decrees aggressive war or barbarous inhumanities or broken
covenants, to attempt to exculpate themselves by saying, “Oh, we were
never in favor of _those_ things.”

One cannot escape the conviction that, had the war terminated in victory
for Germany, all of the acts of Hitler, including those related to the
charges in this indictment, would have been hailed as strokes of genius,
and that this defendant would now be elbowing his way into the front row
of those claiming to have successfully and victoriously carried out
Hitler’s orders and policies—in fact, claiming co-authorship in many.
But with Germany defeated and Hitler dead, it becomes naively convenient
to take refuge in the flimsy claim that no one except Hitler was in
favor of the invasion of Poland and Russia and France and the rape of
Holland and Belgium and Norway and Denmark.

The defendant insists that he knew nothing of the atrocities and
violence which were cumulating day by day throughout Europe. Being a
good German, he says, he supinely obeyed the decree which forbade
listening to foreign broadcasts or reading foreign periodicals. He
surrendered to a political philosophy which outlawed the ordinary means
of knowledge and which prevented the formation of rationalized opinion
or judgment. No one might read or listen or talk except in predetermined
channels. Ignorance was prescribed by law. The first weapon of tyranny
is to keep its victims in darkness. The Germans were an intelligent,
cultured people; they were not ignorant serfs. What a travesty to say
that a people which has produced some of the greatest intellects in
human history is not fit to be told the truth.

Desperate and discouraged peoples, distraught with the crushing problems
of hunger and insecurity, have always cried out for a miracle worker to
lead them out of the wilderness. Then is the golden opportunity for the
mountebank with bland promises and soothing phrases to provide a
poisonous panacea for their distress. In their desperation they fail to
realize that despotism has a way of beginning with benevolence and ends
by being merely despotic. Masquerading in the mantle of a messiah, the
wily opportunist lulls them into subscribing to some glib Fuehrerprinzip
which means, “Ask no questions; leave everything to me.” And when the
debacle comes, they realize that they _have_ left everything to
him—honor, dignity, self-respect, liberty, even life itself—and they
end up degraded, ashamed, impoverished, and hopeless. But have they
ended up wiser? The universal fear today is that in their desperation
they will repeat the vicious process by saying, “Last time we picked the
wrong man. Let us seek a new messiah. He will save us.” The lessons of
one generation are quickly forgotten by the next, but the inexorable
laws of nature are immutable. The tragic fruits of tyranny and
intolerance will always be the moral decay of peoples and the
degradation of human dignity.

Over the heavy gates which shut in the hapless victims at Dachau is a
legend reading, “Work will set you free.” The toil of slaves cannot set
them free; it only serves to further enslave them. Some day an
enlightened German people will storm those gates and all others like
them and recast them into an image of Truth—an imperishable figure with
eyes open and unbandaged. So long as Truth stands free and untarnished,
no future Hitler will ever arise to deceive and degrade the German
nation. Then there will never be another Dachau.

                                             [Signed]  ROBERT M. TOMS
                                                        PRESIDING JUDGE
                                                  FITZROY D. PHILLIPS
                                                                  JUDGE
                                                  MICHAEL A. MUSMANNO
                                                                  JUDGE
                                SENTENCE

This Tribunal takes no pleasures in performing the duty which confronts
it, but the deliberate enslavement of millions must not go unexpiated.
The barbarous acts which have been revealed here originated in the lust
and ambition of comparatively few men, but all Germans are paying and
will pay for the degradation of their souls and the debasement of the
German honor, caused by following the false prophets who led them to
disaster.

It would be a travesty on justice to permit those false leaders,
including this defendant, to escape responsibility for the deception and
betrayal of their people. It would be even a greater injustice to view
with complacence the mass graves of millions of men, women, and children
whose only crime was that they stood in Hitler’s way. Retribution for
such crimes against humanity must be swift and certain. Future would-be
dictators and their subservient satellites must know what follows their
defilement of international law and of every type of decency and fair
dealing with their fellow men. Civilization will be satisfied with
nothing less.

It is the sentence of this Tribunal that the defendant Erhard Milch be
confined to the Rebdorf Prison for the remainder of his natural life.

-----

[157] Concurring opinions were filed by Judge Musmanno, see pp. 797-859,
and by Judge Phillips, see pp. 860-878.

[158] Trial of the Major War Criminals, vol. I, pp. 243-47, Nuremberg,
1947.

[159] Ibid., pp. 381-83.




           B. Concurring Opinion by Judge Michael A. Musmanno

The defendant is Erhard Milch, Field Marshal in the German Luftwaffe,
Inspector General of the Luftwaffe, State Secretary in the Air Ministry,
Generalluftzeugmeister, representative of the Wehrmacht on the Central
Planning Board, Chief of the Jaegerstab and member of the Nazi Party. He
stands indicted of war crimes and crimes against humanity as defined in
Control Council Law No. 10, enacted by Allied Control Council on 20
December 1945.

The indictment contains three counts which may be briefly summarized as
follows:

                               COUNT ONE

Erhard Milch is charged with having knowingly committed war crimes as
principal and accessory in enterprises involving slave labor and having
also willingly and knowingly participated in enterprises involving the
use of prisoners of war in war operations contrary to international
convention and the laws and customs of war.

                               COUNT TWO

The defendant is accused of having knowingly and willfully participated
in enterprises involving fatal medical experiments upon subjects without
their consent.

                              COUNT THREE

In the third count the defendant is charged with responsibility for
slave labor and fatal medical experiments, in the same manner as
indicated in the first two counts, except that here the alleged victims
are declared to be German nationals and nationals of other countries.

The defendant has entered a general denial of Not Guilty to all counts.
To the charges of slave labor he has answered in effect—

    1. That the term slave labor is a misnomer and that all foreign
    workmen in Germany during the war were there of their own free
    will.

    2. That if they did not come voluntarily they were treated
    humanely, considerately, and were not subjected to any
    ill-treatment either in transportation or while actively
    employed for the Reich.

    3. That if ill-treatment, fatal or otherwise, of foreign workmen
    occurred, the defendant was in no way responsible for such
    ill-treatment.

To the charges of responsibility for fatal medical experiments inflicted
on involuntary subjects, the defendant replies substantially—

    1. That the high-altitude and freezing experiments were not
    painful to the subjects, nor did any illegal deaths result
    therefrom.

    2. That if fatalities did occur, they were suffered by those
    already condemned to death, or were caused by persons over whom
    the defendant had no control.

    3. That in any event, Milch was in no way officially connected
    with the illegal and fatal experiments.

                             I. SLAVE LABOR
                       (a) Methods of Recruitment

The defense has affirmatively asserted that there was no slave labor in
Germany during the war, or that if it did exist, its scope was
negligible. The Tribunal finds that this assertion is not supported by
the testimony in the case. It concludes, on the contrary, from the
evidence presented at this trial that the German Reich during World War
II did actively and plenarily employ slave labor. It further is of the
opinion that the Third Reich used and abused slave labor to an extent
and in a manner hitherto unknown in either modern or ancient history.
The exploitation of human beings by Germany during the years of the war
must take its place, in point of cruelty and inhumaneness, with the most
iniquitous slave practices of the ancient Egyptians, Babylonians,
Assyrians, and Persians. The building of the Pyramids, the Hanging
Gardens of Babylon, and other ancient landmarks under whip and lash have
their modern counterpart in the German building of the Western Wall, the
Gothic Line, military fortifications, concentration camps, and munitions
factories. The guilt of the German Reich is greater than that of the
ancient empires because in that area of antiquity the immorality of
human bondage was not universally accepted, whereas in 1939 no country
in the sisterhood of civilized nations had failed to condemn and outlaw
involuntary servitude in its every form.

It is submitted in behalf of the defendant that foreign workers came to
Germany of their own will. It is true that in the early stages of the
European conflict, Germany offered such inducements in foreign countries
as to persuade numbers of their subjects voluntarily to proceed to that
country for remunerative employment. In those first days of Blitzkrieg
when nation after nation fell helplessly under the invincible Nazi war
machine, workers accepted employment in Germany not only because of
promises made, but because exterior evidence to their bewildered minds
seemed to portend that soon the frontiers of Germany would be
coterminous with the boundaries of Europe itself. Thus, but small choice
remained to them; whether they worked at home or in Germany the master
was destined to be the same.

However, when the subjugated peoples perceived at Stalingrad that the
unbeatable German army could be beaten, when they heard the roar of
American propellers in the sky and the clank of British tanks returned
once more to the battle, a light of hope gleamed that it might not be
true, as Hitler had said, that his rule and order were to endure a
thousand years, and then these people refused the coin and currency of
the German Reich. From then on the feet of foreign workers were not
turned willingly toward Germany. And in the face of this defiance,
Sauckel, German Plenipotentiary for Labor, declared, “Should we not
succeed in obtaining the necessary amount of labor on a voluntary basis,
we must immediately institute conscription or forced labor.”
(_T-58._)[160]

There is no adding machine tape to which one can turn to determine the
exact total number of foreign workers impressed into German industry,
but Fritz Sauckel, Plenipotentiary General for Labor, declared, “Out of
5,000,000 workers who arrived in Germany, not even 200,000 came
voluntarily.” (_T-149._) Heinrich Himmler placed the number of foreign
workers at from 6,000,000 to 7,000,000. (_IMT 243_)[161].

On 9 November 1941, Hitler declared in a speech—

    “The territory which now works for us contains more than
    250,000,000 men, but the territory which works indirectly for us
    includes now more than 350,000,000. In the measure in which it
    concerns German territory, the domain which we have taken under
    our administration, it is not doubtful that we shall succeed in
    harnessing the very last man to this work.”

Hitler was never quite able to achieve the fullness of this ambitious
program, but it was not due to any relinquishment of efforts in that
direction by himself or his criminal coadjutors. Of course, this program
was in direct violation of Article 52 of the Hague Convention which
declares—

    “Requisition in kind and services shall not be demanded from
    municipalities or inhabitants, except for the needs of the army
    of occupation. They shall be in proportion to the resources of
    the country, and of such a nature as not to involve the
    inhabitants in the obligation of taking part in military
    operations against their own country.”

In the very initial stages of the German invasions, the officiating
agents phrased their demands for labor in language which gave the
recruitment an aspect of voluntary action on the part of the workers.
Thus, when the German forces entered Lithuania, male and female farm
workers were called upon by the military administration to sign up for
six months’ employment on large estates, but after the signatures were
obtained the promises were not kept. (_T-97._) And it was not long until
all pretense at voluntary recruitment was abandoned and then
Lithuanians, ordered to official agencies “only for registration”, were
held there and taken away under military guards to the local barracks
where they had neither the opportunity to bid their families good-by nor
to put their most personal affairs in order. (_T-97-98._)

There were other pacific methods to “persuade” foreign workers into
employment for the Reich. Thus, Governor General Frank of Poland
recommended that one way to force Polish workers into Germany was to
withhold their unemployment insurance. (_T-112._)

However, these genteel methods in Poland soon gave way to means more
direct. Recruitment now degenerated into a fierce manhunt with
unsuspecting victims being seized on the streets, in railroad stations,
from their homes, even in churches. (_T-83._)

    “Everybody is exposed to the danger of being seized anywhere and
    at any time by members of the police, suddenly and unexpectedly,
    and being brought into an assembly camp. None of his relatives
    knows what has happened to him; only weeks or months later, one
    or the other gives news of his fate by a postcard.” (_T-83._)

In Ukrainia skilled workers whose names had been furnished to the police
by corrupted village elders were “dragged from their beds at night to be
locked up in cellars until shipped.” (_T-67._) As neither the male nor
the female workers were given time to gather up their belongings they
often arrived at the collecting center without shoes or other adequate
clothing for the long and torturing journey ahead. (_T-67._)

A directive applying to recruitment in White Ruthenia declared—

    “All permissible means shall be used to obtain manpower from
    White Ruthenia. Do not hesitate to apply extraordinary
    measures.” (_T-91._)

In the same directive “the recruiters” are told, “Everything you do for
Germany is right, everything else is wrong.” (_T-93._) So wide-sweeping
was this recruitment drive waged by the SS and police in one area of
White Ruthenia that 115,000 hectares of farm land became useless because
the whole population had been removed. (_T-93._)

Goering bluntly declared in a speech at the Reich Ministry of Air on 7
November 1941, in connection with the Four Year Plan that Poles,
Dutchmen, etc., were to be taken, “if necessary as prisoners of war and
employ them as such, if work through free contract cannot be obtained.
Strong action.” * * * “Foreigners not to be treated like German
workers.” (_T-53._)

One Leyser in making a report to Rosenberg on the situation in his
district of Zhitomir gives the answer to the assertion of voluntary
labor when he says—

    “It is certain that a recruitment of labor, in the sense of the
    word, can hardly be spoken of. In most cases, it is nowadays a
    matter of actual conscription by force. The population has been
    stirred up to a large extent and views the transports to the
    Reich as a measure which does in no way differ from the former
    exile to Siberia during the Czarist and Bolshevist system.”
    (_T-94._)

A report on recruitment measures taken in Holland reveals—

    “All Jewish Netherlanders, whom the Germans could lay their
    hands on, with the exception of a small group of exempted
    persons, were brought together here; hospitals, old age homes,
    institutions for the blind and other disabled persons were
    emptied in order to concentrate the inmates in Westerbork for
    deportation. Even the inmates of lunatic asylums did not escape
    deportation.” (_T-125._)

On the subject of workers from the Netherlands, Goering said on 28
October 1943, in the presence of the defendant—

    “After that has been done once, one has to modify the system for
    the second blow. Then the Dutch people will be no longer out in
    the streets on Sunday for pleasure promenades * * *. First, all
    the people must be brought together in a pen. Then they will be
    asked individually who works where. Then the men will be
    selected accordingly.” (_T-2094._)

And on the subject of foreign exchange at that same meeting, Goering
contributed this bit of wisdom in finance—

    “All we need to do is to fix the rate of exchange * * * today
    the German mark equals 20 francs, tomorrow 23, then 27, then 40,
    and so forth, up to one million, or one billion. We have had all
    that. The same holds true for the guilder. One cigarette now
    costs in Holland 1.50 guilders; formerly it cost 10 cents. I
    merely have to say, 1.50 guilders equal 10 pfennigs or one mark
    equals 15 guilders.” (_T-2095._)

It may be well to note at once that all quotations from the transcript
represent excerpts from records and documents located in the official
files of the German Reich. The evidence advanced by the prosecution in
this case was almost exclusively documentary. Thus, if any observation
in this opinion seems overly emphatic and appears to go beyond the
restraint usually found in judicial pronouncements, it will still fall
short of the force of language employed in some of the original reports
made by German officials to their own superiors at the time of the
events described. A top secret memorandum on conditions in occupied
Russian territory declared—

    “It is no longer a secret from friend or foe that hundreds of
    thousands of them literally have died of hunger or cold in our
    camps * * *. We now experience the grotesque picture of having
    to recruit millions of laborers from the occupied eastern
    territories, after prisoners of war have died of hunger like
    flies, in order to fill the gaps that are formed within Germany.
    Now the food question no longer existed. In the prevailing
    limitless abuse of the Slavic humanity, _recruiting methods were
    used which probably had their origin only in the blackest
    periods of the slave trade_.” (_T-121._)

Even Rosenberg acknowledged the severity and harshness of the
recruitment program and protested, not, to be sure, on humanitarian
grounds, but because “endangered persons prefer to escape their fate” by
going over to guerilla bands. (_T-78._)

The fury with which the manhunt for workers was prosecuted reached such
extremes that in many instances villages were burned down as
“retribution for failure to comply with the demand for the appropriation
of labor forces directed to the communities.” (_T-80._)

And it was not only where large numbers were demanded that savage
reprisals occurred. In a little village where 25 workers had been
ordered but none reported, the German militia set fire to the houses of
those who had fled. Then—

    “The people who had hurried to the scene were forbidden to
    extinguish the flames, beaten and arrested, so that seven
    homesteads burned down. The policemen meanwhile ignited other
    houses. The people fell on their knees and kissed their hands,
    but the policemen beat them with rubber truncheons.”
    (_T-80-81._)

All because the mighty Reich needed 25 men to throw into its vast
workshop of millions turning out the steel teeth of war.

In the same instance the German militia continued into other villages
and where they did not find the workers they seized the parents. “The
workers who had not appeared until then were shot.” Then, in the report
we are quoting from, appears the damning phrase which shows more than
anything else to what a low ebb the dignity of man had been reduced and
degraded by the German Reich. “_They are now catching humans like the
dog catchers used to catch dogs._” (_T-81._) The report closes on a
statement which must needs bring a blush of shame to the cheek of every
member of the civilized human race—

    “People from many villages went on a certain day to a pilgrimage
    to the monastery Potschaew. They were all arrested, locked in,
    and will be sent to work. Among them there are lame, blind, and
    aged people.” (_T-81._)

It has been asserted that the defendant and others holding high office
cannot and should not be held responsible for the acts of subordinate
officers in far away places, and of whose activities they could have no
knowledge. But these smaller officers were only putting into effect the
policies publicly declared over and over by the chieftains. Thus, when a
certain Koch spoke in Kiev and declared—

    “I will draw the very last out of this country. I did not come
    to spread bliss. I have come to help the Fuehrer. The population
    must work, work, and work again * * * for some people are
    getting excited that the population may not get enough to eat.
    The population cannot demand that. One has only to remember what
    our heroes were deprived of in Stalingrad * * *. We definitely
    did not come here to give out manna; we have come here to create
    the basis for Victory.” (_T-86._)

He was only repeating what had been said by Hitler, Himmler, Goering,
and Milch, in varying forms. The defendant claims that he did not
literally mean the blood and thunder declarations admittedly authored by
him, and that phase of the case will be discussed in detail later. But
underlings who heard these wild, inflammatory utterances did not know
that Milch was only barking, if in fact we are to assume that his
ferocious words were only purposeless growlings. The men in the field
did not stop at words, because they were in a position to act and did
act—directly on the people. Koch was not voicing a concept original
with him when he said in that same speech—

    “We are a master race which must remember that the lowliest
    German worker is racially and biologically a thousand times more
    valuable than the population here.” (_T-86._)

Unfortunately, however, his utterances were not confined to rhetoric,
but being in a position to put them into flesh and blood effect, he did
so.

Quotations from documents furnishing further proof of involuntary
foreign labor in Germany are too numerous to repeat in the judgment.
Reference, however, will be made to but one more before proceeding to
the next item for discussion. In the recruitment of 1 million workers
demanded in the Ukraine, SS Major Christensen, in charge of operations,
declared that whatever harsh treatment was required should be
controlled. He thus orders that in arresting communist functionaries it
is no longer necessary to arrest all the close relatives of a member of
the communist party. He decrees further that in searching for workers
“when it becomes necessary to burn down a village, the whole population
will be put at the disposal of the commissioner by force.” (_T-129._)

This is regarded as a concession, and then comes what must be classified
as the most heart-rending utterance which has come out of this war—

    “_As a rule, no more children will be shot._”

Not an out-and-out prohibition against shooting children; not that more
care should be exercised in the handling of children; but only a
general, vague suggestion that this SS battalion of murderers must not
fire at children on sight just as one might mow down sparrows or
rabbits. However, if the situation requires, then of course, children
will be shot with everybody else, for the order goes on to say, “Slavs
will interpret all soft treatment on our part as weakness.” “The most
important thing,” the directive concludes, “is the recruitment of
workers.” (_T-129-130._)

                        (b) Treatment of Workers

On 20 April 1942, Fritz Sauckel announced his labor mobilization program
which contained the one supremely cruel proposition regarding treatment
of foreign workers—

    “All the men must be fed, sheltered, and treated in such a way
    as to exploit them to the highest possible extent at the lowest
    conceivable degree of expenditure.” (_T-58._)

After the announcement of this inhuman decree of maximum work with
minimum sustenance, Sauckel followed with—

    “It has always been natural for us Germans to refrain from
    cruelty and mean chicaneries towards the beaten enemy, even if
    he has proved himself the most bestial and most implacable
    adversary, and to treat him correctly and humanly, even when we
    expect useful work of him.” (_T-58-59._)

It can be imagined with what kindness an underling of Sauckel’s would
treat a worker whom Sauckel has already characterized as a “bestial and
most implacable adversary”.

As a result of the minimum sustenance directive it is not difficult to
understand the report of a Dr. Hupe who stated—

    “During the last few days we have established that the food for
    the Russians employed here is so miserable that the people are
    getting weaker from day to day. Investigations showed that
    single Russians are not able to place a piece of metal for
    turning into position, for instance, because of lack of physical
    strength. The same conditions exist at all places of work where
    Russians are employed.” (_T-55._)

Wilhelm Jager, senior camp director at the Krupp Works, reported that
diet prescribed for eastern workers was 1,000 calories less per day than
the minimum prescribed for any Germans. Further, that while German heavy
workers received 5,000 calories a day, eastern workers in comparable
jobs received only 2,000 calories. Such meat as was allowed the foreign
workers was that which had been “rejected by the veterinary, such as
horse meat or tuberculin infested”. (_T-103._) The clothing allowed the
eastern workers was likewise entirely inadequate. They had no overcoats
and, because of the shortage of shoes, many were forced to go to work
barefoot even in winter. In the work camps tuberculosis was widespread
among the eastern workers, caused by bad housing, insufficient and poor
food, overwork and insufficient rest—

    “These workers were likewise afflicted with spotted fever. Lice,
    the carrier of this disease, together with countless fleas,
    bugs, and other vermin tortured the inhabitants of these camps.
    As a result of the filthy conditions of the camps nearly all
    eastern workers were afflicted with skin disease. The shortage
    of food also caused many cases of Hunher-Oedem, Nephritis, and
    Shighakruse.” (_T-103._)

These conditions became infinitely worse, of course, during the time of
air raids—

    “The French prisoner-of-war camp in Nogerratstrasse had been
    destroyed in an air raid attack and its inhabitants were kept
    for nearly half a year in dog kennels, urinals, and in old
    baking houses. The dog kennels were three feet high, nine feet
    long, and six feet wide. Five men slept in each of them. The
    prisoners had to crawl into these kennels on all fours.”
    (_T-105._)

A Dr. Stinnesbeck reports on 12 June 1944—

    “The PW camp at Nogerratstrasse was in most deplorable
    condition. The people live in ashcans, doghouses, old baking
    stoves, and self-made huts.” (_T-106._)

Visiting camp Humboldtstrasse, Dr. Stinnesbeck found 600 Jewish women
who worked at the Krupp factory. They suffered from festering wounds and
other diseases. They had no shoes and went about in their bare feet!

    “The sole clothing of each consisted of a sack with holes for
    their arms and head. Their hair was shorn. The camp was
    surrounded by barbed wire and closely guarded by SS guards.”
    (_T-106._)

Concentration camp inmates were made to work, to which there can be no
objection on the grounds of inhumanity. In fact, some useful toil is
preferable to idleness in prison. But camp commanders were instructed
that the “employment must be, in the true meaning of the word,
exhaustive, in order to obtain the greatest measure of performance.”
(_T-61._)

    “There is no limit to working hours. Their duration depends on
    the kind of working establishments in the camps and the kind of
    work to be done. They are fixed by the camp commanders alone.”
    (_T-62._)

Certain “antisocial elements” were by special order “to be worked to
death”. In the literal Gestapo language “death” was never used
rhetorically or figuratively. Those who were to be killed through work
were listed as “under protective arrest”. This included Jews, gypsies,
Russians, and Ukrainians; Poles with more than three-year sentences;
Czechs and Germans with more than eight-year sentences. (_T-63._)

In these work camps frequently children of tender age were forced to
toil.

    “An indication of the awful conditions this may lead to is given
    by the fact that in the camps for eastern workers, camp for
    eastern workers ‘Waldlust’, Post Office Lauf, Pegnitz, there are
    cases of eight-year old, delicate and undernourished children
    put to forced labor and perishing from such treatment.”
    (_T-99._)

Those who were imported for farm work fared no better than their factory
brothers. A directive issued by the Ministry of Finance and Economy at
Baden on the control of Polish farm workers in Stuttgart and Baden
directed that farm workers were to be quartered in stables, and the
employer was urged that “no remorse should restrict such action.”
(_T-47._) “Fundamentally”, this extraordinary document proclaims, “farm
workers of Polish nationality no longer have the right to complain, and
thus no complaints may be accepted any more by any official agency.”
(_T-46._)

To deprive a human being of the right to complain is in effect to
classify him lower than an animal because even a beast of burden is
privileged to announce his objections to harsh and cruel treatment. Nor
were the Polish workers permitted the consolation and comfort in
adversity which religion affords. “The visiting of churches, regardless
of faith, is strictly prohibited.” The edict of the Ministry of Finance
said further that this prohibition against attendance at churches even
excluded the visiting of churches when no service was in progress. The
visiting of theatres, motion picture shows, or other cultural
entertainment also was prohibited. (_T-46._)

    “Gathering of farm workers of Polish nationality after work is
    prohibited, whether it is on other farms, in the stables, or in
    the living quarters of the Poles. The use of railroads, buses,
    or other public conveyances by farm workers of Polish
    nationality is prohibited.” (_T-47._)

The difference between slave labor of this type and outright slavery is
a margin faint and indistinguishable. There was no limit to the hours of
work, and the employer was invested with the right, bestially inherent
in the proprietorship of slave owners, to inflict corporal punishment on
the worker “_if_ instruction and good words failed”. Nor was there any
one to determine whether good words had failed because the “employer may
not be held accountable in any such cases by an official agency.”
(_T-47._)

Heinrich Himmler took a very active part in the slave labor program.
Concerning commitment of manpower from the East, he laid down strict
rules which, if violated, brought severe punishment. He decreed that—

    “In severe cases, that is in such cases where the measures at
    the disposal of the leader of the guard do not suffice, the
    state police office has to act with its means. Accordingly, they
    will be treated, as a rule, only with strict measure, that is
    with transfer to a concentration camp or with special
    treatment.” (_T-53._)

We learn further on in the directive that the “special treatment” so
casually referred to as if it were some slight deprivation of comfort or
convenience means nothing less than hanging!

    “Special treatment is hanging. Hanging should not take place in
    the immediate vicinity of the camp. A certain number of the
    manpower from the original Soviet Russian territory should
    attend the special treatment; at that time they are to be warned
    about the circumstances which led to this special treatment.”
    (_T-53._)

If workers sought to escape, search measures were to be decreed locally,
and when caught the fugitive must receive special treatment. (_T-54._)

Heinrich Himmler was one of the most relentless pursuers of slave labor,
as, of course, he was the most notorious executant of all that was
inhuman, indecent, cruel, and vulgar in the entire Nazi program. Himmler
does not defy description, he invites it. He stands out in the whole
hideous camp of Hitler barbarians as the most savage of them all. A
fiend in human shape, a monster in the clothing of man; there is no wild
beast, bound only by jungle code, which, in point of honor, was not his
superior; there is no slimy, maggoty larva, wriggling in the stagnancy
and stench of the foulest cesspool which could be regarded his inferior.
His creed was murder, his religion massacre, his belief kidnapping, his
faith treachery, and his dogma oppression in every form. Only one thing
mattered and that was German blood—

    “What happens to a Russian, to a Czech, does not interest me in
    the slightest. What the nation can offer in the way of good
    blood of our type, we will take, if necessary by kidnapping
    their children and raising them here with us. Whether nations
    live in prosperity or starve to death interests me only insofar
    as we need them as slaves for our Kultur; otherwise, it is of no
    interest to me. Whether 10,000 Russian females fall down from
    exhaustion while digging an antitank ditch interests me only
    insofar as the antitank ditch for Germany is finished * * *.
    When somebody comes to me and says, ‘I cannot dig the antitank
    ditch with women and children, it is inhuman, for it would kill
    them,’ then I have to say, ‘You are a murderer of your own blood
    because if the antitank ditch is not dug, German soldiers will
    die, and they are sons of German mothers. They are our own
    blood.’ That is what I want to instill into this SS and what I
    believe I have instilled into them as one of the most sacred
    laws of the future. Our concern, our duty, is our people and our
    blood. It is for them that we must provide and plan, work and
    fight, nothing else. We can be indifferent to everything else.”
    (_T-145._)

When hundreds of thousands of Russian prisoners of war died from
exhaustion and hunger, his regret was not that they died, but that it
was deplorable “by reason of the loss of labor.” (_T-144._)

The defense in this case denied that foreign workers and prisoners of
war were maltreated, and produced some evidence to dispute the
prosecution’s contentions in this regard, we quote from the affidavit of
one Albin Schirmer, a resident of Nuernberg—

    “From the year 1929 onwards, I was employed by the Hercules
    Works, Ltd. at Nuernberg (Nuernberger Herkuleswerke G.m.b.H.),
    and worked there in the capacity of foreman throughout the war.
    The necessary workers were requested by the firm from the Labor
    Office. The Labor Office allocated French prisoners of war, free
    French, and Czech workers to the firm. The free foreign workers,
    who also cooperated in executing the commissions of the
    Luftwaffe, were treated in every respect in exactly the same way
    as the German workers. Some lived in furnished rooms. Some lived
    in a camp as it was cheaper there. Working hours, wages, ration
    cards, and the supplementary ration cards for workers, whose
    hours were long, were the same as for any German. Equally,
    freedom of movement during leisure hours, permission to attend
    theaters, churches, and cinemas, the protection of the Labor
    Front and of strength-through-joy, permission to visit public
    houses and German families were available to free foreign
    workers as well as to German workers. Intercourse with German
    girls was also permitted to free foreign workers. This, however,
    did not apply to prisoners of war. The sanitary installations of
    the firm were good, and were available for the use of foreign
    workers, as well as of the German workers. The prisoners of war
    had fixed times for taking showers whereas the free foreign
    workers had their showers at the same time as the Germans. The
    free French workers were allowed free postal communication with
    France, and they also went there on leave. I know of only two
    cases in which free French workers did not return from their
    leave in France.

    Many French prisoners of war volunteered as free workers, in
    order to be eligible for the resultant advantages. Even the
    prisoners of war had beer sent to them every day.

    During air raids, the free foreign workers played their part
    with devotion, a thing which they would certainly not have done
    if they had not considered that they were well-treated.

    After the arrival of the American troops most of the French
    workers said good-by to me in a friendly fashion, shaking hands
    with me, and wishing me luck. The female workers from the
    Ukraine too liked it here according to their statements.”

Why should one doubt that in the vast German workshop which employed a
score of millions, here and there some foreign workers were not abused
but in the long run fared well? It would need to be someone wearing
spectacles of pitch and groping in a Cimmerian night of prejudice and
pique to assert that the German people are incapable of hospitality and
generosity. The very fact that there were concentration camps in the
land attests to the fact that not everybody accepted Hitler’s and
Himmler’s crackpot master race ideology. However, even accepting Albin
Schirmer’s affidavit at face value, it is but one little flower in a
jungle of evidence establishing that only a very few foreign workers
were so fortunate as to be showered with the care and comforts and
allowed to revel and luxuriate in the liberties vouchsafed those who
were so lucky as to be employed in the Hercules Works, Limited, at
Nuernberg.

As against this idyllic picture of happiness in a powder plant or
strength-through-joy in Nuernberg, there is recalled the image of the
last witness at this trial. He also was a German, Joseph Krysiak, and he
too worked in a war factory. In December 1940, he remarked in a
conversation to some friends that if America entered the European
conflict, Germany could not win. The ubiquitous Gestapo learned of his
observation and he was committed to a concentration camp, from which he
went daily to work at the Me [ssersmitt] 109 plant at Gusen I. His
living conditions were a trifle less felicitous than those described by
Schirmer. Krysiak worked twelve hours a day, he had coffee for
breakfast, watery soup for lunch, and at night seven men shared a loaf
of bread. If he did not reach the quota of work assigned him for the
day, he was beaten. Later he was sent to another factory, and of working
conditions there he said—

    “We were working at Saint George, Gusen II, for twelve hours.
    Also, the transport to and from work and back to this camp
    occupied two to three hours as well, so that these people
    altogether had only four to five hours sleep under the worst
    imaginable conditions. Four people had to sleep in one bed.

    “Q. Did you work seven days a week?

    “A. Yes, and the day and night shift, and Sundays, too.”
    (_T-2366._)

When asked what effect these conditions had on the health of the
workers, he replied—

    “The most dreadful effect, the majority died in Mauthausen and
    Gusen II. It was a rule no one was released, but transports
    which were filled were where detainees would die.”

And as to his own particular condition, he stated—

    “All I can say now is that I suffer from TB and I am medically
    being treated, and this is what those five years did to me.

    “Q. What was your condition before going to the concentration
    camp?

    “A. I was active in sports, and I was a long distance runner. I
    can say my lungs were not blemished at all.”

The shattering of this man’s health is perhaps only a small part of the
disaster which has befallen him. From the witness stand he gave the
impression of one who had been spiritually crushed by his five years’
ordeal. His voice faltered, his shoulders drooped, his eyes looked out
into distance. He was alive, but something within him had perished.
Perhaps he reflected on the tragedy that this awful thing which had
happened to him had been inflicted by his own countrymen, not for
opposing his country but for speaking a truth which, if listened to,
could have averted not only his own ruin but the misery of millions of
his brethren.

                          II. PRISONERS OF WAR

Article 31 of the Geneva Convention provides—

    “Work done by prisoners of war shall have no direct connection
    with the operations of the war. In particular it is forbidden to
    employ prisoners in the manufacture or transport of arms or
    munitions of any kind, or on the transport of material destined
    for the combatant units.”

The Hague Convention of 1907, Article 6 provides—

    “The State may utilize the labor of prisoners of war according
    to their rank and aptitude, officers excepted. The tasks shall
    not be excessive and shall have no connection with the
    operations of the war.” (_T-155._)

These prohibitions on the use of prisoners of war were flagrantly
violated by the Germans in World War II. On 7 November 1941, Hermann
Goering, speaking at the meeting in the Reich Ministry of Air, already
referred to, declared that “it would be ideal if entire factories could
be manned by Russian prisoners of war.” (_T-52._) Then, insofar as
feeding these prisoners was concerned the notes of the speech report:
“Food is a matter of the Four Year Plan. Supply their own food (cats,
horses, etc.).” (_T-52._)

On 20 April 1942, Fritz Sauckel, Plenipotentiary General for Labor
Mobilization, proclaimed that—

    “All prisoners of war, from the territories of the West as well
    as of the East, actually in Germany, must be completely
    incorporated into the German armament and nutrition industries.”
    (_T-58._)

On 26 August 1941, the Reich Labor Ministry directed the presidents of
the Regional Labor Offices as follows:

    “Upon personal order of the Reich Marshal, 100,000 men are to be
    taken from among the French prisoners of war not yet employed in
    armament industry, and are to be assigned to the armament
    industry (airplane industry). Gaps in manpower supply resulting
    therefrom will be filled by Soviet prisoners of war. The
    transfer of the above-named French prisoners of war can be
    utilized only in quite large concentrated groups under the
    well-known tougher employment conditions.” (_T-49-50._)

In a discussion with Sauckel, the defendant, and others on the subject
of manpower available for the armament industry, Goering stated on 28
October 1943, that out of 2,200,000 in armament production, 770,000 were
prisoners of war. (_T-2093._)

On 14 April 1943, Sauckel reported to Hitler that “1,622,829 prisoners
of war are employed in the German economy.” (_T-90._)

Noting that the utilization of prisoners of war in the war program was a
very profitable enterprise for the Reich, Goering regretted that any had
ever been released. However, it was a mistake easily rectified.

    “I should like to see that the prisoners of war who have been
    released, Norwegians and so forth, be taken again. Insofar as
    officers are concerned, this has been done to a certain extent.
    It was the greatest nonsense ever committed by us and for which
    nobody thanks us. We have made prisoners of entire armies and we
    let them go again. We do not get anything from Norway.”
    (_T-2096._)

At a Jaegerstab meeting on 19 June 1944, it developed that 300 American
prisoners of war were assigned to work at the Dornier airplane factory
at Oberpfaffenhofen, but with good Yankee obstinacy, knowing their
rights, they refused to work. Lange, of the Speer Ministry, complaining
about this said—

    “They simply sat down, drank coffee, and ate corned beef, and
    could not be persuaded to work in spite of threats of shooting.
    Now, the question has been asked if we should not start a
    shooting action.” (_T-2102._)

And the only reason they were not shot is that the Fuehrer feared
reprisals.

         III. PARTICIPATION OF MILCH IN THE SLAVE LABOR PROGRAM

It was not contended by the prosecution at the trial that the defendant
was aware, nor would it have been physically possible for him to have
had knowledge, of all the excesses, inhumanities, and illegalities
encompassed in the far-flung slave labor program which spread its
cruelties into practically every part of Europe. However, its very
bigness and the great production power which it generated in every
department of the German war plant negates the defendant’s position that
he was utterly ignorant of its existence. This opinion has gone to some
length in pointing out the numbers involved in the compulsory work
program, and the heinousness of some of its operations, and has quoted
from official decrees promulgated in its unfoldment, not only for the
purpose of demonstrating the basis for condemning the whole illegal
enterprise, but also for the purpose of laying the foundation for
consideration of Milch’s responsibility in this phase of German war
guilt.

On 23 May 1939, Hitler outlined his plans for war to his fourteen most
trusted and important military chieftains. Milch attended that then
secret, and now notorious, conference. Hitler there said, “The
population of non-German areas will perform no military service and will
be available as source of labor.” (_T-37._) This statement is taken from
the memorandum made by adjutant Lieutenant Colonel Schmundt, who was
present and preserved a drastically condensed record of the speech for
the Reich files. The accuracy of the Schmundt record was attacked in the
IMT trial and came under fire here. The defendant goes so far as to
conjecture that the Schmundt statement was prepared months, perhaps even
a year, after Hitler’s speech, and was intended to demonstrate Hitler’s
uncanny and possibly supernatural powers of prophecy by the undeniably
sure method of writing up the prophecy subsequent to the happening of
the event predicted. The memorandum obviously is not definitely precise
because it consists of only ten pages whereas the speech lasted four and
one-half hours. As the memorandum manifestly cannot be complete, neither
can human recollection (unaided by notes) be infallible. Milch, who made
no notes at all, testified that labor was not mentioned in the speech,
but Admiral Schniewind, also present, and who testified in court, stated
that he did not exclude the possibility that labor was discussed.
(_T-1326._)

In any event, whether Hitler did or did not mention labor in his
utterances of that day is not so important as it is that Milch was
present when Hitler made crystal clear his intentions to attack Poland,
and, if it became necessary or expedient, to fight other countries as
well, with the inevitable subjugation of the conquered peoples. Slave
labor was an inescapable concomitant of the type of total war Hitler
intended to wage, and the character of which Milch could not fail to
appreciate.

As a field marshal in the German Reich, Milch could not ignore the
existence of Sauckel’s proclamation on 20 April 1942 that “the raw
materials as well as the fertility of the conquered territories and
their human labor power are to be used completely and conscientiously to
the profit of Germany and her allies.” (_T-57._)

But in the evaluation of Milch’s criminal responsibility for Germany’s
use of slave labor something more is needed in a court of law than
presumptions of his assumed general knowledge of what was taking place.
It must be established that he, himself, participated in the slave labor
enterprises, or knowing that such illegal practices were being
committed, he, having the power to do so, made no effort to curb or halt
them. The prosecution contends that the defendant, as a member of the
Central Planning Board and of the Jaegerstab, and as
Generalluftzeugmeister (Aircraft Master General), was thoroughly
cognizant of Sauckel’s program and that he, Milch, actively participated
in slave labor practices.

                       (a) Central Planning Board

The Central Planning Board was made up of three members, Speer, Milch,
and Koerner, each having equal authority, although, as it developed,
Speer and Milch dominated the proceedings. The function of the Central
Planning Board in the main was the distribution and allocation of raw
materials necessary for the entire conduct of the German war economy,
the planning of intended construction or enlargement, and the
systematization of transportation industry independent of the shortage
of raw materials. During the war this Board had 60 meetings and much
time was given to consideration of the manpower problem confronting the
various departments in the huge German war workshop. Sauckel often
appeared before the Central Planning Board to report on the foreign
labor situation. Various other officials came before the Board to
express their needs in connection with foreign workers. Milch often
presided at these meetings. He was absent on several occasions but all
quotations from the minutes of the Central Planning Board meetings,
cited in this opinion, are from meetings where he was present, and he is
therefore chargeable with knowledge of their contents.

Wehrmacht representatives were often in attendance at the Central
Planning Board meetings, and on 25 July 1944, Field Marshal von Kluge,
Commander in Chief West, issued an order on labor recruitment—

    “As the only limitation, the Fuehrer has ordered that no
    forcible means shall be employed against the population in the
    actual combat area as long as it shows itself prepared to assist
    the German Armed Forces. However, recruiting of volunteers from
    among refugees from the combat zone is to be carried out
    vigorously. Moreover, every means is justified to seize as much
    labor as possible, apart from the powers granted to the armed
    forces.” (_T-271._)

It will be noted that the Fuehrer orders that forcible means shall not
be used if the population assists. This is comparable to saying that the
armed robber is thoroughly peaceful in his intentions because he will
not shoot if the victim surrenders his valuables voluntarily.

The proof in this case that foreign workers were brought into Germany
against their will generally does not come from them, but almost
exclusively from their abductors. At one of the meetings of the Central
Planning Board, Mr. Timm, representing the Plenipotentiary General for
Labor, reports that they are encountering resistance to recruitment—

    “In all countries we have to change over more or less to
    registering the men by age groups and to conscripting them in
    age groups. They do appear for registering as such, but as soon
    as transport is available, they do not come back so that the
    dispatch of the men has become more or less a question for the
    police. Especially in Poland the situation at the moment is
    extraordinarily serious. It is well known that vehement battles
    occurred just because of these actions.” (_T-197-198._)

The word “recruitment” will be used in this opinion not in its literal
sense of voluntary enlistment, but in the broad sense of both voluntary
and involuntary gathering up of workers.

It is the contention of the defense that Milch had nothing to do with
the actual recruitment. It is, of course, true that he did not go into
France, Italy, Hungary, Russia, and other countries, to physically rope
the workers and drag them into Germany, but is the guilt any less if one
sits back in his office and signs the order which casts the uncoiling
rope for the far-reaching lasso?

Goering, in an interrogation conducted 6 September 1946, stated that
after the death of Udet it was Milch, as Chief of Supply for the air
forces, who put forward the needs of the Luftwaffe for workers. The
requests were forwarded to Speer, and Speer would ask Sauckel for the
workers for the entire armament branch. Sauckel, on 24 September 1946,
made a very important declaration in an affidavit on the part Milch
played in the matter of obtaining workers—

    “Milch produced the figures for aviation. The same was done by
    Speer in his sphere of activity. Speer and Milch, however, also
    exerted influence on the allocation of workers. How far this
    came within their capacity as members of the Central Planning
    Board I cannot say; in any case they did this in their
    ministerial capacity.” (_T-281._)

Thus, if Milch knew how workers were actually being recruited, how they
were being transported, and to what they were being transported, he
cannot claim exoneration in the assertion that he did not take them in
hand personally. And, if this knowledge is established, then he, when he
asked for workers, was, in effect, consigning foreign workers to the
suffering and torture of which he had cognizance. Behind each
requisition for foreign labor there shone the inevitable backdrop of the
lurid scenes of labor camps with their “special treatment,” disease,
vermin, starvation, whipping, illness, and death.

On 8 April 1943, Milch wrote Sauckel and Goering, announcing that in
certain sections he had proclaimed an 84-hour week in the air force
industry. (_T-196._) The defendant has explained that this applied only
to those engaged in guard work. Witness Krysiak testified that he worked
84 hours a week.

At the 1 March 1944 meeting of the Central Planning Board, Sauckel
particularly addressed himself to Milch who was presiding, and said—

    “Thereupon I even proceeded to employ and train a whole batch of
    French male and female agents who for good pay, just as was done
    in olden times for ‘shanghaiing’, went hunting men and made them
    drunk by using liquor as well as words, in order to dispatch
    them to Germany.” (_T-228._)

As evidence that he was encountering difficulty in obtaining foreign
workers, Sauckel pointed out that several dozen of his very able labor
executive officers were shot. (_T-228._) In France he wrung from Laval
the concession “that the death penalty be threatened for officials who
tried to sabotage the labor supply.” And then he adds that “if the
Frenchmen despite all their promises do not act, then we Germans must
make an example of one case, and by reason of this law, if necessary put
Prefect or Burgomaster against the wall.” (_T-232._)

It is a long speech which Sauckel makes, and then Milch replies,
analyzing in his turn the foreign labor question. He complains bitterly
that more men have not been called up from France—

    “Four whole age groups have grown up in France; men between 18
    and 23 years of age, who are therefore at that age when young
    people moved by patriotism or seduced by other people are ready
    to do anything which satisfies their personal hatred against
    us—and of course they hate us. These men ought to have been
    called up in age groups and dispatched to Germany; for they
    present the greatest danger which threatens us in case of
    invasion.” (_T-236._)

    “If one had shown the mailed fist and a clear executive
    intention, a churchyard peace would reign in the rear of the
    front at the moment the uproar starts. This I have emphasized so
    frequently, but still nothing is happening, I am afraid.”
    (_T-237._)

When Sauckel complains about the trouble he is having in getting workers
from Italy, Milch recommends—

    “We could take under German administration the entire food
    supply for the Italians and tell them, only he gets any food who
    either works in a protected factory or goes to Germany.”
    (_T-240-241._)

When on another occasion one Kehrl declared that it would be difficult
to control the food situation in France because food was delivered by
parcel post, Milch made the extraordinary pronouncement, “I personally
as military commander would confiscate all goods sent by parcel post.”
(_T-295._)

The Tribunal has not been shown any statement wherein the defendant
advocated that foreign workers be induced to come to Germany by offering
them good wages, good working conditions, pensions, security, and the
usual attractions held out to prospective employees. When he speaks on
the importation of foreign workers it is invariably in an aggressive and
domineering manner. At the 54th meeting of the Central Planning Board,
held on 1 March 1944, he explained that force had to be exercised
because there was nothing to attract the workers to Germany since they
believed that Germany would soon be defeated, and furthermore they were
attached to their families and their own countries. A very cogent
observation indeed.

Speaking on the French situation, he said—

    “Even if Bichelonne and Laval have the best intentions there
    will be resistance from the mayors, the gendarmes, and the
    prefects, just because these people are afraid that firstly,
    they will be called to account afterwards for this affair, and
    secondly, because of their national point of view, which makes
    them say, ‘We must not work for the enemy of our country.’
    Therefore I would like to have an authority in our
    administration which would force these people to do it, because
    then the French could say, ‘If you force us, we will do it, but
    voluntarily we will not do it.’ The same applies to Italy.”
    (_T-292-293._)

Once the transportation of workers got under way it was not always
certain that they would all arrive. Aside from the unsanitary conditions
under which they travelled, frequently without food and in the
wintertime without heat, many in desperation escaped. To offset these
defections en route, Milch recommended—

    “If a transport has left a town and has not arrived, 500 to 600
    persons from this place must be arrested and sent to Germany as
    prisoners of war.” (_T-294._)

The defense has asserted many times that the foreign workers were not
all treated as badly as the prosecution’s evidence might indicate. It is
unquestionably true that not all foreign workers were starved and
tortured, because if this were so they could not have worked at all, and
the German war machine would have ground to a stop long before the
spring of 1945. Thus, there is no reason to disbelieve the statement
made at one of the Central Planning Board meetings—

    “The performance of the Soviet Russians so employed is to be
    raised by a premium system. For this purpose, the ban on pay
    restrictions is to be lifted and the manager be allowed to
    distribute among the workmen, according to his duty and
    discretion, RM 1 per head per day as premium for particular
    services rendered. Furthermore, care will be taken, that workmen
    can exchange these premiums, which will be paid out in camp
    money for goods. It is intended to put at their disposal various
    provisions—beer, tobacco, cigarettes and cigars, small items
    for daily use, etc.” (_T-219._)

If the defendant has much to explain in this case it is principally
because of declarations made by himself. On 16 February 1944 at a
meeting of the Central Planning Board, he announced that the armament
industry employed foreign workmen to the extent of 40 percent, and that
in maximum production the foreign workers prevailed to the extent of 95
percent and higher. He said further that the Germans’ best new engine
was made 88 percent by Russian prisoners of war and the other 12 percent
by German men and women. “Only 6 to 8 German men are working on this
machine. The rest are Ukrainian women who have beaten all the records of
trained workers.” And yet, despite this apparently creditable
performance on the part of foreign workers, he complains bitterly—

    “The list of the shirkers should be entrusted to Himmler’s
    trustworthy hands who will make them work all right. This is
    very important for educating people and has also a deterrent
    effect on such others who would likewise feel inclined to
    shirk.” (_T-223._)

When Milch recommends entrusting anyone to Himmler’s “trustworthy
hands”, the world well knows how bloody and homicidal those hands were.

The charges of maltreatment of foreign workers leveled against Milch
could be taken almost literally from his own words—

    “It is, therefore, not possible to exploit fully all the
    foreigners unless we compel them by piece work or we have the
    possibility of taking measures against foreigners who are not
    doing their bit. But, if the foreman lays hands on a prisoner of
    war or smacks him there is at once a terrible row, the man is
    put into prison, etc. There are sufficient officials in Germany
    who think it their most important duty to stand up for human
    rights instead of war production. I am also for human rights.
    But if a Frenchman says, ‘You fellows will all be hanged and the
    chief of the factory will be beheaded first,’ and if then the
    chief says, ‘I am going to hit him’, then he is in a mess. He is
    not protected. I have told my engineers, ‘I am going to punish
    you if you don’t hit such a man; the more you do in this respect
    the more I shall praise you. I shall see to it that nothing
    happens to you.’ This is not yet sufficiently known. I cannot
    talk to all factory leaders. I should like to see the man who
    stays my arm because I can settle accounts with everybody who
    stays my arm. If the little factory leader does that he is put
    into a concentration camp and runs the risk of losing the
    prisoners of war. In one case two Russian officers took off with
    an airplane but crashed. I ordered that these two men be hanged
    at once. They were hanged or shot yesterday. I left that to the
    SS. I expressed the wish to leave them hanged in the factory for
    the others to see.” (_T-223-224._)

On the stand Milch denied that he had anything to do with the fate of
the two Russian prisoners of war mentioned above. He further claimed
that his reference to this episode was made at another meeting (a GL
meeting), and that possibly the two stenographers got their notes
confused. The defense also introduced affidavits to the effect that
Milch was in no way implicated in this happening and that if the two
Russians were executed, the execution was performed by shooting and not
by hanging. It is probably true that Milch did not order the hanging of
these men, but did author the remarks attributed to him because they are
in keeping with his many other admitted and proved statements.

Did Milch know that prisoners of war were being used in violation of
international convention, and the laws and customs of war?

On 6 March 1944, Milch, Speer, General Bodenschatz, and Colonel von
Below conferred with Hitler. Hitler was informed of the Reich Marshal’s
wishes for the further utilization of the production power of prisoners
of war, by giving the direction of the Stalags to the SS. The Fuehrer
considered the proposal good, and asked Colonel von Below to arrange
matters accordingly. (_R-124, p. 168._)

At the 42d meeting of the Central Planning Board, held on 23 June 1943,
the intensive discussion on labor needs seemed to settle on the use of
Russian prisoners of war as the solution to the problem. It was
recommended that the Fuehrer be advised that 200,000 Russian prisoners
of war, fit for the heaviest work, should be made available from the
Wehrmacht and Waffen SS through the intermediary of the Chiefs of the
Army Groups (_T-218._)

However, Milch’s participation in the illegal use of prisoners of war is
not confined to his knowledge that it was being done. At the meeting on
30 October 1942, Sauckel suggested that as soon as the army took
prisoners in operational territories they should be immediately turned
over to him as Plenipotentiary for Labor. Instead of objecting to this
procedure as contrary to international law, Milch added—

    “The correct thing to do would be to have all Stalags
    transferred to you by order of the Fuehrer. The Wehrmacht takes
    prisoners and as soon as it relinquishes them, the first
    delivery goes to your organization. Then everything will be in
    order.” (_T-176._)

Nothing can be more precise and definitive in international law than
that prisoners of war may not be compelled to fight against their own
country. But Milch treats this matter rather lightly at one of the
meetings of the Central Planning Board—

    “We have made a request for an order that a certain percentage
    of men in the antiaircraft artillery must be Russians. Fifty
    thousand will be taken altogether; 30,000 are already employed
    as gunners. This is an amusing thing that Russians must work the
    guns.” (_T-192._)

On this statement the defendant has various explanations. One, that the
German word which has been translated into “amusing”, should really have
been rendered “mad”. Thus, it is a mad thing to make Russian prisoners
work guns against their own allies. In support of this interpretation
Milch argues that since he needed these prisoners in his armament
program, he could not have approved their use as gunners. He then also
denies that they were in fact used as gunners, and if they were, he was
not responsible for the deed. But other witnesses called by the defense
clearly established that the Russian prisoners were stationed at the
guns, either for servicing the pieces, hauling ammunition to them, or
actually firing them. It is clear that the Russian prisoners were
utilized at the guns and that this type of use of prisoners of war
represents an extreme violation of the laws and customs of war.

It has been argued by the defense that since Russia had denounced
adherence to the Geneva Convention, Germany was not compelled to treat
Russian prisoners with the limitations laid down in that convention.
German Admiral Canaris on 15 September 1941, in a memorandum of counsel
to the German High Command, declared that despite Russia’s attitude on
the Geneva Convention her prisoners were yet entitled to immunities
guaranteed under the rules and customs of war—

    “The Geneva Convention for the treatment of prisoners of war is
    not binding in the relationship between Germany and the U.S.S.R.
    Therefore, only the principles of general international law on
    the treatment of prisoners of war apply. Since the 18th century
    these have gradually been established along the lines that war
    captivity is neither revenge nor punishment, but solely
    protective custody, the only purpose of which is to prevent the
    prisoners of war from further participation in the war. This
    principle was developed in accordance with the view held by all
    armies that it is contrary to military tradition to kill or
    injure helpless people * * *. The decrees for the treatment of
    Soviet prisoners of war enclosed are based on a fundamentally
    different viewpoint.” (_IMT 222._)

Admiral Canaris’ position was entirely correct and in accordance with
accepted international law. In the episode of the Russian gunners
adverted to by Milch, he could not help but know the physical facts and
could not escape being aware that such use of prisoners of war violated
international law. His responsibility here is unequivocal.

On 25 March 1944, the defendant complained that prisoners of war were
not being treated with sufficient severity—

    “If a decent foreman would sock one of those unruly guys because
    the fellow won’t work, then the situation would soon change.
    _International law cannot be observed here._ I have asserted
    myself very strongly, and with the help of Saur I have
    represented the point of view very strongly that the prisoners,
    with the exception of the English and the Americans, should be
    taken away from the military authorities. The soldiers are not
    in a position, as experience has shown, to cope with these
    fellows who know all the answers. I shall take very strict
    measures here and shall put such a prisoner of war before my
    court martial. If he has committed sabotage or refused to work,
    I will have him hanged, right in his own factory. I am convinced
    that that will not be without effect.” (_T-249._)

When a German field marshal, speaking to men subordinate in rank,
declares that “international law cannot be observed here”, it can only
mean to those under his command that in the execution of their duties,
international law should go overboard and, thus being unlimited in their
treatment of prisoners of war, the rights of the prisoners of war must
sink also.

Defense counsel insists that Milch had, as a matter of fact, a mild and
lenient disposition. Testimony was introduced to show that on several
occasions when he sat on courts martial, his judgments were tempered
with mercy. Note will be taken of this occasional yielding of an
apparently implacable and unyielding spirit, but one must also remark
the incongruity that one who, in his references to foreign workers and
prisoners of war, had constant harshness on his lips, could have
possessed in his make-up no harshness at all. In one of his speeches he
complains because the workers collapsed, and that they receive a
furlough of three or four days every eight weeks. This he calls “dirty
business of the first order, and treason to the country!” (_T-249._)

Then he adds—

    “I further ask for support by the Luftwaffe physicians. With all
    the rabble that we have among the foreign workers, there is of
    course a lot of shirking. At the moment the Russians—that is,
    the Russian prisoners of war—are feigning a lot of fatigue and
    illness. The incidence of sickness of one and a half to two
    percent which we have had up to now has at least doubled and in
    some factories it has been increased to eight, nine, and ten
    percent. That is, of course, done by previous agreement. There
    the official physicians, who have to be very strict, find out
    that it is not true, and then we return the fellows to work by
    means of the whip. Then the whip serves as a cure.” (_T-250._)

Recommending the employment of so merciless an instrument as a whip can
hardly be regarded as evidence of a mild disposition. Then he says—

    “Let everyone consider that if he does not do his duty, we do
    not ask whether there is a law; we ask only whether he is the
    responsible one and then we will seize him no matter who he is *
    * *. Please go wherever you are going and knock everybody down
    who blocks your way! We cover up everything here. We do not ask
    whether he is allowed to or whether he is not allowed to. For
    us, there is nothing but this one task. We are fanatics in this
    sphere. We do not even consider letting anything at all distract
    us from that task. No order exists which could prevent me from
    fulfilling this task.” (_T-251._)

Then comes the outburst which is an out and out defiance of all law—

    “Gentlemen, I know that not every subordinate can say, ‘For me,
    the law no longer exists,’ but he has to have someone who covers
    up for him, not out of cowardice. But if you act according to
    the spirit of the old field service regulation, ‘Abstaining from
    doing something hurts us more than erring in the choice of the
    means,’ and if, moreover, you keep in touch and immediately
    clarify difficult points, so that something can be done, then we
    are willing to accept the responsibility, whether this is the
    law or not. I see only two possibilities for me and for Germany.
    Either we succeed and thereby save Germany, or we continue these
    slipshod methods and then get the fate that we deserve. I prefer
    to fall while I am doing something that is against the rules but
    that is right and sensible, and be called to account for it, and
    if you like, hanged, rather than be hanged because Papa Stalin
    is here in Berlin, or the Englishmen. I have no desire for that.
    I would rather die in a different way. But I think we can
    accomplish this task, too. We are in the fifth year of war. I
    repeat, the decision will come during the next six weeks!”
    (_T-251-252._)

                             (b) Jaegerstab

We now come to a consideration of the Jaegerstab, formed on 1 March
1944, for the purpose of increasing production of fighter aircraft to
meet the incessant and ever increasingly effective bomber attacks of the
Americans and British which had seriously damaged the entire airplane
industry in Germany. Every airplane factory with the accessory workshops
had been hit at least three times. The Jaegerstab became essentially a
concentration of experts drawn from various ministries. Its programs
envisaged a decentralization of plane factories by transferring them in
part to above-surface localities and in part to subterranean localities.
Milch and Speer were joint chiefs of the Jaegerstab, and Karl Adolph
[Otto] Saur functioned as Chief of Staff. SS Obergruppenfuehrer Kammler
had supervision of the construction program. So far as this trial is
concerned, we are interested in the work of the Jaegerstab only to the
extent that it involves employment of foreign labor and prisoners of
war. Did the Jaegerstab employ labor prohibited under international law,
and if so, can Milch be held responsible for such illegal use?

In order to resolve this question we must review the documents submitted
in evidence.

On 6-7 April 1944, Milch and Saur reported to Hitler on the
achievements, up to that time, of the Jaegerstab and discussed with him
the plans for further construction on a second work project. Hitler
declared that he desired this project be set up in the Protectorate and,
at this point, the minutes read, “If it should prove impossible there
too to get hold of the necessary workers, the Fuehrer, himself, will
contact the Reichsfuehrer SS and will give an order that the required
100,000 men are to be made available by bringing in Jews from Hungary.”
(_T-318._) Here Milch is put directly on notice that forced labor is
being contemplated.

Fritz Schmelter, director of the Central Department for Employment and
Distribution of Labor, and because of that a member of the Jaegerstab,
declared in an affidavit on 9 December 1946, that Kammler utilized
concentration camp prisoners placed at his disposal by the SS in order
to carry out his share of the Jaegerstab construction program. Also,
that Xaver Dorsch of the Todt Organization used foreign workers, part of
whom were Hungarian Jews, to accomplish his part of the Jaegerstab
construction program. Then Schmelter states, “Milch, as one of the two
responsible chiefs of the Jaegerstab, personally directed, ordered or
approved decisions made in the interests of Jaegerstab undertakings.”
(_T-322._)

On 13 November 1946, Saur, Chief of Staff of the Jaegerstab, declared in
an interrogation that in the decentralization program Kammler divided 30
factories into 700 individual workshops, and that the workers used in
the project were concentration camp prisoners. (_T-323._)

Speer, in an interrogation made shortly after his capture, declared that
Hungarian Jews were used in the building program. (_T-325._)

At one of the Jaegerstab meetings, presided over by Milch,
Stobbe-Dethleffsen, in discussing the matter of labor needed for the
Jaegerstab program, requests a few German key personnel to supervise the
concentration camp inmates “with the other _subjugated people_.”
(_T-328._)

At a Jaegerstab meeting on 6 March 1944, a Sturmbannfuehrer of the SS
declared he had 5,000 prisoners in readiness for work, but needed 750
guard personnel. To this statement Milch commented, “We must distribute
our German people as key personnel. That is, out of three construction
companies we can probably make ten complete ones by introducing 70
percent foreigners.” (_T-331._)

At a meeting on 2 May 1944, Kammler, in Milch’s presence declares he had
30 men hanged—

    “As usual it is because the people have noticed that they are no
    longer treated severely enough. I had 30 people hanged as a
    special measure. Since they were hanged, everything has been to
    some extent in order again. It is the same old story, whenever
    people notice that they are not being treated so severely as
    before, they take all sorts of liberties. It is not surprising
    that a normal soldier, standing guard on people who were
    previously always harmless, does not suspect anything of the
    kind. They are not, however, harmless people.” (_T-333-34._)

The minutes of the meeting do not indicate that Milch in any way
protested Kammler’s deeds and utterance, although at the trial he
doubted that Kammler had actually hanged 30 people as he had stated.

Although Milch was not present at the meeting on 25 May 1944 of the
Jaegerstab, he approved the minutes of that meeting which revealed a
discussion among Schmelter (labor expert for Jaegerstab), Schlempp
(deputy of Jaegerstab) and Lange, in charge of machinery for Jaegerstab.

Schmelter said—

    “The Hungarian Jews are expected now, and they will require some
    kind of key personnel. Altogether I need about 250,000
    construction workers for the large bunkers and for Schlett’s
    installations.” (_T-334._)

To this Lange remarked—

    “You can get them all in Hungary. There are still Jews running
    about Budapest.” (_T-334._)

It is to be noted that Lange uses phraseology that one would employ in
speaking of dogs or other animals. There are still dogs running around
Budapest. There are still Jews running about Budapest.

At the meeting on 26 May 1944, Schmelter reported that two transports of
Hungarian Jews had arrived at the SS in Auschwitz, but that they
consisted primarily of children, women, and old men. Kammler then
declared that he had conscripted his own men by taking 50,000 people
into protective custody.

Schlempp, in outlining Dorsch’s needs for labor, states—

    “Dorsch said yesterday that he wanted to bring 100,000 Jews from
    Hungary, 500,000 Italians,[162] 10,000 men from bomb damage
    repair, also 1,000 from Waldbrohl; then he wanted to get
    something from Greiser’s zone by negotiation, then 4,000 Italian
    officers, 10,000 men from south Russia, and 20,000 from north
    Russia. That would be 220,000 altogether.” (_T-335-36._)

As early as 20 March 1944, we find Chief of Staff Saur asking Milch to
inform Sauckel that the group mobilization in Hungary must be placed
primarily at the disposal of the Jaegerstab. “Large, heavy labor
companies must be formed. The people have to be treated like the
prisoners. Otherwise it won’t work.” (_T-342._)

In the face of all these uncontradicted documents and stenographic
records of meetings, it would be fatuous for anyone to say that Milch
was unaware that forced labor and prisoners of war were being used in
the Jaegerstab construction program.

However, there is more than this passive evidence. Milch, himself,
contributes the positive evidence of his full knowledge of and
unrestrained participation in the Jaegerstab slave labor activities.

On 25 April 1944, he said—

    “It will only work if we put these workers into barracks. We
    cannot exactly treat them as prisoners. It must appear
    otherwise, but it must be so in practice. * * * I am personally
    convinced after talking to the Fuehrer that he will agree as
    soon as it is made reasonable. The people should not be able to
    mingle with the population and to conspire. Nor should they be
    allowed to run around free, so that they can cross the frontier
    every day. Both practices must be stopped. * * * I am of the
    opinion that that must be done at once. It’s all the same to me
    if individual people do object. Protest does not interest me at
    all, whether from the Chief of Prisoners of War Affairs or from
    our side. Kleber, would you be so good as to take care of this?”

    KLEBER: “As far as prisoners of war are concerned I can take
    care of it, but not where it concerns the air force. That must
    be handled separately.”

    MILCH: “Naturally. This must be handled by us. There was, in
    fact, another proposal but we do not want it. Otherwise someone
    else will come complaining.”

    KLEBER: “I should like to transfer the prisoners further off to
    Brunswick.”

    MILCH: “I think it is an excellent idea for the prisoners to go
    there if Brunswick continues to be attacked.” (_T-356-57._)

Article 9 of the Geneva Convention of 1929 provides—

    “No prisoner of war may be sent to an area where he would be
    exposed to the fire of the fighting zone.”

At the 4 May 1944 meeting, Saur reported that the Jaegerstab itself,
independent of Sauckel, had organized an expedition for the procuring of
workers in Italy. On 5 May 1944, Schmelter reported that the Jaegerstab
transport from Italy had been delayed because of the lack of guards,
whereupon the defendant said—

    “Is there someone at the escort detachment headquarters in Italy
    responsible for seeing that people do not get out and run away
    during the journey? That is what the escorting personnel is
    there for. Someone of standing? Dr. Wendt is responsible for the
    whole undertaking. I am of the opinion that, if anyone jumps
    out, he should be shot; otherwise a thousand will get on and
    only twenty will arrive there. The gendarmerie and all military
    posts must look out for those who abscond on the journey. They
    will be arrested at once and will appear before a court
    martial.” (_T-349-50._)

At a conference held on 22 February 1944, one Rautenbach says—

    “That refers to Wernigerode. In Solingen we had the best results
    with Frenchmen and the worst with Italians, meaning the Italian
    workers and not the prisoners of war. For that reason we do not
    employ any Italians here in Wernigerode. They are only 50 to 60
    percent efficient.” (_T-2180._)

And the defendant then remarks—

    “Could not the following be done; give the Italians in principle
    only half of their food rations, letting them earn the other
    half when they do their work well?” (_T-2181._)

It is obvious that, as one of the chiefs of the Jaegerstab, the
defendant actively, willingly, and knowingly countenanced, ordered, and
participated in slave labor practices and the use of prisoners of war in
activities prohibited by international law. Aside from his other
statements, the one made on 13 June 1944, where he advocates the
exportation from France of machinery and men would, in itself, be enough
to convict him of such participation.

    “We must write off these areas in France completely, and above
    all the factories which are situated further into the country
    towards the south and west. For when the invasion begins, the
    guarding neither of a stretch of land, nor of a line will be
    possible, nor will anything function because of sabotage * * *.
    No Frenchman will work when the invasion begins. I am of the
    opinion that the French should be brought over again by force,
    as prisoners.”

    SAUR: “I should prefer to do it sooner.”

    LANGE: “We have machines there too, in particular the presses.”

    MILCH: “Everything must come out; machines and men.” (_T-358._)

The Jaegerstab functioned from 1 March 1944 to 1 August 1944 and then it
expanded into the Ruestungsstab. When the Jaegerstab concluded its
efforts a report was made to the Fuehrer, which declared that Jaegerstab
had, in spite of air attacks, doubled its aircraft production.
(_T-360._)

                       (c) Generalluftzeugmeister

In his capacity as Generalluftzeugmeister, Milch held periodical
meetings and conferences in connection with the Luftwaffe armament
production. Labor, its procurement, disposition, and treatment, was
inevitably a subject for frequent discussion, and in these discussions
Milch portrayed himself an intransigent, implacable taskmaster,
uninhibited neither by law nor custom, and unrestrained by moderation or
regard for the helpless vanquished.

At one of these meetings on 5 May 1942, presided over by the defendant,
one Fridag reported—

    “The French become worse and worse. I threw out 80 of them who
    will be sent to concentration camps in Russia. They refused to
    work. The French say at 4 o’clock: ‘I won’t work another hour’,
    and you cannot make them work another hour. This happened four
    weeks ago all of a sudden when the first bombing attack on Paris
    took place, while before that the French were the best people.”
    (_T-2106._)

The fact that the bombardment of the beloved Paris of these Frenchmen
would naturally emotionally disturb them was not weighed or considered
by the defendant in spite of the fact that Frydag had reported that
prior to the bombardment they had been excellent workers. Implacable and
unyielding as some story book pagan god, the defendant turns to von
Gablenz, Chief of the Planning Office, and declares—

    “I demand if the people refuse to work they immediately be
    placed against the wall and shot before all the other workers.”
    (_T-2107._)

Further—

    “I ask you to get in touch with the Reich Fuehrer SS [Himmler]
    and to ask him to discuss the matter with the Fuehrer. Now is
    the right time; unless we do something effective now, the others
    will become bothersome. I ask that their being sent to
    concentration camps be taken into consideration too. I will tell
    you afterwards how you should act in such a matter.” (_T-2107._)

Later, on 7 July 1942, he indicated a willingness to try more peaceable
methods, but if they did not succeed, then—

    “I intend to fill the new Heinkel Plant in the East entirely
    with Frenchmen brought down there by force. If they don’t work
    in France, they may work as prisoners in Poland. After all, we
    have to remember that it is we and not the French who have won
    the war.” (_T-2116._)

On 28 July 1942 we find him again complaining about French production—

    “At the present time we receive six to nine planes from the
    French. I could well imagine that they would get out 45 for
    themselves. I shall close up the shop with a single stroke and
    have the workers and the machines come to Germany. If it does
    not work on a voluntary basis, then we do it by compulsory
    contracts. Perhaps I shall first give them a week to think it
    over. It is a fact that, on the whole, these people work in
    silent opposition. One cannot blame them for it either, it is
    true, but they should not have started the war.” (_T-2117._)

In this outburst we discover two strange utterances. One, “compulsory
contracts”, and the other the statement that the French started the war.
Since the word “contract” means a willing agreement between two or more
people, a “compulsory contract” is, of course, meaningless because one
cannot be forced into a contract. If there is any compulsion, then the
operation becomes a matter of outright coercion. With regard to the
French starting the war, the defendant had the grace to state during the
trial that he now knows that France did not initiate hostilities,
although he believed to the contrary at the time.

The defendant has declared repeatedly that he had no connection with, or
even knowledge of, concentration camps. He only visited one of them
(Dachau) in 1935. At the end of the war he was aware of the existence of
but two concentration camps, although 200 were flourishing in all their
ghastliness at the time. Yet despite this blissful ignorance of
concentration camps the phrase rippled easily from his tongue. At the
same meeting above-mentioned he stated that if two certain individuals,
Schneider and Bergen, “make difficulties” he would put them into a
concentration camp for the duration of the war (_T-2118._)

When one Petersen, on 30 November 1942, spoke of obtaining 500 men from
a concentration camp, Milch said, “For this purpose we should come to an
agreement with Himmler.” (_T-2148._)

On 27 April 1943, when one Stahms indicated that concentration camp
inmates are almost 3,000 strong, Milch declares that against a
withdrawal of 3,000 foreign workers from the Luftwaffe industry, he
attached importance to the assignment of these 3,000 concentration camp
inmates to the Luftwaffe. (_NOKW-413._)

At the GL meeting of 4 August 1942, someone reported that the French
might strike in the event of a British attack. This provoked Milch into
the thunderous outburst—

    “In such a case I would ask to be appointed military commander
    myself. I would band the workers together and have fifty percent
    of them shot; I would then publish this fact and compel the
    other fifty percent to work by beating if necessary. If they
    don’t work, then they, too, will be shot. I would get the
    necessary replacement somehow. But I hope the military commander
    will do his duty. I’m not worried about it. The word ‘strike’
    must never be used. For us there is only ‘living or dying’ but
    not ‘striking’. That goes for the educated man as well as for
    the worker, for the German as well as for the foreigner. The
    word ‘strike’ means death for the man who uses it.”
    (_T-2121-2122._)

On this quotation in court the following colloquy occurred between a
member of the Tribunal and the witness [Milch]:

    JUDGE MUSMANNO: Curiosity consumes me as to what would happen if
    an officer inferior in rank to yourself took you at your word
    and actually executed a number of these workers or prisoners of
    war. Would that officer then be punished?

    THE WITNESS: No one was there who would have been in a position
    to do so. Apart from that, all those who were under my orders
    knew me and my way of handling things. They knew exactly that I
    didn’t mean it the way I said it, and apart from that they
    always laughed about my remarks when I used such strong words.

    JUDGE MUSMANNO: In other words, the comment of a field marshal
    in a matter of this seriousness was really of no value?

    THE WITNESS: Because the people knew that I got excited very
    easily about certain things, and these incidents here have been
    selected and submitted of course. From every one of these
    meetings, which took place twice a month, there was a
    report—about this thick—and perhaps, at some time or another,
    sometimes once, sometimes twice, due to the many reports which I
    received, there was a certain outburst, and then I would lose my
    temper as we soldiers used to. However, I didn’t intend to do
    anything about it and I spoke to those under my orders once in a
    while. They pointed out to me that I used such strong words, and
    they knew exactly that this was not meant seriously. They knew
    exactly that no such order had been given and that I myself
    would never cause anybody to be punished, not even when it would
    have been justified, for the very simple reason that I did not
    have the power to give punishments. (_T-2124-2125._)

Then Judge Phillips inquired—

    JUDGE PHILLIPS: Well, now, whether you meant it or not, you
    would say these things, and by so doing you counselled and
    advised others under you at a meeting which you presided over to
    do such things. Whether you meant it or not, you did that,
    didn’t you?

    THE WITNESS: No. I never gave the order by using these words,
    because my people spoke with me, and after all they knew from my
    words that I never meant it earnestly.

    JUDGE PHILLIPS: Didn’t you say, ‘I would band the workers
    together and have fifty percent of them shot? I would then
    publish this fact and compel the other fifty percent to work by
    beating if necessary.’ Did you say that or not?

    THE WITNESS: I do not remember to have said that. However, three
    days ago I believe I said that I never knew afterwards when I
    had such outbursts of rage because I had that rush of blood to
    my skull due to that injury I had, and I couldn’t remember what
    I said at that particular moment. I just burst out in rage.
    (_T-2125-2126._)

The defendant has constantly denied that he was a moving factor in the
foreign workers program. But at the GL meeting on 18 August 1942, we
find him asking for a complete report on the labor question, how it has
developed, what nationalities are involved, how great is the
fluctuation—

    “What real requests we now have to make in the different sectors
    in order to cover the needs for specialists and for skilled and
    unskilled labor, how many of them are foreigners, etc. What
    happens to those who leave the industry? Are they compelled to
    work elsewhere? Are they, _as I proposed, under control in the
    camps supervised by the SS_ and considered as being in mild
    concentration camps or are these gentlemen allowed to remain
    outside and do as they please?” (_T-2127._)

When questioned as to the significance of “mild” concentration camps, he
explained that these were camps to which people were sent for a short
time for “education”.

Complaining about “antisocial elements” who “moved from one factory to
another,” Milch rejected the suggestion that the armed forces should
take care of these people in camps. This could not be done because “they
have not been condemned and in no way violated the existing laws.”

    “That is why Himmler should get these people into his clutches
    because he can treat them _outside the law_.” (_T-2134._)

At the GL meeting on 19 October 1943, the defendant spoke on the subject
of a possible foreign workers’ uprising. He said that he had discussed
this eventuality with Himmler, and that he, Milch, had already given
orders to the Chief AW[163] and to the training stations to get military
training in this field.

    “If for instance in the locality X, an uprising is started, then
    a sergeant with a few men, or else a lieutenant with 30 men is
    to turn up in the plant, and first of all shoot into the crowd
    with a machine gun. What he should do after is to shoot down as
    many people as possible in cases of revolt. I have given orders
    to that effect even if our foreign workers are involved. But
    first of all he must succeed in getting them all laid out flat
    on the ground. And then every tenth man is to be singled out and
    shot, while the others are lined up and see it. If our machines
    are being wrecked, etc., then such measures have to be applied.
    I said to Himmler: ‘I’ll go along with you in your efforts.’”
    (_T-2153._)

Milch denied at the trial that he had talked to Himmler about this
matter and endeavored to argue incorrectness in the minutes. But the
weakness of his attempted exculpation here lies in the fact that he
could well have argued the necessity for drastic action in such an
emergency, without excesses of course. In fact, he had explained, “If
our planes are destroyed in the workshops, an energetic measure should
be taken.” But in the desire to extricate himself completely from the
situation, he challenges the record, he refutes the Himmler conference,
and then adds the usual explanation that he was excited at the time.

At a GL conference on 2 March 1943, the defendant was commenting on the
fact that foreign workers were becoming hostile.

    “On principle I have to be informed of every case of
    swinishness. I do not understand at all why Germany should put
    up with it when Poles and Frenchmen explain to the
    people—today, indeed, you are still sitting in this work; but
    later we shall be the owners; and if you treat us properly we
    shall see to it then that you are shot dead immediately and not
    tortured first. In all these matters energetic interference must
    be made. I am of the opinion that there should be only two types
    of punishment in such cases; firstly, concentration camps for
    foreigners, and secondly, capital punishment. If a certain
    number of such hostile elements are removed and the others are
    informed, they will then work better. Their love for us
    certainly won’t become any greater; but neither will their hate,
    for it is already strong enough. In this respect, too, energetic
    interference must be made and in no case must the works put up
    with it. The best method is to give one blow with a sledge
    hammer to the person concerned; and I shall treat with
    distinction every man who does something like that whenever he
    hears such stupid nonsense. We are living in total war; and the
    workers must be told that they don’t have to put up with
    anything.” (_T-2169._)

When the above was read to the defendant in court, he stated that he did
not recall the utterance and explained, “that once again it is my
well-known rage. I simply let go.” However, upon further
cross-examination he seemed to recall what it was all about and said,
“Yes, and I was enraged here through the report which had been submitted
to me as to the fact that our people were being threatened with death.
That enraged me considerably; and I blew up.” This is an interesting
observation. This man, from whose lips death threats fell like acorns
from an oak, asks that all his fulminations be ignored. Although he sat
on the victors’ bench at the time, yet because a worker who had been
dragged from his home hundreds, or perhaps thousands, of miles away,
blurted from the depth of his misery, that if he got the opportunity he
would kill his captor, the captor felt morally justified in recommending
the use of a sledge hammer on the head of the defenseless captive. The
sledge hammer blow was to be delivered not for a deed committed, but
merely for the use of words. To fortify this point, defense introduced
an affidavit which declared that the servant girl in the Milch household
repeated certain statements as to what her people (she was a Ukrainian)
would do in the event they became victorious. On this subject they were
so sensitive that even the gossip and chatter of a maid servant threw
fear into their hearts, but it is solemnly averred in court that the
imprecations of a field marshal were always ignored.

At the same meeting above indicated the defendant said—

    “But in the abstract, I see no difficulties in the way of
    getting 100,000 or 200,000 French workers to Germany, nor do I
    see any difficulties in the way of keeping them in order. If a
    case of sabotage occurs in one area, every tenth man in the area
    will be shot. Then such acts of sabotage would cease of
    themselves. The western peoples are very much afraid of death,
    while it is quite different matter with the Russians.”
    (_T-2172._)

In explanation of this remark the defendant said that he did not recall
making it. “That was still part of my madness.”

On 4 November 1943, Milch conferred with Goering at the Junkers Works at
Dessau. Discussing the Italian workers, the defendant said—

    “We have to let certain plants go on working in Italy, such as
    ball bearings, steel castings, and others, and we cannot take
    the people from there. The same applies to the technical sphere.
    The people there are working for us. All depends on our policy
    toward the Italians. I have ordered that they can be beaten up
    if they do not work. I have also given permission that Italians
    caught sabotaging be sentenced to death. If this measure is not
    desired by the higher authorities, which seems to be the case,
    we are powerless. Then the Italians in the Reich will not be of
    any use to us.” Further, “We could count on millions all
    together, if we let them starve if they do not work!”
    (_T-2193-2194._)

The defendant denies that he ever gave the order specifically mentioned
here, and since he was talking to Goering, he places himself in the
position of having lied to his superior officer, something of which,
considering his vehement professions of soldier’s loyalty to military
hierarchy, it would never be expected he could be guilty.

On the subject of French prisoners of war, the defendant said—

    “Don’t forget that not even 1,000,000 Frenchmen are here as PW’s
    while we have 7 to 8 million soldiers. Therefore, the French are
    still in a very favorable position. But they must realize that
    they will be brought to Germany all together if they don’t work
    hard enough at home.” (_T-2198._)

As Vichy was working hand in glove with Berlin at the time, the
defendant contends that coercion was not involved since it was the
French Government who had issued the orders for this movement.

Addressing himself on another occasion to the subject of French workers,
the defendant stated, “There is no good will in France, and you can
really not expect it from these fellows. But we will force them to work
by not feeding them.” Goering then said, “I can do this here much
better.” And Milch replied, “That will get us nowhere. We shall then
have to shut down the plants in France.” (_NOKW-245._)

At the GL meeting of 27 May 1942, von Gablenz reported, “Yesterday, the
first[164] has exploded in France, at the Arado plant, an explosive, a
float, but no damage has been done.” Milch commented, “What measures
have been taken in consequence? I want to have a report on what has been
done—How many people have been shot and how many hanged. If that guy
cannot be found today, fifty men should be selected and if I were you I
would hang three or four of them whether they are guilty or not. It is
the only way!” (_NOKW-407._)

                        IV. MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS
                        (a) High-Altitude Tests

On 15 May 1941, Dr. Rascher, medical officer in the Luftwaffe and member
of the SS stationed at Munich, wrote Heinrich Himmler asking that
Himmler furnish to him two or three professional criminals to be used as
subjects in high-altitude experiments. He stated that tests had been
made with monkeys, but since their reactions differed from those of
human beings, he preferred to work with live men, it being understood
that these individuals could, of course, die in the experiment. Himmler
replied through his adjutant, Rudolf Brandt, that he would gladly make
prisoners available for such high-altitude research, and authorized that
the experiments be carried out by Dr. Rascher, a Dr. Kottenhoff, and Dr.
G. A. Weltz, who was Chief of the Institute for Aviation Medicine in
Munich.

In March 1942, with a low-pressure chamber furnished by the Luftwaffe,
the experiments began at Dachau. The apparatus used for these tests was
simply a wood and metal cabinet in which air pressure could be increased
and decreased, the purpose of the tests being to ascertain the subject’s
capacity and ability to take large amounts of pure oxygen, and to
observe his reaction to a gradual decrease of oxygen approaching
infinity. In this manner high-altitude atmospheric pressure would be
simulated, and from the results the experimenters were to be able to
determine methods and means of maintaining and saving lives among
aviators compelled to rise to extreme altitudes, and at times because of
war hazards obliged to parachute to the earth. The subjects for these
experiments were to be individuals already sentenced to death.

Stated in strictly academic fashion, one could without too much
difficulty be persuaded that these experiments were not entirely
irrational or inhuman. The subjects were to die anyway, and if in dying
they could furnish scientific data not obtainable otherwise, data which
would save the lives of others, the project would not seem as criminally
homicidal as it might appear when stated bluntly that experimenters
would kill experimentees.

Whether the project was criminal and inhumane depends upon answers to
the inevitable questions:

  1. Were the prisoners actually condemned to death previously?
  2. If so, for what reasons were they condemned to capital punishment?
  3. Were the experiments painful to the subjects?
  4. What scientific benefits resulted from the experiments?

If any prisoner used in the experiments was condemned to death merely
for opposing the Nazi Regime without actually having committed any
physical crime, it does not answer the criminal charge to say that the
subject was already doomed to die, because by using that argument the
experimenter or his SS superior could easily take any concentration camp
inmate and, by merely pointing a finger at him, condemn him to death.
Obviously in such a case the slayer could not, after the death, plead
innocence on the grounds that the victim was to die anyway. Exculpation
from the charge of criminal homicide can possibly be based only upon
bona fide proof that the subject had committed murder or any other
legally recognized capital offense; and, not even then, unless the
sentencing Tribunal with authority granted by the State in the
constitution of the Court, declared that the execution would be
accomplished by means of a low-pressure chamber.

It has been asserted by the defense in this case that pardons were
promised the subjects of these experiments in the event they survived.
But the whole record reveals but one such shadowy case. It was also
stated by one of the witnesses for the defense (General Wolff of the SS)
that the subjects of these experiments were men who, because of their
criminal records, had been denied the honor of fighting for the
Fatherland, but that by submitting to these experiments they would be
allowed, if they survived, to join combat forces at the front. General
Wolff furnished no names or specific instances in this connection, nor
does it appear that he, at any time, was in attendance upon the
experiments at Dachau.

Dr. Romberg, under indictment for these same and kindred offenses, said
on 1 November 1946, that he personally witnessed the death of three of
Dr. Rascher’s subjects, and that he knows that other experimental
subjects were killed while he was not present. He estimated that the
fatalities totaled between five and ten. He was silent on the character
of the victims.

Rudolf Brandt, who is currently on trial in Tribunal I, declared in an
affidavit dated 30 August 1946, that Rascher wrote Himmler asking for
concentration camp subjects for his high-altitude experiments.
“Volunteers could not very well be expected, as the experiments could be
fatal under the circumstances.” (_T-475._) Also “many experiments ended
with the death of the experimental subject.” (_T-477._)

Brandt declared further that after Rascher submitted a report on his
first experiments, Himmler ordered him to continue the experiments and
authorized the commutation to life imprisonment of those subjects,
previously condemned to death, who survived the experiments. However,
Poles and Russians were excluded from this declared clemency. For
Himmler, to be a Russian or a Pole or a Jew was an offense that could be
expiated only with death. Both Romberg and Brandt are interested
witnesses since they are defendants in another trial on similar charges.
The testimony of one Anton Pacheleff, however, is not burdened with this
possible defect as he is not answering to any charges. An Austrian
patent lawyer, he was an inmate of Dachau, and while his testimony must
still be carefully scrutinized, it does not need to be evaluated on the
basis that the affiant has something to gain in exaggerating the nature,
extent, and effect of the medical experiments. He declared under oath
that Dr. Rascher chose the victims for his researches from the
punishment company at Dachau, a group made up of political prisoners
marked for extermination. “A few convicts were among the political
prisoners, having been placed there merely to depress the morale of the
political prisoners, and so a few convicts were killed along with the
others.” (_T-408._)

The most complete account of this entire operation was contributed by
Walter Neff, an Austrian who had been committed to Dachau because, prior
to the Anschluss, he had testified in an Austrian court against certain
Nazi terrorists. Only by coincidence were the experiments enacted in a
ward to which he had been assigned as an untrained nurse, and thus he
became an unofficial observer. He testified that from 180 to 200
concentration camp inmates were subjected to the high-altitude
experiments, and of these, 10 were volunteers. Of all these subjects
only one man was ever released, and that was an individual called
Zopota.

It was Neff’s conclusion that over a period of three months from 70 to
80 persons were killed in the high-altitude experiments. He declared
further that approximately 40 of the persons killed were persons not
previously condemned to death. One man, according to Neff, was
deliberately killed in the low-pressure chamber by Dr. Rascher so that
he could perform an autopsy on him after his death at the atmospheric
pressure of 10,000 meters altitude. During one autopsy it was discovered
after the breast had been opened that the heart was still beating. “This
experiment,” Neff said, “caused many cases of death because many more
experiments were made in order to see how long the heart of a man could
beat thus autopsied.” (_T-419._)

In this connection, reference must be made to one of the most cruel and
fiendish decrees scratched by the claw of Himmler on the horror-filled
parchment of his diabolic ingenuity. On 13 April 1942 he wrote Dr.
Rascher, “these experiments should above all be evaluated for the
purpose of seeing whether it is not possible, through this long
functioning of the heart, to bring such people back to life. Should such
an experiment of bringing back to life succeed, then it is understood
that the person condemned to death will be commuted to lifelong
imprisonment in a concentration camp.” (_1971-B-PS._) Thus, if the
lifeless and mutilated body of one of these tortured victims of
cold-blooded homicide should be made to function again, its owner would
receive from the benevolent Heinrich Himmler the assurance of the
luxuries of a lifelong imprisonment in an SS concentration camp!

But this is not the end of the hilarious game of these two death-head
players, as they toss human life back and forth. On 20 October 1942,
Rascher queries Himmler’s adjutant on this subject. He desires to know
if, amongst the mythical survivors of his lethal experiments, there
should be any Poles or Russians, whether they were also to receive the
boon of lifelong imprisonment in a concentration camp. Incidentally,
Rascher adds, the only ones he has experimented with have been Poles and
Russians. And the reply comes back from Himmler’s adjutant that Dr.
Rascher, “please,” is to be informed that “the decree of the
Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler concerning pardoning (they called it
pardoning!) of experimental subjects does not apply to Poles and
Russians.” (!!!)

The manner in which some of the victims were selected is material fit
for an Edgar Allen Poe story or a horror magazine. One day after 16
Russian prisoners had been used as experiments, two Jews were scheduled
to be killed. Curious as to the identity of the two scheduled for
extermination, Neff watched the first victim being placed in the
experimental chamber. Something in the man’s features forcibly brought
to his mind the image of the prison tailor. Hurrying to the tailor shop
he learned that indeed it was the tailor, and that he had not been
condemned to death, but that an SS-man, one Endres, had placed him among
the list of those scheduled to be killed because this tailor had refused
to make a civilian suit for Endres!

Neff further testified that at one time the chamber became damaged, but
after being repaired more deaths occurred, and on the last day Rascher
killed five persons. (_T-421._)

On 16 April 1942, Rascher wrote Himmler describing an experiment which
he repeated four times “with the same results.”

    “When Wagner, the last VP (experimental subject) had stopped
    breathing, I let him come back to life by increasing pressure.
    Since the VP was assigned for a terminal (‘Terminal’ meaning
    ‘death-resulting’ in this case) experiment, since a repeated
    experiment held no prospect for new results, and since I had not
    been in possession of your letter at that time, I subsequently
    started another experiment through which VP Wagner did not live.
    Also in this case the results obtained by electrocardiographic
    registration (Herzstromabschreibung) were extraordinary.”
    (_T-431-32._)

Here Rascher, in a macabre demonstration worthy of his record, repeated
an experiment four times knowing what the result would be, and then
finally killed the subject because he had been marked for extermination
anyway.

            (b) Were the Experiments Painful to the Subjects

The defense contends that the experiments, even though often fatal, were
not accompanied with actual pain to the subjects, and therefore the
experiments could not be characterized cruel or inhuman. Anton Pacheleff
often stood by the apparatus during the experiments and looked through
the observation window of the chamber. He testified—

    “I have personally seen through the observation window of the
    chamber when a prisoner inside would stand a vacuum until his
    lungs ruptured. Some experiments gave men such pressure in their
    heads that they would go mad, and pull out their hair in an
    effort to relieve the pressure. They would tear their heads and
    face with their fingers and fingernails in an attempt to maim
    themselves in their madness. They would beat the walls with
    their hands and head, and scream in an effort to relieve
    pressure on their eardrums. These cases of extreme vacuums
    generally ended in the death of the subject. An extreme
    experiment was so certain to result in death that in many
    instances the chamber was used for routine execution purposes
    rather than an experiment.” (_T-409._)

One report made up by Doctors Ruff, Romberg, and Rascher graphically
described the reactions of the subject as he fell from a height of
47,000 feet. Some of the more unusual reactions are noted:

  47,200 ft.    Lets the mask fall, severe altitude sickness, spasmodic
                  (klonische) convulsions.
  45,580 ft.    Opisthotonus.
  44,950 ft.    Suspended in opisthotonus.
  44,920 ft.    Arms stretched stiffly forward; sits up like a dog,
                  legs spread stiffly apart.
  43,310 ft.    Agonal convulsive breathing.
  40,030 ft.    Dyspnea, hangs limp.
  23,620 ft.    Uncoordinated movements with the extremities.
  19,690 ft.    Clonic convulsions, groaning.
  18,080 ft.    Yells aloud.
   9,520 ft.    Still yells, convulses arms and legs, head sinks
                  forward.
   6,560 ft.    Yells spasmodically, grimaces, bites his tongue, does
                  not respond to speech, gives the impression of
                  someone who is completely out of his mind.
   5 minutes    (after reaching ground level) Reacts for the first time
                  to vocal stimulation.
  11 minutes    Holds his head turned convulsively to the right; tries
                  repeatedly to answer the first question concerning
                  his birth date.
  28 minutes    Sees nothing; runs against open window sash upon which
                  the sun is shining, so that large lump is formed on
                  his forehead; says “Excuse me, please.” No expression
                  of pain.
  37 minutes    Reacts to pain stimuli.
  75 minutes    Still disoriented in time; retrogressive amnesia over
                  three days.
  24 hours      Normal condition again attained; has no recollection of
                  the experiment itself. (_T-455-56._)

                          (c) Results Achieved

On 11 May 1942, Rascher made his first report to Himmler on the
high-altitude experiments—

    “As practical result of the more than 200 experiments conducted
    at Dachau the following can be assumed. Flying in altitudes
    higher than 12 kilometers without pressure-cabin or
    pressure-suit is impossible even while breathing pure oxygen. If
    the airplane pressure machine is damaged at altitudes of 13
    kilometers and higher the crew will not be able to bail out of
    the damaged plane themselves since at that height the bends
    appear rather suddenly. It must be requested that the crew
    should be removed automatically from the plane, for instance, by
    catapulting the seats by means of compressed air. Descending
    with opened parachute without oxygen would cause severe injuries
    due to the lack of oxygen besides causing severe freezing;
    consciousness would not be regained until the ground was
    reached. Therefore, the following is to be requested: (1) A
    parachute with barometrically controlled opening. (2) A portable
    oxygen apparatus for the jump. For the following experiments
    Jewish professional criminals who had committed ‘Rassenschande’
    (race pollution) were used; the question of the formation of
    embolism was investigated in ten cases. Some of the VP’s died
    during a continued high-altitude experiment; for instance, after
    one-half hour at a height of 12 kilometers. * * * To find out
    whether the severe psychical and physical effects, as mentioned
    under No. 3, are due to the formation of embolism, the following
    was done: After relative recuperation from such a parachute
    descending test had taken place, however before regaining of
    consciousness, some VP’s were kept under water until they died.
    * * * One VP was made to breathe pure oxygen for two and
    one-half hours before the experiment started. After six minutes
    at a height of 20 kilometers he died and at dissection also
    showed ample air embolism as was the case in all other
    experiments.” (_T-384-385._)

Dr. Romberg declared in an interrogation conducted on 29 October 1946,
that he and other doctors had conducted experiments on themselves
reaching altitudes of 17,000 meters (17 kilometers). Beyond that, he
said, death was probable. This seems to contradict the report made by
Rascher, above referred to, in which he speaks of the impossibility of
flight at 12 kilometers (12,000 meters).

But the whole fallacy of the experiments and their sheer futility are
revealed in a letter which Dr. Hippke, Chief of the Medical Section of
the Luftwaffe, wrote to Himmler under date of 8 October 1942—

    “It is true that no conclusions as to the practice of
    parachuting can be drawn for the time being, as a very important
    factor, viz., cold, has so far not yet been taken into
    consideration; it places an extraordinary excess burden on the
    entire body and its vital movements, so that the results in
    actual practice will very likely prove to be far more
    unfavorable than in the present experiments.” (_T-404._)

If it was impossible perfectly to simulate flying conditions in the
low-pressure chamber—and this, if they were scientists at all worthy of
the name, they should have known and must have known—then the tests
were only the wildest kind of experimenting. And if the experimenting
was done with human lives, as it was, the recklessness and the wanton
handling of these human lives, resulting from 60 to 70 times in death,
can only be characterized by what it was,—murder.

                        (d) Freezing Experiments

On 20 May 1942, [Field] Marshal Milch wrote General Wolff recommending
experiments “in regard to perils at high seas.” (_T-393._) As German
aviators from time to time were being forced to parachute into the North
Seas, and consequently being subject to extreme cold for extended
periods of time, the purpose of the freezing experiments was to
ascertain the most effective way of rewarming such aviators and thereby
saving their lives. (_T-480._)

The cold water experiments were performed between August and October
1942; the dry-cold experiments from February to April 1943. Walter Neff,
already identified, described the experimental basin as being made of
wood, two meters long, two meters high, and 50 centimeters above the
floor. He stated that 280 to 300 prisoners were used in the tests, many
of them undergoing as high as three experiments, and that out of the
number indicated 80 to 90 died. The selection of the subjects was left
to the political department of the camp after Rascher had made requests
for a certain number. The eventual victims were made up of political
prisoners, foreigners, prisoners of war, and inmates condemned to death.
According to Neff, none of the subjects were volunteers. (_T-423._)

The experiment was conducted in the following manner. The basin was
filled with water and then ice was added until the temperature measured
3° [centigrade]. Now the subject, either naked or dressed in a flying
suit, was forced into the freezing liquid. When two certain doctors,
Holzloehner and Finke, were performing the experiment, the subjects had
narcotics administered to them, but when Rascher took over he refused
narcotics because he maintained that “you cannot find the exact
condition of the blood, and that you would exclude the willpower of the
subject if he was under an anaesthetic.” When the subject was
experimented on in a conscious state, a much longer time elapsed before
the so-called freezing narcosis set in. (_T-424._)

Neff, describing the operation, declared that the “sinking down of the
temperature until 32° [centigrade] was a terrible plight for the
experimental subject.” At 32° the subject lost consciousness, but these
persons “were frozen down to 25° body temperature.” When Rascher was
handling the experiments “a large number of the persons involved were
kept in the water so long a time until they were dead.” (_T-425._)

Many others died during the reviving or during the re-warming procedure.
The utterly heartless and fiendish manner in which some of the
experiments were conducted can be gathered from the graphic description
by Neff of the episode of the two Russians—

    “It was the worst experiment which was ever carried out. From
    the bunker two Russian officers were carried out. We were
    forbidden to speak to them. They arrived in the afternoon at
    approximately 4 o’clock. Rascher had them undressed and they had
    to go into the basin in a naked state. Hour after hour passed
    and when usually after a short time, 60 minutes, the freezing
    would have set in, these two Russians were still conscious even
    after two hours. All of our appeals to Rascher, asking him to
    give them an injection was without purpose. Approximately in the
    third hour one Russian said to the other: ‘Comrade, tell that
    officer that he may shoot us.’ Then the other one replied,
    ‘Don’t expect any mercy from this Fascist dog.’ And how can one
    imagine that we inmates also had to be witnesses of such a death
    and could do nothing against it, then you can really estimate
    how terrible it is to be condemned to work in such an
    experimental station. After these words, which were translated
    to the Germans by a young Pole in a somewhat different form,
    Rascher went back into his office. The young Pole immediately
    tried to give them an anaesthetic with chloroform, but Rascher
    returned immediately. He threatened us with a pistol, and he
    said, ‘Don’t dare interfere and approach these victims.’ The
    experiment lasted at least five hours until death set in. Both
    corpses were sent to Munich for autopsy in the Schwabisches
    Hospital there. Q. Witness, how long did it normally take to
    kill a person in these freezing experiments? A. The length of
    the experiment varied according to the individual case. It
    always varied according to whether the subject was clothed or
    unclothed. If his physical construction was weak and if in
    addition to that he was naked, death often set in already after
    80 minutes. But there were a number of cases where the
    experimental subject lived up to three hours and remained that
    way in the water until finally death set in.” (_T-426._)

On 20 September 1942, Rascher made an intermediary report on these
experiments—

    “The experimental subjects (VP’s) were placed in the water
    dressed in complete flying uniform, winter or summer
    combination, and with an aviator’s helmet. A life jacket made of
    rubber or kapok was to prevent submerging. The experiments were
    carried out at water temperatures varying from 2.5° to 12°
    [centigrade]. In one experimental series, the occiput, the brain
    stem, protruded above the water, while in another series, the
    brain stem and back of the head were submerged in water * * *.
    Fatalities occurred only when the brain stem and back of the
    head were also chilled. Autopsies of such fatal cases always
    revealed large amounts of free blood, up to one-half liter, in
    the cranial cavity. The heart invariably showed extreme dilation
    of the right chamber. As soon as the temperature in these
    experiments reached 28° the experimental subjects died
    invariably, despite all attempts at resuscitation. The
    above-discussed autopsy findings conclusively proved the
    importance of a warming protective device for the occiput when
    designing the planned protective clothing of foam type.”
    (_T-398-399._)

The sheer monstrousness of this type of experiment reveals itself in the
last sentence of the report which states with the flourish of a great
scientific discovery that if the back of the head, the occiput is to be
submerged in freezing water, there should be a warm, protective device
to cover the occiput. If one is to have his feet in icy water, he should
wear warm, waterproof boots. If he is to dip his head in the icy water,
then his head should also be protected! This, then, is the weighty
conclusion of so-called scientists sacrificing human lives for an
observation that is obvious to a ten-year-old child.

    “During attempts to save severely chilled persons (Unterkuehlte)
    it was shown that rapid re-warming was in all cases preferable
    to slow re-warming, because after removed from the cold water,
    the body temperature continued to sink rapidly. I think that for
    this reason, we can dispense with the attempt to save intensely
    chilled subjects by means of animal heat. Rewarming by animal
    warmth, animal bodies or women’s bodies, would be too slow. As
    auxiliary measures for the prevention of intense chilling,
    improvements in the clothing of aviators come alone into
    consideration. The foam suit with suitable neck protector which
    is being prepared by the German Institution for Textile Research
    (Deutsches Textilforschungsinstitut), Muenchen-Gladbach,
    deserves first priority in this connection. The experiments have
    shown that pharmaceutical measures are probably necessary if the
    flier _is still alive_ at the time of rescue.” (_T-399-400._)

Here other amazing, fantastic discoveries were made.

    1. That something should be done at once to re-warm a body that
    has been floating about in icy water.

    2. That aviator suits be made up with suitable neck protectors.

    3. And that if the flier is still alive when rescued, medicine
    should be prescribed for him. If dead, no pharmaceutical
    measures are recommended!

In the year 1942, in the name of science, in the name of progress, men
trained in medicine calmly and deliberately froze the blood in the
arteries and veins of human beings to the point of death to proclaim
warm clothing for low temperatures and re-warming and medicine for those
who have succumbed to coldness.

Dr. Becker-Freyseng, who participated in some of the experiments,
declared that as a result of the freezing experiments conducted at
Dachau, they gave orders to flight surgeons that the warm bath method
was to be used in reviving aviators who had been chilled. And thus
another milestone was reached in science; namely, that warmth revived
and comforted these who had been chilled. (_T-470._)

On 22 September 1942, Himmler acknowledged Rascher’s report, but Himmler
who was carrion and obscenity incarnate, ordered that further subjects
be frozen, and that re-warming and revival be attempted by the use of
naked women. For this purpose Rascher obtained four gypsy women, and the
experiments began. The subjects were, in accordance with usual
procedure, forced into water in which ice cakes floated and were
retained in the freezing compound until unconscious. Then each frozen
victim was put to bed with two naked women, and the three were covered
with blankets. In still other experiments the unconscious subject was
placed in bed with only one woman. From all this revolting and macabre
performance, the scientific deduction was reached that the re-warming
process was better achieved by one woman than two because with one
single partner “personal inhibitions are removed and the woman nestles
up to the chilled victim more intimately.” This was the great scientific
revelation achieved from an obscene spectacle which could have seemed
more like the superstitious drum-beating rites of barbarians on some
forgotten savage, jungle-infested isle, than the work of educated
doctors in the year 1942. Nor was this type of experiment without its
fatalities. Of one subject, the report stated, “This person died with
symptoms suggesting cerebral hemorrhage as was confirmed by the
subsequent autopsy.” The Nazi scientists, after this experiment, did
however, achieve greatness in stating that this type of re-warming was
recommended only when women were available and other types of re-warming
facilities were not available, except in the “case of small children who
are best re-warmed by their mothers with the aid of hot-water bottles.”
(!)

In a final report to Himmler on the super-cooling experiments at Dachau,
the ghastly experimenters, after having killed scores of subjects, came
to the conclusion that they did not know whether rescued persons should
be re-warmed quickly or slowly—

    “It was not clear, for example, whether those who had been
    rescued should be warmed quickly or slowly. According to the
    current instructions for treating frozen people, a slow
    warming-up seemed to be indicated. Certain theoretical
    considerations could be adduced for a slow warming. Well-founded
    suggestions were missing for a promising medicinal therapy.”

The uncertainty is blamed on the “absence of well-founded suggestions
concerning the cause of death by cold in human beings.” (_T-433._)

And now, in order to clarify this question, they decided to go back to
animal experiments which would suggest that after all their
experimenting and killing of human beings, they are no closer to any
scientific discovery than when they started. (_T-433._)

However, they still continued the experiments with human beings in
another manner. This was the dry-cold process, an operation carried out
during the period January-March 1943. The _modus operandi_ of this
experiment was to place the subject outdoors at night in a nude state,
cover him with a linen sheet, and then pour cold water over him hourly.
After several operations of this character, Rascher complained that it
was a mistake to cover the subjects even with a linen sheet. He must be
utterly naked, otherwise “the air cannot get at the person.” And from
then on the subjects suffered their torture without covering of any
kind. Even if it could be assumed that the test could have the slightest
modicum of value, it is not understood why the subject had to be utterly
naked. As the purpose of the experiment, it is presumed, was to
ascertain the reaction of a soldier’s body to a frozen state, there is
no reason why the subject could not wear some clothes, if only the
merest undergarment, because it is scarcely conceivable that a soldier
or aviator would be without some clothing on his back. On this subject,
Neff testified—

    “The next experiment was a mass experiment when the prisoners
    were also put outside naked at night. The temperature of one of
    them was measured with a galvanometer, the others with a
    thermometer. Rascher was present during approximately eighteen
    to twenty experiments of that type, but I can not remember
    exactly how many deaths occurred and if deaths occurred in
    connection with these experiments. I would like to say with
    certain reservations that approximately three deaths occurred
    during that period.” (_T-429._)

On the character of the subjects Neff stated—

    “Of the experimental subjects subjected to air-cooling
    experiments, none were people who were sentenced to death. They
    were prisoners of various nationalities. There were also German
    political prisoners and ‘green’ prisoners.

    “Q. And these prisoners had not volunteered, had they?

    “A. No.” (_T-429._)

                     V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
       (a) Responsibility of Milch as to Count One of Indictment

Article II of Control Council Law No. 10, promulgated by the Allied
Control Council, representing the nations of the United States, Great
Britain, France, and Russia, proclaims the ill-treatment or deportation
to slave labor of civilian populations of occupied territories, or the
ill-treatment of prisoners of war, to be war crimes, punishable by
death, imprisonment, or other penalties.

It is sufficient for this Tribunal to cite Control Council Law No. 10 as
authority for its action in this case. Since, however, the Control
Council came into being after the ending of the war, and since the laws
which it published necessarily also followed the termination of
hostilities, it has been argued by defense counsel that it does not
comport with justice and reason that a defendant should be condemned for
an act which, prior to its commission, was not accepted in international
law as a crime. From the day of surrender Germany has been without a
government of its own, and as the Allied powers are exercising
quasi-sovereign jurisdiction in practically all phases of German
relations, both internal and external, the very circumstances of
Germany’s present political situation not only justifies but demands
that the Control Council establish government in its three fundamental
phases; namely, the judiciary, the executive, and the legislative.
Otherwise chaos would fling Germany into even a more precipitous abyss
than the one into which she has fallen, and the supreme and perhaps
irreparable disaster, arrested by Allied intervention, would be upon
her.

Yet it can be argued and it has been argued that despite the imperative
need of an occupational force with its almost unlimited jurisdiction,
such an occupying force simply represents the authority of victor over
vanquished. In the discharge of its duties under the law which created
it, this Tribunal is not called upon to answer the arguments just
indicated, but a respect for the opinion of mankind invites a listing of
the reasons which establish the justice of the procedure here invoked
and the reasons which must invest its judgment with the solemnity and
solidity of accepted international law.

In the first place, it is not Control Council Law No. 10 which makes
abuse of civilian populations an international crime, nor even the
decision of the International Military Tribunal, which in turn derived
its power from the London Charter which had as its antecedent the Moscow
Declaration of 1943. International law is not a body of codes and
statutes, but the gradual expression, case by case, of the moral
judgments of the civilized world, and no international law textbook of
the last century ever sanctioned the deportation of a civilian
population for labor. Although under Article 52 of the Hague
Regulations, the inhabitants of occupied countries may be used for the
needs of the occupying army, such civilians may be utilized only in
proportion to the resources of the country, and they may not under any
circumstances be required to take part in military operations against
their own country. L. Oppenheim’s Treatise on International Law (Vol.
II, Sixth Edition, page 345) states flatly that there is no right to
deport inhabitants to the country of the occupant for the purpose of
compelling them to work there.

It is submitted, however, that though this is the law and so recognized,
total warfare, as it raged in World War II, suspended, if it did not
outrightly abrogate, all these rules heretofore respected and esteemed
as binding on civilized nations. In this respect defense counsel argues
that “modern warfare, having as its aim total annihilation of the armed
production of the enemy, brought with it to a great extent warfare
against the civilian population,” and he cites total blockade as an
illustration of his thesis. It is true that total blockade affects the
entire blockaded population, as indeed air raids strike at the most
helpless and harmless of the enemy’s civilians. The writer of this
opinion was witness many times to the death and mutilation of
inhabitants, including women, children, and old men, in Luftwaffe air
raids aimed at legitimate war targets. German civilians also paid with
their lives for living in their own country. And thus, it would seem in
principle, that if civilians may legitimately be killed through military
action, though noncombatant, they may certainly be made to work. But it
does not follow that because military necessity unintentionally
victimizes a civilian population, political domination may strip them of
their civil rights and subject them to intentional torture and possible
death. With all its horror modern war still “is not a condition of
anarchy and lawlessness between the belligerents, but a contention in
many respects regulated, restricted, and modified by law.” (Oppenheim,
ibid., 421.)

Though the adversaries descend into the pit of bloody combat, there is
always open to them the means of re-ascending to the level of nonhostile
negotiations. The matter of temporary truces for recovering the dead and
succoring the wounded, the making of arrangements through international
relief organizations for the treatment of prisoners, the granting of
safe passage through the lines of persons mutually agreed upon by the
parties, all are instances which refute the logical development of
defense counsel’s argument that total warfare justifies the abandonment
of every restriction and authorizes the combatants to use all manners
and means to win the conflict.

And no one was in a better position to understand this than the
defendant. He had participated as a soldier in the First World War; he
had, following the war, entered distinguished private enterprise; he had
travelled extensively and was induced by none other than Hitler himself
to enter the Air Ministry long before the outbreak of World War II
because of his talents and abilities. It is idle for defense counsel to
say that Milch “was never a good National Socialist.” If joining a
political party, accepting its benefits and preferments, rising to
supreme heights in grade and distinction, offering never-flagging
loyalty to the Fuehrer, even in the face of a declared acknowledgment
that the Fuehrer was leading Germany to disaster, if this does not make
one a full-fledged National Socialist, then nothing does.

Milch did not simply passively ignore international law, he actively
expressed a knowledgeable contempt for it. We have seen how he declared
at one of the Central Planning Board meetings that “International law
cannot be observed here.”

Defense counsel made much of the point that the German people did not
want war, and the defendant himself described how when the first tanks
moved through the streets of Berlin, the inhabitants of that city were
silent and worried. But it is not clear how this observation advances
the innocence of the defendant. If anything it adds to his moral guilt
because the evidence reveals only too well that to the fullest extent of
his energies he prosecuted a war which he states was against the will
and interests of his people. The indictment has not charged him with
waging aggressive war, but in view of his participation in the 23 May
1939 conference when Hitler outlined quite clearly his aggressive
intentions, and in view of his (Milch’s) never tiring efforts in the
war’s various phases—at the front, in the air, in production, in
inspection—it cannot be said that to his trained mind the war had the
aspects of a defensive and not an aggressive conflict. Although Milch
has here repudiated belief in the master race theory, yet we know that
he went through a formal procedure to establish the absence of Jewish
blood in his veins. This procedure even took the embarrassing turn of
statements concerning his parentage. In doing this, Milch could not help
but know that the Jews were being persecuted by the political party to
which he voluntarily belonged. Nor will the Tribunal believe his
declaration that he knew of only two concentration camps in all of
occupied Europe. For the Tribunal to acknowledge this statement would be
to declare Milch weak-minded if not _non compos mentis_. Milch, was
constantly threatening workers with the concentration camp. These
threats he attributes to excessive anger as he does all his outbursts,
to which we have already called attention.

Milch would have the Tribunal believe that his violent language was
never intended to produce results. He explained that his declaration
that Italian prisoners of war attempting to escape should be shot does
not constitute cruelty because, in the words of his counsel, “all
countries have prisoners shot who attempt to escape.” This contradicts
another statement made in court wherein he lauded prisoners who sought
to regain their freedom. When confronted with inconsistencies of this
character, the defendant invariably sought refuge in the statement that
he was never taken seriously in his threats to shoot, hang, or whip. He
informs us that he never used a whip, that everybody knew he
exaggerated, that nobody took him seriously, and that he did not have
full control of himself. But Erhard Milch was not the village idiot. He
carried a field marshal’s baton, and the lifting of that baton compelled
obedience no matter how idiotic might be the demand. Further, Milch’s
imprecations were not simple interjections; they frequently carried the
appearance of orders already given or about to be issued. He may never
have actually penned a death warrant or called out the SD with its
murder squads, but is it so certain that underlings beyond his
cognizance did not carry into effect his sometimes very clear directions
on punishments to be inflicted?

Violent language is not as innocuous as Milch would have the present
world believe. Even if it should be true that his immediate circle
laughed at his fulminations, as was testified, there is no assurance
that others laughed. A field marshal’s fraternizations are necessarily
limited. There were not many who had the privilege to stand beside him,
as did General Vorwald, and philosophically muse; “Now his neck is
getting red again.” There were necessarily hundreds in the course of six
years of war who, attending his various meetings, were not informed that
his fire and brimstone were froth. Vorwald can laugh at a field marshal
and a field marshal can laugh at a Hitler, but the comedy ceases there.
Milch has ridiculed Hitler’s speeches and pointed out that certain
portions of the Fuehrer’s orations were known as the “Adam and Eve”
section. He indicated further that many of Hitler’s thunderings were
mere bluff, but who can say today that he was bluffing?

Hitler’s most potent force for evil was language. With all that he has
to answer for at the bar of history, it can be doubted that there exists
proof that he with his own hands killed any man or even the proverbial
fly. Hitler’s armory was language. It was Hitler’s language which
mesmerized the German nation. Every one has said so. He had no other
abilities. He was no soldier. All the generals were agreed on that. He
could not ride a horse, he could not drive a car, he could not build a
fence. He could hang paper and he could talk, and the German people
regarded that talk as substance. And on the phosphorescent sea of his
wildly undulating phrases they launched the ship of their well-being
with the tragic result that fragments and splinters of that ship now
piteously stare at one from every nook and corner of this once
prosperous and happy land.

The greatest individual force of destruction in Germany for nearly 20
years was _Mein Kampf_. And yet _Mein Kampf_ was simply language. To the
knowledge of the writer of this opinion, _Mein Kampf_ was never used as
a missile or fired as a projectile, but is there a German sincerely
interested in the welfare of his country today who doubts that its words
were bullets, its phrases bombs, and its pages poison which, falling
into the wells of the nation, corroded the thinking of the innocent and
goaded into action the ambitions of the wicked?

As the record shows, Milch incessantly threatened the wildest excesses,
he orally directed them, and he reported to his chief on one occasion
that he had put certain ones into effect. In spite of his present
disavowal, there is nothing in the transcript to indicate that he
repudiated his threats at the time of utterance. The defense has
repeatedly attacked the accuracy of the minutes of the Central Planning
Board, the GL, and the Jaegerstab. All these documents were taken from
the official files of the Reich Air Ministry. Furthermore, the
defendant’s constant efforts on the stand to modify the far-reaching
implications of his speeches concede the general correctness of the
remarks attributed to him. Thus, making due allowance for stenographic
errors, the defendant stands out through the pages of these reports as a
resolute, persevering, determined worker, unyielding and loyal to his
cause, which was the cause of the Fuehrer.

It can be believed that Erhard Milch was not seeking personal enrichment
and a luxurious living, which was so obviously the nefarious and
principal goal of his chief, the super-pilferer Hermann Goering. Milch
was seeking victory for Germany, for which he held an understandable
affection, but his intelligence, training, and experience in the affairs
of the world told him inescapably that Germany was waging an aggressive
and culpable war. Milch gave of his talents and energies to the winning
of a war criminally begun and lawlessly prosecuted, which, had it ended
in victory for the aggressors would have resulted in the heartless
subjugation of countless millions of innocent and helpless people. The
defendant has recounted his worries and anguish and has explained that
this mental torment provoked many of his unbridled utterances, but what
was the cause of this bitterness and mortification? Not that Europe had
become a slaughterhouse, not that blood ran like water, not that the
four Horsemen of the Apocalypse were galloping over the continent
hurling famine, pestilence, and death into every city, village, and
hamlet. Milch’s torment and soul-sickness were not that the human race
and human dignity were being debased and degraded as they had never been
before since man knew shame. It was not for all this that Milch’s heart
was breaking. His consternation, his panic was that Germany was losing
the war!

He said, “I had to walk into defeat with open eyes.” (_T-1948._) Also,
“I could see what was coming and I could not help my people.” And in his
bitterness he increased the fury of his verbal lashes over the backs of
the foreign workers, he redoubled his efforts for more importations and
screamed for more production. He knew, as far back as November 1941,
that the war was lost; this knowledge was confirmed after Stalingrad,
and every vestige of doubt as to the eventual result was shattered by
the clouds of bombers over Germany every day. He knew that Hitler was
leading Germany over the brink to ruin, and yet he called for more and
more production to make the disaster all the more noteworthy. He was
having difficulties with Goering, Hitler did not want him any more, and
yet he stoked the fires of his wrath to an even higher degree of
vengeance against the workers because they would not turn out more
production for the war, every continuing day of which brought only
greater misery to his people. The argument does not ring true. Milch may
have believed Germany might lose the war but he certainly made every
effort to have it end victoriously. This in itself is honorable for a
soldier, but he allowed himself to use means and methods which the code
of a soldier does not authorize or countenance, and therein he fell.

He has related several accidents which may have affected his health. He
cracked-up two or three times with his plane and he suffered an
automobile mishap as well. It is suggested, although not vigorously
pressed, that all this may explain his towering wraths and lightning
fury. But the plea in this case is not “Not Guilty because of Insanity.”
Nowhere is it advanced that the defendant is not now, nor that at any
time throughout the war was not, in the fullest possession of his mental
faculties. If a temporary aberration is being suggested, it is
remarkable that these deviations from the norm occurred only when he was
urging the maximum and severest employment of forced labor and menacing
with the direst punishment those who did not fulfill to the extreme the
commitments of this illegal enterprise. If Milch was at any time
deprived of his reasoning faculties, his temporary unbalance had method
in it.

The Tribunal finds Erhard Milch guilty on count one of the indictment.

                             (b) Count Two

In considering Milch’s responsibility under count two, we will need to
enumerate and weigh each reference to him in the testimony in this
connection. The high-altitude experiments began in March and lasted
until June 1942. Cold-water experiments were conducted during the period
from the middle of August until October 1942. The dry-cold experiments
lasted from February through April 1943. During this time Milch was
Inspector General of the Air Forces, State Secretary in the Air
Ministry, and Generalluftzeugmeister. As Inspector General he was in
charge of the office which authorized research and medical experiments
conducted in behalf of the Air Forces. General Hippke, physician in
charge of the Luftwaffe Medical Department, was directly subordinate to
the defendant. As Generalluftzeugmeister, Milch was head of air
ordnance. Milch had charge of the development of technical experiments
for the Luftwaffe.

All medical institutes and Luftwaffe medical men were subordinate to the
Medical Inspectorate Chief, Dr. Hippke. The DVL[165] was subordinate to
Hippke’s office in technical matters. Dr. Rascher conducted his
experiments at Dachau. He was temporarily assigned to the SS, but
retained his status as a Luftwaffe physician, rising from a second
lieutenant to a captain in the Luftwaffe. During the period of the
experimentations, Rascher was under the command of the Luftwaffe.

On 20 May 1942, Milch wrote a letter to General Wolff, stating that his
medical inspector had reported to him that the high-altitude experiments
conducted by the SS and the Luftwaffe had been finished, and he did not
recommend that they should be continued. He did, however, authorize
experiments “of some other kind in regard to perils at high seas.” On 4
June 1942, Milch authorized Hippke the continued use of the low-pressure
chamber. On 20 July 1942, Rascher sent Brandt a report on the
high-altitude experiments and the accompanying letter stated that it is
Himmler’s desire that the report should be sent to Milch. On 25 August
1942, Himmler sent Milch a copy of the report and asked that he receive
Dr. Rascher and Dr. Romberg for a lecture and a showing of the film made
of the experiment.

On 31 August 1942, Milch wrote Himmler acknowledging the report and
promising to receive the two gentlemen for the lecture and showing of
the film. On 23 August 1942, Sievers wrote Brandt discussing a revival
of the high-altitude experiments and stating that a report was to have
been made to Milch, but that the report was not made. On 3 October 1942,
Rascher wrote Brandt that the report to Milch, planned for September,
could not be made because Milch was not present. On 27 November 1942,
Wolff wrote Milch a long letter pointing out the need and the great
value of the experiments with human beings, stating that Himmler “has
accepted the responsibility for supplying death-deserving, asocial
persons, and criminals from the concentration camps for these
experiments.” He asks Milch to assign Rascher to the SS so that he can
continue with the experiments directly under Himmler’s orders. “In any
case, these experiments must not be stopped. We owe that to our men.”

Dr. Romberg stated in an affidavit that Milch “was familiar with these
experiments.” Neff testified that “Milch’s name was mentioned in
connection with the high-altitude experiments.” Sievers, Director of the
Research and Teaching Association, stated that “Milch must have known
about the experiments of Dr. Rascher.” Dr. Ruff stated that to his
knowledge Milch was informed of these tests either by Hippke or by the
SS. Dr. Becker-Freyseng said that Dr. Kalk told him he had seen Rascher
in Milch’s office.

When the film was shown in Milch’s office on 11 September 1942, Milch
was not present. Wolfgang Lutz testified that Milch had negotiated
directly with Himmler regarding the execution of such experiments
without consulting the Medical Inspectorate. Rudolf Brandt stated that
Milch was fully informed about the low-pressure experiments. As late as
January 1943, Milch had not replied to the letter sent him by Wolff,
asking for the assignment of Rascher to the SS.

This, in brief, constitutes the case against Erhard Milch in connection
with the medical experiments. In order to find Milch guilty on this
count of the indictment, it must be established that—

   1. Milch had knowledge of the experiments.
   2. That, having knowledge, he knew they were criminal in scope and
      execution.
   3. That he had this knowledge in time to act to prevent the
      experiments.
   4. That he had the power to prevent them.

In pressing this count against the defendant, the prosecution has the
burden, as it has the burden in every count, to prove the guilt of the
defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. We begin our deliberations with the
cardinal rule that the defendant is presumed to be innocent. Glancing at
the evidence as a whole, it is a facile matter to say that the defendant
must have known of the experiments; that, with so much smoke, there must
be fire. But in addition to smoke, there must be light.

The proof against Milch on this count is entirely circumstantial, and
before we can find him guilty we must conclude that every hypothesis
resulting from the circumstances is consistent with guilt and
inconsistent with innocence. One can easily reach the hypothesis of
guilt from the documents and testimony but that hypothesis in many of
its phases is also consistent with innocence. Thus, applying the rule of
evidence just cited, the test of guilt fails.

So far as chronology is concerned, Milch does not come into the picture
of the experiments until 20 May 1942 with a letter in which he states
that his medical inspector informed him that the high-altitude
experiments had been completed. Obviously if they were completed there
was nothing he could do to prevent them. Nor did the medical inspector
or anyone else testify that Milch was informed of the precise nature of
the experiments. Further, there is no evidence that Milch ever received
any reports at all on the freezing experiments.

No one ever suggested that Milch attended the operations at Dachau or
that he ever gave an order that human beings were to be used to the
point of death.

If we can imagine the pieces of evidence on this count as irregularly
shaped blocks of wood floating on water, we find these blocks
occasionally coming together and dovetailing into a pattern of guilt,
but then we find them separating and just as often forming the pattern
of innocence. No man should be convicted on evidence that does not
remain fixed and immovable in granitic solidity. Guilt cannot be founded
on a set of facts from which arguments are equally convincing as to
guilt and as to innocence. Remarks such as “the defendant must have
known,” or “to the best of my knowledge he knew,” and other similar
inconclusive conjectures frequently used in this part of the case are
not the kind of links which are imperatively needed to make up a chain
strong enough to sustain the weight of a conviction.

The defendant is found not guilty on the second count of the indictment.

Though Milch is acquitted of complicity and participation in the medical
experiments, we have nonetheless commented on those experiments at
length. We have done this because otherwise the reference to Milch’s
acquittal standing alone might convey impression that the experiments
themselves were not criminal. The Tribunal holds that the _corpus
delicti_ was established and a crime was committed, even though Milch is
not guilty of it.

                            (c) Count Three

The third count of the indictment charges the defendant with crimes
against humanity (slave labor and fatal medical experiments) committed
on German nationals and nationals of other countries. As we have found
him not guilty on count two, we necessarily also find him not guilty of
the crime of fatal medical experiments in count three. We have, however,
adjudicated him guilty on count one, and since the evidence establishes
that nationals of other countries were also victims of slave labor under
his control, we thus find Erhard Milch guilty on that part of the third
count which covers the nationals of other countries. Sufficient proof
was not submitted as to slave labor offenses against German nationals to
justify an adjudication of guilt on that ground.

Thus, in recapitulation, we find the defendant guilty on count one, not
guilty on count two, not guilty on count three insofar as it appertains
to German nationals and guilty wherein it refers to “nationals of other
countries.” In reaching these conclusions, we inescapably ascertain that
Erhard Milch was a full-fledged member of the National Socialist Party
of Germany. Further, that he adhered to the doctrines of this Party
which, with the almost cataclysmic force of planetary violence, achieved
more destruction than has been known since man stood upright on the
shores of history. The conclusion is also unavoidable that it was
individuals like Milch that made the Hitler plan of war and subjugation
possible. Hitler was but one man and it was only because he had
brilliant and able coadjutors that he could develop a war machine which
achieved the incredible and fantastic record of smashing Poland in 18
days, striking France to her knees in 2 months, driving England from the
continent in 6 weeks, overrunning Holland and Belgium in a few days,
vanquishing Norway in several weeks, and Denmark overnight.

In those days of spectacular triumph, Milch had no complaint against
Hitler. But it was precisely then that Hitler was working his greatest
harm to Germany because it was inevitable that the people he had
temporarily crushed would rise again and not rest until the evil power
responsible for their suffering was destroyed. If Milch had entertained
the loyalty to his people which he now professes, then was the time to
withdraw from a program which was wreaking a devastation so universal
that no country, including Germany, could escape.

The defendant stated from the witness stand he could not withdraw
because he owed fealty to Hitler and to the German people. His loyalty
to Hitler was loyalty to a man who he now states had marked him for
liquidation, and so far as allegiance to the German people is concerned,
they can feel no gratitude for an allegiance which increased their ruin,
magnified their misery, and pushed them only deeper into the pit of
despair. The Germans could do without a devotion of that kind.

The defendant apparently gained the impression in our questioning of him
that some heroic sacrifice was expected on his part. We never intended,
nor was it suggested, that he should take any action which could result
in the forfeiture of his life. But he did himself volunteer from the
witness stand that on two occasions he was ready to tell Hitler the
truth even if it should mean his execution. If he was prepared to
sacrifice his life on so futile a gesture, he could have taken some
action which involved less hazard. He could thus, at least to that
extent, have contributed to honesty and justice by refraining from
threatening with death and whipping those who did not give of their last
ounce of energy in the production of ordnance whose muzzles would
eventually be turned on Germany itself.

In his last statement in court Milch declared that he was indifferent to
his fate but he was interested in seeing Germany relieved of her
suffering and re-admitted to the community of nations as an equal
partner. We do not believe that any intelligent person can be
indifferent to his fate, although one can summon sufficient spiritual
fortitude to rise above an immediate regret. With regard to Milch’s wish
for the German people, he has definitely performed one service in
pulling aside the curtain to disclose to them the stupidities, the
vanities, and the arrogances of their leaders which brought about their
present state. The record of this case will particularly, of course,
expose Milch’s own errors and his transgressions against international
law, the laws and customs of war, the moral code of humanity and even
commandments 4 and 7 of the 10 commandments of the German soldier.

The purpose of these postwar trials obviously is not vengeance. The
object aimed at (as in the criminal jurisprudence of all civilized
nations) is the ascertainment of truth. When guilt is established, the
penalty imposed is to serve as a deterrent to all others who might be
similarly minded. Albert Speer, convicted in the first trial, stated
here in this courtroom that had trials such as these followed the First
World War, the Second World War might have been averted. Erhard Milch
may obtain some comfort from the realization that by the publication of
the evidence of this trial he is definitely contributing to the
education and well-being of Germany’s future, as indeed a precise
contribution is being made to the cause of world justice itself.

Over 155,000 Americans made the supreme sacrifice in Germany in this
war. These lads gave their lives for this ideal of world justice and
world peace. America sought no territorial aggrandizement or material
advantage. The American flag in this courtroom ensured to the defendant
all the guarantees of the United States Constitution as to a fair trial.
No person within the continental limits of the United States itself
could have wished for a fuller opportunity to demonstrate his innocence
of the charges brought against him.

America and her Allies bestowed upon Germany what no desire can achieve
and what no money can buy. The Allied nations gave the blood of their
youth to water the roots of the tree of liberty and tolerance which had
withered in the twelve-year drought of National Socialism. It is to
reveal who were responsible and what was responsible for the desiccation
of that tree and to proclaim to the world the inevitable consequences to
others who degrade the soil with the pollution and prussic acid of
oppression that these trials have been established. The present trial is
one chapter in the book which will forever condemn _Mein Kampf_ and
offer to the new German nation a volume of proved fact, whose every page
will tell of the sorrow awaiting any people which permit any man or men
to hoist deceit above truth, power above justice, oppression above
tolerance, war above peace and man above God.

                                        [Signed]  MICHAEL A. MUSMANNO
                                             JUDGE MILITARY TRIBUNAL II

-----

[160] The reference “T” is to the page of the mimeographed transcript.

[161] “IMT” refers to Trial of the Major War Criminals before the
International Military Tribunal, Vol. I, Nuremberg, Germany, 1947.

[162] Original German document read 50,000 but, due to clerical error,
translation of document which was submitted in Court read 500,000.
Incorrectness is obvious by total figure of 220,000 in last sentence.

[163] Chef Ansbildungawesen (Chief of Training).

[164] A word is missing here in the German original.

[165] Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt (German Institute for
Aviation Research). In this case, the reference is to the Medical
Section of the Institute.




           C. Concurring Opinion by Judge Fitzroy D. Phillips

This Tribunal has been duly organized and is now existing under the
authority of Ordnance No. 7 pursuant to the powers of the Military
Governor of the United States Zone of Occupation within Germany
expressly conferred therein and further pursuant to the powers conferred
upon the zone commander by Control Council Law No. 10 and Articles 10
and 11 of the Charter of the International Military Tribunal annexed to
the London agreement of 8 August 1945, and by authority of Executive
Order No. 9819 signed and issued by Harry S. Truman, President of the
United States of America, the pertinent parts of said order as follows:

    “By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and
    the statutes, and as President of the United States and
    Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, it
    is ordered as follows:

    “1. I hereby designate Fitzroy Donald Phillips, Judge of a
    Superior Court in the State of North Carolina; Robert Morrell
    Toms, Judge of the Third Judicial Circuit Court, Detroit,
    Michigan; and Captain Michael A. Musmanno (S), USNR, 086622, as
    the members, and John Joshua Speight as the alternate member of
    one of the several military tribunals established by the
    Military Governor for the United States Zone of Occupation
    within Germany pursuant to the quadripartite agreement of the
    Control Council for Germany, enacted December 20, 1945, as
    Control Council Law No. 10, and pursuant to Articles 10 and 11
    of the Charter of the International Military Tribunal, which
    Tribunal was established by the Government of the United States
    of America, the Provisional Government of the French Republic,
    the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
    Northern Ireland, and the Government of the Union of Soviet
    Socialist Republics, for the trial and punishment of major war
    criminals of the European Axis. Such members and alternate
    member may, at the direction of the Military Governor of the
    United States Zone of Occupation, serve on any of the several
    military tribunals above mentioned.”

and as such Tribunal, has jurisdiction to try and determine this case.

Subsequent to the organization of said Tribunal, Telford Taylor,
Brigadier General, United States Army, Chief of Counsel for War Crimes,
prepared and caused to be prepared a bill of indictment charging the
defendant, Erhard Milch, with certain war crimes and crimes against
humanity as will appear more specifically hereinafter in this judgment
and on 14 November 1946 caused said bill of indictment to be duly served
upon the defendant, Erhard Milch, by the Marshal for the United States
Military Tribunals according to the provisions of law.

Thereafter said bill of indictment was made returnable and said cause
set for trial before United States Military Tribunal No. II. Whereupon,
Dr. I. Friedrich Bergold of the Nuernberg, Germany, bar was duly
appointed as counsel for the defendant and accepted such appointment.

On 20 December 1946, at 9:30 a.m. in the Palace of Justice, Nuernberg,
Germany, the defendant, Erhard Milch, being present in court and
represented by his counsel, Dr. I. Friedrich Bergold, and the United
States of America being represented by Telford Taylor, Brigadier
General, United States Army, Chief of Counsel for War Crimes, and
Honorable Clark Denney of counsel, the Tribunal duly arraigned the
defendant upon the charges contained in the bill of indictment against
him, and the defendant when called upon to plead to the bill of
indictment entered a plea of Not Guilty. Whereupon the Tribunal set the
date of 2 January 1947, for the trial of said case and adjourned until
said time.

On 2 January 1947, United States Military Tribunal No. II met in the
Palace of Justice, Nuernberg, Germany, and commenced the trial of this
case.

The bill of indictment charging the defendant, Erhard Milch, with
certain and specific war crimes and crimes against humanity is
summarized as follows:

_Count One_: War crimes involving murder, slave labor, deportation of
civilian populations for slave labor, cruel and inhuman treatment of
foreign laborers, and the use of prisoners of war in war operations by
force and compulsion.

_Count Two_: War crimes involving murder, subjecting involuntary victims
to low-pressure and freezing experiments, resulting in torture and
death.

_Count Three_: Crimes against humanity, involving murder and the same
unlawful acts specified in counts one and two against German nationals
and nationals of other countries.

The trial was conducted in two languages in the main, English and
German, and in English, German, and French when French witnesses were
testifying.

The hearing of evidence and the arguments of counsel concluded on 25
March 1947.

The prosecution offered three witnesses who gave evidence orally and 161
written exhibits, several exhibits containing many documents. The
defense offered 27 witnesses who gave evidence orally and the defendant
also testified in his own behalf, and in addition to oral evidence the
defendant offered 51 written exhibits. The exhibits as offered by both
the prosecution and defense contained documents, photographs,
affidavits, interrogatories, letters, maps, charts, and other written
evidence.

A complete stenographic record of everything said and done in court has
been made as well as an electrical recording of all the proceedings.

Copies of all the documents and written evidence offered by the
prosecution have been supplied to the defense in the German language.
The applications made by the defendant for the production of witnesses
and documents were passed upon by the Tribunal and orders made in
pursuance thereof. The Tribunal, after examination, granted all of the
defense applications which in their opinion were relevant to the defense
of the defendant and denied a few that the Tribunal found not to be
relevant. Facilities were provided for obtaining those witnesses and
documents granted through the Office of the Secretary General of the
Tribunal.

Much of the evidence presented to the Tribunal on behalf of the
prosecution was documentary evidence captured by the Allied armies in
German army headquarters, government buildings, and elsewhere, and some
of said documents were captured in the private files of the defendant
himself. The case therefore against the defendant rests in a large
measure on the documents thus obtained. The documents offered against
the defendant on the part of the prosecution were in a large measure of
his own making or those that were made in the organizations of which he
was a member and largely under his control, and the authenticity of
which has not been challenged except in a few cases and in those he
challenged them mainly on the correctness of the transcript and not upon
the subject matter as a whole. The evidence, oral and written, together
with exhibits and documents contain approximately 3,000 pages which
constitutes the record in this case.

The trial was conducted generally along the lines as are usually
followed in trial courts of the United States except as to the rules of
evidence, and as to those the Tribunal was not bound by technical rules
of evidence and admitted any and all evidence which it deemed to have
probative value and in strict compliance with the provisions of Article
VII of Ordnance No. 7.

The Tribunal has kept in mind throughout the entire trial that this was
a Tribunal established for the purpose of trying major war criminals and
in this particular case a fallen military field marshal of a conquered
nation, and that he was entitled to the Anglo-Saxon and English common
law presumption that he was innocent until his guilt was established
beyond a reasonable doubt.

Article II of Control Council No. 10 is as follows:

                              “ARTICLE II

    “1. Each of the following acts is recognized as a crime:

    “(_a_) _Crimes against Peace._ Initiation of invasions of other
    countries and wars of aggression in violation of international
    laws and treaties, including but not limited to planning,
    preparation, initiation or waging a war of aggression, or a war
    in violation of international treaties, agreements or
    assurances, or participation in a common plan or conspiracy for
    the accomplishment of any of the foregoing.

    “(_b_) _War Crimes._ Atrocities or offenses against persons or
    property constituting violations of the laws or customs of war,
    including but not limited to, murder, ill-treatment or
    deportation to slave labor or for any other purpose, of civilian
    population from occupied territory, murder or ill-treatment of
    prisoners of war or persons on the seas, killing of hostages,
    plunder of public or private property, wanton destruction of
    cities, towns or villages, or devastation not justified by
    military necessity.

    “(_c_) _Crimes against Humanity._ Atrocities and offenses,
    including but not limited to murder, extermination, enslavement,
    deportation, imprisonment, torture, rape, or other inhumane acts
    committed against any civilian population, or persecutions on
    political, racial or religious grounds whether or not in
    violation of the domestic laws of the country where perpetrated.

    “(_d_) Membership in categories of a criminal group or
    organization declared criminal by the International Military
    Tribunal.

    “2. Any person without regard to nationality or the capacity in
    which he acted is deemed to have committed a crime as defined in
    paragraph 1 of this Article, if he (_a_) was a principal or
    (_b_) was an accessory to the commission of any such crime or
    ordered or abetted the same or (_c_) took a consenting part
    therein or (_d_) was connected with plans or enterprises
    involving its commission or (_e_) was a member of any
    organization or group connected with the commission of any such
    crime or (_f_) with reference to paragraph 1 (_a_), if he held a
    high political, civil or military (including General Staff)
    position in Germany or in one of its Allies, co-belligerents or
    satellites or held high position in the financial, industrial or
    economic life of any such country.

    “3. Any person found guilty of any of the crimes above-mentioned
    may upon conviction be punished as shall be determined by the
    Tribunal to be just. Such punishment may consist of one or more
    of the following:

    “(_a_) Death.

    “(_b_) Imprisonment for life or a term of years, with or without
    hard labor.

    “(_c_) Fine, and imprisonment with or without hard labor, in
    lieu thereof.

    “(_d_) Forfeiture of property.

    “(_e_) Restitution of property wrongfully acquired.

    “(_f_) Deprivation of some or all civil rights.

    “Any property declared to be forfeited or the restitution of
    which is ordered by the Tribunal shall be delivered to the
    Control Council for Germany, which shall decide on its disposal.

    “4. (_a_) The official position of any person, whether as Head
    of State or as a responsible official in a Government
    Department, does not free him from responsibility for a crime or
    entitle him to mitigation of punishment.

    “(_b_) The fact that any person acted pursuant to the order of
    his Government or of a superior does not free him from
    responsibility for a crime, but may be considered in mitigation.

    “5. In any trial or prosecution for a crime herein referred to,
    the accused shall not be entitled to the benefits of any statute
    of limitation in respect of the period from 30 January 1933 to 1
    July 1945, nor shall any immunity, pardon, or amnesty granted
    under the Nazi regime be admitted as a bar to trial or
    punishment.”

The defendant stands indicted for the violation particularly of the
provisions of section _b_, which defines war crimes, and for the
violation of the provisions of section _c_, which defines crimes against
humanity, and for the violations of certain provisions of international
conventions, particularly of Articles 4, 5, 6, 7, 46, and 52 of the
Hague Regulations, 1907, and of Articles 2, 3, 4, 6, and 31 of the
Prisoner-of-War Convention, Geneva, 1929, the laws and customs of war,
the general provisions of criminal law as derived from the criminal laws
of all civilized nations, the internal penal laws of the countries in
which such crimes were committed, and further as particularly defined in
Article II of the Control Council Law No. 10.

The first count in the bill of indictment has been designated by the
prosecution as “Slave Labor,” the second count as “Medical Experiments”
and the third count as “Slave Labor and Medical Experiments upon German
Nationals.” The pertinent rules of law that are applicable in this case
will now be considered, and we shall consider briefly some salient
precepts and prohibitions of international law up to and including the
provisions of Control Council Law No. 10.

The prosecution has offered evidence which tended to show that much of
the labor which supplied Germany with the tools of absolute and total
war was extracted from people who had been uprooted from their homes in
occupied territories and imported to Germany against their will and
often under the most trying and difficult circumstances. Displacement of
groups of persons from one country to another is the proper concern of
international law in as far as it affects the community of nations.
International law has enunciated certain conditions under which the fact
of deportation of civilians from one nation to another during times of
war becomes a crime. If the transfer is carried out without a legal
title, as in the case where people are deported from a country occupied
by an invader while the occupied enemy still has an army in the field
and is still resisting, the deportation is contrary to international
law. The rationale of this rule lies in the supposition that the
occupying power has temporarily prevented the rightful sovereign from
exercising its power over its citizens. Articles 43, 46, 49, 52, 55, and
56, Hague Regulations, which limit the rights of the belligerent
occupant, do not expressly specify as crime the deportation of civilians
from an occupied territory. Article 52 states the following provisions
and conditions under which services may be demanded from the inhabitants
of occupied countries:

    1. They must be for the needs of the army of occupation.

    2. They must be in proportion to the resources of the country.

    3. They must be of such a nature as not to involve the
    inhabitants in the obligation to take part in military
    operations against their own country.

Insofar as this section limits the conscription of labor to that
required for the needs of the army of occupation, it is manifestly clear
that the use of labor from occupied territories outside of the area of
occupation is forbidden by the Hague Regulations.

The second condition under which deportation becomes a crime occurs when
the purpose of the displacement is illegal, such as deportation for the
purpose of compelling the deportees to manufacture weapons for use
against their homeland or to be assimilated in the working economy of
the occupying country. The defense as contained in this case is that
persons were deported from France into Germany legally and for a lawful
purpose by contending that such deportations were authorized by
agreements and contracts between Nazi and Vichy French authorities. The
Tribunal holds that this defense is both technically and substantially
deficient. The Tribunal takes judicial notice of the fact that after the
capitulation of France and the subsequent occupation of French territory
by the German army, a puppet government was established in France and
located at Vichy. This government was established at the instance of the
German Army and was controlled by its officials according to the
dictates and demands of the occupying army and a contract made by the
German Reich with such a government as was established in France
amounted to in truth and in fact a contract that on its face was null
and void. The Vichy Government, until the Allies regained control of the
French Republic, amounted to no more than a tool of the German Reich. It
will be borne in mind that at no time during the Vichy regime a peace
treaty had been signed between the French Republic and the German Reich
but merely a cessation of hostilities and an armistice prevailed, and
that French resistance had at no time ceased and that France at all
times still had an army in the field resisting the German Reich.

The third and final condition, under which deportation becomes illegal,
occurs whenever generally recognized standards of decency and humanity
are disregarded. This flows from the established principle of law that
an otherwise permissible act becomes a crime when carried out in a
criminal manner. A close study of the pertinent parts of Control Council
Law No. 10 strengthens the conclusions of the foregoing statements that
deportation of the population is criminal whenever there is no title in
the deporting authority or whenever the purpose of the displacement is
illegal or whenever the deportation is characterized by inhumane or
illegal methods.

Article II (1) (_c_) of Control Council Law No. 10 specifies certain
crimes against humanity. Among those is listed the deportation of any
civilian population. The general language of this sub-section as applied
to deportation indicates that Control Council Law No. 10 has
unconditionally contended as a crime against humanity every instance of
the deportation of civilians. Article II (1) (_b_) names deportation to
slave labor as a war crime. Article II (1) (_c_) states that the
enslavement of any civilian population is a crime against humanity. Thus
Law No. 10 treats as separate crimes and different types of crime
“deportation to slave labor” and “enslavement.” The Tribunal holds that
the deportation, the transportation, the retention, the unlawful use,
and the inhumane treatment of civilian populations by an occupying power
are crimes against humanity.

The Hague and Geneva Conventions codify the precepts of the law and
usages of all civilized nations. Article 31 of the Geneva Convention
provides that labor furnished by prisoners of war shall have no direct
relation to war operations. Thus the convention forbids (1) the use of
prisoners of war in manufacture or transportation of arms or ammunitions
of any kind; and (2) the use for transporting of matériel intended for
combat units. The Hague Regulations contain comparable provisions. The
essence of the crime is the misuse of prisoners of war derived from the
kind of work to which they are assigned, in other words, to work
directly connected with the war effort. The Tribunal holds as a matter
of law that it is illegal to use prisoners of war in armament factories
and factories engaged in the manufacture of airplanes for use in the war
effort.

Now, considering the basic charges and the law governing the charge
against the defendant in which it alleges his responsibility for and
participation in the medical experiment program, the fundamental crime
with which the defendant is charged in this connection is murder. Also
involved are various atrocities, tortures, offenses against the person,
and other inhumane acts. The provisions of Control Council Law No. 10,
which are applicable to this charge, to wit, Article II, are “_b._ War
crimes” and “_c._ Crimes against humanity.” The bill of indictment
charges:

    “A. War crimes, namely violations of the laws and customs of war
    as to medical experiments performed involuntarily upon persons,
    some of whom were prisoners of war and citizens of countries who
    were at war with the German Reich, and other deported citizens
    from other countries who were at war with the German Reich
    involving the commission of murders, tortures, and other
    inhumane acts.

    “B. Crimes against humanity, namely medical experiments
    performed upon involuntary German nationals and nationals of
    other countries in the course of which brutalities, murders, and
    other inhumane acts were committed.”

The prosecution contends that the defendant Milch did not personally
participate in or personally direct, counsel, or initiate such medical
experiments but that the same was done by members of his command and
that he was personally responsible for their conduct by virtue of the
authority that he held over his subordinates.

In this connection in the recent case before the United States Supreme
Court in re Yamashita, the opinion of which was handed down by the
Supreme Court of the United States at the October term, 1945, of said
Court, some of the pertinent holdings in this case are as follows:

    “It is evident that the conduct of military operations by troops
    whose excesses are unrestrained by the orders or efforts of
    their commander would almost certainly result in violations
    which it is the purpose of the law of war to prevent. Its
    purpose to protect civilian populations and prisoners of war
    from brutality would largely be defeated if the commander of an
    invading army could with impunity neglect to take reasonable
    measures for their protection. Hence the law of war presupposes
    that its violation is to be avoided through the control of the
    operations of war by commanders who are to some extent
    responsible for their subordinates.

    “This is recognized by the annex to Fourth Hague Convention of
    1907, respecting the laws and customs of war on land. Article I
    lays down the condition which an armed force must fulfill in
    order to be accorded the rights of lawful belligerents, that it
    must be commanded by a person responsible for his subordinates.

    “These provisions plainly imposed on petitioner, who at the time
    specified, was Military Governor of the Philippines, as well as
    commander of the Japanese forces, an affirmative duty to take
    such measures as were within his power and appropriate in the
    circumstances to protect prisoners of war and the civilian
    population. This duty of a commanding officer has heretofore
    been recognized, and its breach is penalized by our own military
    tribunals.

    “* * * It is plain that the charge on which petitioner was tried
    charged him with a breach of his duty to control the operations
    of the members of his command, by permitting them to commit the
    specified atrocities. This was enough to require the commission
    to hear evidence tending to establish the culpable failure of
    the petitioner to perform the duty imposed on him by the law of
    war and to pass upon its sufficiency to establish guilt.”

I am of the opinion and find as a fact from the evidence in this case
that the defendant Milch between the years 1939 and 1945 was State
Secretary in the Air Ministry, Inspector General of the Air Force,
Deputy to the Commander in Chief of the Air Force, a member of the Nazi
Party. The defendant Milch was also Field Marshal in the Luftwaffe, 1940
to 1945; Air Quartermaster General, 1941 to 1944; member of the Central
Planning Board, 1942 to 1945; and Chief of the Jaegerstab, 1944 to 1945.

After hearing the evidence of both the prosecution and defense, and
after having heard the arguments of counsel, and after having fully
considered all of the evidence, the following facts are concluded:

                              COUNT NO. I
                             _SLAVE LABOR_

That the defendant, Erhard Milch, was born in Germany on 30 March 1892,
that he was a member of the Air Force of the German Army in World War I
and was a contemporary in said air force with Goering, Udet, and others;
that after the termination of World War I he returned to Germany, had a
business and later was connected with the manufacture of civilian
airplanes.

Prior to the outbreak of World War II he became a member of the Nazi
Party and materially aided in the rebuilding of the air force of the
German Reich. Shortly prior to the outbreak of World War II he visited
various countries as a personal emissary of the Fuehrer, Hitler; to
France, England, Holland, Italy and other countries in an effort to
establish so-called permanent peace between the German Reich and these
nations. That on 23 May 1939, the defendant attended a conference for
the purpose of planning World War II with the following present: Hitler,
Goering, Col. Gen. von Brauchitsch, Col. Gen. Keitel, Gen. Halder, Gen.
Bodenschatz, Rear Admiral Schniewind, Col. (GSC.) Jeschonnek, Col.
Warlimont, Lieut. Col. Schmundt, Captain Engel, Lieut. Commander
Albrecht, and Captain v. Below. At the time of this meeting the
defendant held a high position in the German Army, to wit, the rank of
colonel general.[166]

At this meeting the Fuehrer, Hitler, gave his plan of aggressive war,
and in this plan was included the attack of Poland at the first suitable
opportunity; what the struggle would be like; the question of a short or
long war; England’s weakness; the consequences of such a war; the
unrestricted use of all resources available; the plan of attack; and the
working principles of an entire and complete program. Aggressive war was
planned and initiated at this meeting, and the defendant was one of the
high-ranking officers who counseled and approved of the plan.

After the outbreak of the war and the subsequent attack on Poland, the
defendant actively participated in the prosecution of aggressive war
until after the capitulation and fall of France. From that time on he
did not participate as a combat officer but was used in the general
economy for the prosecution of war in Germany, and particularly as to
the building and maintenance of the Luftwaffe. Later he was elevated to
the rank of field marshal in the Luftwaffe and was second in command
only to Goering.

The defendant was a member of the Central Planning Board which was
established and organized in April 1942, and said organization served as
a means of consolidating in a single agency all controls over German war
production. The Central Planning Board held regular meetings, and the
defendant presided over and was present at a majority of such meetings.
The Central Planning Board at each meeting kept full minutes, and a
great number of said minutes have been submitted to the Tribunal and
reflect the fact that the defendant had a dominant role in the meetings
of said board. The scope and authority of the Central Planning Board is
contained in the minutes of a meeting held on 27 April 1942, and the
duties and responsibilities of the board, according to said minutes,
were announced as follows:

    “The Central Planning in the Four Year Plan (Decree of the Reich
    Marshal of Greater Germany of 22 April 1942) is a task for
    leaders. It encompasses only principles and executive matters.
    It makes unequivocal decisions and supervises the execution of
    its directives. The Central Planning does not rely on anonymous
    institutions difficult to control but always on individuals and
    fully responsible persons who are free in the selection of their
    work methods and their collaboration as far as there are no
    directives issued by the Central Planning.”

On 20 October 1942, the statutes of the Central Planning Board were
published and distributed, a portion of which are as follows:

    “The Central Planning Board, created by the Fuehrer and the
    Reich Marshal in order to unify armament and war economy, deals
    only with the decision of basic questions. Professional
    questions remain the task of the competent departments, which in
    their field remain responsible within the framework of the
    decisions made by the Central Planning Board.”

The Central Planning Board was superior to “the highest Reich authority,
the Reich protector, the Governor General, and the executive authorities
in the occupied countries.”

The International Military Tribunal found that the Central Planning
Board “had supreme authority for the scheduling of German production and
the allocation and development of raw materials.” The International
Tribunal found further in its opinion, in the case of United States vs.
Goering and others, “that the Central Planning Board requisitioned labor
from Sauckel with full knowledge that the demands could be supplied only
by foreign forced labor and that the board determined the basic
allocation of this labor within the German war economy.” The
International Military Tribunal found further in its opinion the
following:

    “In the fall of 1943 Funk (who was then indicted before said
    Tribunal in regard to deportation and the use of foreign forced
    labor in the German Reich) was a member of the Central Planning
    Board which determined the total number of laborers needed for
    German industry, and required Sauckel to produce them, usually
    by deportation from occupied territories * * * but Funk was
    aware that the board of which he was a member was demanding the
    importation of slave laborers, and allocating them to the
    various industries under his control.”

The prosecution offered evidence which tended to show that Albert Speer
was the Plenipotentiary for Armament and was the nominal head of the
Central Planning Board and that the defendant was a member of said board
and was, by the order of Hitler, assigned to assist Speer as the head of
said board. During much of the time of the existence of said board Speer
was ill and unable to attend the meetings and look after the duties of
the board and during this time the defendant was the acting head of said
board and presided over its meetings as chairman.

Fritz Sauckel was Plenipotentiary for Labor and was directly responsible
for the procurement and allocation of labor to the various war
industries. However, the Tribunal finds as a fact that although Sauckel
had the primary duty of procuring and allocating labor, the Central
Planning Board on many occasions, as the minutes of the meetings of said
board show, called Milch into conference with the members of the Central
Planning Board and in such conferences labor was assigned and allocated
by the Central Planning Board and Sauckel. The minutes of the Central
Planning Board, as introduced by the prosecution, show that the members
of the Central Planning Board knew and discussed the fact that labor was
being deported from occupied countries against their will and were being
used in various factories manufacturing armaments, airplanes, and other
articles essential and necessary to the war effort, that such foreign
workers were being forcibly taken from their homes without knowledge of
their destination, and by force and against their will, crowded into box
cars without food or water or toilet facilities, transported great
distances, and forced to work in factories manufacturing war materials
and other necessary items for the prosecution of the war as slave
laborers.

I find as a fact that the defendant Milch had knowledge of the way and
manner in which such labor was procured and the work that they were
forced to do, and that he aided, abetted, counseled, advised, and
assisted in the deportation, allocation, and work of said slave
laborers.

The documents and reports of the meetings as offered by the prosecution
are too voluminous to incorporate herein, but said records clearly show
that the defendant was one of the authorized agents who dealt with the
procurement, deportation, and work of thousands and thousands of slave
laborers from occupied countries.

                              _JAEGERSTAB_

I find as a fact that it was the defendant who conceived and instigated
the formation of the Jaegerstab, and that the defendant directed its
activities and acted as its chairman. The Jaegerstab assumed control
over fighter production and exploited foreign forced labor in the
armament industry and directed the use of the same. The Jaegerstab was
assigned top priority for their projects, for the recruitment and
commitment of manpower in the air armament industry. From the meetings
of said board as offered in evidence by the prosecution, the question of
manpower was time and time again referred to by the defendant. When
other methods of obtaining its labor was not forthcoming, the Jaegerstab
recruited its own labor either directly or by engineering snatching
expeditions for the seizure of manpower arriving on transports from the
East.

At one of the meetings of the Jaegerstab, Prosecution Exhibit 54, page
28, the defendant made this statement to his subordinates, that
“international law cannot be observed here.” When the question of
Italian civilian labor was being discussed at a meeting of the
Jaegerstab, the defendant made the statement and advocated the shooting
of those who attempted to escape in transit.

I find as a fact that the Jaegerstab was not a mere discussion group but
was an agency with absolute authority over fighter production and acted
by orders and directives, fixed hours of labor and conditions of work,
and on one occasion fixed the established hours of work per week in the
aircraft industry at seventy-two hours.

Much of the labor employed by the Jaegerstab in aircraft production and
in the air armament industry was from concentration camp inmates and
foreign forced labor. The defendant was well acquainted with the
procurement and allocation of this labor.

I find as a fact, from the evidence offered in the case, that after the
arrival of forced slave labor from occupied countries they were poorly
fed, poorly clothed, were forced to work an excessive amount of hours
each week, and that their general condition and treatment as a result of
such forced labor resulted in the death of a great many and the
permanent disability of others, both in body and in mind.

                        _GENERALLUFTZEUGMEISTER_

I find as a fact from the evidence offered in the case, that the
defendant, as Generalluftzeugmeister, had complete control of aircraft
production and that he requisitioned labor for the aircraft industry
with knowledge of the brutal and inhuman techniques in recruiting these
laborers; and that he gave directives for the criminal treatment of the
same in the centers of production. Fritz Sauckel, Plenipotentiary for
Labor, stated that it was “Milch who produced manpower figures for
aviation.” Albert Speer testified as follows: “The requests of the air
armament industry for laborers were presented by Milch, and he did not
permit anyone to take this right away from him until March 1944.”

I find as a fact from the evidence offered on the part of the
prosecution, that prisoners of war were included in the manpower that
the defendant was requisitioning and distributing to the aircraft
industry with full knowledge that they were prisoners of war. As chief
of aircraft production, the defendant regulated the treatment of foreign
forced labor in the German aircraft industry, fixed hours of labor and
conditions of work, and by directives to his subordinates formulated the
basic policy for the handling of such labor within the industry.

The evidence presented by the prosecution tended to show that the
defendant advocated the most extreme measures in dealing with foreign
forced labor, inhuman measures which violated every recognized principle
of decency. When foreign forced laborers refused to work, the defendant
ordered that they be shot. When they attempted to revolt the defendant
directed that some of their numbers be killed, regardless of their
personal guilt or innocence. In the case of prisoners of war who
attempted to escape, the defendant ordered that these prisoners be shot
and later hanged in the factory for all to see. On one occasion the
defendant made the following statement, Prosecution Exhibit 145:

    “The other day I talked to Himmler about it, and I told him that
    his main task should be to see to the production of German
    industry in case of internal uprisings of the foreign workers. I
    said that consequently a well established method should exist,
    and I have already given orders to the Chief A. W.[167] and to
    the training stations to get military training in this field.
    If, for instance, in the Locality X an uprising is started, then
    a sergeant with a few men, or else a lieutenant with thirty men
    has to turn up in the plant, and first of all shoot into the
    crowd with a machine gun. What he should do after is to shoot
    down as many people as possible in case of revolt. I have given
    orders to that effect, and even if our own foreign workers are
    involved—and then every tenth man is to be singled out and shot
    while the others are lined up and see him.”

On another occasion, Prosecution Exhibit 148, when the defendant was
speaking of the treatment of foreign workers, he made the following
statement.

    “In all these matters energetic interference must be made. I am
    of the opinion that there should be only two types of punishment
    in such cases; firstly, a concentration camp for foreigners, and
    secondly, capital punishment.”

The prosecution offered a great number of documents containing
statements made by the defendant in regard to orders and threats of
violence, for mistreatment and punishment, tortures, killings, and
hangings of foreign workers. Space is too short to quote in this
judgment all of such pertinent documents.

Although the defendant denied making a number of these statements
appearing in the documents, he admitted the authenticity and utterances
of many, with the excuse that he was a man of very violent temper, who,
when worried from overwork, was not wholly responsible for many
utterances made by him. He protested further that he did not actually
mean nor intend for orders given in such fits of temper to be carried
out, but they were simply the result of uncontrolled anger, and
understood by his associates and subordinates to have been uttered in
such vein. In further extenuation he declared that head injuries
resulting from two serious accidents were largely responsible for such
uncontrollable temper.

I have given due consideration to the explanation given by the defendant
and am compelled to reject it. If but only a few of such remarks could
be attributed to the defendant, his protestations might be given some
credence; but when statements such as appear in the documents have been
persistently made over long periods of time, at many places and under
such varying conditions, the only logical conclusion that can be reached
is that they reflect the true and considered attitude of the defendant
toward the Nazi foreign labor policy and its victims and are not mere
aberrations brought on by fits of uncontrollable anger. I find as a
fact, therefore, that the true attitude of the defendant toward foreign
laborers and prisoners of war is that reflected in the documents of the
prosecution and was not the result of uncontrollable fits of temper. I
find, further, that the defendant ordered, advised, counselled, and
procured inhumane and illegal treatment of foreign workers resulting in
permanent injury and death to many.

                              COUNT NO. 2
                         _MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS_

The prosecution contends that in violation of the laws of war and of
crimes against humanity, high-altitude and freezing experiments were
carried out by the Luftwaffe physicians at Dachau, and that said
physicians who conducted such experiments were under the command of and
subordinate to the defendant Milch.

I am of the opinion from the evidence offered on the part of the
prosecution that illegal and inhuman medical experiments were conducted
at Dachau by Luftwaffe physicians who were under the command and
subordinate to the defendant Milch and from which a great number of
deaths ensued to concentration camp inmates and that great pain and
suffering and permanent disability resulted to many others. I find as a
fact from the evidence offered on the part of the prosecution that Dr.
Erich Hippke was the Medical Inspector of the Luftwaffe and was the
direct subordinate of the defendant Milch; that Hippke gave authority
and ordered Dr. Rascher, a Luftwaffe physician, in the early spring of
1941 to use concentration camp inmates and prisoners of war as
high-altitude experimental subjects for the benefit of the Luftwaffe. I
further find, as a fact, that the witness Hippke at no time communicated
this information to the defendant Milch, nor has the prosecution offered
any direct evidence to the effect that the defendant Milch knew that
such experiments had been conducted until after their completion. All of
the testimony and the evidence, both for the prosecution and the
defense, is to the effect that the defendant Milch did not have such
knowledge of the high-altitude or low-pressure experiments which were
carried out and completed by Luftwaffe physicians at Dachau until after
the completion of such experiments. The evidence offered as to the
knowledge or responsibility of the defendant Milch was not of such a
nature as to show guilty knowledge on his part of said experiments.

As to the cooling or freezing experiments performed at concentration
camp, Dachau, for which the defendant is charged with responsibility, I
find as a fact that the defendant ordered experiments to be conducted at
the camp for the benefit of the Luftwaffe. In a letter from Milch to
Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff of the SS, dated 20 May 1942, the following is
stated:

    “In reference to your telegram of 12 May our medical inspector
    reports to me that the altitude experiments carried out by the
    SS and Luftwaffe at Dachau have been finished. Any continuation
    of these experiments seems essentially unreasonable. However,
    the carrying out of experiments of some other kind in regard to
    perils at high sea would be important. These have been prepared
    in immediate agreement with the proper offices. Oberstabsarzt
    Weltz will be charged with the execution and Stabsarzt Rascher
    will be made available until further order in addition to his
    duties with the medical corps of the Luftwaffe. A change of
    these measures does not appear necessary and an enlargement of
    the task is not considered pressing at this time.”

Further evidence makes it manifestly plain that subsequent to the
receipt of the letter of Wolff, officers of the Luftwaffe, under the
command and subordinate to the defendant, conducted medical experiments
on concentration camp inmates at Dachau, against their will, by placing
such experimental subjects in tanks of water of freezing temperatures,
and requiring them to remain there for long periods of time while
certain medical data concerning such subjects was gathered; and that as
a result of such experiments, many of the human subjects died or were
gravely injured.

The defendant admits giving orders for the conduct of experiments within
the scope of the authority conferred by the letter, but contends that he
did not know of, or contemplate, that the experiments would be conducted
in an illegal manner or would result in the injury or death of any
person. The defendant further asserts that he did not know or have any
reason to believe that the experiments were conducted in such manner
until after they had been completed. He therefore insists that he was
and is not responsible for the unlawful manner in which the experiments
were actually conducted by the Luftwaffe officers, and that he is not
guilty of any crime as a result thereof.

The Tribunal, in its majority opinion, has fully considered the decision
of the United States Supreme Court in the judgment in re Yamashita, and
has found that said decision is not controlling in the case at bar. In
weighing the evidence, the Tribunal was mindful of the fact that the
defendant gave the order and directed his subordinates to carry on such
experiments, and that thereafter he failed and neglected to take such
measures as were reasonably within his power to protect such subjects
from inhumane treatment and deaths as a result of such experiments.
Notwithstanding these facts, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the
evidence fails to disclose beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant
had any knowledge that the experiments would be conducted in an unlawful
manner and that permanent injury, inhumane treatment or deaths would
result therefrom.

Therefore, the Tribunal found that the defendant did not have such
knowledge as would amount to participation or responsibility on his part
and therefore found the defendant not guilty on charges contained in
count 2.

                              CONCLUSIONS

(1) I concur in the opinion of the Tribunal that war crimes and crimes
against humanity were committed by the defendant, including deportation,
enslavement, and mistreatment of millions of persons; and that as a
result thereof and in furtherance of such treatment, murders,
brutalities, cruelties, tortures, atrocities, and other inhumane acts
were committed in a large scale measure upon citizens of occupied
countries, prisoners of war, Jews, and other nationals. I agree further
that the defendant was a principal in, accessory to, ordered, abetted,
and took a consenting part therein. I also agree that for such acts and
conduct on the part of the defendant, he is guilty of charges contained
in count number one of the indictment.

The evidence produced during the trial upon the charges contained in
this count showed conclusively that countless millions of persons were
unlawfully deported, enslaved, and murdered. Especially were the Jews
mistreated, tortured and murdered merely because they were Jews and
their extermination desired. History discloses the fact that as early as
the year 1349 in the city of Nuernberg, and within sight of where this
opinion is being written, the citizens of Nuernberg drove the Jews from
their city, confiscated their property, and erected a market place on
the site of the Ghetto and the Liebfrauenkirche in place of the
Synagogue. The hatred of the Aryan German for the Jew seems to have been
constant during the many intervening years. History will record such
conduct as a blot upon the name of the present German generation for
many years to come.

(2) The Tribunal found the defendant not guilty of the charges contained
in count number two, and I concur in such finding.

Under the American concept of liberty, as brought to us by our
Anglo-Saxon heritage and the English Common Law, every person accused of
crime is presumed to be innocent until proof of his guilt is established
by the evidence and beyond a reasonable doubt. This presumption follows
him throughout the trial and until he is found guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt. In applying this God-given principle of liberty, one
eminent American jurist uttered the following words:

    “After considering and weighing all of the evidence you then
    find that your minds are disturbed, your convictions
    tempest-tossed, and your judgment, like the dove of the deluge,
    finds no place to rest; the law says you must acquit.”

The defendant was given the full benefit of these great and lasting
rules of law and has received at the hands of the Tribunal a fair and
impartial trial in full accord with the American concepts of justice
under the law.

(3) Count three of the indictment charges the defendant with crimes
against “German nationals and nationals of other countries.” I am of the
opinion that sufficient evidence was not produced by the prosecution to
justify an adjudication by the Tribunal of guilt as to German nationals
alone. However, as to such crimes against nationals of other countries,
the Tribunal has heretofore considered such charges and has made an
adjudication concerning the same in count number one of the indictment.
The conclusion of the Tribunal is that the same unlawful acts of
violence which constituted war crimes under count one of the indictment
also constitute crimes against humanity as alleged in count three of the
indictment. Therefore, the Tribunal found the defendant guilty of crimes
against humanity under count three, with which finding I concur.

In weighing the evidence, the Tribunal simulated the ancient customs of
using the seed of the oriental carob tree to balance the scales of
justice. The defendant should not now complain.

Therefore, for the reasons stated, I am in full agreement with the
judgment of the Tribunal and concur therein.

      Respectfully submitted this the 15th day of April, 1947
                                        [Signed]  FITZROY D. PHILLIPS
                                                  Fitzroy D. Phillips
                                        Judge, Military Tribunal No. II

-----

[166] See Table of Comparative Ranks, p. 331.

[167] Chef Ausbildungswesen (Chief of Training).




                            VIII. PETITIONS


           A. Extract from Petition for Clemency to Military
              Governor of United States Zone of Occupation

                                                  Nuernberg, 2 May 1947

To the Military Governor

                                PETITION

                                   of

                 Attorney-at-law Dr. Friedrich Bergold,
                  Nuernberg, Prinzregenten-Ufer 7/III,
                   Defense Counsel, Military Court II

                               Nuernberg

                    in Case II against the defendant
                  Erhard Milch, General Field Marshal,
               at present in the Court Prison, Nuernberg,
            to modify the sentence of the Military Court II

                               Nuernberg

                          on 16/17 April 1947.

                 *        *        *        *        *

                                   A

The sentence passed on counts I and III contains actual inaccuracies,
which are inconsistent with the recorded evidence. Obviously, these
errors have had an influence on the sentence as far as the award of
punishment is concerned. A correction of these errors would necessarily
lead to a less severe sentence.

1. The statements on page 3 of the judgment that Milch since 19 November
1941 was the second highest commander of the Luftwaffe is not in
agreement with the evidence. The witnesses have testified that from
1938-1941 Milch held only one of the four highest commanding posts under
Goering, and since 1941 two of the four highest Luftwaffe commanding
posts. Only in regard to seniority he was the oldest officer of these
four highest commands. This is important because evidence has been given
for the fact that the general staff of the Luftwaffe had the
responsibility for the armament program of the Luftwaffe.

2. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that the Central Planning
Board had been created by a decree of the Fuehrer of 29 October 1943. It
has been proved by the statement of Speer that the decree of 29 October
1943 was a decree issued by Speer a long time after the creation of the
Central Planning Board and without authorization of the defendant Milch.
Since this decree was issued by Speer for his sphere of administration
only, no conclusion can be drawn therefrom against the defendant.

3. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that the Court finds that
the Central Planning Board handled the labor problem as such. Exhibit
151 of the prosecution proved the opposite. The witnesses who have been
heard have confirmed that the Central Planning Board handled the labor
problem only for information purposes for the distribution and
production of raw materials and in order to clarify the untrue
statements of Sauckel. This Exhibit 151 constitutes essential new
evidence which is of greatest importance in regard to the verdict of the
International Military Tribunal.

4. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that the defendant had
admitted having seen Russian prisoners of war at service at 8.8 and 10.5
cm. antiaircraft guns in aircraft factories in Luftgau 7. The witness
Vorwald made this statement on the basis of his own observation.

It has been proved that Milch had nothing to do with the allocation of
Russians to the antiaircraft artillery (flak), and that he declared
himself against it.

5. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that Milch said that
Russian prisoners of war had volunteered for work in war plants. What he
did state—and this was in agreement with the witnesses Vorwald and
Foerster—was that Russian prisoners of war had volunteered for service
at the antiaircraft artillery (flak), with the reservation that they
would not be used for combatting Russian airplanes. This condition was
fulfilled. Thus, there is no question of an inadmissible use of
prisoners of war for war service.

6. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that Sauckel, the
Plenipotentiary for the Allocation of Labor, participated in at least 15
sessions of the Central Planning Board. Only 15 minutes concerning the
sessions [minutes of 15 sessions] of the Central Planning Board have
been submitted. These minutes prove that Sauckel was not present at most
of these sessions.

7. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that the defendant was
informed about the methods employed and the cruelties on the occasion of
the recruiting and utilization of foreign workers. All witnesses who
have been heard have stated the opposite. It is therefore not
permissible to assume without the basis of exact proof that Milch was
informed about these matters. The Court concludes from the fact that
foreign workers and prisoners of war had been used that Milch must
necessarily have recognized that the methods must have been cruel. Speer
has stated explicitly that the cruel methods were not necessary and
that, therefore, they were an error. But if they were not necessary then
the conclusion drawn from them without any explicit proof was not
permissible.

8. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that 100,000 Polish
prisoners of war were deported to concentration camps. The opposite has
been proved, viz., that Polish prisoners of war, in accordance with the
agreement between Russia and Germany were released from captivity and
employed as civilians.

9. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that Romanian nationals
were subjected to deportation. Not one single piece of evidence for that
has been submitted. Romania was mentioned by the defense only in
connection with the armistice agreement between Russia and Romania.

10. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that Milch used
Hungarian Jews. It is proved by the evidence that this did not happen
before the summer of 1944 when Milch had resigned from his positions.

11. It is not consistent with recorded evidence that the Schmundt
minutes must be correct, for the reason that if any allusion to a war
had been omitted, Hitler would not have spoken at all. It has been
proven that Hitler spoke merely theoretically about the world situation
in case there should be a war at some time. He did not mention that he
wanted to foment aggressive wars.

                                   B

The judgment states that the defendant recommended more drastic and more
cruel measures in regard to the recruiting and utilization of workers.
(Page 18 of the judgment.)

This is in discrepancy with the recorded evidence.

Here the defense does not argue about the separate reasons given by
Judge Michael A. Musmanno, since these reasons do not constitute the
official judgment. These reasons also contain factual errors and even
use material which has not been discussed during the trial.

These separate reasons, however, make it possible to draw a conclusion
in regard to the sentence of the judgment which states that the
defendant recommended more drastic and more cruel measures.

It has been proved through the evidence that utterances to that effect
were made by the defendant only in smaller circles and while he was in a
state of excitement. It has been proved that no action was ever taken in
conformity with these utterances. It has been proved that the defendant
never asked for action pursuant to such utterances. It has been proved
that he did not have any executive power in regard to any measures
whatsoever. It has finally been proved that the record concerning such
utterances must in part be incorrect.

Therefore, it has not been proved that the defendant approved such
cruelties or demanded them in earnest.

                                   C

The objection must be raised that the Military Tribunal did not clarify
at all the legal questions which were raised by the defense in
connection with the fact that the Russian Government has explicitly
renounced the Hague Convention concerning Land Warfare and the previous
Geneva Conventions. Since the Decree Number 7 of the Military Government
for Germany provides, in Article XV, that reasons have to be given for
the sentence, the Tribunal would have had to state its position in
regard to these questions. This also constitutes a defectiveness of the
verdict and this defect may possibly have had an influence on the award
of the punishment.

                                   D

The Military Tribunal has extensively referred on page 14 and 15 to the
verdict of the International Military Tribunal against Speer. The
Tribunal has therefore made the reasons of the International Military
Tribunal its own to a large extent.

But consequently the Military Tribunal would have had to examine the
problem of extenuating circumstances. The defense has already pointed
out that the fact that he organized protected factories constituted for
Speer an extenuating circumstance. During the trial it has been clearly
proved that Milch was the first who already in 1941 organized protected
factories, and that he was, therefore, the inventor of this kind of
employment.

The problem of extenuating circumstances involves further the
examination of the question, whether Milch had more to do with the
utilization of foreign workers and prisoners of war than Speer. This
examination was omitted. Exhibit Milch 55 and also all the evidence
proved that Speer’s participation in the utilization of foreign workers
and prisoners of war was considerably more extensive.

If the Tribunal had examined the extenuating circumstances, then the
result would undoubtedly have been that the defendant would have been
allowed extenuating circumstances on a large scale. Due to the fact that
the responsibility of Speer was greater than that of Milch, Milch should
not have received a more severe sentence than Speer.

Consideration should also have been given to the fact that it was proved
that Milch continually advocated restrictions in the employment of
foreign workers and of prisoners of war, and that he did indeed succeed
in achieving such restrictions.

Finally, consideration should also have been given to the fact that
Milch withdrew from his positions as early as spring and summer 1944,
and that he had nothing to do with the extraordinary aggravation of all
conditions which took place toward the end of the war.

This weighs more than what Speer did—the nonexecution of some insane
orders which Hitler issued at the end of the war in 1945.

This consideration too should have led the Tribunal to a much less
severe sentence. The fact that this was not taken into consideration is
therefore made a part of this petition.

                                                   (Signed) DR. BERGOLD




         B. Petition to the Supreme Court of the United States
                        for Writ of Habeas Corpus

Erhard Milch,
Petitioner _vs._ United States of America

                                                  Nuernberg, 2 May 1947

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

Application for Leave to File Petition for Writ of Habeas Corpus

                   Petition for Writ of Habeas Corpus

I, the undersigned Erhard Milch, have been charged in Case No. II before
the Military Court No. II Nuernberg of illegally, deliberately, and
intentionally having committed war crimes and crimes against humanity,
as defined in Control Council Law No. 10 Article II, viz. the following:

_Count One of the Indictment._ War crimes, including murder, slave
labor, deportation of the civilian population for slave labor, cruel and
inhuman treatment of foreign workers, and the employment of prisoners of
war by force and duress in actions connected with warfare.

_Count Two of the Indictment._ War crimes, including murder, whereby
involuntary victims were exposed to sub-pressure and cold, experiments
resulting in torture and death.

_Count Three of the Indictment._ Crimes against humanity, including
murder and the unlawful acts listed in counts one and two of the
indictment, committed against Germans and foreigners.

 (page 2 of original)

I have been acquitted on count II of the indictment and found guilty by
the sentence passed by the Military Court II on 16/17 April 1947 in
respect of counts I and III of the indictment, and am condemned
therefore to lifelong imprisonment.

I hereby make application for the sentence of the Military Court II
passed on 16/17 April 1947 to be completely quashed, as being
inadmissible according to Articles 63 and 64 of the Geneva Convention of
1929.

                            _Substantiation_

Decree No. 7 of the Military Government of Germany concerning the
constitution and competency of certain military courts, constitutes a
violation of Article 63 of the Geneva Convention of 1929, insofar as
Decree No. 7 is applied to prisoners of war as well, and in its Article
II appoints special courts for passing sentences on prisoners of war.
Article 63 of the Geneva Convention of 1929 lays down, “Sentence against
a prisoner of war may only be passed by the same courts and according to
the same procedure as a sentence against persons belonging to the
fighting forces of the country where he is a prisoner”. A field marshal
is equal to a five-star general of the United States of America. The
present Court consisted of three judges, of which not one has the
military rank which I have. It therefore does not correspond to the
court which, according to the laws of the United States of America,
could pass sentence on a five-star general. The authority of the present
Court is, however, expressly recognized by me.

Furthermore, Decree No. 7 of the Military Government of Germany
constitutes a violation in Article XV of Article 64 of the Geneva
Convention of 1929, because Article XV declares the sentence of the
court in finding the defendant guilty, to be final and incontestable.
Article 64 of the Geneva Convention of 1929 stipulates that prisoners of
war must be allowed to employ the same legal means against a verdict as
are granted to members of the fighting forces

(page 3 of original)

of the country where they are detained.

The rules laid down by the Geneva Convention of 1929 represent
compulsory international law of a universal character and cannot be
altered either by a signatory power alone or by an agreement between
several signatory powers, but only by the consent of all signatory
powers. In no case may they be altered by a decree of Military
Government, not even by a decree of the Control Council. The rights of a
prisoner of war, which are based upon the regulations of the Geneva
Convention of 1929, can neither be waived nor cancelled.

The violation of the regulations of the Geneva Convention has now come
about with the passing of sentence and the now existing restrictions
placed in the way of contesting the verdict, not already by the trial as
such.

I am still a prisoner of war. I have not been released from captivity. I
am therefore still under the protection of the Geneva Convention, the
same as before.

The violation of the Geneva Convention is all the more serious, in that
I am still a prisoner of war of the British. True, the defense counsel
was told at the beginning of the trial in reply to an express question,
that my transfer to the jurisdiction of the United States of America was
already effected, but it was not proved until the conclusion of the
passing of sentence. That should have been absolutely necessary.

After the serving of the indictment and the beginning of the actual
trial, an attempt was made on 4 January 1947 to gain my veiled consent
to my release without saying anything, whereby I was asked to accept
release money. On the receipt, however, I expressly noted, “Without
recognizing my release”. I declared that release by American officers
was not

(page 4 of original)

permissible at that moment and moreover a German field marshal could not
be released in any case under existing German law.

After this explanation on my part, the American major conducting the
proceedings revealed to me that another separate release proceeding
would have to be carried out against me then.

Thereby it is clear that I am still a prisoner of war today. At any
rate, I was when the trial begun and therefore in accordance with
Article 60 of the Geneva Convention the protecting power for German
prisoners of war, viz., Switzerland, should have been informed of the
proceedings. This too constitutes a violation of the Geneva Convention
of 1929. If the public prosecution authorities, however, were to refer
to the fact that I was released after the trial had begun, then they
should be confronted with the assertion that such a release is invalid.
It would represent nothing but an evasion of the regulations of the
Geneva Convention of 1929. I was not set at large for a single day. But
that is demanded by a release from captivity as a prisoner of war. A
release from captivity as a prisoner of war while maintaining captivity
would be a release in fraudem legis.

Therefore the sentence constitutes a violation of international law. At
the same time this violation is also a violation of the Habeas Corpus
Act. None, under whatever pretext, may be deprived of the rights of
legal proceedings and of a legal judge.

I therefore request the Supreme Court in Washington to examine whether
the Decree No. 7 of the Military Government of Germany may be applied in
my case, and whether, with due regard to the regulations of Article
60-65 of the Geneva Convention, the present Military Court II

(page 5 of original)

Nuernberg was in a position to pass sentence on me.

Furthermore I enclose a copy of my petition to the Governor-General
[Military Governor of U. S. Zone of Occupation].

                                               [Signed]  ERHARD MILCH

    [Note: Another petition with the same text was submitted to the
    United States Supreme Court by Dr. Bergold, Defense Counsel.]




                   IX. AFFIRMATION OF SENTENCE BY THE
                     MILITARY GOVERNOR OF THE UNITED
                        STATES ZONE OF OCCUPATION


                                       Military Tribunal II, Case No. 2

In the Case of

The United States of America

   _vs._

Erhard Milch, Defendant

                    _Order with Respect to Sentence_

In the case of the United States of America against Erhard Milch, tried
by United States Military Tribunal II, Case 2, Nuernberg, Germany, the
defendant on 17 April 1947 was sentenced by the Tribunal to be
transported to the Rebdorf Prison and there confined for the remainder
of his natural life. A petition to modify the sentence, filed on behalf
of the defendant by Dr. Friedrich Bergold, his defense counsel, has been
referred to me pursuant to delegation by the Military Governor under the
provisions of Article XXIII of Military Government Ordinance No. 7 and
paragraph 6_b_ of Regulation No. 1 under said Ordinance. I have duly
considered the petition and the record of the trial, and in accordance
with Article XVII of said Ordinance and paragraph 6_b_ of said
Regulation it is hereby ordered that—

The sentence imposed by Military Tribunal II, upon Erhard Milch be, and
hereby is, in all respects affirmed.

                                        [Signed]  FRANK A. KEATING
                                                   FRANK A. KEATING
                                                    Major General USA
                                               Deputy Military Governor
 17 June 1947




                 X. ORDER OF THE UNITED STATES SUPREME
                     COURT, 20 OCTOBER 1947, DENYING
                          WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS


Present: Mr. Chief Justice Vinson, Mr. Justice Black, Mr. Justice Reed,
Mr. Justice Frankfurter, Mr. Justice Douglas, Mr. Justice Murphy, Mr.
Justice Jackson, Mr. Justice Rutledge, and Mr. Justice Burton.



No. 50, Misc. Erhard Milch, petitioner, _vs._ The United States of
America. The motion for leave to file petition for writ of habeas corpus
is denied. Mr. Justice Black, Mr. Justice Douglas, Mr. Justice Murphy,
and Mr. Justice Rutledge are of the opinion that the petition should be
set for hearing on the question of the jurisdiction of this Court. Mr.
Justice Jackson took no part in the consideration or decision of this
application.




                                APPENDIX




                      List of Witnesses in Case 2


    [NOTE.—With the exception of Constantin von Neurath, Erich
    Raeder, and Albert Speer, all witnesses in this case appeared
    before the Tribunal. Prosecution witnesses are designated by the
    letter “P,” defense witnesses by the letter “D”, Tribunal
    witness by the letter “T”. The name not preceded by any
    designation represents the defendant testifying in his own
    behalf. Extracts from testimony in this Case are listed in the
    index of documents and testimonies.]

              Name           │   Date of Testimony   │       Pages
                             │                       │   (mimeographed
                             │                       │    transcript)
D  ALEXANDER, Dr. Leo        │14 Feb 47              │1074-1092
D  BECKER-FREYSENG, Hermann  │14 Feb 47              │1061-1066
D  BRANDT, Rudolf            │24 Feb 47              │1330-1354
D  BRAUCHITSCH, Berndt von   │20 Feb 47              │1271-1289
D  DORSCH, Xaver             │24 Feb 47              │1361-1379
D  ENGEL, Gerhard            │24 Feb 47              │1355-1361
D  ESCHENAUER, Artur         │13 Feb 47              │980-996
D  FELMY, Helmut             │20 Feb 47              │1290-1296
P  FERRIER, Roland           │5, 6 Mar 47            │1481-1548
D  FOERSTER, Helmut          │12 Feb 47              │915-938
D  HERTEL, Walter            │12 Feb 47              │944-979
D  HIPPKE, Erich             │7, 11 Feb 47           │759-870
D  KOENIG, Max               │17 Feb 47              │1189-1204
D  KOERNER, Paul             │5 Feb 47               │652-710
P  KRYSIAK, Joseph           │21 Mar 47              │2362-2376
P  LE FRIEC, Paul            │6 Mar 47               │1550-1584
T  LICHTENSTEIN, Walter      │3 Mar 47               │1428-1432
   MILCH, Erhard             │11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18,│1696-2276
                             │  19, 20 Mar 47        │
D  NEFF, Walter              │12 Feb 47              │939-943
D  NEURATH, Constantin von   │19 Feb 47              │1440-1443
D  PENDELE, Max              │18 Feb 47              │1205-1227
D  RAEDER, Erich             │4 Mar 47               │1434-1439
D  REINECKE, Hermann         │20 Mar 47              │2277-2287
D  RICHTER, Karl Eitel       │11 Feb 47              │871-900
D  ROEDER, Manfred           │3 Mar 47               │1381-1403
D  ROMBERG, Hans Wolfgang    │14 Feb 47              │1021A-1050
D  RUFF, Siegfried           │14, 17 Feb 47          │1092-1122
D  SCHMELTER, Fritz          │6, 7 Feb 47            │717-759
D  SCHNIEWIND, Otto          │24 Feb 47              │1307-1329
D  SCHROEDER, Oskar          │                       │(withdrawn)
D  SIEVERS, Wolfram          │14 Feb 47              │1050-1057
D  SPEER, Albert             │17, 19 Feb 47          │1136-1186; 1445-1457
D  VORWALD, Wolfgang         │10, 11, 20, 21 Mar 47  │1586-1696; 2287-2340
D  WARLIMONT, Walter         │20 Feb 47              │1296-1299
D  WELTZ, Georg August       │14 Feb 47              │1066-1072
D  WOLFF, Karl               │18 Feb 47              │1228-1268




                    INDEX OF DOCUMENTS AND TESTIMONY


Document No.   Exhibit No.                 Description               Page
EC-68        Pros. Ex. 6      Letter from the Ministry of Finance      389
                                and Economics of Baden, 6 March
                                1941, containing directives
                                regarding the treatment of Polish
                                farm workers.
EC-194       Pros. Ex. 8      Memorandum of Keitel, 31 October 1941,   393
                                concerning the use of PW’s in the
                                armament industry.
F-824        Pros. Ex. 57     Order of Field Marshal von Kluge         542
                                regarding compulsory recruitment of
                                labor in the West, 25 July 1944.
L-61         Pros. Ex. 20     Letter from Sauckel to the presidents    413
                                of Labor Offices, 26 November 1942,
                                concerning deportation and
                                employment of Poles and Jews.
L-79         Pros. Ex. 3      Extract from minutes of Fuehrer          387
                                conference, 23 May 1939.
NI-1098      Pros. Ex. 63     Extracts from affidavit of Fritz         456
                                Sauckel, 22 September 1946,
                                regarding the jurisdiction of the
                                Central Planning Board.
NO-219       Pros. Ex. 83     Letter from Dr. Rudolf Brandt to Dr.     626
                                Rascher, 27 April 1942, concerning
                                medical experiment report for
                                Himmler and Milch.
NO-261       Pros. Ex. 89     Letter from Milch to Dr. Hippke, 4       626
                                June 1942, concerning availability
                                of low pressure air chamber for
                                experiments.
NO-262       Pros. Ex. 119    Letter from Dr. Hippke to SS             631
                                Obergruppenfuehrer Wolff, 6 March
                                1943, concerning Rascher’s transfer
                                to the Waffen SS.
NOKW-017     Pros. Ex. 54     Extracts from the minutes of the         527
                                conference with Air Force Engineers
                                and Chief Quartermasters under
                                chairmanship of Milch, 25 March
                                1944.
NOKW-041     Pros. Ex. 113    Sworn statement by Hermann Goering, 27   625
                                September 1946, concerning Milch’s
                                position as Inspector General of the
                                Luftwaffe.
NOKW-180     Pros. Ex. 155    Extracts from stenographic notes on      613
                                the conference at the Reich
                                Marshal’s on Thursday, 4 November
                                1943, 11 o’clock at the Junkers
                                Plant in Dessau.
NOKW-195     Pros. Ex. 143    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    608
                                conference with Goering, 28 October
                                1943.
NOKW-245     Pros. Ex. 157    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    606
                                conference with Goering, 22 February
                                1943, regarding plans for airplane
                                construction.
NOKW-247     Pros. Ex. 61     Appointment of Field Marshal Milch as    540
                                Goering’s plenipotentiary for the
                                intensification of air force
                                armament in June 1944.
NOKW-261     Pros. Ex. 70     Chart of the organization of the         535
                                Jaegerstab drawn by Saur with letter
                                of transmittal to prosecution staff,
                                14 November 1946.
NOKW-266     Pros. Ex. 76     Affidavit of Fritz Schmelter, 19         559
                                November 1946, concerning the
                                organization of the Jaegerstab.
NOKW-269     Pros. Ex. 59     A short curriculum vitae of Field        633
                                Marshal Erhard Milch.
NOKW-286     Pros. Ex. 144    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    605
                                GL-Conference, 1 September 1942.
NOKW-287     Pros. Ex. 49     Letter from Milch to Sauckel, 8 April    499
                                1943, concerning the protection of
                                industry.
NOKW-311     Pros. Ex. 62     Extract from interrogation of Hermann    597
                                Goering on 6 September 1946,
                                regarding Milch’s position as
                                Generalluftzeugmeister (GL).
NOKW-320     Pros. Ex. 73     Extract from interrogation of Karl       558
                                Otto Saur on 13 November 1946,
                                concerning the use of concentration
                                camp prisoners in Jaegerstab
                                construction.
NOKW-334     Pros. Ex. 75     Extract from transcript of               550
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference of 25 April
                                1944.
NOKW-334     Def. Ex. 16      Extracts from stenographic minutes of    564
                                the Jaegerstab Conference, 25 April
                                1944.
NOKW-336     Pros. Ex. 75     Extracts from transcript of              555
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference on 26 May
                                1944.
NOKW-336     Def. Ex. 23      Excerpts from the stenographic minutes   566
                                of the Jaegerstab Conference on
                                Friday, 26 May 1944, at 10:00
                                o’clock.
NOKW-337     Pros. Ex. 75     Extracts from transcript of              544
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference of 6 March
                                1944.
NOKW-337     Def. Ex. 12      Excerpts from the stenographic minutes   561
                                of the Jaegerstab Conference on 6
                                March 1944 in the Reich Air
                                Ministry.
NOKW-338     Pros. Ex. 75     Extracts from transcript of              545
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference on Friday, 17
                                March 1944.
NOKW-338     Def. Ex. 13      Excerpts from the stenographic minutes   562
                                of the Jaegerstab Conference
                                presided over by Field Marshal Milch
                                on Friday, 17 March 1944, 1100
                                hours, in the Reich Air Ministry.
NOKW-346     Pros. Ex. 75     Extracts from transcript of              546
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference under
                                chairmanship of Field Marshal Milch
                                on Monday, 20 March 1944.
NOKW-359     Pros. Ex. 75     Extracts from transcript of              557
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference on 27 June
                                1944.
NOKW-361     Pros. Ex. 75     Extract from transcript of               554
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference during the 6th
                                journey of the “Hubertus
                                Undertaking” from 8-10 May 1944.
NOKW-362     Pros. Ex. 75     Extracts from transcript of              552
                                stenographic minutes of Jaegerstab
                                Conference on the occasion of the
                                5th trip of the “Hubertus
                                Undertaking”, 2 and 3 May 1944.
NOKW-365     Def. Ex. 15      Extract from the stenographic minutes    563
                                of the Jaegerstab Conference, 12
                                April 1944.
NOKW-388     Pros. Ex. 75     Extracts from transcript of              547
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference of 28 March
                                1944.
NOKW-390     Pros. Ex. 75     Extract from transcript of               553
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference of 4 May 1944.
NOKW-406     Pros. Ex. 138    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    599
                                the GL-Conference, 7 July 1942.
NOKW-407     Pros. Ex. 137    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    599
                                GL-Conference, 27 May 1942.
NOKW-408     Pros. Ex. 139    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    600
                                GL-Conference, 28 July 1942.
NOKW-409     Pros. Ex. 140    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    601
                                GL-Conference, 4 August 1942.
NOKW-412     Pros. Ex. 141    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    602
                                GL-Conference, 18 August 1942.
NOKW-416     Pros. Ex. 142    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    602
                                GL-Conference, 26 August 1942.
NOKW-418     Pros. Ex. 136    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    598
                                GL-Conference, 5 May 1942.
NOKW-442     Pros. Ex. 75     Extract from transcript of               554
                                stenographic minutes of the
                                Jaegerstab Conference on 5 May 1944.
NOKW-442     Def. Ex. 21      Extract from the stenographic minutes    565
                                of the Jaegerstab Conference, 5 May
                                1944.
NOKW-449     Pros. Ex. 148    Extracts from stenographic minutes of    607
                                GL-Conference, 2 March 1943.
016-PS       Pros. Ex. 13     Letter from Sauckel to Rosenberg, 24     405
                                April 1942, and extracts from report
                                on Sauckel’s labor mobilization
                                program, 20 April 1942.
084-PS       Pros. Ex. 16-A   Extracts from interdepartmental report   408
                                of the Ministry for Occupied Eastern
                                Territories, 30 September 1942,
                                concerning the status of Eastern
                                laborers.
204-PS       Pros. Ex. 39     Extracts from memorandum of a            424
                                conference, 18 February 1944,
                                concerning the release of indigenous
                                labor for purposes of the Reich.
208-PS       Pros. Ex. 55     Report by Sauckel, 7 July 1944, on the   428
                                accomplishments of labor
                                mobilization in the first half of
                                1944.
265-PS       Pros. Ex. 35     Extracts from report by Leyser to        423
                                Rosenberg, 30 June 1943, on
                                conditions in the district Zhitomir.
294-PS       Pros. Ex. 19-A   Extracts from top secret memorandum,     411
                                signed by Braeutigam, 25 October
                                1942, concerning effects of slave
                                labor program.
407-II-PS    Def. Ex. 3       Report from Sauckel to Hitler, 10        439
                                March 1943, concerning difficulties
                                originating from the draft of
                                manpower in former Soviet
                                territories.
407-V-PS     Pros. Ex. 30     Extracts from letter from Sauckel to     418
                                Hitler, 14 April 1943, concerning
                                labor questions.
407-IX-PS    Pros. Ex. 33     Letter from Sauckel to Hitler, 3 June    420
                                1943, concerning foreign labor
                                situation.
1063-D-PS    Pros. Ex. 21     Extract from order of Mueller, 17        415
                                December 1942, concerning prisoners
                                qualified for work to be sent to
                                concentration camps.
1206-PS      Pros. Ex. 9      Outlines of directives of Goering        395
                                regarding the employment of PW’s in
                                the armament industry, 7 November
                                1941.
1510-PS      Pros. Ex. 58     Extracts from decree of 16 September     450
                                1943, defining the duties of the
                                Planning Office of the Central
                                Planning Board.
1526-PS      Pros. Ex. 25     Extracts from letter from                416
                                German-appointed Ukrainian main
                                committee to Frank, February 1943.
1584-III-PS  Pros. Ex. 71     Correspondence between Himmler and       537
                                Goering, 9 March 1944, concerning
                                the use of concentration camp
                                prisoners in the aircraft industry.
1607-A-PS    Pros. Ex. 115    Letter from Himmler to Milch, 25         628
                                August 1942, concerning Dr.
                                Rascher’s report on high-altitude
                                experiments.
1607-B-PS    Pros. Ex. 115    Letter from Dr. Rascher to Dr. Brandt,   627
                                20 July 1942, concerning report on
                                high-altitude experiments.
1617-PS      Pros. Ex. 111    Letter from Himmler to Milch, 13         629
                                November 1942, concerning Rascher’s
                                transfer to the Waffen SS.
3000-PS      Pros. Ex. 34     Extracts from report rendered to         422
                                Riecke, Ministerialdirektor in the
                                Ministry of Agriculture, 28 June
                                1943, on experiences in political
                                and economic problems in the East.
3005-PS      Pros. Ex. 7      Extracts from letter from the Reich      392
                                Labor Ministry to presidents of
                                Regional Labor Offices, 26 August
                                1941, concerning the use of French
                                and Russian PW’s.
3040-PS      Pros. Ex. 10     Extracts from secret order of Himmler,   399
                                20 February 1942, concerning the
                                commitment and treatment of manpower
                                from the East.
3721-PS      Pros. Ex. 41-A   Testimony of Fritz Sauckel, 22           452
                                September 1945, regarding the
                                jurisdiction of the Central Planning
                                Board.
3819-PS      Pros. Ex. 56     Minutes of a conference on 11 July       430
                                1944 attended by Milch, concerning
                                the labor problem.
R-103        Pros. Ex. 40     Extracts from a letter from the          426
                                (German-appointed) Polish main
                                committee to the General Government
                                of Poland on the conditions of
                                Polish workers in Germany, 17 May
                                1944.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-B   Stenographic record of the first         447
                                conference of the Central Planning
                                Board on 27 April 1942.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Extracts from report on the eleventh     457
                                conference of the Central Planning
                                Board, 22 July 1942.
R-124        Def. Ex. 5       Extract from the stenographic report     509
                                of the eleventh conference of the
                                Central Planning Board, 22 July
                                1942.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Extracts from report on the              459
                                seventeenth conference of the
                                Central Planning Board, 28 October
                                1942.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Extracts from stenographic minutes of    461
                                twenty-first conference of Central
                                Planning Board, 30 October 1942.
R-124        Def. Ex. 6       Extract from the stenographic minutes    510
                                of the twenty-second conference of
                                the Central Planning Board, 2
                                November 1942.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-B   Extracts from stenographic minutes of    465
                                the twenty-third conference of the
                                Central Planning Board, 3 November
                                1942.
R-124        Def. Ex. 7       Extract from the stenographic minutes    510
                                of the thirty-second conference of
                                the Central Planning Board, 12
                                February 1943.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Extracts from stenographic minutes of    467
                                the thirty-third conference of the
                                Central Planning Board, 16 February
                                1943.
R-124        Def. Ex. 8       Extract from the stenographic minutes    511
                                of the thirty-third conference of
                                the Central Planning Board, 16
                                February 1943.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Extracts from stenographic minutes of    471
                                the thirty-sixth conference of the
                                Central Planning Board, 22 April
                                1943.
R-124        Def. Ex. 9       Extract from stenographic minutes of     516
                                the thirty-ninth conference of the
                                Central Planning Board, 23 April
                                1943.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Report of the forty-second conference    475
                                of the Central Planning Board, 23
                                June 1943.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Extracts from stenographic minutes of    478
                                the fifty-third conference of the
                                Central Planning Board, 16 February
                                1944.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-B   Report on the fifty-third conference     479
                                of the Central Planning Board, 16
                                February 1944.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Extracts from the stenographic minutes   484
                                of the fifty-fourth conference of
                                the Central Planning Board, 1 March
                                1944.
R-124        Def. Ex. 31      Extracts from the stenographic minutes   517
                                of the fifty-fourth conference of
                                the Central Planning Board, 1 March
                                1944.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-D   Extracts from the report on the          498
                                fifty-sixth conference of the
                                Central Planning Board, 4 April
                                1944.
R-124        Def. Ex. 1       Extract from report on Fuehrer           438
                                conference attended by Milch on 19
                                February 1942.
R-124        Def. Ex. 32      Extract from the Fuehrer conference      438
                                minutes, 21 and 22 April 1942.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-B   Letter of 20 October 1942 transmitting   448
                                the statutes of the Central Planning
                                Board.
R-124        Def. Ex. 2       Extract from the Fuehrer conference      439
                                minutes of 3, 4, 5 January 1943.
R-124        Def. Ex. 33      Extract from report on Fuehrer           441
                                conference of 30 May 1943.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 124    Speer’s minutes of a conference with     501
                                Hitler on 8 July 1943.
R-124        Def. Ex. 4       Extract from report of Fuehrer           442
                                conference of 11-12 September 1943.
R-124        Def. Ex. 34      Extract from Fuehrer conference of 1-4   443
                                January 1944, concerning Speer’s
                                report on the French labor
                                situation.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-A   Extract from the report by Saur of the   502
                                conference with the Fuehrer, 5 March
                                1944.
R-124        Pros. Ex. 48-E   Extracts from the minutes of             539
                                discussions between Saur and the
                                Fuehrer, 6 and 7 April 1944.
Speer Ex. 34 Def. Ex. 17      Order of Hitler, 21 April 1944,          560
                                delegating to Dorsch authority for
                                Jaegerstab constructions.

                              TESTIMONIES

Excerpts from the testimony of defendant _Milch_                       635
Extracts of testimony of defense witness Fritz _Schmelter_             567
Extracts of testimony of defense witness Xaver _Dorsch_                583
Extracts from testimony of defense witness Max _Koenig_                615
Excerpts from the testimony given by defense witness Albert _Speer_    502
before Commission on 19 February 1947




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES

Punctuation and spelling has been maintained except where obvious
printer errors have occurred such as missing periods or commas for
periods. American spelling occurs throughout the document. Multiple
occurrences of the following spellings which differ and are found
throughout this volume are as follows:

                         border line borderline
                          front line front-line
                    Jewish Bolshevik Jewish-Bolshevik
                           Fraeulein Frau

Although some sentences may appear to have incorrect spellings or verb
tenses, the original text has been maintained as it represents what the
tribunal read into the record and reflects the actual translations
between the German, English, Russian and French documents presented in
the trial(s). This volume had no German, Polish, Russian or other
eastern European diacritics, only French diacritics. As a result,
Goering and Fuehrer are spelled without umlauts throughout.

An attempt has been made to produce this ebook in a format as close as
possible to the original document's presentation and layout.

Some illustrations were moved to facilitate page layout.

[The end of _Trials of War Criminals before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunals under Control Council Law No. 10 (Oct 1946-Apr 1949) (Vol.
2)_, by Anonymous.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Trials of War Criminals before the
Nuernberg Military Tribunals under, by Various

