CHAPTER XVIII

JOSEPH ALBO (1380-1444)


Of the post-Maimonidean philosophers Crescas is the last who contributes
original views of philosophical value. Joseph Albo, of Monreal in
Aragon, is of little importance as a philosopher. He rehashes the
problems which occupied a Maimonides, a Gersonides and a Crescas, and
sides now with one, now with the other. He benefited by the writings of
his predecessors, particularly Maimonides, Crescas, and Simon
Duran;[403a] and the philosophical discussions in the last three
sections of his "Book of Roots" ("Sefer Ikkarim") give the impression of
an eclectic compilation in the interest of a moderate conservatism. The
style is that of the popularizer and the homilist; and to this he owes
his popularity, which was denied his more original teacher, Crescas.

But philosophy as such was not Albo's forte, nor was it his chief
interest. While it is true that all the Jewish thinkers of the middle
ages were for a great part apologetes, this did not prevent a Maimonides
or a Gersonides from making a really thorough and disinterested study of
science and philosophy; and often their scientific and philosophic
conviction was so strong that the _apologia_ was _pro philosophia sua_
rather than _pro Judaismo_. The central theme therefore in the majority
of Albo's philosophical predecessors was the equally metaphysical and
theological, of God and his attributes. These were proved by reason and
confirmed by Scripture and tradition. Judaism had to be formulated and
defended with a view not so much to the dangers threatening from
Christianity and Mohammedanism as to those endangering all religions
alike, namely, the opinions of science and philosophy as taught
especially by the Aristotelians. Hence Maimonides treated for the most
part of the same problems as the Mohammedan Mutakallimun before him, and
Thomas Aquinas the Christian had no scruple in making the Jewish
philosopher's method his own when he undertook to defend the Catholic
faith "contra Gentiles."

Different were the circumstances as well as the attitude of Joseph Albo.
The purely philosophic interest was not strong in his day. He was not
confronted by the necessity of proving the existence and incorporeality
of God by reason. No one doubted these things and they had been
abundantly written about in times gone by. In the interest of
completeness and for the benefit of those who were not trained in
technical philosophy, Albo found it desirable to restate the results of
previous discussions of these topics in a style more accessible to the
readers of his day. But the central interest in his age was shifted. It
was a time of religious disputations and forced conversions. Albo
himself had taken part in such a disputation held at Tortosa in 1413-14,
and he had to defend Judaism against Christianity. He had to show his
own people that Judaism was the true religion and Christianity spurious.
Hence it was religion as such he had to investigate, in order to find
what marks distinguished a divine law from a human, and a genuine divine
law from one that pretended to be such. To make this investigation
logically complete he had to show that there must be such a thing as a
divine law, and that no such law can be conceived without assuming
certain basal beliefs or dogmas. A discussion of religious dogma was
essential, for upon the nature of these fundamental beliefs depended
one's judgment of a given law and its character as divine or human,
genuine or spurious. Hence the title of Albo's treatise, "Book of
[religious] Roots [dogmas]." And while it is true that Maimonides, the
systematizer and codifier, could not fail to put down in his commentary
on the Mishna a list of articles of the Jewish creed, nothing is said of
this in his philosophical work, the "Guide of the Perplexed." With Albo
the establishment of the fundamental dogmas is the central theme.

At the same time Albo was anticipated even in this, his more original
contribution. Crescas, his teacher, had written, beside the "Or Adonai,"
a work against Christianity.[404] And in the "Or Adonai" itself he
devotes considerable space to the question of the fundamental dogmas of
Judaism, and takes occasion to criticize Maimonides for his faulty
method in the selection of the thirteen articles, on the ground that he
did not distinguish between what was fundamental and what was
derivative. This suggestion gave Albo his cue, which he developed in his
own way.[404a]

Human happiness, Albo tells us, depends upon theory and practice, as
Aristotle says. But the human mind is inadequate to know by itself the
truth touching these two. Hence there is need of something superior to
the human mind which will define right practice and the true ideas. This
can be only by divine guidance. Hence everyone must be able to tell the
divine legislation from those which are not divine. For this it is
necessary to know what are the principles without which a divine law
cannot exist. This is the purpose of the book, to explain the essential
principles of a divine law.[405]

A knowledge of the principles of religion would seem easy, for all
people profess some religion or other, and hence are presumed to know
upon what their religions are based. But this question has not been
treated adequately before, and there is no agreement among previous
writers about the number of the principles or their identity. Some say
there are thirteen (Maimonides), some say twenty-six, some six
(Crescas), without investigating what are the principles of divine
religion generally. For we must distinguish between the general
principles which pertain to divine legislation as such and hence are
common to all religions, and special principles which are peculiar to a
particular religion.

Seeing the importance of this subject, Albo continues, I undertook this
investigation. I came to the conclusion that there are three general
principles of divine religion, existence of God, Revelation, and Reward
and Punishment after death. Then there are special principles peculiar
to a particular religion. From the general principles ("Ikkarim") follow
particular or derivative principles ("Shorashim.")[406]

The investigation of the principles of religion is a delicate matter
because one is in danger of being reckoned an infidel if he denies what
is considered by others a fundamental dogma. Thus according to
Maimonides the belief in the Messiah is fundamental, and he who denies
it is a heretic and has no share in the world to come. And yet Rabbi
Hillel in the Talmud (Sanhedrin, 99a) said, "Israel need expect no
Messiah, for they had the benefit of one in the days of Hezekiah, King
of Judah." On the other hand, Maimonides does not regard creation _ex
nihilo_ as fundamental, whereas others do; and to their mind Maimonides
is open to the charge of unbelief.

The truth is that only he is an unbeliever who deliberately and
knowingly contradicts the Bible. A person who believes in the Bible but
is led mistakenly to misinterpret it, and denies real principles because
he thinks the Bible does not require us to believe them as principles,
or does not require us to believe them at all, is guilty of error and in
need of forgiveness, but is not a heretic.[407]

Having thus defined his attitude and purpose, Albo proceeds to criticize
the list of dogmas laid down by Maimonides and modified by Crescas, and
then defends his own view. A fundamental principle ("Ikkar," lit. root)
is one upon which something else depends and without which this latter
cannot exist. Maimonides counts thirteen principles of Judaism as
follows: (1) Existence of God, (2) Unity, (3) Incorporeality, (4)
Eternity, (5) He alone must be worshipped, (6) Prophecy, (7) Superiority
of the prophecy of Moses, (8) Revelation, (9) Immutability of the Law,
(10) God's Omniscience, (11) Reward and Punishment, (12) Messiah, (13)
Resurrection.[408] This list is open to criticism. If Maimonides
intended to admit strict principles only without which Judaism cannot
exist, we understand why he named (1), (6), (8), (10), (11), which are
general principles of any divine religion, and (7) and (9) as special
principles of Judaism. But we cannot see why he included (2) and (3).
For while they are true, and every Jew should believe them, Judaism can
be conceived as existing without them. It is still more strange that (5)
should be counted as a principle. To be sure, it is one of the ten
commandments, "Thou shalt have no other Gods before me.... Thou shalt
not bow thyself down to them, nor serve them" ... (Exod. 20, 35), but
Judaism can be conceived to exist even with the belief in a mediator.
Similarly it is not clear why (13) should be considered as a fundamental
dogma. On the other hand, he omitted Tradition and Free Will as beliefs
essential to any divine religion.

If, in defence of Maimonides, we say that he intended to name not only
fundamental principles, but also true beliefs, whether fundamental or
derivative, then there are many others he might have mentioned, such as
creation _ex nihilo_, belief in miracles, that God rests in Israel
through the Torah, and so on.

Another writer counts twenty-six principles, including everything that
occurred to his mind, such as the attributes of eternity, wisdom, life,
power, will and others, counting paradise and hell as two, and other
absurd ideas. Others again,[409] criticizing Maimonides's principles,
reduce them to six, viz. (1) God's knowledge, (2) Providence, (3) Power,
(4) Prophecy, (5) Free Will, (6) Purpose, adding thereto the three
proved by Maimonides, God's existence, unity and incorporeality. The
objection to this list is that it does not contain the special dogmas of
Judaism, and does not give us a principle by which we can distinguish
between the genuine and spurious divine religion. For the dogmas named
in the above list give us the _necessary_ requirements for a divine law,
but not the _sufficient_. We may have all these principles and yet not
have a divine religion. As to Free Will and Purpose, they are essential
to divine legislation to be sure, but not _qua_ divine; they are also
essential to a conventional human law. Divine religion has a special
purpose peculiar to it.[410]

Having laid bare the defects in the attempts at a list of fundamental
dogmas of Judaism made by his predecessors, Albo categorically lays down
the following three principles as fundamental to divine religion: (1)
Existence of God, (2) Providence, and reward and punishment, (3)
Revelation.

To justify this statement Albo finds it necessary to make clear what is
meant by divine law or religion, and what relation it bears to other
laws, not divine. This necessitates an explanation of existing laws and
their motives and causes.

Animal life, we are told, may be divided into three classes according to
the mode of living adopted by each. Beasts of prey live separately and
not in groups. Mankind must live in communities, as one individual is
dependent upon the work of another, and social life is essential to
their existence. Intermediate between beast of prey and man are the
gregarious animals, which keep together not as a matter of necessity, as
is the case in man, but for convenience, for the sake of being together.
Man is social by nature; and in order to make communal life possible,
there must be some order in the community which prohibits violence,
robbery, and so on. This is known as "natural law." In addition to this
there are in many places "conventional laws," made by kings and
emperors, regulating more carefully and with greater detail than the
natural law the affairs of the members of the community.

But this is not all. There is still another kind of law due directly to
God's providence. The providence of God is seen even in the lower
animals, in the constitution of their bodies, not merely in matters
essential to the preservation of the animal, but also in the interest of
comfort and convenience, as for example the duplication of the sense
organs. It stands to reason therefore that there is a divine influence
which provides for man even to a greater degree. This providence may
extend only to one individual, but this person brings about the
perfection of the race; just as in the individual man the heart is
instrumental in giving life to all the other limbs. The law which is
promulgated through this person is a "divine law."

The term "law" ("Dat") applies to any system of directions embracing a
large aggregate of men, whether it contains many commands or one. There
are thus three kinds of law, natural, conventional and divine. Natural
law is the same for all persons, times and places. Conventional law is
ordered by a wise man or men in conformity with the necessity of the
persons, times and places, as the reason dictates, without special
divine suggestion. Divine law is ordered by God through a prophet. The
purpose of natural law is to remove wrong and promote right, keeping men
from robbery and theft so that society may be able to exist.
Conventional law goes further and tends to remove the unseemly and to
promote the becoming. Divine law has for its purpose to guide men to
true happiness, which is the happiness of the soul and its eternal life.
It points out the way to follow to reach this end, showing what is the
true good for man to pursue, and what is the real evil which one must
shun; though it also lays down the law of right and wrong like the other
two.[411]

The conventional law is inferior to the divine in a number of ways.

The conventional law only orders human conduct for the purpose of
improving social life, but does not concern itself with perfection in
theoretical speculation and knowledge, which leads the soul to eternal
life. The divine law embraces both the parts upon which human perfection
depends, conduct and theory. It embraces the becoming and unbecoming
(practice), and the true and untrue (theory). As the Psalmist has it,
"The Law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul" (Psal. 19, 8).

The conventional law, being human, cannot always decide with certainty
what is becoming and what unbecoming. It is liable to error. This is
particularly the case in matters of theory, such as the creation or
eternity of the world. The divine law gives us certainty in all things,
"The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple" (_ib._).

The person guided by the conventional law is not sure that he is always
guided aright; hence he cannot feel the satisfaction and the joy of the
man whose guide is the divine law, making him certain of being
right--"The precepts of the Lord are upright, rejoicing the heart"
(_ib._ 9).

The conventional law can give general rules only, but is unable to
advise in a particular case. So Aristotle in the Ethics points out that
virtue is a mean, but he cannot determine exactly the proper measure at
a given time. This is the function of the divine law--"The commandment
of the Lord is clear, enlightening the eyes" (_ib._).

The conventional law is subject to change in the course of time. Witness
the marriage of sisters in the early period of Adam and Abel. The divine
law alone does not change--"The fear of the Lord is pure, enduring for
ever" (_ib._ 10).

The conventional law cannot estimate exactly the merited amount and kind
of reward and punishment; whereas, "The ordinances of the Lord are the
truth; they are just altogether" (_ib._).[412]

Freedom and Purpose are principles of conventional law. Without freedom
there is no sense in giving orders. For this reason Freedom and Purpose
are not correctly given as fundamental dogmas of divine law, for while
the latter cannot get along without them, they are not peculiar to
divine law as such, but are common also to conventional law. This is why
Maimonides omitted Freedom in his creed. The same is true of Purpose in
general. The divine law, however, has a special purpose, perfection and
eternal life, hence Maimonides did include it in his list.[413]

The fundamental dogmas of divine law are, as we said before, Existence
of God, Revelation, Reward and Punishment. It is evident that there
cannot be a divine law without the first two. The third is also
necessary; for the purpose of divine law must be a perfection greater
than the conventional law can accomplish. This is eternal life, and is
signified by Reward and Punishment.

As all agree that the Law of Moses is divine, it is proper to use it as
a standard in order to discover what a divine law must have. Accordingly
if we examine the first four chapters of Genesis, we find the principle
of the existence of God in chapter one, describing creation. The second
and third chapters give evidence of revelation, or communication of God
with man for the purpose of directing his conduct. Finally in the Cain
incident in chapter four is illustrated the third dogma of Reward and
Punishment.[414]

Creation _ex nihilo_ is a true belief but not a fundamental principle.
For though the Aristotelian view of eternity is heretical, as it takes
away the possibility of miracles, nay even the possibility of Moses and
the Messiah (for these could exist only after the lapse of an infinite
number of individuals), one who believes like Plato in a primitive
matter is not necessarily in contradiction with the Biblical miracles,
for they were not _ex nihilo_[415] (_cf._ above, p. 358).

It is not sufficient to believe in the three principles mentioned to be
considered a believer and to be entitled to a share in the world to
come. One must believe also in the derivative principles following from
them. Thus from the existence of God follow his unity and
incorporeality. And if a man does not believe in incorporeality, he
disbelieves in the real nature of God, and it is as if he denied the
original principle.

The derivative principles ("Shorashim" = roots) are as follows. From
existence of God are derived four: (1) Unity, (2) Incorporeality, (3)
Independence of time, (4) Freedom from defects. From Revelation are
derived three: (1) God's knowledge, (2) Prophecy, (3) Authenticity of
God's messenger. From Reward and Punishment is derived one--Providence
in the sense of special Providence. In all there are eleven dogmas.[416]

A particular commandment of the Law is not reckoned either as a
fundamental principle or as a derivative. He who trangresses it is a
sinner and is punished for his misdeed, but is not a heretic who loses
his share in the world to come, unless he denies that the commandment in
question is from God. In that case he comes in the category of those who
deny revelation. Similarly the belief in tradition is not a principle
because it is a particular commandment. Unity of God is a principle
though it is apparently a special commandment, because the term unity
contains two concepts; first, that God is one and there is not another
like him; second, that being one and free from any multiplicity or
composition, he is the cause of all the multiplicity in the world. The
latter is not a particular commandment, but a principle derived from the
existence of God. The former is a particular commandment. If particular
commandments were regarded as principles, we should have as many
principles as there are commandments in the Bible.[417]

The above distinction between the two senses of the term unity, one of
which is rationally derived from the existence of God, whereas the other
not being so derivable is not a principle, and is given in the Bible as
a special commandment, is clearly due to Crescas, who after a few
attempts at proving the unity of God in the sense of excluding dualism,
gives it up as incapable of proof logically, and falls back upon the
testimony of Scripture, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is
One." The other sense of the word unity Crescas proves by reason. Hence
Albo counts it among the derivative principles (_cf._ above, p. 392).

If a particular commandment is not a principle, which means that a
fundamental or derivative dogma cannot itself be a commandment, but must
lie at the basis of all commandments, the question arises whence come
these principles, and who is to warrant their truth. In the sciences we
know that the basal principles of a given science are not proved in that
science itself, but are borrowed from another science in which they are
proved. Thus physics takes the concepts of substance and accident from
metaphysics. In turn the latter takes the idea of a first mover from
physics. Among the laws, too, the conventional law takes its principles,
freedom and purpose, from political philosophy. Whence does divine law
take its principles? The existence of God can be demonstrated
philosophically from premises going back to axioms and first principles.
But this is not true of Prophecy and Providence.

The answer Albo gives to this question is that of Judah Halevi and
Crescas. The principles of the divine law are known empirically, _i. e._,
by experience. Adam knew of the existence of God, of prophecy and
reward and punishment from personal experience. Similarly Noah and
Abraham. Nowadays we know the law by tradition, but the majority of the
principles thus known are so certain that there is neither difference of
opinion nor doubt entertained by anyone concerning them. Such is the
status for example of the principle of Revelation. Other principles
again, like the existence of God, are, as was said before, known by
theoretical speculation.[418]

To find out whether a religion professing to be of divine origin is
really so or not, it must be examined first with reference to the three
fundamental, and the other derivative principles. If it opposes them, it
is spurious and not genuine. If it is not opposed to the principles in
question, it must be further examined with a view to determining whether
the promulgator is a genuine messenger of God or not. And the test here
must be a direct one. Miracles and signs are no conclusive proof of
prophecy, and still less do they prove that the person performing them
is a messenger sent by God to announce a law. They merely show that the
person is considered worthy of having miracles performed through him,
provided the miracles are genuine and not performed through magic. The
test of the prophet and the messenger of God must be as direct as it was
in the case of Moses, where the people actually saw that he was
addressed by God and commissioned with a message for them.[419]

This opinion of Albo is clearly intended as a defence of Judaism against
Christianity's claim that Jesus performed miracles, a claim which the
Rabbis of the middle ages were inclined to recognize.

In addition to the three fundamental and eight derivative principles of
divine legislation, there are six dogmas, which every follower of the
Mosaic law must believe. They are (1) Creation _ex nihilo_, (2)
Superiority of Moses to other prophets, (3) Immutability of the Law, (4)
That human perfection can be attained by any one of the commandments of
the Law, (5) Resurrection, (6) Messiah.

Creation _ex nihilo_ is neither a fundamental nor a derivative principle
of religion generally or of Judaism specially because, as we saw before
(p. 413), they can exist without this dogma. At the same time it is a
truth which it behooves every religionist and particularly every Jew to
believe. It follows from the principle of the existence of God. If God
cannot create _ex nihilo_, there is a defect in him. For creation _ex
nihilo_ is admitted in a certain sense even by those who hold that the
world is eternal. They admit that God is the cause of everything else;
hence matter is his effect through the mediation of the separate
Intellect. But how can a separate Intellect be the cause of matter if
there is no creation _ex nihilo_. This is _ex nihilo_ as much as
anything can be. To say that we can find no reason why he should create
at a particular time rather than at another, and hence the world must be
eternal, is no argument; for this reasoning can apply only to action
from necessity. Voluntary action is just of this kind, that it takes
place at a particular time.

In the above argument for creation the reader will not fail to see
reminiscences of Maimonides as well as Crescas (_cf._ pp. 271 and 403).

The superiority of Moses to other prophets is not essential to Judaism,
nevertheless it behooves every Jew to believe it, as it is included in
the principle of Revelation, and the Bible tells us, "And there arose
not a prophet since then in Israel like unto Moses" (Deut. 34, 10).

The Immutability of the Law will be treated in detail later. Here it
will suffice to say that while it is not a _sine qua non_ of Judaism,
every Jew should believe it, as it is included in the derivative
principle of the Authenticity of God's messenger.

It stands to reason that human perfection can be attained by the
performance of any one of the commandments of the Law. For if it
requires the performance of all the commandments for this purpose, then
the Law of Moses makes it more difficult to reach perfection than the
previous laws, which is not in consonance with the statement of the
Rabbis that "God gave Israel so many laws and commandments because he
wished to make them meritorious" (Tal. Bab. Makkot, 23 b).

Resurrection will be treated more at length later. It must be believed
because it has been accepted by Israel and has come down to us by
tradition. The same thing applies to the belief in the Messiah. This is
also a traditional belief and is related to the principle of Reward and
Punishment, though it is not like the latter indispensable either to
religion in general or to Judaism in particular.[420]

The difference, it will be seen, between Albo and Maimonides in the
question of Jewish dogmas is simply one of classification and grading.
Albo includes in his enumeration all the thirteen dogmas of Maimonides
with the exception of the fifth, namely, that God alone be worshipped,
but instead of placing them all on the same level of importance as
equally essential to the structure of Judaism, as Maimonides apparently
intended, Albo divides them into three categories of descending rank as
follows: fundamental principles, derived principles, true beliefs. Of
Maimonides's list the last two, Messiah and Resurrection, belong to the
last category. None the less Albo believed strictly in both and held it
incumbent upon every Jew to believe in them. It was only a question of
the status of a person who mistakenly denies these true beliefs.
According to Maimonides, it would seem, he would be called a heretic and
be excluded from a share in the world to come equally with one who
denied the existence of God; whereas according to Albo a person so
guilty is a sinner and needs forgiveness, but is not a heretic. Of the
other eleven dogmas of Maimonides, (1), (8) and (11) are placed by Albo
in his first class, (2), (3), (4), (6) and (10) belong to the second
class, while (7) and (9) come under true beliefs along with Messiah and
Resurrection. The difference between the first and the second class is
purely logical and not practical. As we saw before (p. 413), one who
denies incorporeality (a principle of the second class) disbelieves in
the true nature of God, which is tantamount to denying the principle of
the existence of God.

Before concluding this general discussion of the fundamental dogmas of
religion and Judaism, Albo undertakes to answer two questions which must
have been near his heart, and which were on the tongues no doubt of a
great many honest people in those days of religious challenge and
debate. The first question is, Is it proper, or perhaps obligatory, to
analyze the fundamental principles of one's religion, to see if they are
true; and if one finds another religion which seems to him better, is
one permitted to adopt it in place of his own? Albo sees arguments
against both sides of the dilemma. If a man is allowed to analyze his
religion and to choose the one that seems best to him, it will follow
that a person is never stable in his belief, since he is doubting it, as
is shown by his examination. And if so, he does not deserve reward for
belief, since belief, as Albo defines it elsewhere (Pt. I, ch. 19),
means that one cannot conceive of the opposite being true. Again, if he
finds another religion which he thinks better and is allowed to exchange
his own religion for the new one, he will never be sure of any religion;
for he may find a third still better, and a fourth, and so on, and as he
cannot examine all the possible religions, he will remain without any
religious convictions.

On the other hand, if he is not allowed to investigate the foundations
of his belief, it follows either that all religions alike bring their
believer happiness, no matter how contradictory they are, which is
absurd; or God would seem unfair if only one religion leads its devotees
to happiness and no one is allowed to change his religion for one that
seems to him the true one.

The answer of Albo to this interesting question is characteristic. It
shows that he armored himself in advance, before he risked such a
delicate question. He makes it clear that it really does not expose to
any danger the religion of Judaism, the mother of the other two, which
they came to supersede. If all religions in the world, Albo tells us,
were opposed to one another, and regarded each other as untrue, the
above difficulty would be real. But it is not so. All religions agree in
respect to one of them that it is divine; but they say that it is
superseded. Hence every religionist who is not a Jew must investigate
his religion to see if it is justified in opposing the religion which is
acknowledged to be divine. Similarly the professor of the admittedly
divine religion should investigate to see if his religion is temporary
or eternal. In this investigation he must first see if the religion
conforms to the principles of divine religion above mentioned. If it
does this and in addition endeavors to order human affairs in accordance
with justice, and leads its devotees to human perfection, it is divine.
It is still, however, possible that it is the work of a wise man of good
character. It is therefore necessary to investigate the character of the
promulgator, to find out whether he is a genuine divine messenger or
not. This test, as was said above (p. 415), must be a direct test and
not an indirect.[421]

The other question is whether there can be more than one divine
religion. Apparently there can be only one, since the giver is one, and
the recipients are of one species. But in reality the receivers vary in
temperament according to difference in inheritance and environment.
Hence there may be a difference in the law according to the character of
the people for whom it is intended. Since, however, the difference is
due to the receiver and not to the giver, it must reside in those
elements which are dependent upon the receiver, _i. e._, in particulars
and details, not in the principles, fundamental or derived. So the
Noachite and the Mosaic laws differ only in details, not in fundamental
principles.[422]

We have now completed the exposition of the part of Albo's teaching that
may be called distinctly his own. And it seems he was aware that he had
nothing further to teach that was new, and would have been content to
end his book with the first part, of which we have just given an
account. But his friends, he tells us in the concluding remarks to the
first part of the "Ikkarim,"[423] urged him to proceed further and
discuss in detail the principles, fundamental and derived, the true
beliefs and the so-called "branches," which he barely enumerated in the
first part. He was persuaded by their advice and added the other three
sections, each devoted to one of the three fundamental dogmas and the
corollaries following from it. Here Albo has nothing new to teach. He
follows the beaten track, reviews the classic views of Maimonides, takes
advantage of the criticisms of Gersonides and Crescas, and settles the
problems sometimes one way sometimes another, without ever suggesting
anything new. Accordingly it will not be worth our while to reproduce
his discussions here. It will suffice briefly to indicate his position
on the more important problems.

The second section deals with the existence of God and the derived
principles and branches growing out from this root. In proving the
existence of God he refers to Maimonides's four proofs (_cf._ p. 257 ff.),
and selects the third and fourth as really valid and beyond
dispute. The first and second are not conclusive; the one because it is
based upon the eternity of motion, which no Jew accepts; the other
because the major premise is not true. It does not follow if one of the
two elements _a_, _b_, of a composite _a + b_ is found separately, that
the other must be found existing separately likewise.[424]

We have seen that from the principle of the existence of God follow four
derivative dogmas, unity, incorporeality, independence of time, freedom
from defects. We are now told that from these secondary roots issue a
number of branches. From Unity it follows that no attributes either
essential or accidental can be applied to God, such as wisdom, strength,
generosity, and so on, for they would cause multiplicity. From
incorporeality we infer that God is not subject to corporeal affections
like fear, sorrow, joy, grudge, and so on. Independence of time implies
infinite power and want of resemblance to other things. Freedom from
defect implies absence of such qualities as ignorance, weakness, and so
on.[425]

In the discussion of the divine attributes Albo has nothing new to
offer, but instead he argues forward and backward, now with Maimonides,
now against him, reproducing a good deal of Maimonides's classification,
embodying some material of Bahya on unity, and after this rambling and
not very consistent discussion, he comes to the conclusion that none but
active and negative attributes are applicable to God; and yet some
essential attributes too must be his, but these must be understood as
implying only the aspect of perfection, and not that other aspect of
attribute which is responsible for multiplicity.[426]

He asks the question so often asked before, How can multiplicity come
from unity? And after giving Ibn Sina's scheme of the emanation of the
Intelligences one after the other, and criticizing it in the manner of
Gazali and Maimonides, he gives his own solution that the variety and
multiplicity of the world tends to one end, which is the order of the
world. And thus are reconciled plurality and unity. (_cf._ Gersonides
above, p. 351).[427]

He discusses the question of angels or Intellects, gives the views of
the philosophers concerning their nature and number, each being the
effect of the superior and the cause of the inferior, and objects to
their idea on the ground that these cannot be the same as the Biblical
angels, who are messengers of God to mankind. He then gives his own view
that the number of angels is infinite, not as the philosophers say ten
or fifty, and that they are not related to each other as cause and
effect, but that though they are immaterial Intellects they are
individuated and differentiated according to the degree of understanding
they have of God.[428]

In discussing the second fundamental principle, Revelation, Albo argues
in the good old fashion that man is the noblest creature of the sublunar
world, and the most distinctive and noblest part of man--his form and
essence--is the theoretical reason. Hence the purpose of man must be the
realization of the theoretical intellect. At the same time, and with
little consistency, Albo takes the part of Judah Halevi and Crescas,
employing their arguments, without naming them, that the philosophers
and the philosophizing theologians are wrong who make human immortality,
perfection and happiness depend solely upon intellectual activity. He
comes to the conclusion, therefore, that spiritual understanding, which
gives perfection of soul when in combination with practice, is not
acquisition of ideas but the intention of doing the will of God in the
performance of good deeds, and not that of pleasure or reward.[429]

This being so, it becomes an important question what are the practices
which tend to human perfection, and what are those which tend the other
way. In general we may conclude, as like desires and rejoices in like,
that those deeds which give the soul pleasure before and after
performance are good and helpful, while those which cause subsequent
pain, regret and sorrow are bad, and tend away from the soul's
perfection.

But the criterion of pleasure and pain just suggested is not sufficient
as a guide in conduct, for a great deal depends upon a man's
temperament. What a hot-blooded man may commend and find pleasure in,
the phlegmatic temperament will object to, and will feel discomfort in
doing. Besides, as the good deed is always a mean between two extremes,
which it is hard to measure precisely; and as the good deed is that
which pleases God, and beyond generalities we cannot tell what does, and
what does not please God, since we do not know his essence, it was
necessary for man's sake that God should reveal his will to mankind
through a prophet. Thus Revelation is proved by reason.[430]

This leads to the problem of prophecy, one of the derivative principles
of Revelation. The divine influence from which man gets a knowledge of
the things pleasing and displeasing to God, he cannot obtain without the
divine will. Instead of magic, divination, and communication with evil
spirits and the dead, which the ancient heathen employed in order to
learn the future, God sent prophets to Israel, to tell the people of the
will of God. Foretelling the future was only secondary with them.
Prophecy is a supernatural gift, whether it takes place with the help of
the imagination or not. If it were a natural phenomenon dependent upon
the intellectual power of the individual and his faculty of imagination,
as the philosophers and some Jewish theologians think, there should have
been prophets among the philosophers.

Here again we see Albo adopt the view of Halevi and Crescas against the
intellectualism of Maimonides and Gersonides. His further classification
of the grades of prophecy is based upon Maimonides, though Albo
simplifies it. Instead of eleven Albo recognizes four grades in all,
including that of Moses. The great majority of mankind, he says, stop
with the ability to analyze, such as is exhibited in the analysis of
things into matter and form, and so on, though not all of them go so
far. But there are some few who go farther and are enabled to speak
words of wisdom and to sing praises to God without being able to account
for the power. This is the holy spirit ("Ruah ha-Kodesh"). Some go still
farther, and through the strength of their reason and imagination they
dream true dreams and receive prophecies; though, the imagination having
the upper hand, they struggle very hard and tremble and faint, almost
losing their soul. This is the first stage of prophecy. The second stage
is when the imagination and reason are equal. In that case there is no
struggle or fainting. Visions come to the prophet at night in dreams, or
in a revery at daytime. The forms that appear are not real, but the
meanings they convey are. Such are the figures of women, horses, basket
of summer fruit, and so on, in the visions of Zechariah and Amos. The
third stage is when the reason gets the better of the imagination and
there are no forms or images, but real essences and ideas, like the
visions of Ezekiel, which represent real things in the secrets of nature
and divinity. The prophet in this stage also hears an angel speaking to
him and giving him information of importance to himself or others. In
all these cases the will of God is essential. No preparation can replace
it. Finally the fourth stage is reached when the imagination does not
come into play at all. In this stage there is no angel or form, and the
message comes to the prophet at daytime while he is awake. He hears a
voice telling him what he desires to know; and whenever he chooses he
can summon this power. Moses alone attained to this final stage. Outside
of the prophets, the righteous and the pious have various degrees of
power according to the degree of their union with God. Some can in this
way influence the powers of nature to obey them, as a person can, by
thinking of food, make his mouth water. So they can by taking thought
cause rain and storm. Others can bring down fire from above and revive
the dead.

Through the influence of a prophet the gift of prophecy may sometimes
rest upon individuals who are themselves unprepared and unworthy.
Witness the revelation on Sinai where the entire people, six hundred
thousand in number, were endowed with the spirit of prophecy, and that
too of the highest degree, like Moses himself. The prophetic medium
reflects the spirit of prophecy on others as a smooth surface reflects
the light of the sun upon dark bodies. This is why prophecy is found
only in Israel and in Palestine, because the ark and the Tables of
Stone, upon which the Shekinah rests, reflect the divine spirit upon
those who are worthy and have in them something resembling the contents
of the ark, namely, the Torah and the commandments.[431]

Among the true beliefs we have seen (p. 416) that Immutability of the
Law is related to the principle of Revelation. Hence this is the place
to discuss this question. Can a divine religion change with time or not?
It would seem at first sight that it cannot. For the giver expresses his
will in the Law, and his will never changes. The receivers are the same,
_i. e._, the same nation, and a nation does not change. Finally the
purpose of the Law or religion is to give people true opinions, and
these never change.

And yet on further reflection there seems no reason why religion should
not change with the change of the recipient, as the physician changes
his prescription with the progress of the patient, and as a matter of
fact we find that the commandments given to Adam were different from
those given to Noah and to Abraham and to Moses. Adam was not allowed to
eat meat, Noah was. Abraham was commanded circumcision. High places were
at first permitted and later forbidden. Maimonides makes the
immutability of the Law a fundamental dogma, relying upon the
commandment, "Thou shalt not add thereto, and thou shalt not diminish
therefrom" (Deut. 13, 1). But in the first place the verse refers to
changes in the mode of observing the laws; and besides, it says nothing
about God himself changing the Law.

The phrases "an eternal statute," "throughout your generations," "it is
a sign for ever," are no proof of the eternity of the Law; for not all
commandments have these expressions attached, and this shows rather that
the others are subject to change. Besides, the expressions, "for
eternity," and so on, are not to be taken absolutely. They are often
used to express finite periods of time.

After the Babylonian Exile two changes were made. They changed the
characters in which the Bible was written, and the order and names of
the months, beginning with Tishri instead of Nisan. There is no reason,
therefore, why other laws might not change, too. We need not, then,
regard Immutability of the Law as a fundamental dogma with Maimonides.
Hasdai Crescas also classes it with true beliefs and not with
fundamental principles.

Albo resolves the problem as follows: A matter that is revealed by God
himself cannot be changed by a prophet unless it is changed by God
himself. The first two commandments, "I am the Lord thy God, &c.," and
"Thou shalt not have other gods, &c.," were heard by the people directly
from God without the intervention of Moses, hence they cannot be changed
by any prophet. It follows therefore that the three fundamental dogmas,
existence of God, Revelation and Reward and Punishment can never be
changed by a prophet, for they are implied in the first two
commandments, which were heard from God himself. The rest of the
commandments, as they were heard from God through the interpretation of
Moses, can be changed by a prophet as a temporary measure. The other
laws which were given by Moses may be changed by a later prophet even
permanently. But the prophet must be greater than Moses, and he must
show this by the greatness, number, publicity and permanence of his
miracles, which must excel those of Moses. He must likewise show that he
was sent by God to change the Law, as clearly as Moses proved that he
was sent to give it. But it is unlikely that any such prophet will come,
for the Torah says that there never was or will be any prophet like
Moses.[432]

Before discussing the third fundamental dogma, Albo finds it desirable
to dispose first of a few other problems implied by this dogma, one of
which, God's knowledge, was postponed to this place, though it is
connected with Revelation, because it cannot well be separated in
discussion from the problem of Freedom. Providence is the other related
problem, which is derived from the dogma of Reward and Punishment.

There is nothing that is new in Albo's treatment of knowledge and
Freedom. He insists like Maimonides that God must be omniscient, and on
the other hand the contingent cannot be denied, and neither can freedom.
He gives the stock arguments, which it is not necessary to reproduce at
this late hour. And his solution is that of Maimonides that in God human
freedom and divine Omniscience are reconcilable because God's knowledge
is not our knowledge.[433]

Nor is there anything original in Albo's discussion of the problem of
Providence. He recognizes with Maimonides and others that a strong
argument against special Providence is the observed inequality between
the destinies of men and their apparent merits. And he endeavors in the
well worn method to give reasons and explanations for this inequality
which will not touch unfavorably God's justice or his special
Providence. The reasons are such as we met before and we shall not
repeat them. Albo also gives a few positive arguments to prove the
reality of special Providence for man. He sees in various natural and
human phenomena evidence of deviation from the merely "natural" as
demanded by the principles of Aristotle's Physics or the laws of
uniformity. This shows special Providence. Thus the existence of dry
earth, the heaviest element, above water, cannot be accounted for by the
laws of Physics. The phenomenon of rain cannot be reduced to law, hence
it argues will and purpose and Providence. Admonition in dreams is
direct evidence of special Providence, and it is scarcely likely that
man, who has special equipment above the other animals in his reason,
should not also receive special care above that which the lower animals
have. Now they are protected in the species, hence man is provided for
as an individual.[434]

Having disposed of the auxiliary dogmas, Albo takes up the fundamental
principle of Reward and Punishment. He cites various opinions on the
subject, which are dependent upon the idea one entertains concerning the
nature of the soul. Thus if one holds that the human soul is not
different in kind from the animal soul, it follows that as there is no
reward and punishment for the animal, there is none for man. And if one
regards the human soul as merely a capacity or possibility of
intelligence he must necessarily conclude that the soul perishes with
the body and there is no spiritual reward and punishment after death.
The only reward there is must therefore be corporeal, during life. On
the other hand, our general experience, which brings before us many
cases of good men suffering and bad men enjoying prosperity, would seem
to argue against corporeal reward and punishment in this world. This
taken together with the philosophical opinion that the soul is an
immaterial and indestructible substance gives rise to the third view
that the only recompense is spiritual after death. None of these views
is satisfactory to Albo. The first two because they are based upon an
erroneous notion of the soul. All agree, philosophers as well as
theologians, that the human soul is different in kind from the soul of
the animal; and it is likewise admitted that the human soul is immortal.
His criticism of the third view so far as it is based upon the
intellectualist idea that the thing of highest value is intellectual
effort, and the only reward is immortality which intellectual activity
engenders, is similar to that of Halevi and Crescas in its endeavor to
refute this notion and to substitute for it the religious view that the
soul is an independent substance having a capacity for intelligence _in
God's service_. The degree in which a person realizes this service
determines his reward and punishment. The argument from experience Albo
does not answer here, but we may suppose he regards it as answered by
what he said in his discussion of Providence, where he tries to account
for the prosperity of the wicked and the adversity of the righteous.

Albo's own view accordingly is that which he also attributes to the
Bible that there is a twofold reward, in this world and in the next.
There is still a difference of opinion concerning the nature of the true
and ultimate reward, whether it is given to the soul alone, or to body
and soul combined in resurrection. He quotes Maimonides's opinion, with
whom he agrees, that the real reward is purely spiritual enjoyed by the
soul alone. To be sure, after the coming of the Messiah the bodies of
the righteous will be resurrected to make known abroad God's wonders, or
to give these people bodily pleasure for the pain they suffered during
life, or to give them additional opportunity to acquire perfection so
that they may have a greater reward later. But this state of resurrected
life will last only for a time, and then all will die again, and the
souls will enjoy spiritual life forever.

The other opinion, held by Nachmanides, is that the real and ultimate
reward is that of body and soul united to everlasting life. Albo is not
satisfied with this view, his objections being among others that if only
the perfect are resurrected, the rest will remain without any reward at
all, not to mention the difficulty that it is not likely that the human
body--a perishable thing--will change into a matter that will last
forever.

As to the nature of reward and punishment after death, Albo tells us
that reward will consist in the soul's realization that its endeavors
in this world were correct, and in the next world it will be prepared to
join the spiritual beings, which will give it great joy. The erring soul
will find itself in a position where it will still desire the corporeal
pleasures of this world, but will not be able to have them for want of
corporeal organs. At the same time it will also entertain the other more
natural desire of a spiritual substance to join the other spiritual
beings in the other world. This feeling too it will not be able to
satisfy because of its want of perfection. This division of desires
unsatisfied will cause the soul excruciating torture, and this is its
punishment.[435]




CONCLUSION


Our task is done. We have now reached the limit we have assigned
ourselves. We have traced objectively and with greater or less detail
the rationalistic movement in mediæval Jewry from its beginnings in the
ninth and tenth centuries in Babylon among the Karaites and Rabbanites
to its decline in Spain and south France in the fifteenth century. We
have followed its ascending curve from Saadia through Gabirol, Bahya and
Ibn Daud to its highest point in Maimonides, and we likewise traced its
descent through Gersonides, Crescas and Albo. We took account of its
essential nature as being a serious and conscientious attempt to define
a Jewish _Weltanschauung_ in the midst of conflicting claims of
religions and philosophies. The Jewish sacred writings had to be studied
and made consistent with themselves in regard to certain ethical and
metaphysical questions which forced themselves upon the minds of
thinking men. In this endeavor it was necessary to have regard to the
system of doctrine that was growing up among their Mohammedan neighbors
and masters--itself inherited from Greece--and adjust its teachings to
those of Judaism. The adjustment took various forms according to the
temperament of the adjuster. It embraced the extremes of all but
sacrificing one of the two systems of doctrine to the other, and it
counted among its votaries those who honestly endeavored to give each
claim its due. The system of Judaism was the same for all throughout the
period of our investigation, excepting only the difference between
Karaites and Rabbanites. This was not the case with the system of
philosophic doctrine. There we can see a development from Kalam through
Neo-Platonism to Aristotelianism, and we accordingly classified the
Jewish thinkers as Mutakallimun, Neo-Platonists or Aristotelians, or
combinations in varying proportions of any two of the three systems
mentioned.

It was not our province to treat of the mystic movement in mediæval
Jewry as it developed in the Kabbalistic works and gained the ground
yielded in the course of time by the healthier rationalism. To complete
the picture it will suffice to say that as the political and economic
conditions of the Jews in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
deteriorated, and freedom and toleration were succeeded by persecution
and expulsion, the Jews became more zealous for their own spiritual
heritage as distinguished from foreign importations; philosophy and
rationalism began to be regarded askance, particularly as experience
showed that scientific training was not favorable to Jewish
steadfastness and loyalty. In suffering and persecution those who stuck
to their posts were as a rule not the so-called enlightened who played
with foreign learning, but the simple folk who believed in Torah and
tradition in the good old style. The philosophical and the scientific
devotees were the first to yield, and many of them abandoned
Judaism.[436] Thus it was that mysticism and obscurantism took the place
of enlightenment as a measure of self-defence. The material walls of the
Ghetto and the spiritual walls of the Talmud and the Kabbala kept the
remnant from being overwhelmed and absorbed by the hostile environment
of Christian and Mohammedan. The second half of the fourteenth, and the
fifteenth century were not favorable to philosophical studies among the
Jews, and the few here and there who still show an interest in science
and philosophy combine with it a belief in Kabbala and are not of any
great influence on the development of Judaism.

Shemtob ben Joseph ibn Shemtob (ab. 1440) author of a work entitled
"Emunot,"[437] is a strong opponent of Greek science and philosophy. He
is not content with attacking the lesser lights and extremists like
Albalag or Gersonides or Abraham ibn Ezra. He goes to the very
fountain-head of Jewish Aristotelianism and holds Maimonides responsible
for the heresies which invaded the Jewish camp. He takes up one doctrine
after another of the great Jewish philosopher and points out how
dangerous it is to the true Jewish faith. Judah Halevi and Nachmanides
represent to him the true Jewish attitude. The mysteries of the Jewish
faith are revealed not in philosophy but in the Kabbala, which
Maimonides did not study, and which he would not have understood if he
had studied it, for he had no Kabbalistic tradition.

Unlike Shemtob, his son Joseph ben Shemtob (d. 1480)[438] shows great
admiration for Aristotle and Maimonides. But he is enabled to do so by
lending credence to a legend that Aristotle in his old age recanted his
heretical doctrines, in particular that of the eternity of the world.
Joseph ben Shemtob made a special study of Aristotle's Ethics, to which
he wrote a commentary, and endeavored to show that the Stagirite's
ethical doctrines had been misunderstood; that the highest good of man
and his ultimate happiness are to be sought according to Aristotle not
in this world but in the next. It was likewise a misunderstanding, he
thinks, when Maimonides and others make Aristotle deny special
Providence. True science is not really opposed to Judaism. At the same
time he too like his father realizes the danger of too much scientific
study, and hence agrees with Solomon ben Adret that the study of
philosophy should be postponed to the age of maturity when the student
is already imbued with Jewish learning and religious faith.

The son of Joseph, bearing the name of his grandfather, Shemtob ben
Joseph (fl. ab. 1461-89), followed in his father's footsteps,[439] and
wrote a commentary on the "Guide of the Perplexed" of Maimonides, whom
he defends against the attacks of Crescas.

Isaac ben Moses Arama (1420-1494)[440] is the author of a
philosophico-homiletical commentary on the Pentateuch entitled, "Akedat
Yizhak," and a small treatise on the relations of philosophy and
theology. He was also interested in Kabbala and placed Jewish revelation
above philosophy.

Don Isaac Abarbanel (1437-1508),[441] the distinguished Jewish statesman
who went with his brethren into exile at the time of the expulsion of
the Jews from Spain in 1492, was a prolific writer on Biblical exegesis
and religious philosophy. Though a great admirer of Maimonides, on whose
"Guide" he wrote a commentary, and whose thirteen articles of the creed
he defended against the strictures of Crescas and Albo, he was
nevertheless an outspoken opponent of the rationalistic attitude and has
no phrases strong enough for such men as Albalag, Gersonides, Moses of
Narbonne and others, whom he denounces as heretics and teachers of
dangerous doctrines. He does not even spare Maimonides himself when the
latter attempts to identify the traditional "Maase Bereshit" and "Maase
Merkaba" with the Aristotelian Physics and Metaphysics (_cf._ above, p.
303 f.), and adopts Kabbalistic views along with philosophic doctrines.
He is neither original nor thoroughly consistent.

His son Judah Leo Abarbanel (1470-1530)[442] is the author of a
philosophical work in Italian, "Dialoghi di Amore," (Dialogues of Love),
which breathes the spirit of the Renaissance of the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries in Italy. It is under the influence of Plato and
Plotinus and identifies God with love, which is regarded as the
essential principle of all life and activity in the world, including
even the inorganic natural processes. There is no attempt made to
construct a Jewish philosophy, and though all evidence is against it,
some have made it out that Judah Abarbanel was a convert to
Christianity.

In the same country, in Italy, Judah ben Yechiel Messer Leon of
Mantua[443] (1450-1490) made a name for himself as a student of Cicero
and of mediæval Latin scholasticism. He wrote a rhetoric in Hebrew based
upon Cicero and Lactantius, and composed logical works based upon
Aristotle's Latin text and Averroes. As an original student of
philosophy he is of no importance.

Two members of the Delmedigo family of Crete, Elijah (1460-1498) and
Joseph Solomon,[444] are well known as students of philosophy and
writers on philosophical and scientific subjects.

Thus the stream of philosophical thought which rose among the Jews in
Babylonia and flowed on through the ages, ever widening and deepening
its channel, passing into Spain and reaching its high water mark in the
latter half of the twelfth century in Maimonides, began to narrow and
thin out while spreading into France and Italy, until at last it dried
up entirely in that very land which opened up a new world of thought,
beauty and feeling in the fifteenth century, the land of the
Renaissance. Jewish philosophy never passed beyond the scholastic stage,
and the freedom and light which came to the rest of the world in the
revival of ancient learning and the inventions and discoveries of the
modern era found the Jews incapable of benefiting by the blessings they
afforded. Oppression and gloom caused the Jews to retire within their
shell and they sought consolation for the freedom denied them without in
concentrating their interests, ideals and hopes upon the Rabbinic
writings, legal as well as mystical. There have appeared philosophers
among the Jews in succeeding centuries, but they either philosophized
without regard to Judaism and in opposition to its fundamental dogmas,
thus incurring the wrath and exclusion of the synagogue, or they sought
to dissociate Judaism from theoretical speculation on the ground that
the Jewish religion is not a philosophy but a rule of conduct. In more
recent times Jewry has divided itself into sects and under the influence
of modern individualism has lost its central authority making every
group the arbiter of its own belief and practice and narrowing the
religious influence to matters of ceremony and communal activity of a
practical character. There are Jews now and there are philosophers, but
there are no Jewish philosophers and there is no Jewish philosophy.




BIBLIOGRAPHY[D]

GENERAL WORKS


SOLOMON MUNK, Mélanges de Philosophie Juive et Arabe, Paris 1859, pp.
461-511. A brief historical résumé of philosophical authors and books.
German translation by Beer, Philosophie und philosophische
Schriftsteller der Juden, Leipzig, 1852. English translation by Isidor
Kalisch, Philosophy and Philosophical Authors of the Jews, Cincinnati,
1881.

A. SCHMIEDL, Studien über jüdische, insonders jüdisch-arabische
Religionsphilosophie, Wien, 1869.

MORITZ EISLER, Vorlesungen über die jüdischen Philosophen des
Mittelalters (3 parts), Wien, 1870-84.

DAVID KAUFMANN, Geschichte der Attributenlehre in der jüdischen
Religionsphilosophie des Mittelalters von Saadia bis Maimuni, Gotha,
1877.

SIMEON BERNFELD, דעת אלהים ,תולדות הפלוסופיא הדתית בישראל, Warsaw, 1897.

S. HOROVITZ, Die Psychologie bei den jüdischen Religions-Philosophen des
Mittelalters, von Saadia bis Maimuni, Breslau, 1898-1912 (includes so
far Saadia, Gabirol, Ibn Zaddik, Abraham ibn Daud).

J. POLLAK, "Entwicklung der arabischen und jüdischen Philosophie im
Mittelalter" in _Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie_, vol. XVII
(1904), pp. 196-236, 433-459.

UEBERWEG-BAUMGARTNER, Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie, vol. II,
10th ed., Berlin, 1915, pp. 385-403.

DAVID NEUMARK, Geschichte der jüdischen Philosophie des Mittelalters,
nach Problemen dargestellt, vol. I, Berlin, 1907, vol. II, part I,
Berlin, 1910.

IGNAZ GOLDZIHER, Die jüdische Philosophie in _Allgemeine Geschichte der
Philosophie_, von W. Wundt, etc. (Die Kultur der Gegenwart I, 5), pp.
70-77 (2nd ed., pp. 301-337).


KALAM IN JEWISH PHILOSOPHY

MARTIN SCHREINER, Der Kalam in der jüdischen Literatur, Berlin, 1895.


ISAAC ISRAELI

JACOB GUTTMANN, Die philosophischen Lehren des Isaak ben Salomon
Israeli, Münster i. W. 1911.


AL MUKAMMAS

ABRAHAM HARKAVY, in Russian periodical _Woskhod_, Sept. 1898.


SAADIA

JACOB GUTTMANN, Die Religionsphilosophie des Saadia, Göttingen, 1882.

D.J. ENGELKEMPER, Saadja Gaon's religionsphilosophische Lehre über die
heilige Schrift, übersetzt und erklärt, Münster, 1903.


JOSEPH AL BASIR

P. F. FRANKL, Ein Muʿtazilitischer Kalam aus dem 10. Jahrhundert, Wien,
1872.

MIKSA KLEIN, Júszuf Al-Baszîr, Al-Kitâb Al-Muḥtavî, Budapest, 1913.

ERNÖ MORGENSTERN, Júszuf Al-Baszîr, Al Kitâb Al Muḥtavî, Budapest,
1913.


JESHUA BEN JUDAH

MARTIN SCHREINER, Studien über Jeschuʿa ben Jehuda, Berlin, 1900.


SOLOMON IBN GABIROL

S. MUNK, Mélanges, etc., Paris, 1859, pp. 151-306.

SEYERLEN, in Zeller's Theologische Jahrbücher, vols. XV and XVI.

JACOB GUTTMANN, Die Philosophie des Salomon ibn Gabirol, Göttingen,
1889.

DAVID KAUFMANN, Studien über Salomon ibn Gabirol, Budapest, 1899.


BAHYA IBN PAKUDA

DAVID KAUFMANN, "Die Theologie des Bachja Ibn Pakuda," in "Gesammelte
Schriften von David Kaufmann" (ed. Brann), vol. II, Frankfurt a. M.,
1910, pp. 1-98.

J. H. HERTZ, Bachya, The Jewish Thomas à Kempis, New York, 1898 (in
Sixth Biennial Report of the Jewish Theological Seminary Association).


PSEUDO-BAHYA

JACOB GUTTMANN, "Eine bisher unbekannte, dem Bachja ibn Pakuda
zugeignete Schrift," _Monatschrift f. G. u. W. d. J._, vol. XLI (1897),
p. 241 ff.


ABRAHAM BAR HIYYA

JACOB GUTTMANN, in _Monatschrift f. G. u, W. d. J_., 1900.


JOSEPH IBN ZADDIK

MAX DOCTOR, Die Philosophie des Joseph Ibn Zaddik, nach ihren Quellen,
insbesondere nach ihren Beziehungen zu den Lauteren Brüdern und zu
Gabirol untersucht, Münster, 1895.

LEOPOLD WEINSBERG, Der Mikrokosmos, ein angeblich im 12. Jahrhundert von
dem Cordubenser Joseph ibn Zaddik verfasstes philosophisches System,
nach seiner Echtheit untersucht, Breslau, 1888.


JUDAH HALEVI

AD. FRANKL-GRÜN, Die Ethik des Juda Halevi, Bilin, s. a.

DAVID KAUFMANN, Jehuda Halewi, Versuch einer Charakteristik, Breslau,
1877; reprinted in "Gesammelte Schriften" (ed. Brann), Frankfurt a. M.,
1910, vol. II, pp. 99-151.

DAVID NEUMARK, Jehuda Hallevi's Philosophy in its Principles,
Cincinnati, 1908.

JULIUS GUTTMANN, Das Verhältniss von Religion und Philosophie bei Jehuda
Halewi, in Israel Lewy's Festschrift (ed. Brann and Elbogen), Breslau,
1911, pp. 327-358.


ABRAHAM IBN EZRA

NACHMAN KROCHMAL, מורה נבוכי הזמן, Warsaw, 1894, p. 266 ff.

DAVID ROSIN, Die Religionsphilosophie Abraham ibn Esras, in
_Monatschrift f. G. u. W. d. J._ vols. XLII (1898) and XLIII (1899).

G. ORSCHANSKY, Abraham ibn Esra als Philosoph, Breslau, 1900.


ABRAHAM IBN DAUD

GUGENHEIMER, Die Religionsphilosophie des R. Abraham ben David ha-Levi
nach dessen noch ungedruckter Schrift Emuna Rama in ihrem inneren und
historischen Zusammenhange entwickelt, Augsburg, 1850.

JACOB GUTTMANN, Die Religionsphilosophie des Abraham ibn Daud aus
Toledo, Göttingen, 1879.


MAIMONIDES

M. JOEL, Die Religionsphilosophie des Mose ben Maimon, Breslau, 1876.

SIMON B. SCHEYER, Das Psychologische System des Maimonides, Frankfurt
a. M., 1845.

DAVID ROSIN, Die Ethik des Maimonides, Breslau, 1876.

MOSES BEN MAIMON, sein Leben, seine Werke und sein Einfluss,
heraus-gegeben von der Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Wissenschaft des
Judenthums, Band I, Leipzig, 1908.

LOUIS-GERMAIN LEVY, Maïmonide, Paris, 1911 (Les Grands Philosophes).

J. MÜNZ, Moses ben Maimon, sein Leben und seine Werke, Frankfurt a. M.,
1912.

M. JOEL, Verhältniss Albert des Grossen zu Moses Maimonides, Breslau,
1876.

JACOB GUTTMANN, Der Einfluss der Maimonidischen Philosophie auf das
christliche Abendland, in _Moses ben Maimon_ (see above), pp. 135-230.

DAVID KAUFMANN, Der "Führer" Maimûni's in der Weltliteratur, _Archiv für
Geschichte der Philosophie_, vol. XI (1898), pp. 335-376; reprinted in
"Gesammelte Schriften" (ed. Brann), Frankfurt a. M., 1910, vol. II, pp.
152-189.

J. P. WICKERSHAM CRAWFORD, The _Vision Delectable_ of Alfonso de la
Torre and Maimonides' _Guide of the Perplexed_, Publications of the
Modern Language Association of America, XXVIII, 2 (1913), pp. 188-212.

ISAAC HUSIK, An Anonymous Medieval Christian Critic of Maimonides,
Jewish Quarterly Review, New Series, vol. II, 1911, pp. 159-190.


GERSONIDES

M. JOEL, Lewi ben Gerson als Religionsphilosoph, Breslau, 1862.

_Isidore Weil_, Philosophie Religieuse de Levi ben Gerson, Paris, 1868.

BENZION KELLERMANN, Die Kämpfe Gottes von Lewi ben Gerson, Uebersetzung
und Erklärung des handschriftlich revidierten Textes, Erster Teil,
Berlin, 1914. Contains the German translation of the first book of the
"Milhamot Adonai." The translation is faulty in many places, as the
present writer has shown in an article entitled, "Studies in
Gersonides," which will appear in the _Jewish Quarterly Review_, New
Series, in the course of the year 1917.


HASDAI CRESCAS

_M. Joel_, Don Chasdai Creskas' religionsphilosophische Lehren in ihrem
geschichtlichen Einflusse dargestellt, Breslau, 1866.

PHILIPP BLOCH, Die Willensfreiheit von Chasdai Kreskas, München, 1879.

JULIUS WOLFSOHN, Der Einfluss Gazâlî's auf Chisdai Crescas, Frankfurt
a. M., 1905.

DAVID NEUMARK, "Crescas and Spinoza," in Commemoration of the Fifth
Centenary of the Publication of the "Or Adonai"; in Year Book of the
Central Conference of American Rabbis, XVIII, 1908, pp. 277-318.


JOSEPH ALBO

SAMUEL BACK, Joseph Albo's Bedeutung in der Geschichte der jüdischen
Religionsphilosophie, Breslau, 1869.

JAULUS, in _Monatschrift f. G. u. W. d. J._, 1874, p. 462 ff.

A. TÄNZER, Die Religionsphilosophie Joseph Albo's nach seinem Werke
"Ikkarim" systematisch dargestellt und erläutert, Frankfurt a. M., 1896.


BIBLICAL EXEGESIS

W. BACKER, Die Bibelexegese der jüdischen Religionsphilosophen des
Mittelalters vor Maimûni, Budapest, 1892.

ID., Die Jüdische Bibelexegese vom Anfange des zehnten his zum Ende des
fünfzehnten Jahrhunderts, Treves, 1892, reprinted from Winter und
Wünsche, Die Jüdische Literatur seit Abschluss des Kanons, II, 239-339,
where a full bibliography is given.

ID., Jewish Encyclopedia, s. v. Bible Exegesis, §§ 14-16.


INFLUENCE OF JEWISH PHILOSOPHY ON SCHOLASTICISM

The works of Joel, Guttmann, Kaufmann, Crawford and Husik mentioned
above under Maimonides; and besides

JACOB GUTTMANN, Das Verhältniss des Thomas von Aquino zum Judenthum und
zur jüdischen Litteratur, Göttingen, 1891.

ID., Die Scholastik des dreizehnten Jahrhunderts in ihren Beziehungen
zum Judenthum und zur jüdischen Literatur, Breslau, 1902.

For further references see the notes.


[D] This bibliography contains a selection of the more important works
of exposition. For original sources see the notes.




NOTES

[Black figures denote the page, the light figures the notes]


=xv=, 1. See below, p. 395 ff.

=xvi=, 2. Talm. Bab. Hagiga 11b.

3. Ibid.

4. See Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen, III, 2, 3d ed. p. 347;
Maimonides, Guide of the Perplexed, I, ch. 71, beginning.

=xvii=, 5. See Wenrich, De Auctorum Graecorum Versionibus et
Commentariis Syriacis, Arabicis, Armeniacis Persicisque, Leipzig, 1842,
p. 4 ff; De Boer, Geschichte der Philosophie im Islam, Stuttgart, 1901,
p. 17 ff (English translation by Jones, London, 1903, pp. 11-30). Duval,
La Littérature Syriaque 2nd ed., Paris, 1900, ch. XIV, § 2, p. 253 ff.

=xx=, 6. See Dieterici, Die Theologie des Aristotles (Arabic text),
Leipzig, 1882; German translation by the same, Leipzig, 1883.

7. See Bardenhewer, Die Pseudoaristotelische Schrift über das reine
Gute, bekannt unter dem Namen Liber de causis, Freiburg i. Br., 1882.

8. See Valentinus Rose, Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 1883, p. 843.

9. See Husik, Judah Messer Leon's Commentary upon the "Vetus Logica,"
Leyden, 1906, p. 11, 97 note.

=xxi=, 10. For the following sketch of the Kalam see Goldziher,
Vorlesungen über den Islam, Heidelberg, 1910, 100 ff, 127 f.

=xxiv=, 11. See below, p. 247.

=xxv=, 12. See Schreiner, Der Kalam in der jüdischen Literatur, Berlin,
1895, p. 3; ibid., Studien über Jeschuʿa ben Jehuda, Berlin, 1900, p. 12
ff.

=xxvi=, 13. See L. Ginzberg, in Jewish Encyclopedia, s. v.
"Anthropomorphism."

14. See Talm. Bab. Berakot, 33b. מודים מודים משתקין אותו.

15. See Talm. Bab. Megillah, 25b. הכל בידי שמים חוץ מיראת שמים.

16. Schreiner, Studien über Jeschuʿa ben Jehudah, p. 15 note 2.

17. See Bab. Talm. Pesakim, 54a, שבעה דברים נבראו קודם שנברא העולם ואלו
.הן תורה.... תורה דכתיב (משלי ח׳) ה׳ קנני ראשית דרכו

18. Schreiner 1. c. p. 12.

19. Ibid.

20. Schreiner, Der Kalam in der jüdischen Literatur, p. 3, 4.

=xxvii=, 21. Guide of the Perplexed, I, ch. 71.

22. See below, p. 246 ff.

23. See Goldziher, Vorlesungen über den Islam, p. 155 ff.

=xxviii=, 24. See Yahuda, Al-Hidāja 'Ilā Farā'id Al-Qulūb
des Bachja ibn Joseph Ibn Paquda, Leyden, 1912, p. 53 ff.

=xxxvii=, 25. Cf. above, note 6.

=1=, 26. See Steinschneider, Die Hebräischen Uebersetzungen des
Mittelalters und die Juden als Dolmetscher, Berlin, 1893, § 479 and
notes.

=1=, 27. See Guttmann, Die Scholastik des dreizehnten Jahrhunderts in
ihren Beziehungen zum Judenthum und zur jüdischen Literatur, Breslau,
1902, P. 55 ff.

28. Omnia Opera Ysaac, Lugduni, (Lyons), 1515.

=2=, 29. See אגרותּ הרמב״ם, ed. Amsterdam, p. 14b.

30. S. Fried, Das Buch über die Elemente (ספר היסודות), Drohobycz, 1900.

31. Published by Hirschfeld in "Festschrift zum achtzigsten Geburtstag
Moritz Steinschneiders," Leipzig, 1896, PP. 131-141; cf. also pp. 233-4.

32. See note 28 and the two preceding notes.

=5=, 33. ספר הרוח והנפש published by Steinschneider in the Hebrew
periodical הכרמל I, pp. 401-405. cf. Guttmann, Die philosophischen
Lehren des Isaak ben Salomon Israeli, Münster i. W., 1911, p. 31, note 1.

=10=, 34. Fried, ספר היסודות, p. 12f.

=17=, 35. Berlin, 1885, pp. 65, 77-83, 151-154.

36. See the Russian paper Woskhod, September, 1898.

=24=, 37. Arabic text edited by S. Landauer, Kitāb al-Amānāt
wa'l-Iʿtiqādāt, Leyden 1880. The Hebrew translation of Judah ibn
Tibbon has been published in many editions. The references in the
following notes are to the Yozefov edition.

=25=, 38. Cf. below, p. 249 ff.

39. Pt. I, ch. 1, third argument, p. 58 of Yozefov edition.

40. Ibid., fourth argument, p. 59.

=26=, 41. Ibid., ch. 3, p. 63 ff.; cf. Guttmann, Die
Religionsphilosophie des Saadia, Göttingen, 1882, p. 45 f.

42. Pt. II, chs. 9-12, pp. 95-101.

43. Pt. VI, ch. 1, p. 149.

44. Pt. II, ch. 2, pp. 88-9.

=27=, 45. Introduction, pp. 38-39.

46. Ibid., p. 40.

=28=, 47. Ibid., pp. 43-48.

48. Ibid., p. 48.

49. p. 49

50. p. 51.

=29=, 51. Pt. I. Introduction, p. 54 f.

52. Ibid., ch. 1, p. 56.

=30=, 53. Ibid., p. 57.

54. Ibid., p. 58.

55. Ibid., p. 59.

=31=, 56. Ch. 2, p. 60 ff.

57. Ch. 3, third opinion, p. 66 ff.

=32=, 58. Ch. 4, pp. 80-82.

59. Pt. II, Introduction, p. 86.

60. Ibid., ch. 1, p. 88.

=33=, 61. Pt. I, ch. 3, fifth opinion, p. 68.

62. Pt. II, ch. 2, p. 89.

=34=, 63. Ibid., chs. 4-5, pp. 91-93.

64. See Graf, Die Philosophie und Gotteslehre des Jahjā ibn ʿAdī
und späteren Autoren, Münster, 1910, p. 32, note, p. 52.

=35=, 65. III, ch. 10, p. 122; V, ch. 8, p. 147; VII, ch. 2, p. 165.

66. II, chs. 9-12, pp. 95-102.

=37=, 67. VI, chs. 1-4, pp. 148-156.

=38=, 68. III chs. 1-3, pp. 104-110.

=40=, 69. Ibid., chs. 4-5, pp. 110-113.

70. Ch. 6, pp. 113-114.

71. Chs. 7-9, pp. 114-121.

=41=, 72. IV, pp. 124-136.

=42=, 73. V, chs. 1-3, pp. 136-140.

=43=, 74. IX, chs. 1-4, pp. 185-190.

=44=, 75. VI, ch. 8, pp. 160-162.

=45=, 76. VII, chs. 1-9, pp. 162-174.

77. VIII, pp. 175-185.

78. IX, chs. 5-11, pp. 190-197.

=46=, 79. X, pp. 197-215.

=48=, 80. The following sketch is based upon Frankl, Ein
Muʿtazilitischer Kalam aus dem 10ten Jahrhundert, Wien, 1872.

=55=, 81. The following sketch is based upon Schreiner, Studien über
Jeschuʿa ben Jehuda, Berlin, 1900.

=60=, 82. אגרות הרמב״ם (Letters of Maimonides), ed. Amsterdam, p. 14b.

=61=, 83. See Munk, Mélanges de Philosophie Juive et Arabe, Paris, 1859,
p. 291 ff; Guttmann, Die Scholastik des Dreizehnten Jahrhunderts,
Breslau, 1902, pp. 60-85. _Id._, Die Philosophie des Salomon ibn
Gabirol, Göttingen, 1889, p. 54 ff. This last work and that of Munk
represent the best exposition and criticism of Gabirol's philosophy and
of his sources and influences.

=62=, 84. Cf. Baeumker, Avencebrolis Fons Vitæ, Münister, 1892-95,
Prolegomena.

=63=, 85. Jourdain, A., Recherches Critiques sur l'âge et l'origine des
traductions Latines d' Aristote, 2 ed. Paris, 1843, p. 197 note.

86. Munk, Mélanges, etc. (see note 83), contains the Hebrew extracts of
Falaquera. The Latin translation was published by Clemens Baeumker in
the Beiträge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, vol. I,
pts. 2-4 (cf. above note 84). See also Seyerlen in Theologische
Jahrbücher, edited by Zeller, XV and XVI.

=64=, 87. Cf. Munk, Le Guide des Égarés, II, p. 25, note 1, end.

88. See Kaufmann, Studien über Salomon ibn Gabirol, Budapest, 1899.

89. Baeumker, Fons Vitæ, V, p. 313, 6.

=65=, 90. F. V. V, 333-335, Falaquera in Munk's Mélanges, V, §§ 67-69.

91. F. V. IV, 8 ff., Falaquera IV, § 1.

92. F. V. V, 296, 10.

93. F. V. IV, 243, 10.

94. F. V. III, p. 196, 5 ff., Falaq. III, § 10.

95. F. V. III, 208, 15; Falaq. III, § 44.

=67=, 96. F. V. III, 175, 10 ff.; Falaq. III § 27 ff.

97. F. V. IV, 211, 9 ff., 213, 17 ff., 217, II ff., 218, 18; Falaq. IV,
§§ 1-4 and ff.

98. F. V. V, 258, 19; 259, 1; 268, 8, 14, 15; 322, 12; Falaq. V, § 55.

=68=, 99. F. V. V, 306, 7 ff.; Falaq. V, § 34 ff.

100. F. V. V, 330, 15 ff.; Falaq. V, § 64 ff.

101. F. V. V, 326, 3 ff.; Falaq. V, § 60 ff.

=70=, 102. F. V. III, 204, 13 ff.; Falaq. III, § 37.

=71=, 103. S. Wise, "Improvement of the Moral Qualities," New York,
1901. (Columbia University Oriental Studies, vol. 1.)

=72=, 104. F. V. I, 4, 24 ff.; Falaq. I, § 2.

=78=, 105. See Munk, Mélanges, 166 ff.

=80=, 106. Yahuda, Prolegomena zu einer erstmaligen Herausgabe des
Kitāb Al-Hidāja 'Ilā Farā'id Al-Qulūb, Frankfurt a. M.,
1904, 12 ff.; _id._, Al-Hidaja 'Ilā Faraid Al-Qulūb des Bachja ibn
Joseph ibn Paqūda, Leyden, 1912, 63 f.

107. Neumark, Geschichte der jüdischen Philosophie des Mittelalters, I,
Berlin, 1907, 485-493.

=81=, 108. In his commentary on Deut. 32, 39. Cf. Yahuda, Prolegomena,
p. 12, note 2, where 35 should be corrected to 39.

109. Yahuda, Al-Hidaja, etc., p. 97.

=85=, 110.‮ חובת הלבבות‬ (Duties of the Hearts) ed. Warsaw, 1875,
Introduction, pp. 9-28.

=86=, 111. Ibid., Introduction, 28-37.

112. Yahuda, Al-Hidāja, pp. 53-112.

=88=, 113. Duties of the Hearts, I, chs. 1-6, pp. 41-58.

=89=, 114. Duties, I, ch. 6, pp. 57-8.

=92=, 115. Ibid., ch. 7, pp. 58-69.

=93=, 116. Ch. 8, pp. 69-72.

117. Ch. 9, pp. 72-76.

=95=, 118. Ch. 10, pp. 76-84.

=96=, 119. Guide of the Perplexed I, ch. 53.

120. Duties, ch. 1, p. 44.

121. Ibid., ch. 10, end, p. 92 f.

=97=, 122. Duties, II, pp. 95-137.

=99=, 123. III, pp. 138-197.

=101=, 124. IV, pp. 198-256.

125. Duties, 2nd volume, part V, pp. 3-35.

=102=, 126. VI, pp. 36-58.

=103=, 127. VII, pp. 58-82.

=104=, 128. VIII, pp. 82-126.

=105=, 129. IX, pp. 126-150.

130. X, pp. 151-168.

=106=, 131. Broydé, Les Reflexions sur l'âme par Bahya ben Joseph ibn
Pakouda, Paris, 1896; Hebrew title, ספר תורות הנפש.

132. Goldziher, Kitāb Ma'ānī al-Nafs, Berlin, 1907.

133. See Guttmann in "Monatschrift für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des
Judenthums," XLI (1897), 241 ff.

=107=, 134. Arabic text, p. 41, 12 and 46, 2; Hebrew, p. 55, 1 and 61, 5.

135. Ch. 2, p. 4, 29 (Heb. p. 5, last line).

136. Ibid., p. 6, 1 (Heb. p. 7, 3).

137. Ibid., p. 5, 16 f. (Heb. 6, 16 f.).

138. Ibid., ch. 9, p. 34, 13 ff. (Heb. p. 44, 10).

139. Ch. 2, p. 6, 6 ff. (Heb. p. 7, 8 f.).

140. Ch. 12, p. 42, 23 (Heb. p. 56, 23).

=108=, 141. Chs. 1-2.

=111=, 142. Chs. 16-17.

143. Chs. 6 and 11-12.

=112=, 144. Ch. 2.

145. Ch. 9.

=113=, 146. Ch. 7.

147. Chs. 19 and 21.

=114=, 148. ספר הגיון הנפש, edited by Freimann, Leipzig, 1860. German
title, Sefer Hegjon ha-Nefesch.

=115=, 149. p. 2a.

150. Ibid., also 4b.

151. See, however, below, p. 119.

152. p. 2b.

=116=, 153. p. 1.

=117=, 154. pp. 1-2.

=118=, 155. pp. 4b-5a.

156. pp. 2b-4a.

=122=, 157. pp. 5b-8a.

158. p. 8b ff.

=123= 159. p. 11a.

160. pp. 10-12.

=124=, 161. p. 30b ff.

=125=,162. See Doctor, Die Philosophie des Joseph ibn Zaddik, Münster,
1895, pp. 1-3; Horovitz, Der Mikrokosmos des Joseph Ibn Saddik, Breslau,
1903, I-II.

163. Horovitz, Mikrokosmos, XIII, ff.

164. Letters of Maimonides, ed. Amsterdam, 14b.

=126=, 165. Horovitz, Mikrokosmos, 7, 24-8, 2.

=127=, 166. Ibid., 44-46; 53-54; cf. below, p. 145.

167. Ibid., p. 37, 2 ff.; cf. below, p. 138.

=129=, 168. pp. 1-2.

=130=, 169. pp. 3-6.

=133=, 170. pp. 7-19.

=134=, 171. pp. 19-25.

=137=, 172. pp. 25-33.

=141=, 173. pp. 33-43.

=142=, 174. pp. 43-47.

=145=, 175. pp. 47-57

=146=, 176. pp. 57-58.

=149=, 177. pp. 59-79.

=150=, 178. Al-Chazari, I, 67, ed. Hirschfeld, Leipzig, 1887, p. 29, 24.

179. Ibid., p. 29, 19-20.

180. I, 63; II, 66; pp. 29 and 125.

=151=, 181. See Kaufmann, Jehuda Halewi in "Gesammelte Schriften,"
Frankfurt a. M., 1910, vol. 2, pp. 99-151.

=152=, 182. Al-Chazari IV, 13, 15; p. 253, 18 ff., 257, 6 ff.

=153=, 183. Kaufmann, Geschichte der Attributenlehre in der jüdischen
Religionsphilosophie des Mittelalters, Gotha, 1877, pp. 119-140.

=157=, 184. Al-Chazari I, 1-67, pp. 1-29.

=158=, 185. Ibid., 70 ff., p. 31 ff.

=159=, 186. II, 6; p. 75, 22 ff.

187. IX, 13; p. 253, 18 ff.

=160=, 188. IV, 3; p. 229, 10 ff.

189, Ibid., 15 ff.; p. 257, 6 ff.

=161=, 190. II, 2-4; pp. 71-75.

=163=, 191. I, 87 ff.; p. 39 ff.

=164=, 192. I, 99 ff.; p. 53 ff.

193. II, 10 ff.; p. 77 ff.

194. Ibid., 36 ff.; p. 103 ff.

=165=, 195. Ibid., 68 f.; p. 125 f.

=167=, 196. IV, 3 ff.; p. 237, 9 ff.

=168=, 197. II, 26, p. 95; 48, p. 107 f.

=169=, 198. Ibid., 50, p. 109, 24 f.; III, 1 ff., p. 141 ff.

=170=, 199. I, 109 ff.; p. 59 ff.

=173=, 200. V, 20 ff., p. 337 ff.

201. IV, 25, p. 267 ff.

202. Ibid., 27, p. 283 f.

=174=, 203. Ibid., 29 ff., p. 285 ff.

=175=, 204. See above, p. 8.

205. Zeitschrift der ~deutschen~ morgenländischen Gesellschaft, XXIX
(1875), pp. 335-418.

=177=, 206. V, 1 ff., p. 295 ff.

=179=, 207. IV, 25, p. 281, 24 ff.

=181=, 208. V, 12, p. 311 ff.

=182=, 209. Ibid., 14, p. 323 ff.

=183=, 210. Ibid., 16 ff., p. 331 ff.

211. Ibid., 22 ff., p. 357 ff.

=184=, 212. Quoted by Bacher in Jewish Encyclopedia, s. v. Ibn Ezra,
Abraham.

213. Published by Dukes in "Zion," II, Frankfurt a. M., 1842, pp.
117-123, 134-137, 157-159, 175. Cf. also Literaturblatt des Orients, X,
748, where Dukes publishes a brief passage from the "Arugat Habosem,"
not found in "Zion." He derived it from a different manuscript.

=187=, 214. Jesod Mora, published with German translation by M.
Creizenach, Frankfurt a. M., and Leipzig, 1840. Hebrew title יסוד מורא.
Sefer Ha-Schem, ed. Lippmann, 1834. Cf., Bacher, Jewish Encyclopedia,
s. v.

=189=, 215. מורה נבוכי הזמן, Warsaw, 1894, ch. 17
(חכמת המסכן), pp. 266 ff.

216. Die Religionsphilosophie Abraham Ibn Esra's, in "Monatschrift für
Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judenthums," 42 and 43 (1898 and 1899).

=192=, 217. Ibid., 42 (1898), pp. 454-455.

=193=, 218. Commentary on Exod. 33, 21, towards the end of the long
excursus.

=195=, 219. Commentary on Exod. 20, 2.

220. Introduction to his commentary on Ecclesiastes.

=197=, 221. Emunah Ramah (Heb. title אמונה רמה), published
with German translation by Simson Weil, Frankfurt a. M., 1852, p. 2
(Heb.).

222. Em. Ram., p. 83.

=198=, 223. See note 221.

224. Em. Ram., 2-3.

225. See note 221.

=199=, 226. See Horovitz, Ueber den Einfluss der griechischen
Philosophie auf die Entwicklung des Kalam, Breslau, 1909.

=200=, 227. But see below, p. 354, l. 31.

=202=, 228. Em. Ram., p. 1 ff.

=203=, 229. Ibid., 4.

=204=, 230. Al Gazali. Cf. Guttmann, Die Religionsphilosophie des
Abraham ibn Daud aus Toledo, Göttingen, 1879, p. 117, note.

=205=, 231. Em. Ram., 44-46.

232. Ibid., 4-8.

=207=, 233. Ibid., 9-13.

=208=, 234. Ibid., 13-15.

=209=, 235. Ibid., 15-20.

=216=, 236. Em. Ram., 20-41.

237. Ibid., 41-43.

=220=, 238. Em. Ram., 44-51.

=221=, 239. Ibid., 51-57.

=223=, 240. Ibid., 57-69.

=224=, 241. Ibid., 69-70.

=226=, 242. Ibid., 70-75.

=228=, 243. Ibid., 75-81.

=230=, 244. Ibid., 93-98.

=232=, 245. See Guttmann, Die Religionsphilosophie des Abraham Ibn Daud,
p. 220, note 2.

=235=, 246. Ibid., 98-104.

=236=, 247. באור מלות ההגיון, Breslau, 1828. For other editions and
interesting information concerning this treatise see Steinschneider, Die
Hebräischen Uebersetzungen des Mittelalters, Berlin, 1893, § 251, and
Die Arabische Literatur der Juden, Frankfurt a. M., 1902, p. 208, 5.

248. Introduction to the eleventh chapter (ch. Helek) of the treatise
Sanhedrin.

=239=, 249. Letters of Maimonides, ed. Amsterdam, pp. 13b-14.

250. The Arabic text was published with a French translation and
extremely valuable notes by Solomon Munk, under the title, Le Guide des
Égarés, 3 volumes, Paris, 1856-66. English translation by M. Friedländer
in 3 vols., London, 1881-1885, re-issued in one volume, with omission of
notes, London, 1910. For other translations, editions and commentaries
see Kaufmann, "Der 'Führer' Maimûnis in der Weltliteratur," Archiv für
Geschichte der Philosophie, XI (1898), pp. 335-376, republished in
Kaufmann's Gesammelte Schriften ed. Brann, vol. 2, Frankfurt a. M.,
1910, pp. 152-189. See also Friedländer's translation, London, 1910, p.
XXVII ff.

251. The Arabic text was published with a German translation by M. Wolff
under the title, Mûsâ Maimûni's Acht Kapitel, 2nd edition, Leyden, 1903.
Hebrew text with English translation by Joseph I. Gorfinkle, The Eight
Chapters of Maimonides on Ethics, New York, 1912 (Columbia University
Oriental Studies, vol. VII).

=240=, 252. Emunah Ramah, p. 81 ff.

=241=, 253. Guide, I, chs. 1, 3-16, 18-30, 37-45, 64-67, 70.

=243=, 254. Ibid., ch. 54.

255. III, 28.

256. I, 55.

=244=, 257. I, 32.

258. Ibid., ch. 33.

=245=, 259. Ch. 34.

260. Ch. 71.

=246=, 261. Ibid.

=247=, 262. Cf., however, above, p. xxv f. (the view that Kalam
originated in Judaism).

=248=, 263. Ch. 71.

=249=, 264. The following numbers do not correspond to those of
Maimonides.

=252=, 265. Guide, I, 73.

266. Ibid., 74.

=253=, 267. Ibid., 75.

268. Ibid., 76.

269. See below, p. 257.

270. Below, p. 259.

271. Above, p. 218.

272. Below, p. 258, last line, and 260.

=257=, 273. Guide II, Introduction.

=260=, 274. Ibid., ch. 1.

=261=, 275. Ch. 36.

=262=, 276. Ch. 46.

=264=, 277. Ibid., chs. 51-53.

=265=, 278. Chs. 55-58.

279. Ch. 61.

=268=, 280. See Munk, Guide des Égarés II, p. 69, note 1.

281. Guide II, chs. 3-6.

=271=, 282. Chs. 13-18.

=272=, 283. Munk understands the preceding sentence differently. See his
edition, vol. II, p. 157, note 2.

=274=, 284. Guide II, chs. 19-25.

=281=, 285. Ibid., chs. 32-48.

286. III, ch. 8.

=282=, 287. "Eight Chapters," ch. 1.

=285=, 288. Ibid., chs. 2-5.

289. Ch. 7.

=288=, 290. Ch. 8.

=289=, 291. Guide III, chs. 10-12.

=290=, 292. Ibid., ch. 16.

=292=, 293. Ibid., chs. 17-18.

=294=, 294. Ibid., chs. 19-21.

295. Ibid., chs. 26 and 31.

=295=, 296. Ibid., ch. 27.

297, Ibid., ch. 50.

=298=, 298. Ibid., chs. 29-50.

=299=, 299. Ibid., ch. 54.

=304=, 300. Ibid., II, ch. 30.

301. Ibid., III, chs. 1-7.

302. See Munk, Le Guide des Égarés, III, p. 8, note.

303. Ibid.

304. Guide III, chs. 22-23.

=305=, 305. See Kaufmann, Der Führer Maimûnis in der Weltliteratur in
Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie XI (1898) p. 314 f.; reprinted in
Kaufmann's Gesammelte Schriften, ed. Brann, Frankfurt a. M., 1910, p.
158 f.

306. See Jourdain, Recherches critiques sur l'âge et l'origine des
traductions Latines d'Aristote, 2nd ed., Paris, 1843. German transl. by
Stahr, Halle, 1831.

=305=, 307. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, Book VIII, ch. 5, "Nulli nobis
quam isti [sc., Platonici] propius accesserunt"; ch. 9, "Platonem de Deo
ista sensisse, quae multum congruere veritati nostrae religionis
agnoscunt."

=306=, 308. See Mandonnet, Siger de Brabant et l'Averroïsme Latin au
XIII^me Siècle, Louvain, 1911, chs. 1-2; Isaac Husik, An Anonymous
Medieval Christian Critic of Maimonides, Jewish Quarterly Review, New
Series, vol. II, Phila. 1911, p. 159 ff.

309. See J. Perles, "Die in einer Münchener Handschrift aufgefundene
erste lateinische Uebersetzung des Maimonidischen Führers", in
Monatschrift für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judenthums, XXIV
(1875), p. 9 ff.

=307=, 310. See M. Joel, Verhältniss Albert des Grossen zu Moses
Maimonides, Breslau, 1876, in M. Joel, Beiträge zur Geschichte der
Philosophie, Breslau, 1876. J. Guttmann, Das Verhältniss des Thomas von
Aquino zum Judenthum und zur jüdischen Literatur, Göttingen, 1891; id.,
Die Scholastik des dreizehnten Jahrhunderts in ihren Beziehungen zum
Judenthum und zur jüdischen Literatur, Breslau, 1902; id., Der Einfluss
der Maimonidischen Philosophie auf das christliche Abendland, in "Moses
ben Maimon," vol. I, Leipzig, 1908.

=308=, 311. See Graetz, History of the Jews, index volume, s. v.,
"Maimunist Controversy."

=309=, 312. Published by M. L. Bisliches, Pressburg, 1837.

312a. Edited by W. Bacher under the title "Sefer Musar," Berlin, 1910.

313. Published by the "Mekize Nirdamim" Society, Lyck, 1866.

=310=, 314. Published by Munk in Mélanges de Philosophie Juive et Arabe,
Paris, 1859.

315. Published by Bisliches, Pressburg, 1837.

316. See Munk, Mélanges, p. 494, note 1; H. Malter, Shem Tob Palquera,
in Jewish Quarterly Review, new series, vol. I, pp. 151-181, 451-501.

317. Published by Werbluner, Josephi Kaspi ... Commentaria hebraica in
R. Mosis Maimonides Tractatum Dalalat al Haiirin, Frankfurt a. M., 1848.

318. Edited by Goldenthal, Wien, 1852.

=311=, 319. The English reader will also find a good deal of material in
the pages of the Jewish Encyclopedia under the names of the translators
and writers above mentioned.

=313=, 320. Guide I, ch. 74, 7th proof, end.

=314=, 321. Published by the "Mekize Nirdamim," Lyck, 1874.

=315=, 322. Tagm. Hanef. 1.

=317=, 323. Ibid., 1b-7b. The definition occurs, p. 7b, ll. 28 ff.

=318=, 324. Ibid., 8a.

=319=, 325. Ibid., 8a-10a.

=322=, 326. Ibid., 10a-13b.

=323=, 327. Ibid., 13b-19b.

=324=, 328. Ibid., 20a-21b.

=326=, 329. Ibid., 21b-24b.

330. Ibid., 24.

=327=, 331. Ibid., 25a-32.

=328=, 331a. See Heimann Auerbach, Albalag und seine Uebersetzung des
Makâsid al-Gazzalis, Breslau, 1906, p. vii f.; Guttmann, Die Stellung
des Simon ben Zemach Duran in der Geschichte der jüdischen
Religionsphilosophie in Monatschrift für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des
Judenthums, vol. LVII (1913), p. 184 f.

=328=, 332. See Maywald, Die Lehre von der zweifachen Wahrheit, Berlin,
1871; Mandonnet, Siger de Brabant et l'Averroïsme Latin au XIII^me
Siècle, Louvain, 1911, vol. 1, p. 148 ff.

=329=, 333. First edition, Riva di Trento, 1560; modern edition,
Leipzig, 1866. The references in the sequel are to the Leipzig edition.

334. See Husik, Judah Messer Leon's Commentary on the "Vetus Logica,"
Leyden, 1906, p. 11.

335. See Joel, Lewi ben Gerson als Religionsphilosoph, Breslau, 1862, p.
9f. (in M. Joel, Beiträge zur Geschichte der Philosophie, Breslau,
1876).

=330=, 336. Introduction to Gersonides' commentary on the Pentateuch.

337. Introduction to "Milhamot Adonai," pp. 6-7.

=331=, 338. Milhamot I, ch. 14, p. 91.

339. Ibid., Introduction, p. 8.

=336=, 340. I, chs. 1-4, pp. 12-35.

=337=, 341. Ibid., ch. 5, pp. 35-36.

=339=, 342. Ch. 6, pp. 36-48.

=340=, 343. Ibid., chs. 10-12, pp. 61-88.

=342=, 344. Milhamot II, chs. 1-2, pp. 92-98.

345. Ibid., chs. 3, 5 and 6, pp. 98 f., 104, 111 f.

=344=, 346. Milhamot III, ch. 3, p. 132.

=345=, 347. III, chs. 1-6, pp. 120-150.

=349=, 348. IV, chs. 1-7, pp. 151-187.

=350=, 349. V, 3, ch. 6, p. 264 f.

=351=, 350. Ibid., chs. 4-6, pp. 247-264.

=352=, 351. Ch. 12, pp. 278-285.

=354=, 352. VI, 1, chs. 1-9, pp. 293-328.

353, Ibid., chs. 10-13, pp. 328-353; ch. 15, p. 356 f.

=355=, 354. Ch. 16, pp. 359-361.

=357=, 355. Chs. 17-28, pp. 362-416.

356, VI, 2, ch. 1, p. 419.

=358=, 357. VI, 2, chs. 1-8, pp. 418-441.

=360=, 358. Ibid., chs. 9-12, pp. 441-460.

359. Chs. 13-14, pp. 460-463.

=363=, 360. Published by Delitzsch and Steinschneider, Leipzig, 1841.

=364=, 361. Ez Hayim, p. 4.

=366=, 362. E. H., pp. 3-5.

=367=, 363. p. 15, l. 6 f., also p. 18, l. 10 f.

364. Ch. 4, pp. 12-13, l. 24.

=368=, 365. Ch. 9, pp. 26-27.

=369=, 366. p. 17, l. 16.

367. p. 33.

=372=, 368. Chs. 66-72, pp. 80-89.

369. Ch. 75, pp. 93-96.

=373=, 370. Chs. 76-78, pp. 96-99.

=375=, 371. Chs. 79-81, pp. 100-107.

=376=, 372. Chs. 82-89, pp 107-133.

=377=, 373. Ch. 89, pp. 133-136.

=378=, 374. "Guide" III, 24.

=379=, 375. Ez Hayim, ch. 90, pp. 136-144.

376. "Guide" III, chs. 12, 13, 25 end.

=380=, 377. Ez Hayim, ch. 94, pp. 149-154.

=382=, 378. Chs. 96-100, pp. 160-176.

379. Chs. 101-102, pp. 177-181.

380. Ez Hayim, pp. 116-117.

=383=, 381. Ch. 103, pp. 181-185.

=384=, 382. Chs. 104-105, pp. 185-187.

=385=, 383. Ch. 106, p. 187 ff.; ch. 109, p. 194 ff.

384. Chs. 107-108.

=387=, 385. Chs. 110-112.

=389=, 386. Ed. Ferara, 1556 (no pagination).

=390=, 387. "Or Adonai," Introduction, pp. 6-7 (not numbered).

=391=, 388. Book I, sections 1-2.

389. Ibid., section 3, ch. 2.

390. Ibid., ch. 3.

=392=, 391. Ibid.

392. Ibid., ch. 4.

=393=, 393. Book II, section I.

=395=, 394. Ibid., section 2.

395. Section 3.

396. Section 4.

=398=, 397. Section 5.

398. See M. Joel, "Don Chasdai Creskas' religionsphilosophische
Lehren," Breslau, 1866 (in M. Joel, Beiträge zur Geschichte der
Philosophie, Breslau, 1876), p. 54 f.

=402=, 399. Or Adonai, II, section 6.

400. Ibid., III, introduction.

=403=, 401. Ibid., section 1.

=404=, 402. Section 3.

=405=, 403. Section 4.

=406=, 403a. Simon ben Zemach Duran (1361-1444). He was a relative of
Gersonides, a Rabbinical authority, and the author of a scientific and
philosophical work, entitled "Magen Abot." Unlike his more distinguished
relative, Simon Duran was opposed to the extreme views adopted by such
men as Albalag, Moses of Narbonne or Gersonides himself, and favored a
return to the more moderate standpoint of Maimonides. Without laying any
claim to originality his work shows wide reading and familiarity with
the scientific and philosophic literature of the time. See Guttmann,
"Die Stellung des Simon ben Zemach Duran in der Geschichte der jüdischen
Religionsphilosophie," in Monatschrift für Geschichte und Wissenschaft
des Judenthums, vol. 52 (1908), pp. 641-672, vol. 53 (1909), pp. 46-97,
199-228. From Guttmann's investigations it appears that Albo cannot
claim any originality even for the reduction of the fundamental dogmas
of Judaism to three. The first part of the "Ikkarim" turns out to be a
compilation from Crescas and Duran, and is no more original than the
rest of the book. When we consider that though he owes the central point
of his contribution to Duran, Albo never mentions him, the charge of
plagiarism brought against him is not far from justified. See below, p.
407.

=407=, 404. ביטול עקרי הנוצרים, published by Ephraim Deinard, Carney, N.
J., 1904. The work was originally composed in Spanish, and was
translated into Hebrew by Joseph Ibn Shemtob.

404a. See also note 403a.

=408=, 405. ספר העקרים, ed. Warsaw, 1877, pp. 13-14.

406. Ibid., pp. 14-17.

=409=, 407. pp. 21-25.

408. In the introduction to his commentary on the eleventh chapter of
the Mishnic treatise Sanhedrin (chapter Helek).

=410=, 409. Crescas; cf. above, p. 392.

410. Ikkarim, I, ch. 3, pp. 25-31.

=411=, 411. Chs. 4-7, pp. 31-39.

=412=, 412. Ch. 8, pp. 39-46.

413. Ch. 9, pp. 46-48.

=413=, 414. Chs. 10-11, pp. 48-58.

415. Ch. 12, pp. 58-60.

416. Chs. 13 and 15, pp. 60-61 and 64-68.

=414=, 417. Ch. 14, pp. 61-64.

=415=, 418. Ch. 17, pp. 7-76.

419. Ch. 18, pp. 76-78.

=416=, 420. Ch. 23, pp. 84-86.

=418=, 421. Ch. 24, pp. 87-90.

422, Ch. 25, pp. 90-92.

=419=, 423. Ch. 26, p. 93.

424. Book II, chs. 4-5, pp. 107-114.

425. Ibid., ch. 7, pp. 117-118.

=420=, 426. Chs. 8-10, pp. 118-125.

427. Chs. 11-13, pp. 125-140.

428. Ch. 12, pp. 129-133.

=421=, 429. Book III, chs. 1-5, pp. 197-214.

430. Chs. 6-7, pp. 214-218.

=423=, 431. Chs. 8-11, pp. 218-228.

=424=, 432. Chs. 13-20, pp. 229-246.

433. Book IV, chs. 1-6, pp. 279-294.

=425=, 434. Chs. 7-15, pp. 294-313.

=427=, 435. Chs. 29-35, pp. 338-356.

=429=, 436. See Guttmann "Die Familie Schemtob in ihren Beziehungen zur
Philosophie," Monatschrift für Geschichte und Wissenschaft des
Judenthums, vol. 57 (1913), p. 177 ff.

437. See Guttmann as in preceding note.

438. See preceding note.

=430=, 439. See note 436.

440. See Jewish Encyclopedia s. v.

441. J. E. s. v.

=431=, 442. See Zimmels, "Leo Hebraeus, ein jüdischer Philosoph der
Renaissance," Leipzig, 1886; Appel, "Leone Medigos Lehre vom Weltall und
ihr Verhältniss zu griechischen und zeitgenössischen Anschauungen," in
Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie, vol. XX, pp. 387-400, 496-520;
Munk, Mélanges, pp. 522-528.

443. Husik, "Judah Messer Leon's Commentary on the Vetus Logica,"
Leyden, 1906.

444. Jewish Encyclopedia, s. v.




LIST OF BIBLICAL AND RABBINIC QUOTATIONS


BIBLE

 GENESIS: 1, 1, p. 110;
   1, 2, p. 118;
   1, 3, p. 120;
   1, 6, p. 118;
   1, 9, p. 121;
   1, 11, p. 121;
   1, 21, p. 121;
   1, 25, p. 121;
   1, 26, pp. 121, 268;
   1, 27, pp. 94, 121;
   1, 28, p. 121;
   2, 7, p. 121, 214;
   2, 19, p. 121;
   6, 6, p. 227;
   8, 21, p. 102;
   11, 7, p. 268;
   14, 22, p. 369;
   ch. 15, p. 280;
   15, 4, p. 280;
   15, 12 ff., p. 225;
   18, 10, p. 340;
   27, 34-41, p. 74;
   28, 13, p. 94;
   28, 20, p. 105;
   36, 31, p. 295.

 EXODUS: 2, 13, p. 232;
   2, 17, p. 232;
   3, 14, p. 95;
   5, 2, p. 160;
   7, 3, pp. xiv, 42;
   9, 12, p. 74;
   15, 26, p. 403;
   20, 2, pp. 194, 233;
   20, 11-12, p. 233;
   20, 17, p. 83;
   20, 35, p. 409;
   22, 26, p. 74;
   23, 21, p. 109;
   24, 10, p. 167;
   33, 11, p. 381;
   33, 13, p. 243;
   33, 23, p. 37;
   34, 6, p. 233.

 LEVITICUS: 19, 17, p. 83;
   19, 18, p. 83.

 NUMBERS: 10, 8, p. 227;
   12, 8, p. 167;
   15, 39, p. 83;
   23, 10, p. 170.

 DEUTERONOMY: 2, 30, p. xiv;
   4, 15, pp. 35, 95;
   4, 39, pp. 84, 115, 220;
   6, 4, p. 74;
   13, 1, pp. 382, 423;
   15, 7, p. 83;
   17, 15, p. 295;
   30, 15, p. 286;
   30, 19, pp. xiv, 41, 286;
   31, 17, p. 348;
   33, 4, p. 41;
   34, 10, p. 416.

 JOSHUA: ch. 10, p. 360.

 I. SAMUEL: 2, 6, p. 386;
   19, 20, p. 226.

 II. SAMUEL: 23, 2, p. 34.

 I. KINGS: 22, 20, p. xiv.

 ISAIAH: 1, 14, p. 227;
   1, 11-17, p. 82;
   5, 20, p. 374;
   6, 1, 8, p. 280;
   11, 1-4, p. 112;
   26, 19, p. 386;
   40, 12, p. 208;
   40, 26, p. 369;
   43, 1, p. 122;
   43, 7, p. 121;
   45, 18, p. 104;
   59, 19, p. 109.

 JEREMIAH: 7, 22, p. 234;
   9, 22-23, pp. 124, 148, 205, 299;
   18, 1 ff., p. 207;
   31, 33, p. 141.

 EZEKIEL: 8, 9, p. 109.

 HOSEA: 4, 6, p. 348;
   6, 3, p. 141.

 AMOS: 3, 2, p. 164;
   5, 6, p. 141.

 MICAH: 6, 8, p. 168.

 ZEPHANIAH: 2, 3, p. 148.

 MALACHI: 1, 9, p. 41.

 PSALMS: 19, p. 216;
   19, 2, p. 193;
   19, 7, p. 193;
   19, 8, p. 411;
   19, 9-10, p. 412;
   73, 11-13, p. 293;
   94, 9, p. 293;
   136, 6, p. 176;
   139, p. 205;
   145, 9, p. 376.

 PROVERBS: 8, 22, p. 109;
   25, 16, p. 244;
   30, 4, p. 208.

 JOB: 10, 10, p. 378;
   19, 26, p. 116;
   23, 13, p. xxvi;
   ch. 32, p. 349;
   38, 36-37, p. 208.

 ECCLESIASTES: 1, 14, p. 47;
   2, 3, p. 47.

 DANIEL: 7, 1, p. 225;
   10, 8, p. 278;
   10, 17, p. 381;
   12, 2, p. 404.

 NEHEMIAH: 9, 5, p. 95.


 MISHNA AND TALMUD

 BERAKOT (Bab. Tal.): 17 a, p. 44;
   33 b, p. xxvi, note 14, p. 41.

 BERAKOT (Jer. Tal.): I, p. 83.

 PESAKIM: 54 a, p. xxvi, note 17.

 MEGILLAH: 25 b, p. xxvi, note 15.

 HAGIGAH: ch. 2, p. 244;
   11 b, p. xvi, notes 2 and 3.

 SANHEDRIN: 38 b, p. 268;
   99 a, p. 408;
   106 b, p. 83.

 MAKKOT: 23 b, p. 416.

 ABOT: ch. 4, p. 44.




INDEX


 Aaron ben Elijah, xli, 362-387;
   relation to Maimonides, 363 f.;
   to the Muʿtazila, 364;
   reason and faith, 364 f.;
   physics, 366 ff.;
   defends atomic theory, 367 f.;
   creation, ibid.;
   existence of God, 368 f.;
   unity, ibid.;
   incorporeality, ibid.;
   attributes, 369 f.;
   will of God, 372;
   problem of evil, 373 f., 376 f.;
   Providence, 375 f.;
   reward and punishment, 379, 383;
   purpose of the world and of man, 379 f.;
   prophecy, 380 f.;
   immutability of the Law, 382;
   reason of the commandments, ibid.;
   immortality, 384;
   resurrection, 385 f.

 Aaron ben Joseph, 363

 Abarbanel, Don Isaac, 304, 312, 328, 430

 Abarbanel, Judah Leo, 431

 Abd Al Rahman III, 59

 Abélard, 305

 Abraham bar Hiyya, xlvi, 114-124;
   standpoint, 115;
   physics, 116 f.;
   matter, ibid.;
   form, 117 ff.;
   intellect, soul and nature, 119;
   ethics, 119, 122 f.;
   reward and punishment, 119, 122 ff.;
   immortality, 120 f.;
   problem of evil, 123 f., 128, 139, 175, 309, 435

 Æsculapius, 155

 Afer, Constantinus, 1

 Aher, 197

 Akiba, Rabbi, xxvi

 Al-Ashari, xxiii

 Albalag, Isaac, 328, 429, 430, 447, note 403a

 Albalia, Baruh, 151

 Al Basir, Joseph, xxv, xlvii, 48-55;
   priority of reason, 48;
   atomic theory, 49;
   existence of God, 49 f.;
   creation, ibid.;
   attributes, 50;
   divine will, ibid.;
   eternity, 51;
   incorporeality, unity, simplicity, ibid, f.;
   God's word, 52;
   ethics, ibid, f.;
   problem of evil, 54;
   freedom, 54 f.;
   and foreknowledge, ibid.;
   reward and punishment, 55, 56, 57, 81, 126, 127, 128, 141, 146, 200,
   246, 363, 434

 Albertus Magnus, 1, 200, 306, 312, 313, 323

 Albo, Joseph, I, 406-427;
   standpoint, 406 ff.;
   purpose of his work, 408;
   principles of religion, ibid.;
   criticism of Maimonides's 13 articles, 409 ff.;
   Albo's own view, 410 f.;
   divine law distinguished from natural and conventional, 408 ff.;
   freedom, a principle, 412;
   creation, 413, 415;
   existence of God, 419 f.;
   attributes, 420;
   angels, ibid.;
   revelation, 420 f.;
   prophecy, 421;
   immutability of the Law, 423;
   God's knowledge, 424;
   and human freedom, ibid.;
   Providence, 425;
   reward and punishment, 425 f.; 428, 430, 436, 447, note 403a

 Alexander of Aphrodisias, xviii, 7, 60, 290, 313, 321, 332, 334, 335, 336

 Alexander the Great, xvii

 Alexander of Hales, 306

 Alfadhil, 239

 Alfarabi, xx, xxi, xxxix, xlvi, 2, 26, 60, 177, 178, 198, 199, 218, 223,
 252, 253, 276, 281, 302, 312, 313, 362, 391, 392

 Alfasi, 151

 Algazali, xxxix, 80, 152, 153, 389, 392, 420, 443, note 230

 Ali, 86

 Al-Kirkisani, Joseph Ha-Maor, 363

 Almohades, 238

 Alphonso VI, 151

 Al-Mansur, 1

 Almoravid, 151

 Anatoli, Jacob, 302, 309

 Angels, xlvi;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 190 f.;
   in Ibn Daud, 221 f.;
   in Maimonides, 266 f.;
   in Albo, 420

 Anthropomorphism, xxii, xxvi, xlv, 35, 95, 186, 260 f.

 Appel, 448, note 442

 Aquinas, Thomas, 1, 61, 63, 200, 207, 306, 307, 312, 313, 323, 331, 332,
 406

 Arama, Isaac, 430

 Archimedes, xviii

 Aristotelians, xl, 150, 165, 246, 364, 365, 366, 368, 428

 Aristotle, xvi, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, xxix ff., xxxvii, xxxix, xl, xli,
 xlii, xlv, xlvi, 7, 8, 9, 13, 20, 26, 60, 62, 64, 72, 89, 92, 107, 111,
 126, 132, 138, 139, 155, 157, 173, 175, 177, 178, 179, 181, 182, 184,
 185, 199, 200, 206, 207, 210, 213, 216, 217, 218, 236, 240, 247, 252,
 253, 254, 256, 258, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 273, 274, 275, 276,
 290, 291, 299, 300, 303, 305, 306, 307, 309, 312, 313, 315, 316, 321,
 329, 331, 332, 333, 334, 338, 346, 347, 350, 352, 353, 354, 366, 367,
 375, 378, 388, 389, 390, 395, 402, 408, 412, 425, 429, 430, 431

 "Arugat Habosem," 184

 Ashariya, xxiii, xxvii, xlvii, 23, 246, 251, 291, 362, 365, 372, 378, 379

 Atomic theory, in the Kalam, xxii, 249 f.;
   in Saadia, 25;
   in Al Basir, 49;
   in Jeshua ben Judah, 56;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 367 f.

 Attributes, doctrine of, in the Kalam, xxiii, xxvii, xl, xliv;
   in Saadia, xliv, 33 f.;
   in Mukammas, 18 ff.;
   in Al Basir, 50;
   in Bahya, 93 f.;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 145 f.;
   in Judah Halevi, 161 ff.;
   in Ibn Daud, 220 f.;
   in Maimonides, xlv, 262 ff.;
   in Levi ben Gerson, xlv, 344 f., 351 f.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 369 f.;
   in Crescas, 391 f.;
   in Albo, 420

 Auerbach, Heimann, 445, note 331a

 Augustine, xli, 51, 305, 445, note 307

 Averroes (Ibn Roshd), xx, xxi, xxxix, xli, xlvi, xlvii, 7, 60, 62, 125,
 177, 199, 306, 309, 310, 312, 313, 318, 321, 322, 323, 329, 332, 334,
 335, 336, 362, 392, 431

 Avicebron, see Gabirol, Solomon Ibn

 Avicenna (Ibn Sina), xx, xxi, xxxix, xlvi, 2, 26, 60, 62, 107, 108, 175,
 177, 178, 179, 198, 199, 207, 210, 211, 213, 218, 223, 224, 253, 276,
 281, 302, 312, 313, 362, 391, 392, 420


 Bacher, W., 437, 443, notes 212 and 214; 445, note 312a

 Back, Samuel, 436

 Baeumker, Clemens, 440, note 84; 441, notes 86 and 89

 Bahya, Ibn Pakuda, xix, xxviii, xxxix, xlii, 1, 80-105;
   duties of the limbs and duties of the heart, 82 f.;
   sources of knowledge, 83;
   creation, 86 ff.;
   unity, 89 f.;
   attributes, 93 f.;
   study of nature, 96 f.;
   gratitude to God, 97 f.;
   submission to God, 98;
   freedom, ibid.;
   the laws, 98 f.;
   trust in God, 99 f.;
   "unity of conduct," 101 f.;
   humility, ibid.;
   repentance, 102;
   self-examination, 103;
   temperance, 104;
   asceticism, ibid.;
   love of God, 105; 106, 126, 128, 146, 147, 162, 167, 168, 195, 200, 201,
   217, 241, 246, 252, 309, 362, 428, 434

 Baradæus, Jacob, 34

 Bardenhewer, 439, note 7

 Bardesanes, 375

 Becker, C. H., xxvi, xxvii

 Beer, 433

 Bernfeld, Simon, viii, 433

 Bisliches, M. L., 445, notes 312 and 315

 Bloch, Philipp, 436

 Brahmins, 380

 Brethren of Purity, xxxix, 60, 107, 125, 126, 128, 139, 187, 199

 Broydé, Isaac, 106, 441, note 131


 Cicero, 431

 Clement VI, Pope, 329

 Clement of Alexandria, 302

 Chazars, 153

 Crawford, J. P. W., 436

 Creation, in Kalam, xxii, xlii, 24, 247, 252;
   in Saadia, xlii, 24;
   in Israeli, 5 ff.;
   in Al Basir, 49 f.;
   in Jeshua ben Judah, 56;
   in Gabirol, 68;
   in Bahya, xlii, 86 ff.;
   in Pseudo Bahya, 110;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 116 ff.;
   in Ibn Zaddik, xlii, 143;
   in Judah Halevi, 157;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 190;
   in Maimonides, 269 ff.;
   in Levi ben Gerson, 352 f.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 367 f.;
   in Albo, 413, 415

 Creed, articles of, l;
    in Maimonides, 409 f.;
    in Crescas, 392 ff.;
    in Albo, 410 f.

 Creizenach, M., 443, note 214

 Crescas, Hasdai, xv, xix, xxvii, xxxix, xl, xlii, xlix, l, 173, 200, 312,
   388-405;
   standpoint, 389;
   existence of God, 389 f.;
   unity, 391 f.;
   attributes, ibid.;
   fundamental dogmas of Judaism, 392 ff.;
   God's knowledge, 392 f.;
   Providence, 393 f.;
   problem of evil, 394;
   prophecy, 395;
   freedom, 396 f.;
   influence on Spinoza, 398 f.;
   purpose of the Law, 399 f.;
   immortality, 400;
   creation, 402;
   criticism of Maimonides's 13 articles of the creed, 402, 404;
   reward and punishment, 403 f.;
   resurrection, 404 f., 406, 407, 408, 409, 414, 416, 419, 420, 421, 424,
   426, 428, 430, 436, 447, notes 403a and 409

 "Cusari," see "Kusari"


 Daud, Abraham Ibn, xix, xx, xxvii, xxxix, xlii, xliii, xlv, xlvi, xlvii,
   xlviii, xlix, 61, 62, 63, 71, 79, 125, 166, 197-235;
   standpoint, 197 f.;
   Ibn Daud neglected, 201;
   purpose of his book, 201 f.;
   duty to study philosophy, 202;
   relative value of the sciences, 203 f.;
   categories, 205;
   physics, 205 ff.;
   matter and form, ibid.;
   motion, 207;
   infinity, 208;
   psychology, 209 ff.;
   rational soul, 212 ff.;
   the three kinds of intellect, 214;
   immortality, 215;
   metempsychosis, 215 f.;
   the heavenly spheres, 216;
   existence of God, 217 ff.;
   incorporeality, 217;
   unity, 219 f.;
   attributes, 220 f.;
   angels, 221 f.;
   active intellect, 222;
   emanation of Intelligences, 223;
   tradition, 223 f.;
   prophecy, 224 f.;
   abrogation of the Law, 226 f.;
   freedom, 201 f., 229 ff.;
   problem of evil, 228 f.;
   and foreknowledge, 229 f.;
   ethics, 231 ff.;
   virtues, 232;
   reason of commandments, 233 f., 237, 240, 241, 246, 248, 253, 254, 257,
   266, 267, 276, 281, 302, 307, 309, 317, 332, 350, 362, 366, 388, 428,
   435

 De Boer, 439, note 5

 "Definitions, Book of," 2, 4, 60

 Deinard, E., 447, note 404

 Delitzsch, 446, note 360

 Delmedigo, Elijah, 431

 Delmedigo, Joseph Solomon, 431

 Democritus, xxii, 3

 Dieterici, 439, note 6

 Doctor, Max, 435, 442, note 162

 Dominicus Gundissalinus, 61, 63

 Dukes, 443, note 213

 Dunash ben Labrat, 59

 Duns Scotus, 61, 63, 200, 307

 Duran, Simon, 406, 447, note 403a

 "Duties of the Hearts," 80, 81

 Duval, 439, note 5


 "Eight Chapters," 239

 Eisler, Moritz, 433

 "Elements, Book of," 2, 3, 4, 10, 60

 Elias of Nisibis, 34

 Elisha ben Abuya, 197

 Empedocles, 60, 61, 64, 126, 127, 145, 179, 184

 "Emunah Ramah," 198

 "Emunot ve-Deot," 24

 Engelkemper, D. J., 434

 Entelechy, xxxv, 209

 Ephodi, 328

 Epicurus, 290, 367

 Eriugena, 200

 Ethics, in Jewish Philosophy, xlvii f.;
   in Saadia, 46 f.;
   in Al Basir, 52 f.;
   in Jeshua ben Judah, 57;
   in Gabirol, 71 ff.;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 119 ff.;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 148;
   in Judah Halevi, 168;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 195;
   in Ibn Daud, 228 ff., 231 ff.;
   in Maimonides, 281 ff.;
   in Hillel ben Samuel, 325.
   See also "Virtue."

 Euclid, xviii, 90

 Evil, Problem of, in Al Basir, 54;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 123 f.;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 148;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 195;
   in Ibn Daud, 228 f.;
   in Maimonides, 288 f.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 373 f.;
   in Crescas, 394

 Exegesis, Biblical, xvi, xxxvii;
   in Saadia, 35;
   in Gabirol, 78 f.;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 187 f.;
   in Maimonides, 302 ff.;
   in Levi ben Gerson, 357 f., 437

 "Ez Hayim," 363

 Ezekiel, Vision of divine chariot, xvii, 303


 Falaquera, Shem Tob, 61, 63, 64, 309, 328, 441, note 86

 "Fons Vitæ," 60, 61, 72, 80, etc.

 "Fountain of Life," see "Fons Vitæ"

 Frankl, P. F., 434, 440, note 80

 Frankl-Grün, Ad., 435

 Freedom of the Will, xiv, xlvii;
   in Saadia, 41 f.;
   in Al Basir, 54 f.;
   in Bahya, 98;
   in Judah Halevi, xlviii, 171 ff.;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 193;
   in Ibn Daud, xlviii, 229 f.;
   in Maimonides, xlviii, 285 ff.;
   in Crescas, xlviii, 396 ff.;
   in Albo, 412, 424

 Freimann, 442, note 148

 Fried, S., 439, note 30; 440, note 34

 Friedländer, M., 444, note 250


 Gabirol, Solomon Ibn, xix, xxxix, xlvi, 59-79;
   fate of G. in Jewish Literature, 60 f.;
   tendency of his work, 63 f.;
   G. a Neo-Platonist, 64;
   his doctrine, 64 ff.;
   emanation, 65;
   matter in spiritual substances, 65, 67;
   man typical of the universe, 65;
   Intelligence, Soul, Nature, 66;
   matter, 66 f.;
   creation, 68;
   will, 68 f., 70;
   mystic knowledge, 69 f.;
   ethics, 71 ff.;
   the virtues, 72 f.;
   the "Royal Crown" (Keter Malkut), 75 f.;
   Biblical exegesis, 78 f.;
   influence on Jewish Philosophy, 79;
   on Kabbala, ibid., 80, 81, 89, 91, 107, 126, 127, 131, 151, 184, 185,
   187, 188, 198, 200, 206, 237, 246, 307, 309, 328, 428, 434

 Galen, xviii, 2, 3, 72, 209, 252

 Genesis, creation story, xvii, xxix, 303

 Gersonides, see Levi ben Gerson

 Ginzberg, L., 439, note 13

 God, in Aristotle, xxxiii;
   existence of G. in Kalam, xlii, 24, 247;
   in Saadia, xlii, 28 ff.;
   in Al Basir, 49 f.;
   in Jeshua ben Judah, 57;
   in Bahya, xlii, 86 ff.;
   in Ibn Zaddik, xlii, 143;
   in Ibn Daud, xlii f., 217 ff.;
   in Maimonides, xliii, 248, 257 ff.;
   in Levi ben Gerson, 350 f.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 368 f.;
   in Crescas, 389 ff.;
   in Albo, 419 f.

 Goldenthal, 445, note 318

 Goldziher, Ignaz, 106, 433, 439, notes 10 and 23; 442, note 132

 Gorfinkle, Joseph I., 444, note 251

 Graetz, H., 445, note 311

 Graf, 440, note 64

 Gugenheimer, 435

 "Guide of the Perplexed," 239

 Guttmann, Jacob, 434, 435, 436, 439, note 27; 440, notes 33, 41 and 83;
 442, note 133; 443, notes 230 and 245; 445, notes 310 and 331a; 447,
 notes 403a, 436 and 437

 Guttmann, Julius, 435


 Halevi, Judah, xix, xxxix, xl, xlv, xlvi, xlviii, xlix, 125, 150-183;
   his standpoint, 150, 152, 157 f.;
   his life, 151 f.;
   philosophy and religion, 152;
   influence of Algazali, 152 f.;
   the "Kusari," 153 ff.;
   the "philosopher's" creed, 154 f.;
   the Christian's, 155 f.;
   the Mohammedan's, 156;
   the Jew's, 156 ff.;
   creation, 157;
   existence of God, 158;
   will, 159;
   motives of philosopher and believer, 159 f.;
   meaning of the name of "Jhvh," 159 f., 165;
   of "Elohim," 160, 165;
   mysticism in H., 160;
   attributes, 161 ff.;
   incorporeality, 162;
   superiority of Israel, 162 f.;
   need of revelation, 163;
   superiority of Palestine, 164;
   Israel the heart among the nations, 164;
   superiority of the Hebrew language, 164 f.;
   prophecy, 165 f.;
   the active Intellect, 165 f.;
   the ceremonial law, 167 f.;
   ethics, 168 f.;
   immortality, 169 f., 181 f.;
   future world and reward and punishment, 170;
   freedom, 171 ff.;
   and foreknowledge, 172 f.;
   interpretation of "Sefer Yezirah," 173 f.;
   the Rabbis knew the sciences, 174;
   exposition of the current philosophy, 174 ff.;
   H. understands Aristotle's definition of the soul, 175;
   physics, 175 ff.;
   matter, 175;
   criticism, 176 f.;
   emanation of Intelligences, 178;
   criticism, 178 f.;
   psychology, 179 f.;
   criticism, 181 f., 197, 198, 200, 201, 210, 211, 216, 223, 224, 226,
   230, 231, 246, 248, 281, 309, 332, 362, 389, 392, 396, 414, 420, 421,
   426, 429, 435

 Harizi, Judah, 125, 184

 Harkavy, Abraham, 17, 433

 Hasdai Ibn Shaprut, 59, 153, 308

 Hayyuj, 187, 309

 Hefez ben Yazliah, 84

 "Hegyon ha-Nefesh," 114

 Hermes, 60, 155, 184

 Hertz, J. H., 434

 Hillel ben Samuel, xlvi, 312-327;
   standpoint, 314;
   the soul, 314 ff.;
   definition of soul, 317;
   active intellect, 317 ff.;
   reward and punishment, 323 ff.;
   prophecy, 325;
   ethics, ibid.;
   resurrection, 326;
   interpretation of Rabbinic writings, 326 f., 332

 Hippocrates, xviii, 2, 3, 72, 209

 Hirschfeld, 440, note 31; 442, note 178

 "Hobot ha-Lebabot," see "Duties of the Hearts"

 Homonym, 240, 351, 371

 Horovitz, S., 433, 442, notes 162, 163 and 165; 443, note 226

 Husik, Isaac, 436, 439, note 9; 445, note 308; 446, note 334; 448, note
 443

 Hypostasis, xxxviii, 6, 91, 115


 Ibn Aknin, Joseph, 302

 Ibn Badja, 60

 Ibn Caspi, Joseph, 302, 310, 329

 Ibn Daud (Aven Death), 61

 Ibn Daud, Abraham, see Daud, Abraham Ibn

 Ibn Ezra, Abraham, xxxix, 79, 80, 81, 114, 184, 187-196;
   Biblical exegesis, 187 f.;
   unity of God, 189;
   incorporeality, ibid.;
   creation, 190;
   matter, ibid.;
   the universe, 190 f.;
   Intelligences, ibid.;
   angels, ibid.;
   soul, 191 f.;
   reward and punishment, 192;
   transmigration, 192;
   freedom, 193;
   and foreknowledge, ibid.;
   knowledge of God, 193 f.;
   prophecy, 194;
   classification of the laws, 194;
   problem of evil, 195;
   ethics, ibid., 200, 246, 309, 310, 429, 435

 Ibn Ezra, Moses, xxxix, xlvi, 79, 125, 184-187;
   man a microcosm, 185;
   definition of philosophy, 185;
   unity of God, ibid.;
   active intellect, 186, 200, 246

 Ibn Migash, Joseph, 151

 Ibn Janah, 84, 309

 Ibn Roshd, see Averroes

 Ibn Sina, see Avicenna

 Ibn Zaddik, Joseph, xix, xxxix, xlii, xlv, xlvi, xlix, 60, 79, 125-149;
   standpoint, 125 f.;
   division of his book, 128;
   purpose, 129;
   definition of philosophy, 129;
   process and sources of knowledge, 129 f.;
   physics, 130 ff.;
   matter and form, ibid.;
   substance, 131;
   the sphere, 131 f.;
   the four elements, 132 f.;
   the human body, 133 f.;
   the soul, 134 f.;
   the three souls, ibid.;
   the emotions, ibid.;
   life, 136;
   death, ibid.;
   sleep and waking, ibid.;
   the rational soul, 137;
   definition of soul, 138;
   intellect, 139;
   world soul, 140;
   duty to use the reason, ibid.;
   criticism of the Kalam, 141 f.;
   creation, 143;
   existence of God, ibid.;
   unity, ibid.;
   self-sufficiency, 144;
   will of God, ibid.;
   attributes, 145 f.;
   commandments, 147;
   rational and traditional, ibid.;
   the virtues, 148;
   reward and punishment, 148;
   evil, 148 f.;
   Messiah, 149, 162, 175, 184, 200, 206, 209; 211, 237, 246, 309, 317,
   362, 435

 "Ikkarim," 406

 Immortality, in Pseudo-Bahya, 112 f.;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 120 f.;
   in Judah Halevi, 169 f., 181 f,;
   in Ibn Daud, 215;
   in Levi ben Gerson, 339 ff.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 384;
   in Crescas, 400

 Incorporeality, in Kalam, xliv, 253;
   in Saadia, 32;
   in Al Basir, 51;
   in Jeshua ben Judah, 57;
   in Judah Halevi, 162;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 189 f.;
   in Ibn Daud, 217;
   in Maimonides, xliv, 257 ff., 260 ff.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 368 f.

 Infinity, in Kalam, 251 f.;
   in Saadia, 25, 30;
   in Bahya, 86, 87;
   in Ibn Daud, 208;
   in Maimonides, 251 f., 254, 256 f.;
   in Crescas, 390

 Intellect, active, xli;
   in Jewish Philosophy, xlvi f.;
   acquired i., xlvii;
   active i. in prophecy, xlix, 109;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 139;
   in Judah Halevi, 155, 162, 165, 181;
   in Moses ibn Ezra, 186;
   in Ibn Daud, 222;
   in Maimonides, 268, 277;
   in Hillel ben Samuel, 317 ff.;
   in Levi ben Gerson, 337 ff.
   See also "Intelligence," "Soul"

 Intelligence, xlvi;
   in Israeli, 6 f.;
   in Gabirol, 65, 66;
   in Pseudo-Bahya, 109;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 119;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 190 f.;
   in Maimonides, 266 f.

 Israeli, Isaac, xix, xlvi, xlix, 1-16;
   Maimonides on I., 1 f.;
   his works, 2;
   his sources, ibid.;
   theory of the elements, 3, 12;
   definition of philosophy, 4;
   creation, 5 ff.;
   Intelligence, 6 f.;
   Soul, 8 ff.;
   three kinds of soul, 10 ff.;
   element and principle, 12 f.;
   prophecy, 15, 17, 24, 31, 60, 72, 91, 127, 175, 224, 434


 Jabariya, xxi, xlvii

 Jacob ben Machir, 309, 310

 Jacobites, xviii, 34

 Jaulus, 437

 Jeshua ben Judah, xxv, xlvii, 55-58;
   priority of reason, 56;
   atomic theory, ibid.;
   creation, ibid.;
   existence of God, 57;
   incorporeality, ibid.;
   good and evil, ibid.; 200, 246, 363, 434

 Jesus, xxvii, 86, 91

 Job, xv, xxvi, 304, 346, 377 f.

 Joel, M., 398, 435, 436, 445, note 310; 446, notes 335 and 398; 447,
 note 398 end

 Johannes Hispanus, 61

 Joseph ben Shemtob, 429, 430, 447, note 404

 Joseph ibn Zaddik, see Ibn Zaddik, Joseph

 Jourdain, A., 63, 441, note 85; 445, note 306

 Judah ben Barzilai, 17

 Judah Hadassi, 363

 Judah Halevi, see Halevi, Judah

 Judah Messer Leon, 431

 Justinian, xvii


 Kabbala, 79, 429, 430

 Kadariya, xxi, xxii, xxiii, 23

 Kalam, xxiv, xxvii, 16, 17, 48, 50, 52, 55, 86, 106, 125, 128, 141 f.,
 146, 154, 171, 183, 200, 245, 246 ff., 362, 366, 428, 433, 439, note 10

 Kalisch, Isidor, 433

 Karaites, xiii, xxiv, xxv, xli, xlvii, 23, 24, 48, 55, 59, 108, 125,
 126, 146, 154, 174, 183, 200, 245, 246, 362, 363, 364, 365, 370, 373,
 377, 378, 428

 Kaufmann, David, 152, 153, 433, 434, 435, 436, 441, note 88; 442, note
 181; 444, notes 250 and 305

 Kellermann, Benzion, 436

 "Keter Malkut," see "Royal Crown"

 Kindi, Al, xxxix

 Klein, Miksa, 434

 Knowledge, sources of, xl;
   in Saadia, 27 f.;
   in Bahya, 83;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 129 f.

 Koran, xxi, xxii, xxiii, xxvi, xxvii, xxix, xliv, 34, 156

 Krochmal, Nahman, 189, 435

 "Kusari," 153


 Lactantius, 431

 Landauer, S., 175, 440, note 37

 Laws, rational and traditional, 1;
   in Saadia, 38 f.;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 147;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 194;
   in Ibn Daud, 233 f.;
   in Maimonides, 294 ff.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 382

 Lebid-ibn Al-Aʿsam, xxvi

 Leibnitz, 307

 Leverrier, 275

 Levi ben Gerson, xix, xx, xxxix, xli, xliii, xlvii, xlix, 7, 16, 166, 217,
   235, 302, 312, 313, 328-361;
   standpoint, 329 f.;
   reason and authority, 330 f.;
   his style and method, 331;
   the passive intellect, 332 ff.;
   active intellect, 337 ff.;
   problem of knowledge, 338;
   of definition, 339;
   immortality, 339 f.;
   prognostication and prophecy, 340 ff.;
   and the contingent, ibid.;
   God's knowledge, 342 ff.;
   attributes, 344 f., 351 f.;
   Providence, 346 ff.;
   existence of God, 350 f.;
   origin of the world, 352 f.;
   eternal matter, 355 f.;
   interpretation of creation story in Genesis, 357;
   miracles, 358 f., 362, 363, 369, 384, 388, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 398,
   399, 401, 402, 406, 419, 420, 421, 428, 429, 430, 436, 447, note 403a

 Levy, Louis-Germain, 436

 "Liber de Causis," xx, 2, 64, 317

 Lippmann, 443, note 214

 Logos, xxvii, xli, 52, 71, 91


 "Ma'amar Yikkawu ha-Mayim," 309

 "Maase Bereshit," xvi, 242, 303, 430

 "Maase Merkaba," xvi, 242, 303, 430

 Maimonides, Moses, xvi, xix, xx, xxiv, xxv, xxvii, xxxix, xli, xlii,
   xliii, xlv, xlvi, xlvii, xlix, l, 1, 2, 16, 25, 60, 62, 63, 79, 88, 95,
   96, 114, 125, 126, 146, 153, 158, 166, 167, 198, 199, 200, 201, 207,
   218, 221, 235, 236-311;
   his life, 238 f.;
   his _chef d'œuvre_, 239 f.;
   his method, 240;
   his standpoint, 240 ff.;
   importance of science, 243 f.;
   difficulty of metaphysics, 244 f.;
   sketch of Jewish Philosophy, 245 f.;
   exposition of the Kalam, 246 ff.;
   propositions of the "philosophers," 254 ff.;
   existence of God, 257 ff.;
   unity, ibid.;
   incorporeality, ibid., 260 ff.;
   attributes, 262 ff.;
   meaning of "Jhvh," 265;
   angels, 266 f.;
   origin of the world, 269 ff.;
   emanation of Intelligences, 272 f.;
   criticism of Aristotle, 271 ff.;
   psychology, 281 ff.;
   virtue, 282 ff.;
   freedom, 285 ff.;
   and foreknowledge, 287 f.;
   problem of evil, 288 ff.;
   God's knowledge, 289 ff.;
   reason of the commandments, 294 ff.;
   Bible exegesis, 302 ff.;
   influence of M., 305 ff.;
   on Scholasticism, 305-307;
   on Judaism, 307-311, 312, 313, 314, 317, 323, 325, 329, 332, 342, 343,
   344, 345, 346, 350, 352, 353, 357, 358, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 368,
   369, 370, 371, 372, 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 382, 383, 384,
   388, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 398, 399, 400, 402, 403,
   406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 412, 416, 417, 419, 420, 421, 423, 424, 425,
   426, 428, 429, 430, 431, 435, 447, note 403a

 "Malmad Hatalmidim," 309

 Malter, H., vii, 445, note 316

 Mandonnet, P., 445, note 308; 446, note 332

 Manicheans, 375

 Matter, rejected by Mutakallimun, xxii;
   doctrine of, in Aristotle, xxix ff.;
   in Plotinus, xxxviii;
   as source of evil, 38;
   in Gabirol, 66 f.;
   in Pseudo-Bahya, 109;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 117;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 130 ff.;
   in Judah Halevi, 175;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 190;
   in Ibn Daud, 205 f.;
   in Maimonides, 256, 270;
   in Levi ben Gerson, 355 f.

 Maywald, 446, note 332

 "Mekize Nirdamim," 445, notes 313 and 321

 "Mekor Hayim," see "Fons Vitæ"

 Menahem ben Saruk, 59

 Messiah, in Saadia, 45;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 149;
   in Crescas, 402, 404;
   in Albo, 408

 Metempsychosis, see Transmigration

 "Microcosmus," 60, 125

 "Milhamot Adonai," 329

 Miracles, in Levi ben Gerson, 358 f.

 Mohammed, xxv, 86

 Monophysites, xviii, 34

 "More Ha-moreh," 310

 "More Nebukim," 238

 Morgenstern, Ernö, 434

 Moses ben Enoch, 59

 Moses ben Maimon, see Maimonides

 Moses of Narbonne, 309, 310, 328, 430, 447, note 403a

 Motion, in Aristotle, xxvi;
   in Ibn Daud, 207;
   in Maimonides, 254, 269

 Mukammas, David Al, 2, 17-22;
   definition of science and philosophy, 17 f.;
   attributes, 18 ff.;
   unity, 18;
   reward and punishment, 21 f., 34, 52, 81, 84, 95, 200, 246, 434

 Munk, Solomon, 63, 304, 328, 433, 434, 440, note 83; 441, notes 86, 87
 and 105; 444, notes 250, 280 and 302; 445, notes 314 and 316; 448, note
 442

 Münz, J., 436

 Mutakallimun, xxi f., xl, xli, xlvii, 9, 11, 24, 25, 26, 48, 81, 88, 96,
 106, 125, 126, 127, 128, 139, 142, 145, 149, 158, 182, 183, 199, 240,
 246-253, 256, 275, 352, 353, 362, 366 f., 369, 372, 382, 406, 428

 Muʿtazila, xxii ff., xxvii, xlvii, 3, 17, 21, 23, 24, 26, 48, 108, 171,
 246, 251, 291, 292, 362, 365, 366, 375, 377


 Nachmanides, 426, 429

 Nature, in Plotinus, xxxviii;
   in Gabirol, 65, 66;
   in Pseudo-Bahya, 109;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 119

 Neo-Platonic, xx, xxviii, xxxix, xlvi, 2, 6, 13, 24, 38, 64, 79, 81, 86,
 89, 90, 92, 106, 107, 114, 115, 125, 126, 127, 129, 138, 139, 177, 178,
 199, 200, 266, 305, 317, 319

 Neo-Platonism, xxix, 17, 64, 70, 79, 91, 114, 150, 187, 200, 266, 288,
 317, 428

 Neo-Platonists, xl, 31, 64, 91, 106, 184, 199

 Neo-Pythagoreans, 188

 Nestorians, xviii, 34

 Neumark, David, viii, 433, 435, 436, 441, note 107

 "Nous," xxxviii, 7, 91


 "Olam Katon," see "Microcosmus"

 "Or Adonai," 389

 Origen, 288, 302

 Orschansky, G., 435


 Perles, J., 445, note 309

 Philo, xvi, xxvii, xxxviii, xli, 23, 91, 95, 188, 240, 266, 268, 288, 302

 Philoponus, 247, 353

 Philosophy, and religion, xiii;
   content of Jewish P., xl-l;
   defined by Israeli, 4;
   by Ibn Zaddik, 129;
   by Moses Ibn Ezra, 185

 Physics, in Kalam, xxii, xli;
   in Aristotle, xxx;
   in Israeli, 3, 5, 12;
   in Saadia, xli;
   in Ibn Zaddik, xlii, 130 ff.;
   in Judah Halevi, 175 ff.;
   in Ibn Daud, xlii, 205 ff.;
   in Maimonides, xlii, 254 ff., 269 ff.;
   in Levi ben Gerson, 352 f., 355 f.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, xli, 366 ff.;
   in Crescas, xlii, 389

 Plato, xxix, xli, xlv, 5, 7, 8, 37, 47, 90, 91, 122, 138, 155, 179, 181,
 182, 184, 195, 231, 268, 269, 288, 304, 305, 353, 413, 431

 Plato of Tivoli, 114

 Plotinus, xx, xxxvii f., xxxix, 6, 64, 65, 91, 107, 115, 126, 139, 178,
 431

 Pollak, J., 433

 Porphyry, 60

 Proclus, xx, 3

 Prophecy, xlvi, xlix f.;
   in Israeli, xlix, 15;
   in Saadia, 40;
   in Judah Halevi, xlix, 165;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 194;
   in Ibn Daud, xlix, 224 ff.;
   in Maimonides, xlix, 276 ff.;
   in Hillel ben Samuel, 325;
   in Levi ben Gerson, xlix, 340 ff.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 380 f.;
   in Crescas, 395;
   in Albo, 421

 Providence, xl;
   in Maimonides, 290 ff.;
   in Levi ben Gerson, 346 ff.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 375 f.;
   in Crescas, 393 f.;
   in Albo, 425

 Pseudo-Bahya, xlvi, xlix, 106-113;
   standpoint, 106 f.;
   the soul, 108 ff., 111 ff.;
   Intelligence, Soul, Nature, 108 f., 110;
   matter, 109;
   creation, 110;
   virtue, 112;
   immortality, 112 f.;
   reward and punishment, 113, 122, 126, 139, 148, 317, 434

 Ptolemy, xviii, 273, 309

 Pythagoras, 60, 179, 184, 185

 Pythagoreans, 9


 Rashi, 187

 Raymond, Bishop of Toledo, 61

 Reason, and authority, xiii;
   r. in Aristotle, xxxvi;
   active and passive, xxxvi f.;
   in Plotinus, xxxviii;
   r. as a source of knowledge, xl;
   r. and authority in Levi ben Gerson, 330 f.
   See also "Intellect," "Soul"

 Resurrection, l;
   in Saadia, 44 f.;
   in Hillel ben Samuel, 326;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 385 f.;
   in Crescas, 404

 Reward and Punishment, xlvii, xlviii, l;
   in Mukammas, 21 f.;
   in Saadia, 42 f.;
   in Al Basir, 55;
   in Pseudo-Bahya, 113;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 119 ff.;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 148;
   in Judah Halevi, 170;
   in Abraham Ibn Ezra, 192;
   in Hillel ben Samuel, 323 ff.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 379, 383;
   in Crescas, 403 f.;
   in Albo, 425 f.

 Roscellinus of Compiègne, 305

 Rose, Valentinus, 439, note 8

 Rosin, David, 189, 192, 435

 "Royal Crown," the, 75 f.


 Saadia, xix, xxv, xli, xlii, xlv, xlvi, xlix, 1, 17, 23-47;
   his "Emunot ve-Deot," 24 f.;
   modelled on the Kalam, ibid.;
   atomic theory, 25;
   reason for writing, 26 f.;
   sources of truth, 27 f.;
   speculation not forbidden, 28;
   necessity of revelation, ibid.;
   existence of God, 28 ff.;
   incorporeality, 32;
   unity, 32 f.;
   attributes, 33 f.;
   categories inapplicable to God, 35 f.;
   theophanies, 36;
   soul, 37 f.;
   laws and commandments, 38 f.;
   rational and traditional, ibid.;
   prophecy, 40;
   written and oral law, 40;
   abrogation of Law, 40 f.;
   freedom, 41 f.;
   and foreknowledge, ibid.;
   reward and punishment, 42 f., 46;
   future world, 43 f.;
   resurrection, 44 f.;
   ethics, 46 f., 48, 50, 52, 59, 81, 82, 83, 84, 87, 88, 89, 92, 94, 95,
   96, 126, 127, 128, 146, 147, 167, 175, 186, 195, 200, 237, 241, 246,
   252, 253, 302, 309, 362, 363, 388, 428, 434

 Sabeans, 296

 Saladin, 239

 Samuel, 197

 Scaliger, 307

 Scheyer, Simon B., 435

 Schmiedl, A., 433

 Schreiner, M., xxv, xxvii, 433, 434, 439, notes 12, 16, 18 and 20; 440,
 note 81

 "Sefer Ha-Kabbala," 198

 Seyerlen, 63, 434, 441, note 86

 Shemtob ben Joseph, 430

 Shemtob ben Joseph ibn Shemtob, 429

 Socrates, xxix, 155, 184, 185

 Solomon ben Adret, 430

 Solomon ben Yeroham, 363

 Sophists, xxix

 Soul, in Aristotle, xxxv;
   world soul in Plotinus, xxxviii;
   s. in Jewish philosophy, xlv f.;
   world-soul in Jewish Neo-Platonists, xlvi;
   s. in Israeli, 5, 8 ff.;
   in Saadia, 37 f.;
   in Gabirol, 65, 66;
   in Pseudo-Bahya, 108 ff.;
   in Abraham bar Hiyya, 119;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 134 f., 137 f.;
   world-soul in Ibn Zaddik, 140;
   s. in Judah Halevi, 179 ff.;
   in Abraham Ibn Ezra, 191 f.;
   in Ibn Daud, 209 ff.;
   in Maimonides, 281 ff.;
   in Hillel ben Samuel, 314 ff.;
   in Crescas, 400.
   See also "Intellect," "Reason"

 Spinoza, 398 f.

 "Spirit and Soul, Book of," 5

 Steinschneider, Moritz, 311, 439, note 26; 440, notes 31 and 33; 443,
 note 247; 446, note 360

 St. Ephrem of Nisibis, xviii

 Sufis, xxvii f., 86, 153

 Syrians, xvii ff., 199, 246


 "Tagmule ha-Nefesh," 314

 Tänzer, A., 437

 Themistius, 7, 60, 313, 321, 332, 333, 334, 335

 "Theology of Aristotle," xx, xxxix, 64, 266

 Theophrastus, xviii

 Tibbon, Judah Ibn, 71, 309, 310

 Tibbon, Moses Ibn, 309, 440, note 37

 Tibbon, Samuel Ibn, 2, 60, 125, 239, 302, 309

 "Tikkun Midot ha-Nefesh," 71

 "Torot ha-Nefesh," 106

 Tradition, xiii, xli, 28, 223 f.

 Transmigration, in Saadia, 44;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 192;
   in Ibn Daud, 215 f.

 Trinity, xliv, 33, 34, 71, 91

 Truth, twofold, 328

 "Twenty Chapters," 17


 Ueberweg-Baumgartner, 433

 Unity of God, in Kalam, xxii, xliii f., 252;
   in Mukammas, 18;
   in Saadia, 32 f.;
   in Al Basir, 51;
   in Bahya, 89 f.;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 143;
   in Moses ibn Ezra, 185;
   in Abraham ibn Ezra, 189;
   in Ibn Daud, 219 f.;
   in Maimonides, xliv, 257 ff.;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 368 f.;
   in Crescas, 391 f.


 Vincent of Beauvais, 1

 Virtue, xlix; in Gabirol, 72 f.;
   in Pseudo-Bahya, 112;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 148;
   in Ibn Daud, 232;
   in Maimonides, 282 ff.


 Weil, Isidore, 436

 Weil, Simson, 198, 443, note 221

 Weinsberg, Leopold, 435

 Wenrich, 439, note 5

 Werbluner, 445, note 317

 Will of God, in Al Basir, 50;
   in Gabirol, 68 f.;
   in Bahya, 90;
   in Ibn Zaddik, 144;
   in Aaron ben Elijah, 372

 William of Auvergne, 71, 306

 William of Occam, 200

 Wise, Stephen S., 71, 441, note 103

 Wolff, M., 444, note 251

 Wolfsohn, Julius, 436


 Yahuda, 80, 86, 439, note 24; 441, notes 106, 108, 109 and 112

 Yahya ben Adi, 247

 Yefet Ha-Levi, 363

 "Yezirah, Sefer" 17, 94, 173, 179

 Yohanan ben Zakkai, 197


 Zeller, 439, note 4; 441, note 86

 Zeno, 25

 Zimmels, 448, note 442

 Zunz, Leopold, 184


Printed in the United States of America.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A History of Mediaeval Jewish
Philosophy, by Isaac Husik

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEDIAEVAL JEWISH PHILOSOPHY ***

***** This file should be named 27821-0.txt or 27821-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/8/2/27821/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Meredith Bach,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

