*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG BOOK 56354 ***





     An Appeal to the People in Behalf of Their Rights as Authorized
                        Interpreters of The Bible

                         by Catharine E. Beecher

    Author of “Common Sense Applied to Religion,” “Domestic Economy,”
“Domestic Receipt‐Book,” “Letters to the People on Health and Happiness,”
                “Physiology and Calisthenics,” Etc., Etc.

                                 New York

                      Harper & Brothers, Publishers

                                   1860





CONTENTS


Chapter I. Introduction.
Chapter II. The Augustine Theory of the Origin of Evil.
Chapter III. Questions Connected with the Augustinian Theory.
Chapter IV. The Difficulties Involved in the Augustinian Theory.
Chapter V. The Augustinian Theory in Creeds.
Chapter VI. Modes of Meeting Difficulties by Theologians.
Chapter VII. Theologians Themselves Concede the Augustinian Dogmas
Indefensible.
Chapter VIII. The Augustinian Theory Contrary to the Moral Sense of
Mankind.
Chapter IX. The Principles of Common Sense Defined.
Chapter X. Common Sense Applied to Gain the Existence of God.
Chapter XI. The People’s Mental Philosophy.
Chapter XII. The Nature of Mind, or Its Powers and Faculties.
Chapter XIII. Nature of Mind.—Regulation of the Thoughts.
Chapter XIV. Nature of Mind.—The Moral Sense, or Moral Susceptibilities.
Chapter XV. The Nature of Mind.—The Will.
Chapter XVI. Constitutional Varieties of the Human Mind.
Chapter XVII. Nature of Mind.—Habit.
Chapter XVIII. The Nature of Mind Our Guide to the Natural Attributes of
God.
Chapter XIX. The Nature of Mind Our Guide to the Moral Attributes of God.
Chapter XX. Additional Proof of the Moral Attributes of God.
Chapter XXI. Nature of Mind as Perfect in Construction.
Chapter XXII. Right and Wrong—True Virtue.
Chapter XXIII. Laws and Penalties—Sin and Holiness.
Chapter XXIV. Love to God And Love to Man.
Chapter XXV. Increased Civilization Increases Moral Difficulties.
Chapter XXVI. Humility and Meekness.
Chapter XXVII. The Standard of Right and Wrong Decided by The Risks of
Eternity.
Chapter XXVIII. The Destiny of Man in the Future Life.
Chapter XXIX. What Must We Do To Be Saved?
Chapter XXX. How Far Reason and Experience are Sufficient Without
Revelation.
Chapter XXXI. Augustinian Creeds and Theologians Teach the Common‐Sense
System.
Chapter XXXII. Augustinian Creeds and Theologians Contradict the Common‐
Sense System, and Thus, Also, Contradict Themselves.
Chapter XXXIII. The Augustinian Theory Not In The Bible.
Chapter XXXIV. A Reliable Revelation From The Creator Impossible If It
Contains The Augustinian Theory.
Chapter XXXV. Tendencies of the Two Opposing Systems.
Chapter XXXVI. Tendencies of the Two Systems As They Respect the
Cultivation of the Moral and Intellectual Powers.
Chapter XXXVII. Tendencies of the Two Systems in Respect to Individual
Religious Experience.
Chapter XXXVIII. Tendencies of the Two Systems in Reference to the
Character of God.
Chapter XXXIX. Tendencies of the Two Systems as to Church Organizations.
Chapter XL. Tendencies of the Two Systems in Regard to Humility, Meekness
and a Teachable Spirit.
Chapter XLI. Tendencies of the Two Systems in Regard to Dogmatism,
Persecution and Ecclesiastical Tyranny.
Chapter XLII. Tendencies of the Two Systems as Shown in Controversy and
Sects.
Chapter XLIII. Practical Tendencies of the Two Systems.
Chapter XLIV. Tendencies of the Two Systems in the Training of Children.
Chapter XLV. The People Rejecting the Augustinian System.—Position of
Theologians.
Chapter XLVI. Present Position of the Church.
Chapter XLVII. State of the Pastors of Churches.
Chapter XLVIII. The Position of Popular Education.
Chapter XLIX. The Position of Woman as Chief Educator of Mind.
Chapter L. Present Position of Young America.
Chapter LI. Present Position of the Religious Press.
Chapter LII. The Present Position of the Secular Press.
Chapter LIII. What The People Will Do?
Note.
Notes.
Footnotes






                               [Cover Art]





TO The Editors of the Secular Press, THE TRUE TRIBUNES OF THE PEOPLE,
CALLED OF GOD IN BEHALF OF THE COMMONWEALTH TO DEFEND LIBERTY OF
CONSCIENCE, FREEDOM OF SPEECH, AND THE RIGHT OF ALL TO INTERPRET THE BIBLE
FOR THEMSELVES, UNRESTRAINED BY ANY ECCLESIASTICAL POWER, THIS VOLUME IS
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.





CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION.


There is an obvious crisis approaching, in the religious world, on
questions of the highest moment. In past time such periods of change have
been preceded by a slow and silent preparation, in which multitudes have
been led into the same course of thought and feeling. Then, as the crisis
approached, some efficient leader lifted the last stone which sustained
the protecting dyke, and rode on the summit of the in‐rushing tide to
notoriety and influence. Thus it was in the day of Luther, in the day of
Wesley, and at other periods of religious movement.

At the present time there are indications of a great impending change,
which has been preceded by a long course of unobserved preparation. But it
is believed that, in this case, it is not to be exhibited, like former
ones, by leaders forming new sects and parties, amid more or less of
conflict and commotion, but by the agency of _the people_, and by a
healthful, quiet process, which, like leaven, shall gradually assimilate
surrounding particles till the whole be leavened.

The matter involved is the great question of questions, to each individual
for himself, and to every parent and educator for their children: “What
must we DO to be saved?”

It is the object of this volume to show that the answer to this great
question has, for ages, been involved in mystery and difficulty by means
of a _philosophical theory_ to account for the “origin of evil,” which, in
the fifth century, was forced on the people by popes and ecclesiastical
councils, and which has been sustained by persecution ever since—that this
theory is the basis of a system of religious doctrine incorporated into
creeds and churches, which is so contrary to the moral sense of humanity,
that theologians have failed to render it consistent and satisfactory,
even to themselves—that _the people_ are endowed with _principles of
common sense_ by which they can educe from the works of God a system of
natural religion far superior, which system is briefly set forth, and also
the tendencies of the two opposing systems—that _both_ systems are so
incorporated into church creeds, and into theological teachings, that they
are a compound of contradictions, and all the great religious
controversies have been efforts to eviscerate the false system from the
true, while through the long conflict, it is theologians who have proved
the noble confessors and martyrs for truth—that it is impossible to
establish the claims of the Bible, or of any other writings, as
_revelations_ from the Creator, when the Augustinian theory is made a part
of their teachings; so that the real question for the people, is “Bible or
no Bible”—that the leading theological teachers of the chief sects in this
country have virtually conceded that this theory is sustained neither by
common sense nor the Bible; and, finally, that the people are about to
cast off this dogma, which for ages has darkened the way to eternal life,
and by applying the principles of common sense to the Bible, thus
establish its agreement with the system of natural religion herein set
forth.

In conclusion, the indications of the predicted change are set forth as
they are manifested in the present position of theologians—of the
parochial clergy—of the church—of educational interests—of women—of “Young
America”—and of the religious and secular press.





