CHAPTER XL. TENDENCIES OF THE TWO SYSTEMS IN REGARD TO HUMILITY, MEEKNESS
AND A TEACHABLE SPIRIT.


The result of receiving _church_ interpretations as infallible, whether of
priests or regenerated laity, is the assumption of a similar infallibility
by each person who thus accepts them.

This is accomplished by a very singular fallacy, thus:

The regularly ordained priests, or the regenerated priests and laity of
the _true_ church, are claimed to be the only persons qualified to
understand and interpret the meaning of God’s revelations. The question
then is, _which is the true church_? The Catholic says, “Mine, and no
other.” The Episcopalian says, “Mine, and no other;” and so says the
Presbyterian. The result is, each man decides that the true church is _the
one that agrees with his views of what the Bible teaches_.

Having thus decided that the church that agrees with himself is the true
church, the man proceeds, not only to receive reverently the decisions of
his church, but assumes that every other man is bound to do the same.

The Catholic receives one set of interpretations from the church that he
himself has infallibly decided to be the true church. The Protestant
receives the creeds and confessions of the church he has infallibly
decided to be the true church, whose regenerated ministers and members are
qualified to understand the Bible, as no unregenerated man can do.

Being thus sustained by his own claims as a regenerated person, and also
by the claims of the church he adopts as the true one, there is little
foundation for poverty of spirit, humility and meekness. How can a man
feel “poor in spirit,” as destitute of the knowledge requisite for right
action, when he has his own regenerated mind and the guidance of the
regenerated true church? How can a man be meek when others strive to
enlighten him by showing that he is in the wrong, especially when such
efforts are those of the unregenerated, or those shut out of his true
church?

How can a man become very humble and lowly in his own conceit, when, in
contrast with most of the world, he alone can feel and act virtuously or
understand truly God’s revelations?

The natural tendency to pride, self‐sufficiency and dogmatism is still
further increased by the assumption that humility consists mainly in a low
opinion of “the nature” with which we are endowed. Thus, while assuming
infallibility in one aspect, they still can claim to be humble and lowly,
because they abhor and despise their depraved nature and its results in
themselves.

At the same time, the most remarkable self‐deception is practiced in
regard to their own Christian graces. These all being supposed to spring
from a regenerated nature imparted by God, they disclaim all honor or
merit, and give all the glory to God, who has wrought these graces from
their dead and sinful nature. By this method they imagine they attain a
true humility and lowliness of spirit.

But every man of great genius, and every woman of uncommon beauty,
understand as truly as the professedly regenerated person, that their
gifts are from God, and are willing to give all the glory to him for thus
distinguishing them from their fellow‐creatures. And the ascription of all
the power and glory to God does not save the professedly regenerated
person from self‐complacency and pride any more than it does the genius or
the beauty.

And yet we find religious writings abounding in such disclaimers and
ascriptions, which are evidently regarded as proofs of humility and
lowliness of spirit. It is true that such expressions do often flow from
the hearts of the really humble and contrite; but the fact that a person
regards and acknowledges God as the author of his own extraordinary gifts,
that raise him above his fellows, is no _proof_ of humility, while it is
often so regarded.

In contrast to this tendency of the Augustinian system, the common‐sense
view teaches that while our nature is noble and perfect in
construction—the embryo image of its Maker—it is destitute of that
knowledge, experience and training, for which it is equally dependent on
God and on man. And as the requisite knowledge can be gained only by the
aid of those minds around, whose happiness is affected by our conduct, it
is clear that a willingness to learn from any quarter and to be told our
mistakes by any person, is the natural result of an earnest desire to find
out and obey the truth. And a consciousness of our own liabilities to
mistakes, and a certainty that there is no one “that liveth and sinneth
not,” tends to induce compassionate sympathy for the failings of others,
and an indisposition to force opinions on them by any other mode than calm
statement and argument.

At the same time, an earnest desire for inquiry and discussion is
generated, which naturally leads to patient investigation, courteous
demeanor towards opponents, and to all the graces that wait on a gentle,
humble and truth‐loving spirit.





CHAPTER XLI. TENDENCIES OF THE TWO SYSTEMS IN REGARD TO DOGMATISM,
PERSECUTION AND ECCLESIASTICAL TYRANNY.


It has been shown that the Augustinian system, teaching as it does man’s
depraved nature and destitution of any principles of right guidance in his
own mind, makes him wholly dependent not only on revelations from his
Creator, but on infallible interpreters.

Thus we find that wherever this system became dominant there has coëxisted
the claim that _the people_ are not to decide, each one for himself, what
are the teachings of reason, experience and revelation as to truth and
duty. Instead of this, first it was popes and councils, in which the laity
had no voice; next, as among the Puritans, it was the church, including
both the clergy and the regenerated portion of their flocks.

From this resulted religious persecutions, in this manner: Men are to obey
God as their first duty. _The church_ is God’s mouth‐piece to interpret
his commands to mankind. If men refuse to obey God, speaking through his
church, they must be forced to do so by pains and penalties. And as in
view of eternal happiness and eternal misery, all earthly interests are as
nothing, every temporal consideration must be put out of account.
Moreover, whoever leads men to disobey the church and thus to disobey God,
and so to peril not only their own eternal welfare, but that of others,
commits a greater crime than is done by violating any human ordinances.
Therefore, the heaviest penalties should be employed to enforce obedience
to the church, and the church must take precedence of the civil
government.

Thus it came to pass that the more sincere, conscientious and benevolent a
person was, while holding these views, the more surely would he become a
persecutor.

The pages of history give many mournful illustrations of this truth. One
of the most striking will be here introduced.

Isabella of Spain, by whose generosity this western world was discovered,
was one of the most gentle, conscientious, benevolent and lovely
characters that ever adorned a throne.

She was trained to believe the church to be the representative of God on
earth, and her father confessor, Torquemada, the originator of the
Inquisition, was the guide of her conscience. By his commands the
Inquisition reared its horrid dungeons. By his counsel the industrious,
cultivated and chivalrous Moors, the most useful of all her subjects, were
driven from their native soil. By his commands the Jews were brought to
the cruel alternative of giving up their religion or relinquishing all
that made life dear. And thus the historian narrates this dreadful tale of
religious persecution:


    “The experiment of conversion was tried upon the Jews, and it
    utterly and totally failed. In the first place, their position in
    Christian society was a source of continual discussion. ‘If we
    admit them to public offices, we have gained nothing,’ said the
    mercantile classes. ‘If we exclude them,’ said the clergy, ‘what
    motive is held out for the rest to join us?’ But as a religious
    experiment, the failure was even more complete. The fathers were
    nominal converts, and nominal converts the children continued to
    be. Ostentatiously they attended mass; but in their own houses
    their Sabbath was kept, their ritual was read, their psalms were
    sung. Meantime, intercourse and intermarriage with Christians
    became more fatally easy than it had been before. Shunned by the
    middle classes, they intermarried with the ’blue blood’ of the
    nobility, they entered the priesthood, and ascended the highest
    steps of the Catholic hierarchy. Nay, they became, more than once,
    inquisitors, and wielded against their foes with cynical hatred
    the terrors of the Holy Office. Of the Inquisition there is no
    space to speak here;(21) sufficient to say that the ‘New
    Christians’ were the chief cause of its institution, and that
    during the eighteen years that Torquemada held office, ten
    thousand persons were burned alive.

    “But two thirds of the Jews of Spain had remained unconverted; and
    with them the Inquisition had nothing to do; for they were under
    special laws and under royal protection. But Torquemada had not
    forgotten them. Working on the pride of Ferdinand, on the
    conscience of Isabella, he persuaded them to sign the celebrated
    Edict of Exile. They were to leave Spain in three months. They
    were to take neither silver nor gold with them. If it pleased God
    to change their hearts, the church would most willingly receive
    them.

    “Ruinous alike to banisher and banished, this edict had cost a
    struggle. Isaac Abarbenel, wealthy, learned, high in royal favor,
    rushed into the queen’s audience‐chamber, on hearing what till
    then had been carefully concealed from his nation, threw himself
    at her feet, and doubtless won her over for the moment. To
    Ferdinand he offered thirty thousand ducats. But, in the wavering
    of debate, Torquemada appeared suddenly. ‘Judas,’ he said, ‘sold
    his master for thirty pieces. Your Majesties, it seems, want
    thirty thousand. Here He is; take Him; and what ye do, do
    quickly!’ Dashing a crucifix on the table, he left them. The omen
    was clear, and the die was cast.

    “To the Jews one road of deliverance was still left. To renounce
    the outward garb of their religion, never again to pass the
    threshold of a synagogue, never to chant a Hebrew hymn nor keep a
    Hebrew Sabbath; to change every household custom, to break all the
    rules of life, dear from the nursery and clung to on the bed of
    death; to repeat a false creed, to enter an idolatrous temple, to
    kneel down with God’s enemies;—this road was open, though treading
    it they would have trampled on their fathers’ tombs. Yet, on the
    other hand, thousands had taken that course; and would tell them
    that strict adherence to the laws of the land they lived in,
    abstinence from all that might offend, performance of harmless
    superstitions, bowing down for a season in the house of Rimmon,
    that this was a course plainly marked out by Providence. The loss,
    too, that they would suffer in exile was immense; and we must
    estimate this loss before we can estimate the worth of those who
    chose to suffer.

    “We have seen the Jews of France leave it, enter it, leave it
    again, and count the value of their sojourn at exactly the price
    at which reëntrance could be bought. It was a market‐stall, a
    field for acquisition; but it was not the seat of Jewish learning,
    it was not the resting place of their fathers for many
    generations.

    “Now Spain was something more to them than this. It was no foreign
    soil, passed and repassed with the indifference of a stranger.
    They had lived there for twelve hundred years. They had seen the
    Teutonic forest‐creeds moulded and melted into the new faith of
    Rome. They had seen the Ishmaelite sweep that faith away. By him
    they had been welcomed as brothers. With him they had lit the lamp
    of science when all the world was dark. Then they had seen the
    Cross rise from the northern mountains, and the Crescent wane and
    wane before it. By the kings of Christian Spain their worth had
    been acknowledged; they had fostered their trade; they had called
    them to their councils; they had befriended and loved them.
    Persecution and jealousy had driven many of their brethren to
    accept another creed; but the new Christians were Jews still; they
    had married their daughters to the proudest nobles of a race where
    the peasant was proud; and not a duke in all Spain could despise
    them without despising his own mother’s blood. Spain, too, was the
    land where Jewish wisdom had unfolded and blossomed. Their
    physicians and their astronomers were the first in Europe. Their
    poets and their philosophers were eminent among their nation. The
    psalms of Jehuda Halevi were sung in the synagogues of the Rhine.
    Aben Esra had eclipsed the fame of the great Eastern school of
    Pombeditha; above all, Spain claimed the son of Maimon, the great
    prophet of the Exile, famed from the Seine to the Euphrates as the
    second Moses.

    “Such, besides escape from utter ruin, were the temptations to
    apostacy. And those who issued the decree fully hoped that
    apostacy would have been its result. Every means was taken. ‘In
    the public squares, in the synagogues, Catholic preachers
    thundered forth invective against the Hebrew heresy.’ They might
    thunder—they were not heard.

    “ ‘Come,’ said their priests and elders, ‘let us strengthen
    ourselves in our faith and in the teachings of our God, against
    the voice of the oppressor, and the scorn of the enemy. If they
    destroy us—well; if they will let us live—well; but we will not
    depart from the Covenant, neither make our hearts froward; but we
    will go forth in the name of the Lord our God, who saved our
    fathers from Egypt, and brought them through the Red Sea.’

    “The spirit of Moses and of Joshua rested on the aged rabbis, and
    their words prevailed. Few in number and bold in cowardice were
    those who yielded. They made ready for this second Exodus where no
    Canaan glistened in the distance. Forced to sell their possessions
    in three months, forbidden to sell them for gold, they were glad
    to exchange large houses or estates for an ass or mule, or for
    such trifling articles of travel as the wish to be first at the
    spoiling might induce purchasers to supply.

    “Eastward, westward, northward—to Africa, to Portugal, to Italy
    and the Levant,—half a million Jews went forth. Eighty thousand
    sought shelter in Portugal, but did not find it. Thousands fell
    into the hands of the barbarians of Fez. They were sold for
    slaves; they were left to starve on desert isles; their bodies,
    yet living, were ripped open for the hidden gold. Thus writes
    Rabbi Josef:

    “ ‘And there were among them who were cast into the isles of the
    sea, a Jew and his old father, fainting from hunger, begging
    bread; and there was none to break unto them in a strange country.
    And the man went and sold his little son for bread, to restore the
    soul of the old man; and when he returned to his father, he found
    him dead; and he rent his clothes. And he went back to the baker
    to take his son; but the baker would not give him back; and he
    cried out with a sore and bitter cry for his son, but there was
    none to deliver. All this befell us in the year Rabbim—for the
    sons of the desolate are “Many”—yet have we not forgotten thee,
    neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. Hasten to help us,
    O Lord! For thy sake we are killed all the day; we are counted as
    sheep appointed for the slaughter. Make haste to help us, O God of
    our salvation.’

    “Or listen to the chronicler of Genoa, who saw them as they
    drifted eastward:

    “ ‘This expulsion,’ he says, ‘seemed to me at first a praiseworthy
    act, done in the cause and for the honor of God. Yet, when we
    remember that they were not brute beasts after all, but men made
    by God, surely it must be owned that some little cruelty was
    shown. Their woes were very piteous to see. The first who starved
    were the infants at the breast; then the mothers, carrying their
    dead children till they fell down and died with them. Many
    perished of cold and of squalor. Unused to the sea, countless
    numbers died from sickness; many were drowned by the sailors for
    their wealth; the poor, who could not otherwise pay their passage,
    sold their children. Lean, pale, with eyes deep‐sunken, like
    ghosts from the dead, hardly moving enough to show that they were
    alive, they came into our city to find shelter for three days; for
    our ancient laws forbade a longer stay. Yet for the repair of
    their ships, and for health’s sake, a short respite was granted.
    They were allowed to live on the Mole, while they made ready for
    their long voyage eastward. Thus the winter passed, and many of
    them died. The spring came, and ulcers broke out that had been
    hitherto kept under by the cold, and all that year there was a
    plague in that city.’ ”


This mournful narrative exhibits one of the most sublime examples of
religious faith and conscientious self‐sacrifice to what was deemed truth
and duty in the persecuted. At the same time, when the avaricious
Ferdinand relinquished thirty thousand ducats, and the tender and
benevolent Isabella turned a deaf ear to such prayers and sufferings from
her people, there can be no doubt that conscience ruled the persecutors
also. Even Torquemada himself may have been acting from the most
conscientious and benevolent motives in all the disastrous influences he
brought to bear on his royal mistress.

This passage of history also teaches that honesty, and sincerity, and
conscientiousness will not avail without a _knowledge of the truth_. Nay,
more; had these persecutors been less conscientious, the natural instincts
of humanity or personal interests would have mitigated or withheld the
cruel doom.

It is in this light that we are enabled, in spite of their mistakes in
opinions, to look upon theologians as among the noblest sufferers and
confessors for what they believed to be truth. From the time of Augustine
and Pelagius to the present day nothing can be more clear than that the
combatants on both sides were actuated by a sincere love to God and to
man, each believing, as sincerely as did Saul of Tarsus, that in these
conflicts they were verily doing God service, and that all they were
called to suffer was for the true church of God and the salvation of their
fellow‐men.

But the main purpose for which this record of history now appears is to
illustrate the natural tendency of the Augustine theory in leading to
dogmatism, persecution and ecclesiastical tyranny.

The tendency of the common‐sense system can not be illustrated by history,
for unfortunately Christendom has never yet had an opportunity to test by
a fair experiment its true tendencies. We can only imagine what would be
the results were all ecclesiastical restraints and teachings based on the
Augustine theory removed from our pulpit ministries, our hymns and
prayers, our religious literature, and, most of all, from long established
habits of thought and feeling.

Then all our religious organizations would have for their leading aim, not
to maintain some outward rite or modes of organization, but to promote
free discussion for the discovery of truth and harmonious coöperation to
promote happiness according to the laws of God.

Then the ministry of the Word would be committed to men distinguished not
only by natural endowments, acquired knowledge and skill in debate, but
also ensamples to their flocks in the virtues of humility, meekness, and a
gentle and teachable spirit. Then the points that would divide men into
parties would be chiefly _practical_ questions, so that where no agreement
in opinion could be secured, each would peaceably try a fair experiment
and eventually bring the results forward for the general good.

Then every individual would be free to protest against all that he
believes to be injurious and wrong, in regard to individuals, to the
family, to the church and to the state, and be met in his efforts as a
benefactor rather than an opposer or an enemy.





