CHAPTER IX. THE PRINCIPLES OF COMMON SENSE DEFINED.


The preceding extracts exhibit a portion of the evidence to prove that the
Augustinian system is contrary to the moral sense of mankind, and that
theologians have failed, by their own concessions, to render it consistent
and satisfactory even to themselves.

The next attempt will be to show that _the people_ are endowed with
_principles of common sense_, by the aid of which they can educe from the
_works_ of the Creator, independently of any revealed _Word_, a system of
religion far superior to the one based on the Augustinian theory.

Our first aim will be to designate what is intended by “the principles of
common sense.”

It is claimed, then, that there are certain truths, the belief of which
exists in every rational human mind. This belief, in some cases, as all
must allow, results from the constitution of mind given by the Creator,
and not from any instruction or knowledge gained by other modes. Of this
class is the belief of every mind in its own existence, and also the
belief in the existence of other things beside ourselves.

There are other truths universally believed by every rational mind, where
there may be room for question as to whether this belief is acquired or
the result of constitutional organization. But this question is waived, as
of little practical consequence for the present purpose of this work.

The fact on which the name and classification of these truths rests is,
that the belief in them is _common_ to all rational minds, and is regarded
as so indispensable to true rationality, that whenever any person shows by
words and actions that a belief in any one of these truths does not exist,
he is regarded as deranged, that is to say, his _reason_ is said to be
more or less destroyed.

This, therefore, is the _test_ by which we are to distinguish these
principles of common sense from all other knowledge. They are truths which
are believed by all rational persons, so that the disbelief of any one of
them, evinced in words and actions, is universally regarded as proof of a
deranged mind. In such cases, a man, in common parlance, would be said to
have “lost his mind,” or to have “lost his reason;” inasmuch as he is
lacking in some of those peculiar features which constitute man a rational
being.

In this work the question is also waived as to the number of truths which
are to be included in this class. In regard to certain of them there can
be no dispute. Of those involving any discussion, there probably will be
no occasion to speak in this work. The writer does not claim that the
common people, or that metaphysicians, when they speak of “common sense,”
always refer to what is here designated by this term.

All that the writer claims is that there are certain truths, the belief of
which is _common_ to all minds, either as the result of constitutional
organization or of acquired knowledge; and that these can be classified by
this _test_, viz., that men universally talk and act as if they believed
them, and when they cease to do so, are regarded as more or less insane.

Moreover, it is claimed that it is proper to call them _principles of
common sense_, because they are that kind of sense which is _common_ to
the whole race, and also they are _often_ referred to, both by
metaphysicians and by the common people, by this term.

In the following chapters it will be shown that by the application of
these principles, a system of natural religion can be gained from the
works of the Creator by the same methods that men employ in all the
ordinary concerns of life, and that thus we are as fully qualified to gain
religious knowledge and peace as we are to secure temporal comfort and
prosperity.





CHAPTER X. COMMON SENSE APPLIED TO GAIN THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


Having explained what is intended by the principles of common sense, the
next attempt will be to apply certain of these principles to gain a system
of _natural religion_; meaning by this term that religion which may be
gained from the _works_ of the Creator independently of any revealed Word.

In all systems of religion the first article relates to the existence and
character of the Deity to be worshiped and obeyed. The first principle of
common sense to guide us in this inquiry is this:




Every change has a producing cause.


In the widest sense of the word, _cause_ signifies something as an
antecedent, without which a given change will not occur, and with which it
will occur. This is the leading idea in every use of this word.

Then there are two classes of causes; the first are _necessary_ or
_producing causes_, and the second _occasional causes_.

A _producing cause_ is an antecedent which _produces_ a given change.

_Occasional causes_ are those circumstances which are indispensable to the
action of producing causes.

Thus, fire applied to powder is the producing cause of an explosion, while
the placing of the two together is the occasional cause of it.

The idea of a producing cause is one which probably is gained when we
first discover that our own will moves our own limbs and other things
around us. When we will to move a thing, and find the intended change
follows our volition to move it, then we can not help believing that our
own mind _produced_ this change. At the same time we gain the idea of
_power_ to produce this change, and the belief also that the thing changed
had _no power_ to refrain from the change.

Our only mode of defining the idea of a _producing cause_, of _power_ and
of _want of power_, is to refer to occasions when, by willing, we cause
changes, and thus become conscious of the existence and nature of these
ideas by experience.

So also we have no mode of defining our _sensations_ but by stating the
occasions in which we are conscious of them. For instance, _whiteness_ is
the sensation we have when we look at snow, and _blackness_ is the
sensation we have when we look at charcoal.

The same idea of causation and power in ourselves which we have when we
make changes by our will, we always connect with any thing which by
experiment and testimony we find, in given circumstances, to be an
invariable antecedent of a given change. Our minds are so made, that
whenever we find an _invariable_ antecedent of a given change, we can not
help believing that this antecedent _produced_ the change, just as we
believe our own will produces changes in our bodies and in things around
us. And if any person were to talk and act as if lie did not believe this,
be would be regarded as having “lost his reason.”

Moreover, whenever men, by frequent experiments, find that a given change
is _invariably_ preceded by a certain antecedent, they can not help
believing that the antecedent has _power_ to produce this change, and that
the thing changed has _no power_ to do otherwise. This idea of _power_ and
_want of power_ always exists whenever men find an _invariable_ antecedent
to some change. It is by finding what are thus invariably connected as
antecedents and consequents that men learn what are _causes_, and what are
_effects_, and what are the _powers_ of things around us.

Here, then, we have these as principles of common sense believed by all
men, viz.:

1. Every change (in matter or mind) has a producing cause as an
antecedent.

2. Every invariable antecedent of an invariable sequent is a _producing_
cause, and the thing changed has no power to refrain from that change.

3. A producing cause, in appropriate circumstances, has power to make a
given change.

Now every man, however unlearned, can judge for himself whether these
principles of common sense exist in his own mind, as here set forth. For
example, let any person take a magnet and discover, day after day, that
when it is placed near a piece of iron it draws it to itself; let him find
also, by testimony from others, that this is _invariable_ and fails in not
a single instance, and the inevitable result is a belief that the magnet
is the _cause_ of the moving of the iron, just as the mind is the cause of
the movement of our bodies. So also there is a belief that the magnet, in
given circumstances, has _power_ to move the iron, as our will has power
to move our body. So also there is a belief that the piece of iron, in the
given circumstances, has _no power_ to refrain from being thus attracted.

We see, then, that it is a universal fact, that when there is a change of
any thing, or any new mode of existence, every sane man believes there is
some _producing cause_ of this change. Even the youngest child exhibits
this principle as a part of its mental organization. And should a person
be found who was destitute of a belief in this truth, so that he should
talk and act as if things came into existence and were changing places and
forms without any causes, he would be called insane, or a man who had
“lost his reason.”

Our minds being endowed with this principle, we find the world around us
to be a succession of changes which we trace back to preceding causes,
until we come to the grand question, “Who, or what first started this vast
system of successive changes?” Only two replies are conceivable. The first
is that of the Atheist, who, contradicting his own common sense, maintains
that, in some past period, all this vast system of organization and
changes began to exist without any cause. The other reply is, that there
is a great, eternal, self‐existent _First Cause_, who himself never began
to be, and who is the author of all finite existences. This being, the
Creator of the heavens and the earth, we call God.

The next principle of common sense is that by which we gain a knowledge of
the natural attributes of the Creator. It is this:

_Design_ or _contrivance_ to secure a given end, is proof of an
_intelligent_ designer, and the _nature_ of a design proves the intention
and character of its author.

The mind, as has been shown, is so formed that it can not believe that any
existence can commence without some antecedent cause. The existence of
_unorganized_ matter, however, would be no proof that the cause was an
_intelligent mind_.

But when any existence is discovered where there is an adjustment of
parts, all conducing to accomplish some determinate end, no person can
examine and understand its nature and adaptations without the accompanying
belief that the cause of that contrivance was a mind endowed with the
capacity of adjusting means to accomplish an end, and thus an
_intelligent_ mind.

Nor is it possible, when the object which any design is fitted to
accomplish is clearly discovered, to doubt the _intention_ of the
designer. We can not help believing that it was the intention of the
contriver to accomplish the end for which his contrivance is fitted.

As an example to illustrate the existence of these principles, even in the
simplest minds, if a savage should find in the desert a gold watch,
nothing could lead him to believe that it sprang into existence there
without any cause. If he should open it and perceive the nice adjustment
of the wheels and all its beautiful indications of contrivance, he could
not believe that the mind of an animal, or that any but an intelligent
mind constructed its machinery. If he should have all its movements
explained to him, and learn how exactly all were fitted to mark the
passage of time, it would be equally impossible to convince him that the
contriver did not design it for such a purpose.

Very early childhood gives evidence of the existence of these principles.
An interesting instance of this is recorded by a celebrated philosopher,
who, to test the existence of these principles in the mind of his child,
planted a bed with seeds arranged in the form of the letters which spelled
the child’s name. When the green symbols had sprung from the ground and
were discovered by the delighted child, the father in vain endeavored to
force his belief that the letters came without _a cause_ and without _a
design_. “No, father. _Somebody_ planted them; somebody _intended_ to have
them come up and spell my name!” And thus infancy itself maintains the
principles which are our guide to the Great Source of all finite
existences.

Another principle of common sense lends us still further aid in arriving
at the natural attributes of the Creator. It is this:




Things are and will continue according to our past experience till there
is evidence of a change.


All the business of life rests on a belief of this truth. Our confidence
that the sun will rise, the seasons return, the ocean and rivers flow, the
mountains remain; and in thousands of other things that regulate our plans
and conduct, all depends on this implanted belief that things will
continue according to our past experience till there is evidence of a
change. A man who acted as if he disbelieved this principle would be
regarded as having “lost his reason.”

When, therefore, we have gained the idea that the Creator is an
_intelligent mind_, we necessarily believe that his mind is _such as we
have ever known in past experience_, that is, a mind _like our own_,
endowed with reason, intellect, susceptibilities and will. We can not
conceive of any other kind of mind, because we have never had any
experience or knowledge of any other kind.

The only respect in which we can conceive of the Creator as differing from
our own minds is in the _extent_ of those natural faculties which are
exhibited in his works.

Thus by the use of the principles of common sense we have gained the
positions that there is a Being who is the Author of all finite
existences, whose mind is like our own in natural faculties, while in the
extent of these faculties, as exhibited in his works, he is far beyond our
conceptions.





