CHAPTER XXXV. TENDENCIES OF THE TWO OPPOSING SYSTEMS.


The preceding chapters have presented the distinctive features of two
systems which, in their main points, are shown to be contradictory, while
both are exhibited as incorporated into the chief creeds and theological
teachings of the Christian world.

It is the object of this chapter to point out the _tendencies_ of these
antagonistic systems.

It is maintained, that the common‐sense system, resting as it does on
implanted principles common to all minds, is evolved and held very much in
proportion to the development of the reasoning powers and the moral sense.

That part of this system which relates to man’s duties and best interests
_in this life_, without reference to a future state, has been more
harmoniously evolved by the wise and good of all ages and nations than any
other. Thus, in the teachings of Confucius, Zoroaster, Gaudama, Solon,
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, and the Antonines, who are among the
chief heathen sages, we can find nearly all the moral duties of man, to
himself and to his fellow‐man, which are to be found in the Bible. It is
true that there are diversities and deficiencies in all; but a large body
of pure morality could be made up from their united teachings. The account
given of the system of Boodhism in a previous chapter is one illustration
of this fact.

But, while it is comparatively easy for the good and wise heathen to
reason out what is _best_ for man in this life, as taught by experience,
the grand failure is in _motives_ which will secure _obedience_ to the
rules of virtue. “We see the right and yet the wrong pursue,” has been the
universal lament of humanity.

The character of the Creator, as “the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, slow unto anger, of great kindness;” “who doth not _willingly_
afflict or grieve the children of men;” who “like as a father pitieth his
children;” who is “a father of the fatherless and a judge of the widow;”
“a God without iniquity, just and right;” “a judge of the fatherless and
the poor;” who “shall judge the world with righteousness;” “a righteous
God, who trieth the heart and the reins;” who “will regard the prayer of
the destitute;” who “knoweth the wants of the heart;” “who knoweth our
down‐sitting and up‐rising, and is acquainted with all our ways;” who is
“a righteous Lord who loveth righteousness;” “whose judgments are all
right;” whose “word is right;” whose “word is truth from the beginning;”
who is “plenteous in mercy and truth;” such a character as this, as it is
recorded in the Jewish sacred books, was never evolved or set forth by the
wisest and best sages of all the earth, unaided by these writings.

That such a Being regards our race with long‐suffering compassion, and
came himself to earth, by his teachings, example and _self‐sacrificing_
love, to save us from sin, this was never even _imagined_ by any of the
heathen sages of earth.

The _power of motive_, secured by a belief in the omnipresence, sympathy
and love of such a God, never was attained by the unaided reasoning of any
human being.

The fact that the soul survives the dissolution of the body, and that the
good go where they are happy, and the wicked where they are punished, has
been more or less clearly evolved by the heathen world. In some nations,
as for example the followers of Boodhism, this doctrine is quite definite
and distinct, but with most heathen nations all their notions on this
subject are dim, shadowy and unpractical.

It is those nations alone, who have had access to the Bible, who have ever
attained the _powerful motives_ which are found in the system of common
sense. And yet, as has been shown, these influences have been, to a great
extent, nullified by a contradictory system.

It is claimed, that the system of common sense is the one on which the
revelations of the Creator, contained in the Bible, are founded. This
being so, those who are most developed in their reasoning powers, and who
also yield the most reverence to the Bible, are those who are most
powerfully protected against the pernicious tendencies of the antagonistic
system of Augustine.

Thus, a system which is antagonistic to reason and common sense, has, by
ecclesiastical authority and perversion, been fastened most firmly on that
class of minds who bring all their cultivated powers to its defense, while
at the same time the very cultivation of these powers, and their reverence
for the Bible, tend to the destruction of the same system. We consequently
find the strongest defenders, and the strongest antagonists of the
Augustinian system, in those sects who were educated within its
entrenchments.

If common sense and the Bible are to conquer this false system, it must be
done by those whose common sense and reverence for the Bible are most
effective and most prominent. And yet this class of persons are the ones,
who would the most vigorously apply their energies in the defense of a
system in which they have been trained from infancy, and which is
sustained by all the power of public sentiment, and church organization.
This being premised, the tendencies of the two antagonistic systems will
now be set forth.





CHAPTER XXXVI. TENDENCIES OF THE TWO SYSTEMS AS THEY RESPECT THE
CULTIVATION OF THE MORAL AND INTELLECTUAL POWERS.


The system of common sense rests on the assumption that there are
principles of right and wrong founded on the eternal nature of things,
existing independently of the will of the Creator in his own eternal mind,
and by which his character and conduct may be judged.

The human mind is constructed in accordance with these principles, as the
embryo image of the Eternal Creator. By the aid of these principles, we
discover the design and character of God in the _nature_ of his works, and
can perceive what is right or wrong in moral action as tending to fulfill
or oppose this design. Thus we are enabled to understand and to adore the
rectitude, wisdom and goodness of our Creator, as manifested either in his
works or in more direct revelations from him.

According to this system, all voluntary action is right which produces
happiness without violating the laws of God. Thus every person who is
making self or others happy in the _best_ way, guided by the teachings of
experience or by revelations from God, is fulfilling the great design of
our Maker, and thus pleasing him by promoting his chief desire.

On the contrary, the Augustinian system assumes that the human mind, being
totally depraved, is entirely disqualified to judge of the character and
ways of God. Nay more, it assumes that there is no standard of right and
wrong by which we can judge of the rectitude of the ways of God.

According to this theory, the fact that God wills a thing is what makes it
right; so that any thing is right if God does it, and true if he says it,
however contrary it may be to our moral nature and common sense.

In the teachings of moral science, founded on this theory, it is
maintained that God has formed our minds to feel certain emotions of
approval or disapproval in view of certain relations and actions, which
are right or wrong only as agreeing or disagreeing with his will. But as
the mind of man is depraved, this constitution is no certain guide, and we
are dependent on direct revelations from God to teach us what is in
agreement with his will. Yet here again we are at fault; for such is our
depravity that we are disqualified to _interpret_ these revelations,
except as we are regenerated by God.

Accordingly, man has no means of judging of the designs or character of
his Maker—nor, while unregenerate, as most of our race are and have been,
has he any sure means of discovering the will of God, either by reason or
revelation, saving as he may find infallible priestly interpreters.




Tendencies of the Two Systems in Regard to the Cultivation of the
Reasoning Powers and Moral Sense.


The common‐sense system, resting on the assumption that _happiness‐making,
according to the laws of God_, is the chief end of man, naturally leads to
the development of the intellect and reason in order to discover these
laws, and to the devotion of all our powers to happiness‐making, according
to these laws. This being so, every thing that tends to make enjoyment and
diminish evil without violating law, is valued as good and right. All
noble, generous, self‐sacrificing and honorable sentiments and acts are
regarded as right, pleasing to the Father of all, and tending equally to
promote the best good of ourselves and of all our fellow‐beings. In this
light we become _one_ with the Father and with all good beings just so far
as we obey all the physical, social and moral laws of our Creator, and
thus conform to his will, and add to his happiness. Thus the direct
tendency of this system is to promote an earnest desire, first to discover
all that is true and right, and then to follow it. And such efforts
naturally tend both to develop our highest powers, and to bring the mind
into harmony and communion with the Father of our spirits.

On the contrary, the Augustinian system, resting on the assumption that
all the plans and ways of God are a mystery beyond our comprehension; that
man, by nature, has no power to understand what is right or wrong in God’s
dispensations; that what we call goodness and virtue in unregenerate minds
is not so in God’s sight; that every act of every unrenewed mind is sin,
and only sin; that until regenerated we never do any thing to move God to
re‐create our ruined nature; all this in its _tendency_ leads to
recklessness, hopelessness and neglect of all virtuous efforts, as useless
in regard to our highest interests. As before intimated, these tendencies
are more or less counteracted by the teachings of common sense and the
Bible. Still, such tendencies must always be, more or less, effective and
disastrous.





