CHAPTER VI

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD


Thus far I have devoted myself to an investigation of phenomena for
which the theory of telepathy is not inapplicable. It is, however, when
we come to discuss hallucinations from which the idea of a living agent
is apparently excluded that I feel myself entering on even more delicate
and mysterious territory. Having dealt with phantasms of persons at the
point of death, I now propose to deal with phantasms of persons already
dead. Where, indeed, the death has been very recent, the telepathic
theory still serves, for the reception conveyed by the dying agent might
conceivably remain dormant in the sub-consciousness of the percipient,
and only be aroused in a dream or during a propitious waking moment.

This would apply to the case of a lady who saw the body of a well-known
London physician, about ten hours after death, lying in a bare
unfurnished room, which turned out to be a cottage hospital abroad. Mr
Myers, in his "Human Personality," has collected a large number of
examples of apparitions of departed spirits, upon which he lays the
utmost stress, because they, more than any other kind of evidence, tend
to support his great theory of the survival of personality. If, he
reasons, we can gain a number of well-authenticated cases of
hallucinations projected telepathically from an agent before death, an
equal amount of evidence of hallucinations projected by an agent after
death would prove the continuance of life beyond the grave! And some of
the cases which the Society of Psychical Research, both in this country
and America, have collected are certainly of an impressive character.

Unhappily, most of the best and most convincing cases are too long to be
given here; they cannot even profitably be summarised.

In one instance Mr F. G. of Boston, whose high character and good
position are vouched for by Professor Royce and Dr Hodgson, states that
nine years after the death of a favourite sister an apparition appeared
before him:

     "The hour was high noon, and the sun was shining cheerfully
     into my room. While busily smoking my cigar and writing out my
     orders, I suddenly became conscious that someone was sitting on
     my left, with one arm resting on the table. Quick as a flash I
     turned, and distinctly saw the form of my dead sister, and for
     a brief second or so looked her squarely in the face; and so
     sure was I that it was she, that I sprang forward in delight,
     calling her by name, and as I did so the apparition instantly
     vanished."

But that is not the most extraordinary part of the story. The visitation
so impressed the percipient that he took the next train home and related
to his parents what had occurred. He particularly mentioned a bright red
line or scratch on the right-hand side of his sister's face, which he
had distinctly seen:

     "... When I mentioned this, my mother rose trembling to her
     feet, and nearly fainted away, and as soon as she sufficiently
     recovered her self-possession, with tears streaming down her
     face, she exclaimed that I had indeed seen my sister, as no
     living mortal but herself was aware of the scratch, which she
     had accidentally made while doing some little act of kindness
     after my sister's death.... In proof, neither my father nor any
     of our family had detected it, and positively were unaware of
     the incident, yet _I saw the scratch as bright as if just
     made_. So strangely impressed was my mother, that even after
     she had retired to rest she got up and dressed, came to me, and
     told me _she knew_ that I had seen my sister. A few weeks later
     my mother died."

Now, is it not a little singular that, although both Dr Hodgson and Mr
Myers record this incident, the theory of telepathy between a living
agent and a living percipient does not occur to them? Is it not
conceivable that the mother, on whose mind the incident of the scratch
on the features of the corpse had admittedly preyed, should have
unwittingly communicated her secret to her son? In other words, the
mother projected a phantasm of her dead daughter to the mind of her son.

In the "Proceedings of the Society" there is a case which, according to
Mr Stead, "appears to suggest that the deceased are continuing to take
an interest in mundane affairs." The story is communicated by Miss
Dodson. On Sunday, 5th June 1887, close upon midnight, Miss Dodson was
roused by hearing her name called three times. She answered twice,
thinking it was her uncle. The third time she recognised the voice of
her mother, who had been dead sixteen years. "I said," continued Miss
Dodson, "'Mamma!'"

     "She then came round a screen near my bedside with two children
     in her arms and placed them in my arms and put the bedclothes
     over them, and said: 'Lucy, promise me to take care of them,
     for their mother is just dead.' I said: 'Yes, mamma.' She
     repeated: '_Promise_ me to take care of them.' I replied: 'Yes,
     I promise you,' and added, 'Oh, mamma, stay and speak to me, I
     am so wretched.' She replied: 'Not yet, my child,' then she
     seemed to go round the screen again and I remained, feeling the
     children to be still in my arms and fell asleep. When I awoke
     there was nothing. Tuesday morning, 7th June, I received the
     news of my sister-in-law's death. She had given birth to a
     child three weeks before, which I did not know till after her
     death."

Professor Sidgwick says, as the result of an interesting conversation
with Miss Dodson, that the children were of the ages corresponding with
the ages of the children of her sister-in-law; they seemed to be a
little girl and a baby newly born. The only way an ingenious sceptic can
get round this case is by supposing that a telepathic impulse from the
living brother might conceivably embody itself in the form of his
mother. But the idea of a brother in Belgium being able to transmit a
telepathic message in the assumed shape and with the voice of his
mother, who had been dead for sixteen years, and also to telepath into
existence in London the two little children who were living in his house
at Bruges, is rather a clumsy hypothesis. But what other have we?

     "Mr Theobald, an Australian, forwards to the Society a paper
     discovered amongst the effects of his uncle, now dead. The
     apparition, as will be seen, occurred on October 24th, 1860,
     and the account is endorsed on 9th November by the percipient's
     father. Further particulars sent to Mr B---- by the percipient
     (who is here called Mr D----) are dated November 13th, 1860.
     The first account seems to have been sent by the percipient to
     his father, and by the father to Mr B----"

The percipient had been identified, and confirms, as will be seen, this
early narrative, which is as follows:--

     "On the evening of Wednesday, October 24th, 1860, having
     retired to bed about nine o'clock, I had slept, I conclude,
     about two hours, making it then about eleven o'clock P.M. I was
     awoke from my sleep by a hand touching my forehead, and the
     well-known voice of Mrs B---- pronouncing my name, E----. I
     started up and sat in bed, rubbed my eyes, and then saw Mrs
     B----. From the head to the waist the figure was distinct,
     clear, and well defined; but from the waist downwards it was
     all misty, and the lower part transparent. She appeared to be
     dressed in black silk. Her countenance was grave and rather
     sad, but not unhappy.

     "The words she first uttered were: 'I have left dear John.'
     What followed related entirely to myself, and she was permitted
     by a most kind Providence to speak words of mercy, promise, and
     comfort, and assurance that what I most wished would come to
     pass. She came to me in an hour of bitter mental agony, and was
     sent as a messenger of mercy...."

Occasionally there is a curious variant, when the phantasm is auditory
and not visible. In the case published in "Proceedings of the Society
for Psychical Research," vol. iii. p. 90, Mr Wambey heard a phantasmal
voice as though in colloquy with his own thought. He was planning a
congratulatory letter to a friend, when the words "What, write to a dead
man? write to a dead man?" sounded clearly in his ears. The friend had
been dead for some days.

Gurney was much impressed by the unexpectedly large proportion of cases
where the percipient informed us that there had been a _compact_ between
himself and the deceased person that whichever passed away first should
try to appear to the other. "Considering," he adds, "what an extremely
small number of persons make such a compact, compared with those who do
not, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that its existence has a
certain efficacy."

A characteristic case is thus reported by a Mr Bellamy:

     "When a girl at school my wife made an agreement with a
     fellow-pupil, Miss W., that the one of them who died first
     should, if divinely permitted, appear after her decease to the
     survivor. In 1874 my wife, who had not seen or heard anything
     of her former school friend for some years, casually heard of
     her death. The news reminded her of her former agreement, and
     then, becoming nervous, she told me of it. I knew of my wife's
     compact, but I had never seen a photograph of her friend, or
     heard any description of her." (Mr Bellamy told Gurney in
     conversation that his mind had not been in the least dwelling
     on the compact.)

     "A night or two afterwards, as I was sleeping with my wife, a
     fire brightly burning in my room and a candle alight, I
     suddenly awoke and saw a lady sitting by the side of the bed
     where my wife was sleeping soundly. At once I sat up in the bed
     and gazed so intently that even now I can recall her form and
     features. Had I the pencil or the brush of a Millais I could
     transfer to canvas an exact likeness of the ghostly visitant. I
     remember that I was much struck, as I looked intently at her,
     with the careful arrangement of her coiffure, every single hair
     being most carefully brushed down. How long I sat and gazed I
     cannot say, but directly the apparition ceased to be, I got
     out of bed to see if any of my wife's garments had by any means
     optically deluded me. I found nothing in the line of vision but
     a bare wall. Hallucination on my part I rejected as out of the
     question, and I doubted not that I had really seen an
     apparition. Returning to bed, I lay till my wife some hours
     after awoke, and then I gave her an account of her friend's
     appearance. I described her colour, form, etc., all of which
     exactly tallied with my wife's recollection of Miss W. Finally
     I asked, 'But was there any special point to strike one in her
     appearance?' 'Yes,' my wife promptly replied, 'we girls used to
     tease her at school for devoting so much time to the
     arrangement of her hair.' This was the very thing which I have
     said so much struck me. Such are the simple facts.

     "I will only add that till 1874 I had never seen an apparition,
     and that I have not seen one since.

     "ARTHUR BELLAMY."

The following case, from "Proceedings," vol. viii. p. 178, bears a
distinct resemblance to the old-fashioned ghost stories. Mrs M., the
informant, writes under date 15th December 1891:

     "Before relating my experience of having seen a ghost, I should
     like my readers thoroughly to understand that I had not the
     slightest idea that the house in which my husband and I were
     living was haunted, or that the family residing there for many
     years before us had had any family troubles. The house was
     delightfully situated [etc.]. The house being partly new and
     partly old we occupied the old part for our sleeping
     apartments. There were two staircases leading to them, with a
     landing and window, adjoining a morning sitting-room. One night
     on retiring to my bedroom about 11 o'clock, I thought I heard a
     peculiar moaning sound, and someone sobbing as if in great
     distress of mind. I listened very attentively, and still it
     continued; so I raised the gas in my bedroom, and then went to
     the landing window of which I have spoken, drew the blind
     aside; and there on the grass was a very beautiful young girl
     in kneeling posture before a soldier, in a general's uniform,
     sobbing and clasping her hands together, entreating for pardon;
     but alas! he only waved her away from him. So much did I feel
     for the girl, that without a moment's hesitation I ran down the
     staircase to the door opening upon the lawn, and begged her to
     come in and tell me her sorrow. The figures then disappeared!
     Not in the least nervous did I feel then;--went again to my
     bedroom, took a sheet of writing paper and wrote down what I
     had seen. [Mrs M. has found and sent us this paper. The
     following words are written in pencil on a half sheet of
     notepaper:--"March 13th, 1886. Have just seen visions on
     lawn:--a soldier in general's uniform,--a young lady kneeling
     to him. 11.40 P.M."] My husband was away from home when this
     event occurred, but a lady friend was staying with me, so I
     went to her bedroom and told her that I had been rather
     frightened by some noises;--could I stay with her a little
     while? A few days afterwards I found myself in a very nervous
     state; but it seemed so strange that I was not frightened at
     the time.

     "It appears the story is only too true. The youngest daughter
     of this very old proud family had had an illegitimate child;
     and her parents and relatives would not recognise her again,
     and she died broken-hearted. The soldier was a near relative
     (also a connection of my husband's); and it was in vain she
     tried to gain his--the soldier's--forgiveness. [In a subsequent
     letter Sir X. Y.'s career is described. He was a distinguished
     officer.]

     "So vivid was my remembrance of the features of the soldier
     that some months after the occurrence, when I happened to be
     calling with my husband at a house where there was a portrait
     of him, I stepped before it and said: 'Why, look! There is the
     General!' And sure enough it _was_."

In a subsequent letter Mrs M. writes:

     "I did see the figures on the lawn after opening the door
     leading on to the lawn; and they by no means disappeared
     instantly, but more like a dissolving view--viz. gradually; and
     I did not leave the door until they had passed away. It was
     impossible for any real persons to act such a scene.... The
     General was born and died (in the house where I saw him).... I
     was not aware that the portrait of the General was in that room
     (where I saw it); it was the first time I had been in that
     room. The misfortune to the poor girl happened in 1847 or
     1848."

Mrs M. then mentions that a respectable local tradesman hearing of the
incident remarked: "That is not an uncommon thing to see _her_ about the
place, poor soul! She was a badly used girl."

Mr M. writes as follows under date 23rd December 1891:--

     "I have seen my wife's letter in regard to the recognition of
     Sir X. Y.'s picture at ----. Nothing was said by me to her on
     the subject; but knowing the portrait to be a remarkably good
     likeness I proposed calling at the house (which was that of a
     nephew of Sir X. Y.'s), being anxious to see what effect it
     would have upon my wife. Immediately on entering the room she
     almost staggered back, and turned pale, saying--looking hard
     at the picture--'Why, there's the General!' ... Being a
     connection of the family I knew all about the people, but my
     wife was then a stranger, and I had never mentioned such things
     to her; in fact they had been almost forgotten."

Here is a case where the phantasm was visible to several persons at the
same time. It is given by Mr Charles A. W. Lett, of the Military and
Royal Naval Club, Albemarle Street, W.

     "December 3rd, 1885.

     "On the 5th April 1873 my wife's father, Captain Towns, died at
     his residence, Cranbrook, Rose Bay, near Sydney, N. S. Wales.
     About six weeks after his death my wife had occasion one
     evening about nine o'clock to go to one of the bedrooms in the
     house. She was accompanied by a young lady, Miss Berthon, and
     as they entered the room--the gas burning all the time--they
     were amazed to see, reflected as it were on the polished
     surface of the wardrobe, the image of Captain Towns. It was
     barely half figure, the head, shoulders, and part of the arms
     only showing--in fact, it was like an ordinary medallion
     portrait, but life-size. The face appeared wan and pale, as it
     did before his death, and he wore a kind of grey flannel
     jacket, in which he had been accustomed to sleep. Surprised and
     half-alarmed at what they saw, their first idea was that a
     portrait had been hung in the room, and that what they saw was
     its reflection; but there was no picture of the kind.

     "Whilst they were looking and wondering, my wife's sister, Miss
     Towns, came into the room, and before either of the others had
     time to speak, she exclaimed, 'Good gracious! Do you see papa?'
     One of the housemaids happened to be passing downstairs at the
     moment, and she was called in and asked if she saw anything,
     and her reply was, 'Oh, miss! the master.' Graham--Captain
     Towns' old body-servant--was then sent for, and he also
     immediately exclaimed, 'Oh, Lord save us! Mrs Lett, it's the
     captain!' The butler was called, and then Mrs Crane, my wife's
     nurse, and they both said what they saw. Finally, Mrs Towns
     was sent for, and, seeing the apparition, she advanced towards
     it with her arm extended as if to touch it, and as she passed
     her hand over the panel of the wardrobe the figure gradually
     faded away, and never again appeared, though the room was
     regularly occupied for a long time after.

     "These are the simple facts of the case, and they admit of no
     doubt; no kind of intimation was given to any of the witnesses;
     the same question was put to each one as they came into the
     room, and the reply was given without hesitation by each. It
     was by the merest accident that I did not see the apparition. I
     was in the house at the time, but did not hear when I was
     called."

     "C. A. W. LETT."

     "We the undersigned, having read the above statement, certify
     that it is strictly accurate, as we were both witnesses of the
     apparition.

     "SARA LETT,

     "SIBBIE SMYTH

     "(_nee_ TOWNS.)"

"Mrs Lett assures me," wrote Gurney, "that neither she nor her sister
ever experienced a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion.
She is positive that the recognition of the appearance on the part of
each of the later witnesses was _independent_, and not due to any
suggestion from the persons already in the room."

The following, taken from the "Report on the Census of Hallucinations,"
may belong to either the ante-mortem or post-mortem category:--

     "At Redhill on Thanksgiving Day, between eight and nine in the
     evening, when I was taking charge of the little daughter of a
     friend, during my friend's absence on that evening, I left the
     child sleeping in the bedroom, and went to drop the blinds in
     two neighbouring rooms, being absent about three minutes. On
     returning to the child's room in the full light of the
     gas-burner from above I distinctly saw, coming from the child's
     cot, a white figure, which figure turned, looked me full in the
     face, and passed down the staircase. I instantly followed,
     leaned over the banisters in astonishment, and saw the
     glistening of the white drapery as the figure passed down the
     staircase, through the lighted hall, and silently through the
     hall door itself, which was barred, chained, and locked. I felt
     for the moment perfectly staggered, went back to the bedroom,
     and found the child peacefully sleeping. I related the
     circumstance to the mother immediately on her return late that
     night. She was incredulous, but said that my description of the
     figure answered to that of an invalid aunt of the child's. The
     next morning came a telegram to say that this relation who had
     greatly wished to see her niece had died between eight and nine
     the previous evening.

     "I had just put down the 'Pickwick Papers,' with which I had
     been whiling away the time, was free from trouble and in good
     health."

Sister Bertha, Superior of the House of Mercy at Bovey Tracey, Newton
Abbot, states:

     "On the night of November 10th, 1861, I was up in my bed
     watching, because there was a person not quite well in the next
     room. I heard a voice which I recognised at once as familiar to
     me, and at first thought of my sister. It said in the brightest
     and most cheerful tone, 'I am here with you.' I answered,
     looking and seeing nothing, 'Who are you?' The voice said, 'You
     mustn't know yet.' I heard nothing more and saw nothing, and am
     certain that the door was not opened or shut. I was not in the
     least frightened, and felt convinced it was Lucy's [Miss Lucy
     Gambier Parry's] voice.

     "I have never doubted it from that moment. I had not heard of
     her being worse. The last account had been good, and I was
     expecting to hear that she was at Torquay. In the course of the
     next day (the 11th), mother told me that she had died on the
     morning of the 10th, rather more than twelve hours before I
     heard her voice."

A case reported by Mr John E. Husbands, of Melbourne House, Town Hall
Square, Grimsby, is interesting:

     "I was sleeping in a hotel in Madeira in January 1885. It was a
     bright moonlight night. The windows were open, and the blinds
     up. I felt someone was in my room. On opening my eyes I saw a
     young fellow about twenty-five, dressed in flannels, standing
     at the side of my bed, and pointing with the first finger of
     his right hand to the place where I was lying. I lay for some
     seconds to convince myself of someone being really there. I
     then sat up and looked at him. I saw his features so plainly
     that I recognised them in a photograph which was shown me some
     days afterwards. I asked him what he wanted. He did not speak,
     but his eyes and hands seemed to tell me that I was in his
     place. As he did not answer, I struck at him with my fist as I
     sat up, but did not reach him, and as I was going to spring out
     of bed he slowly vanished through the door, which was shut,
     keeping his eyes upon me all the time. Upon inquiry I found
     that the young fellow who appeared to me died in the room I was
     occupying."

There is, too, the famous case of Mrs de Freville and the gardener Bard.
The percipient, who had formerly been in the employ of this somewhat
eccentric lady, who was especially morbid on the subject of tombs and so
forth, was in the churchyard of Hinxton, Saffron Walden, on Friday, 8th
May 1885. He happened to look at the square De Freville stone vault,
when, to his amazement, he distinctly saw the old lady, with a white
face, leaning on the rails. When he looked again she was gone, although
it puzzled him to know how she could have got out of the churchyard, as,
in order to reach any of the gates, she must have passed him. Next day
he was told that Mrs de Freville was dead. As the apparition was seen
about seven and a half hours after death, it could, as I have suggested,
be considered a telepathic impression transmitted at the moment of death
and remaining latent in the brain of the percipient; otherwise, the
case belongs to the category of Haunting, which we will glance at in the
next chapter.




