CHAPTER IV

DREAMS


Having partially discussed the subject of phantasms projected from the
brain of the agent to that of the percipient, I must now briefly
describe another group for which the evidence is very abundant--that of
"veridical" dreams. This is a term used to describe apparitions
coinciding with other events in such a manner as to suggest a
connection. Your dream or hallucination is said to be veridical when it
conveys an idea which is both true and previously unknown to you.

Making every allowance for the element of chance, there is a mass of
evidence which mere coincidence cannot explain away. Yet we must not
overlook the frequency of dreams, even of a striking character, which
may once or twice in a million times actually hit on the coincident
event. But besides coincidence, there is at times another normal
explanation. Mr Podmore relates how a neighbour of his on the night of
24th June 1894 dreamed President Carnot had been assassinated. He told
his family before the morning paper announcing the news had been opened.
As has been pointed out, in a case of that kind it seems possible that
the information may have reached the sleeper in his dreams from the
shouts of a newsboy, or even from the conversation of passers-by in the
street.

Before any supernormal theory, we must admit the possibility of a normal
communication, however far-fetched it may seem. In each of the instances
about to be related the fact of the dream was either recorded by the
dreamer or related to a friend before the fact of any coincidence was
suspected.

One of the best-known cases is that of Canon Warburton, who writes:

     "Somewhere about the year 1848 I went up from Oxford to spend a
     day or two with my brother, Acton Warburton, then a barrister,
     living at 10 Fish Street, Lincoln's Inn. When I got to his
     chambers I found a note on the table apologising for his
     absence, and saying that he had gone to a dance somewhere in
     the West End, and intended to be home soon after one o'clock.
     Instead of going to bed I dozed in an arm-chair, but started up
     wide awake exactly at one, ejaculating: 'By Jove! he's down!'
     and seeing him coming out of a drawing-room into a brightly
     illuminated landing, catching his foot in the edge of the top
     stair, and falling headlong, just saving himself by his elbows
     and hands. (The house was one which I have never seen, nor did
     I know where it was.) Thinking very little of the matter, I
     fell a-doze again for half-an-hour and was awakened by my
     brother suddenly coming in and saying, 'Oh, there you are! I
     have just had as narrow an escape of breaking my neck as I ever
     had in my life. Coming out of the ballroom I caught my foot,
     and tumbled full-length down the stairs.'

     "That is all. It may have been 'only a dream,' but I always
     thought it must have been something more."

A member of the Society for Psychical Research narrates that on 7th
October 1900 he woke abruptly in the small hours of the morning with a
painful conviction upon him that his wife, who was that night sleeping
in another part of the house, had burst a varicose vein in the calf of
her leg, and that he could feel the swelled place three inches long:

     "I wondered whether I ought to get up and go down to her room
     on the first floor, and considered whether she would be able to
     come up to me; but I was only partly awake, though in acute
     distress. My mind had been suddenly roused, but my body was
     still under the lethargy of sleep. I argued with myself that
     there was sure to be nothing in it, that I should only disturb
     her, and so shortly went off to sleep again.

     "On going to her room this morning I said I had had a horrid
     dream, which had woke me up, to the effect that she had burst a
     varicose vein, of which just now care has to be taken. 'Why,'
     she replied, 'I had just the same experience. I woke up at
     2.15, feeling sure the calf of my leg was bleeding, and my
     hand seemed to feel it when I put it there. I turned on the
     light in alarm, noticing the time, and wondered if I should be
     able to get up to thee, or whether I should have to wake the
     housekeeper. Thou wast in the dream out of which I woke,
     examining the place.'

     "Though I did not note the hour, two o'clock is about the time
     I should have guessed it to be; and the impression on my mind
     was vivid and terrible, knowing how dangerous such an accident
     would be."

The foregoing is thus corroborated by the lady:

     "I felt twinges of pain in my leg off and on in my sleep
     without being entirely roused till about 2.15 A.M. Then, or
     just before, I dreamt or had a vivid impression that a vein had
     burst, and that my husband, who was sleeping in another room up
     another flight of stairs, was there and called my attention to
     it. I thought it felt wet, and trickling down the leg as if
     bleeding, passed my hand down, and at first thought it seemed
     wet; but on gaining fuller consciousness found it all right,
     and that it was not more painful than often when I got out and
     stood on it. Thought over the contingency of its actually
     bursting, and whether I could so bandage it in that case as to
     make it safe to go up to my husband's room, and thought I could
     do so.

     "Looking at my watch, found it about 2.20."

As to dreams in which a death occurs there is a vast mass of testimony.
The late Dr Hodgson, on 19th July 1897, received the following letter:--

     "DEAR HODGSON,--Five minutes ago Mr J. F. Morse, who has all
     his life had dreams which were more or less verified later,
     came to my room and said: 'I believe my wife died last night,
     for I had a dream of a most remarkable nature which indicates
     it. I shall be able to let you know soon, for I shall get word
     at my office when I reach there. I will then send you word.'
     His wife is in a country place in Delaware Co. Pa. She is ill,
     but he had no idea she would not live for months, as the
     enclosed letter of July 15th will show; but she was ill, and
     would be likely to decline slowly and gradually. I will get
     this off or in the mail before I hear any more.

     "Mr Morse in his appearance looks like one who had just lost a
     dear friend, and is in a state of great mental depression, with
     tears in his eyes....

     "M. L. HOLBROOK."

On the evening of the same day a telegram was received announcing the
unexpected death of Mrs Morse at 9.15 on the evening of Friday, 16th
July.

A prominent Chicago journalist, Mr F. B. Wilkie, reported that his wife
asked him one morning in October 1885, while still engaged in dressing,
and before either of them had left their sleeping-room, if he knew
anyone named Edsale or Esdale. A negative reply was given and then a
"Why do you ask?" She replied: "During the night I dreamt that I was on
the lake-shore and found a coffin there, with the name of Edsale or
Esdale on it, and I am confident that someone of that name has recently
been drowned there." On opening the morning paper the first item that
attracted his attention was the report of the mysterious disappearance
from his home in Hyde Park of a young man named Esdale. A few days
afterwards the body of a young man was found on the lake-shore.

This case was carefully investigated and authenticated by Dr Hodgson,
and bears some unusual features.

Of dreams that may be reasonably regarded as telepathic the following is
a striking example. It is contributed to "Phantasms of the Living" by a
Mrs Hilton--a lady engaged in active work, and not in any respect a
"visionary."

     "234 Burdett Road, E.

     "April 10th, 1883.

     "The dream which I am about to relate occurred about two years
     ago. I seemed to be walking in a country road, with high grassy
     banks on either side. Suddenly I heard the tramp of many feet.
     Feeling a strange sense of fear I called out: 'Who are these
     people coming?' A voice above me replied: 'A procession of the
     dead.' I then found myself on the bank, looking into the road
     where the people were walking five or six abreast. Hundreds of
     them passed by me--neither looking aside nor looking at each
     other. They were people of all conditions and in all ranks of
     life. I saw no children amongst them. I watched the long line
     of people go away into the far distance, but I felt no special
     interest in any of them, until I saw a middle-aged Friend,
     dressed as a gentleman farmer. I pointed to him and called out:
     'Who is that, please?' He turned round and called out in a loud
     voice: 'I am John M., of Chelmsford.' Then my dream ended. Next
     day when my husband returned from the office he told me that
     John M., of Chelmsford, had died the previous day.

     "I may add that I only knew the Friend in question by sight and
     cannot recollect ever speaking to him.

     "MARIE HILTON."

About a year later Mrs Hilton experienced a dream of a similar kind,
again coincident with the death of an acquaintance seen in the phantom
procession. It is worth noting "remarks Mr Gurney," that these
dreams--for all their _bizarrerie_--seem to belong to a known type.

In another category of phenomena belong precognitive dreams in which
certain events, especially deaths, are foretold. Mr Alfred Cooper, of 9
Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square, W., states, and his statement is
attested by the Duchess of Hamilton, that:

     "A fortnight before the death of the late Earl of L----, in
     1882, I called upon the Duke of Hamilton in Hill Street to see
     him professionally. After I had finished seeing him we went
     into the drawing-room where the Duchess was, and the Duke said
     to me: 'Oh, Cooper, how is the Earl?'

     "The Duchess said: 'What Earl?' and on my answering: 'Lord
     L----,' she replied, 'That is very odd. I have had a most
     extraordinary vision. I went to bed, but after being in bed a
     short time, I was not exactly asleep, but thought I saw a scene
     as if from a play before me. The actors in it were Lord L----,
     in a chair, as if in a fit, with a man standing over him with a
     red beard. He was by the side of a bath, over which bath a red
     lamp was distinctly shown.'

     "I then said: 'I am attending Lord L---- at present; there is
     very little the matter with him; he is not going to die; he
     will be all right very soon.'

     "Well, he got better for a week and was nearly well, but at the
     end of six or seven days after this I was called to see him
     suddenly. He had inflammation of both lungs.

     "I called in Sir William Jenner, but in six days he was a dead
     man. There were two male nurses attending him; one had been
     taken ill. But when I saw the other the dream of the Duchess
     was exactly represented. He was standing near a bath over the
     Earl, and, strange to say, his beard was red. There was the
     bath with the red lamp over it, it is rather rare to find a
     bath with a red lamp over it, and this brought the story to my
     mind.

     "The vision seen by the Duchess was told two weeks before the
     death of Lord L----. It is a most remarkable thing. This
     account, written in 1888, has been revised by the late Duke of
     Manchester, father of the Duchess of Hamilton, who heard the
     vision from his daughter on the morning after she had seen it.

     "MARY HAMILTON.

     "ALFRED COOPER."

Mr Myers adds:

     "The Duchess only knew Lord L---- by sight, and had not heard
     that he was ill. She knew she was not asleep, for she opened
     her eyes to get rid of the vision, and, shutting them, saw the
     same thing again.

     "An independent and concordant account has been given to me (F.
     W. H. M.) orally by a gentleman to whom the Duchess related the
     dream on the morning after its occurrence."

One of the most interesting and well-authenticated cases of dreams
foretelling a death is that of Mr Fred Lane, understudy to that popular
actor the late William Terriss. His statement is as follows:--

     "Adelphi Theatre,

     "December 20th, 1897.

     "In the early morning of December 16th, 1897, I dreamt that I
     saw the late Mr Terriss lying in a state of delirium or
     unconsciousness on the stairs leading to the dressing-rooms in
     the Adelphi Theatre. He was surrounded by people engaged at the
     theatre, amongst whom were Miss Millward and one of the footmen
     who attend the curtain, both of whom I actually saw a few hours
     later at the death scene. His chest was bare and clothes torn
     aside. Everybody who was around him was trying to do something
     for his good. This dream was in the shape of a picture. I saw
     it like a tableau on which the curtain would rise and fall. I
     immediately after dreamt that we did not open at the Adelphi
     Theatre that evening. I was in my dressing-room in the dream,
     but this latter part was somewhat incoherent. The next morning,
     on going down to the theatre for rehearsal, the first member of
     the company I met was Miss H----, to whom I mentioned this
     dream. On arriving at the theatre I also mentioned it to
     several other members of the company including Messrs Creagh
     Henry, Buxton, Carter Bligh, etc. This dream, though it made
     such an impression upon me as to cause me to relate it to my
     fellow-artists, did not give me the idea of any coming
     disaster. I may state that I have dreamt formerly of deaths of
     relatives and other matters which have impressed me, but the
     dreams have never impressed me sufficiently to make me repeat
     them the following morning, and have never been verified. My
     dream of the present occasion was the most vivid I have ever
     experienced; in fact, lifelike, and exactly represented the
     scene as I saw it at night."

Three members of the company--Mr Carter Bligh, Mr Creagh Henry, and Miss
H---- --made statements that Mr Lane related his dream in their presence
on the morning of 16th December. Mr Lane was in the vicinity of the
Adelphi Theatre when the murderer, named Prince or Archer, who had been
employed as a super at the theatre, stabbed Terriss at the stage
entrance to the theatre. The actor was taken to the Charing Cross
Hospital, where he died almost immediately. It is interesting to note
that it was Lane himself who ran to the hospital for the doctor, and on
his return looked in at the stage entrance and saw Terriss lying on the
stairs just as he had seen him in the dream.

While I am fully alive to the possibilities of coincidence, there
certainly does not seem to be much besides levity in the theory that "it
happened to be Jones's hour to see a hallucination of Thompson when it
happened to be Thompson's hour to die," especially when, as frequently
happens, the hallucination occurs more than once to the same percipient.

A Parisian journalist, M. Henri Buisson, sends to "The Annals of
Psychical Science" an account of three premonitory dreams all of which
were told to others before they were fulfilled. In the first, which
occurred on June 8th, 1887, M. Buisson saw his grandmother "stretched
dead on her bed, with a smile on her face as if she slept." Above the
bed, in a brilliant sun, he read the date, "June 8th, 1888," just a
year later; and on that day his grandmother died quite suddenly, with
her face as calm as he had seen it in his dream.

On another occasion M. Buisson saw his mother, not dead, but very ill,
and attended by a doctor, who had died more than a year before, after
having been the family physician for thirty years. The next day M.
Buisson received a telegram saying that his mother was ill, and, in
fact, she died during the day.

In April 1907, M. Buisson dreamt that he received notice to quit his
house on pretence of a message from the Prefect of Police, and that on
looking out of the window he saw the Prefect in the street, dressed in a
leather jacket, with a soft hat, and a slipper on one foot. He also
dreamt that a fire had broken out. On the evening of the next day he
heard the fire-engines, and on following them he found the Prefect on
the spot, dressed just as in the dream, having hurt one foot, he had to
go about in a slipper.

Of still another type is the clairvoyant dream. The following is
related by Mr Herbert J. Lewis, of Cardiff:--

     "In September 1880 I lost the landing-order of a large steamer
     containing a cargo of iron ore, which had arrived in the port
     of Cardiff. She had to commence discharging at six o'clock the
     next morning. I received the landing-order at four o'clock in
     the afternoon, and when I arrived at the office at six I found
     that I had lost it. During all the evening I was doing my
     utmost to find the officials of the Customs House to get a
     permit, as the loss was of the greatest importance, preventing
     the ship from discharging. I came home in a great degree of
     trouble about the matter, as I feared that I should lose my
     situation in consequence.

     "That night I dreamt that I saw the lost landing-order lying in
     a crack in the wall under a desk in the Long Room of the
     Customs House.

     "At five the next morning I went down to the Customs House and
     got the keeper to get up and open it. I went to the spot of
     which I had dreamt, and found the paper in the very place. The
     ship was not ready to discharge at her proper time, and I went
     on board at seven and delivered the landing-order, saving her
     from all delay.

     "I can certify to the truth of the above statement,

     "HERBERT J. LEWIS,

     "THOMAS LEWIS

     "(Herbert Lewis's father).

     "H. WALLIS."

(Mr E. J. Newell, of the George and Abbotsford Hotel, Melrose, adds the
following corroborative note.)

     "August 14th, 1884.

     "I made some inquiries about Mr Herbert Lewis's dream before I
     left Cardiff. He had been searching throughout the room in
     which the order was found. His theory as to how the order got
     in the place in which it was found is that it was probably put
     there by someone (perhaps with malicious intent), as he does
     not see how it could have fallen so.

     "The fact that Mr H. Lewis is exceedingly short-sighted adds
     to the probability of the thing which you suggest, that the
     dream was simply an unconscious act of memory in sleep. On the
     other hand, he does not believe it was there when he searched.

     "E. J. NEWELL."

Now, it seems to me in the above case that the dreamer's subliminal self
may have taken note of the lost landing-order without his
super-consciousness being aware of it, and that the fact returned to him
in his dream.

In R. L. Stevenson's "Across the Plains" may be found a striking chapter
on dreams. It contains an account of some of the most successful dream
experiments ever recorded. Stevenson's dreams were of no ordinary
character; they were always of great vividness, and often of a markedly
recurrent type. This faculty he developed to an unusual degree--to such
an extent, indeed, that it became of great assistance to him in his
work. By self-suggestion before sleep, we are told, the great novelist
would secure "a visual and dramatic intensity of dream-representation
which furnished him with the motives of some of his most striking
romances." But "R. L. S." is not the only one who has secured assistance
of dreams. Here is an account given by a German, Professor Hilprecht, of
an experience of a similar nature ("Human Personality," i. 376):

     "One Saturday evening, about the middle of March 1893, I had
     been wearying myself, as I had done so often in the weeks
     preceding, in the vain attempt to decipher two small fragments
     of agate, which were supposed to belong to the finger-rings of
     some Babylonian. The labour was much increased by the fact that
     the fragments presented remnants only of characters and lines,
     that dozens of similar small fragments had been found in the
     ruins of the temple of Bel at Nippur with which nothing could
     be done, that in this case furthermore I never had the
     originals before me, but only a hasty sketch made by one of the
     members of the expedition sent by the University of
     Pennsylvania to Babylonia. I could not say more than that the
     fragments, taking into consideration the place in which they
     were found and the peculiar characteristics of the cuneiform
     characters preserved upon them, sprang from the Cassite period
     of Babylonian history (_circa_ 1700-1140 B.C.); moreover, as
     the first character of the third line of the first fragment
     seemed to be KU, I ascribed this fragment, with an
     interrogation point, to King Kurigalzu, while I placed the
     other fragment as unclassifiable with other Cassite fragments
     upon a page of my book where I published the unclassifiable
     fragments. The proofs already lay before me, but I was far from
     satisfied. The whole problem passed yet again through my mind
     that March evening before I placed my mark of approval under
     the last correction in the book. Even then I had come to no
     conclusion. About midnight, weary and exhausted, I went to bed
     and was soon in deep sleep. Then I dreamed the following
     remarkable dream. A tall, thin priest of the old pre-Christian
     Nippur, about forty years of age and clad in a simple abba, led
     me to the treasure chamber of the temple, on its south-east
     side. He went with me into a small low-ceiled room, without
     windows, in which there was a large wooden chest, while scraps
     of agate and lapis-lazuli lay scattered on the floor. Here he
     addressed me as follows:--'The two fragments which you have
     published separately upon pages 22 and 26, belong together, are
     not finger-rings, and their history is as follows. King
     Kurigalzu (_circa_ 1300 B.C.) once sent to the temple of Bel,
     among other articles of agate and lapis-lazuli, an inscribed
     votive cylinder of agate. Then we priests suddenly received the
     command to make for the statue of the god Ninib a pair of
     earrings of agate. We were in great dismay, since there was no
     agate as raw material at hand. In order to execute the command
     there was nothing for us to do but cut the votive cylinder into
     three parts, thus making three rings, each of which contained a
     portion of the original inscription. The first two rings served
     as earrings for the statue of the god; the two fragments which
     have given you so much trouble are portions of them. If you
     will put the two together you will have confirmation of my
     words. But the third ring you have not yet found in the course
     of your excavations and you never will find it.' With this the
     priest disappeared. I awoke at once and immediately told my
     wife the dream, that I might not forget it. Next
     morning--Sunday--I examined the fragments once more in the
     light of these disclosures, and to my astonishment found all
     the details of the dream precisely verified in so far as the
     means of verification were in my hands. The original
     inscription on the votive cylinder read: 'To the god Ninib, son
     of Bel, his lord, has Kurigalzu, pontifex of Bel, presented
     this.' The problem was at last solved."




