CHAPTER III

PHANTASMS OF THE LIVING


We have seen that the hypnotic agent is able to project from his own
brain certain thoughts and images into the mind of the percipient.
"When," writes Professor Barrett, "the subject was in the state of
trance or profound hypnotism, I noticed that not only sensations, but
also ideas or emotions, occurring in the operator appeared to be
reproduced in the subject without the intervention of any sign, or
visible or audible communication.... In many other ways I convinced
myself that the existence of a distinct idea in my own mind gave rise to
some image of the idea in the subject's mind, not always a clear image,
but one that could not fail to be recognised as a more or less distorted
reflection of my own thought. The important point is that every care was
taken to prevent any unconscious muscular action of the face, or
otherwise giving any indication to the subject."

This presumed mode of communication between one individual and another,
without the intervention of any known sense, Professor Barrett, arguing
on electrical analogies, is inclined to suggest might be due to some
form of nervous induction. But is this faculty restricted in its
operation to a hypnotised subject? If it were, the significance of the
phenomena would be very much lessened. We should leave telepathy out of
our account. But it is not so restricted. The ideas and images are
capable of being projected not only to a hypnotised person, but to one
who is apparently not under any hypnotic influence whatever. Yet we
still must be careful of how we call in the aid of any "supernatural"
agency to account for the influences I am about to relate--the
translation of ideas and motor impulses from one person to another
without the aid of any known sense. The transference of pictures which
we described in the last article has been achieved in hundreds of cases
by an agent upon a hypnotised percipient. Here we have telepathy
apparently at work, but not, however, at any great distance, nor
successful in conjuring up really vivid or ominous hallucinations. The
scientific term for these is "sensory automatisms," and many instances
of these are given by Edmund Gurney, author of "Phantasms of the
Living."

At an early period the Society for Psychical Research began a "Census of
Hallucinations," which, with Gurney's book, now renders it possible for
us to consider these phenomena with some certainty. The net result of
all this investigation would seem to demonstrate that a large number of
sensory automatisms occur amongst sane and healthy persons. We will
later consider what difficulty lies in the way of attributing to
telepathy the bulk of these phenomena. There is a widely accepted theory
that telepathy is propagated by brain-waves, or, in Sir W. Crooke's
phraseology, by ether-waves, of even smaller amplitude and greater
frequency than those which carry X-rays. Such waves are supposed to pass
from one brain to another, arousing in the second brain an excitation
of image similar to the excitation or image from which they start in the
first place. It has been pointed out that on this view there is no
theoretical reason for limiting telepathy to human beings. Why may not
the impulse pass between men and the lower animals, or between the lower
animals themselves?

I myself have exhumed from the records a case in point. General J. C.
Thompson describes a remarkable apparition of a dog, with every mark of
reality, at the time when the dog was killed in a city more than a
hundred miles distant. General Thompson says:

     "Jim, the dog whose ghost I refer to, was a beautiful collie,
     the pet of my family, residing at Cheyenne, Wyoming. His
     affectionate nature surpassed even that of his kind. He had a
     wide celebrity in the city as 'the laughing dog,' due to the
     fact that he manifested his recognition of acquaintances and
     love for his friends by a joyful laugh, as distinctively such
     as that of any human being.

     "One evening in the fall of 1905, about 7.30 P.M., I was
     walking with a friend on Seventeenth Street in Denver,
     Colorado. As we approached the entrance to the First National
     Bank, we observed a dog lying in the middle of the pavement,
     and on coming up to him I was amazed at his perfect likeness to
     Jim in Cheyenne. The identity was greatly fortified by his
     loving recognition of me, and the peculiar laugh of Jim's
     accompanying it. I said to my friend that nothing but the 105
     miles between Denver and Cheyenne would keep me from making
     oath to the dog being Jim, whose peculiarities I explained to
     him.

     "The dog astral or ghost was apparently badly hurt--he could
     not rise. After petting him and giving him a kind adieu, we
     crossed over Stout Street and stopped to look at him again. He
     had vanished. The next morning's mail brought a letter from my
     wife saying that Jim had been accidentally killed the evening
     before at 7.30 P.M. I shall always believe it was Jim's ghost I
     saw."

This story, circumstantially narrated by an American general, recalls Mr
Rider Haggard's celebrated dream that he saw his dog, Bob, in a dying
condition, probably about three hours after the dog's death.

But we need not pause on such bypaths as these.

Perhaps the simplest form of thought-transference at a distance is that
in which we find a vague mental unrest, unaccompanied by any visual or
auditory hallucination. Cases are not infrequently met with where the
patient suffers from acute depression and anxiety which are not
connected at the time with any definite event. _The Journal of the
Society for Psychical Research_, July, 1895, yields the following.

Miss W. writes:

     "On January 17th of this year (1895) I was haunted all day with
     an indefinable dread, amounting to positive terror if I yielded
     in the least to its influence. A little before six o'clock I
     went to my maid's room and casually inquired of her whether
     she believed in presentiments. She answered: 'Don't let them
     get hold of you; it is a bad habit.' I replied: 'This is no
     ordinary presentiment. All day long I have felt that something
     terrible is impending; of what nature I do not know. I have
     fought against it, but to no purpose. It is a terror I am
     positively _possessed_ with.' I was proceeding to describe it
     in fuller detail, when my mother entered the room with a
     telegram in her hand. One glance at her face told me that my
     foreboding had not been a groundless depression. The telegram
     was to the effect that my brother had been taken very ill at
     Cambridge and needed my mother at once to nurse him.

     "I presume that the intensity of my foreboding was due to the
     very serious nature of his illness.

     "I experienced at different times what are in common parlance
     termed 'presentiments'; but only on one other occasion has the
     same peculiar _terror_ (a chilling conviction of impending
     trouble) beset me."

This is corroborated both by the maid and Miss W.'s brother, an
undergraduate at King's College, Cambridge, who had met with a serious
accident the same afternoon. The affection between brother and sister
was, it is related, very close.

Of a well-known type of case the following is a good example. The Hon.
Mrs Fox Powys is the narrator:--

     "July 1882.

     "I was expecting my husband home, and shortly after the time he
     ought to have arrived (about ten P.M.) I heard a cab drive up
     to the door, the bell ring, my husband's voice talking with the
     cabman, the front door open and his step come up the stairs. I
     went to the drawing-room, opened it, and to my astonishment saw
     no one. I could hardly believe he was not there, the whole
     thing was so vivid, and the street was particularly quiet at
     the time. About twenty minutes or so after this my husband
     _really_ arrived, though nothing sounded to me more real than
     it did the first time. The train was late, and he had been
     thinking I might be anxious."

In response to further inquiries, Mrs Powys added:

     "To me the whole thing was very noisy and real, but no one else
     can have heard anything, for the bell I heard ring was not
     answered. It was a quiet street in town, and there was no
     vehicle of any kind passing at the time; and on finding no one
     on the landing as I expected, I went at once to the window, and
     there was nothing to be seen, and no sound to be heard, which
     would have been the case had the cab been driven off."

Here the expectation of Mr Fox Powys' arrival seems to have caused an
auditory hallucination. In other cases of a similar nature the
hallucination is visual, the percipient actually seeing the figure of
the expected person.

The authors of "Phantasms of the Living" give the following case as an
"interesting puzzle" and invite the reader to decide whether or not it
affords evidence for telepathy. The narrator, Mr W. A. S., is described
as an unexceptionable witness who has never had any other visual
hallucination.

     "January 14th, 1883.

     "In the month of April 1871, about two o'clock in the
     afternoon, I was sitting in the drawing-room of my father's
     house in Pall Mall. The window of the room fronted south; and
     the sun was shining brightly in at the window. I was sitting
     between the fireplace and the window, with my back to the
     light; my niece was sitting on the opposite side of the
     fireplace; and opposite me at the farther corner of the room
     was a door partly open, leading directly to the staircase. I
     saw what I supposed at the first moment to be dirty soapy water
     running in at the door; and I was in the act of jumping up to
     scold the housemaid for upsetting the water, when I saw that
     the supposed water was the tail or train of a lady's dress. The
     lady glided in backwards, as if she had been slid in on a
     slide, each part of her dress keeping its place without
     disturbance. She glided in till I could see the whole of her,
     _except the tip of her nose, her lips and the tip of her chin,
     which were hidden by the edge of the door_. Her head was
     slightly turned over her shoulder, and her eye also turned, so
     that it appeared fixed upon me. She held her arm, which was a
     very fine one, in a peculiar way, as if she were proud of it.
     She was dressed in a pale blue evening dress, worked with white
     lace. I instantly recognised the figure as that of a lady whom
     I had known some twenty-five years or more before; and with
     whom I had frequently danced. She was a bright, dashing girl, a
     good dancer, and we were good friends, but nothing more. She
     had afterwards married and I had occasionally heard of her, but
     do not think I had seen her for certainly more than twenty or
     twenty-five years. She looked much as I used to see her--with
     long curls and bright eyes, but perhaps something stouter and
     more matronly.

     "I said to myself: 'This is one of those strange apparitions I
     have often heard of. I will watch it as carefully as I can.' My
     niece, who did not see the figure, in the course of a minute or
     two exclaimed: 'Uncle A., what is the matter with you? You
     look as if you saw a ghost!' I motioned her to be quiet, as I
     wished to observe the thing carefully; and an impression came
     upon me that if I moved, the thing would disappear. I tried to
     find out whether there was anything in the ornaments on the
     walls, or anything else which could suggest the figure; but I
     found that all the lines close to her cut the outline of her
     figure at all sorts of angles, and none of these coincided with
     the outline of her figure, and the colour of everything around
     her strongly contrasted with her colour. In the course of a few
     minutes, I heard the door bell ring, and I heard my brother's
     voice in the hall. He came upstairs and walked right through
     the figure into the room. The figure then began to fade away
     rather quickly; and though I tried I could in no way recall it.

     "I frequently told the story in society, treating it always as
     something internal rather than external and supposing that the
     lady was still alive; and rather making a joke of it than
     otherwise. Some years afterwards I was staying with some
     friends in Suffolk and told the story at the dinner-table,
     saying that it was no ghost as the lady was still alive. The
     lady of the house said: 'She is not alive, as you suppose, but
     she has been dead some years.' We looked at the peerage and
     found she had died in 1871. (I afterwards found out that she
     had died in November, whereas the apparition was in April.) The
     conversation continued about her, and I said: 'Poor thing, I am
     sorry she is dead. I have had many a merry dance with her. What
     did she die of?' The lady of the house said: 'Poor thing
     indeed, she died a wretched death; she died of cancer in the
     face.' She never showed me the front of her face; it was always
     concealed by the edge of the door."

I will now concern myself with the power of an agent to project himself
phantasmally--that is, to make his form and features manifest to some
percipient at a distance as though he were actually present. In Gurney's
"Phantasms of the Living" is given at length a case of a simple nature.
Here there was not one but two percipients.

     On a certain Sunday evening in November 1881, having been
     reading of the great power which the human will is capable of
     exercising, I determined with the whole force of my being that
     I would be present in spirit in the front bedroom on the second
     floor of a house situated at 22 Hogarth Road, Kensington, in
     which room slept two ladies of my acquaintance--viz. Miss L. S.
     V., and Miss E. C. V., aged respectively twenty-five and eleven
     years. I was living at this time at 23 Kildare Gardens, a
     distance of about three miles from Hogarth Road, and I had not
     mentioned in any way my intention of trying this experiment to
     either of the above ladies, for the simple reason that it was
     only on retiring to rest upon this Sunday night that I made up
     my mind to do so. The time at which I determined I would be
     there was one o'clock in the morning, and I also had a strong
     intention of making my presence perceptible.

     "On the following Thursday I went to see the ladies in
     question, and in the course of conversation (without any
     allusion to the subject on my part) the elder one told me that
     on the previous Sunday night she had been much terrified by
     perceiving me standing by her bedside, and that she screamed
     when the apparition advanced towards her, and awoke her little
     sister, who saw me also.

     "I asked her if she was awake at the time, and she replied most
     decidedly in the affirmative, and upon my inquiring the time of
     the occurrence she replied about one o'clock in the morning.

     "This lady, at my request, wrote down a statement of the event
     and signed it.

     "This was the first occasion upon which I tried an experiment
     of this kind, and its complete success startled me very much.

     "Besides exercising my power of volition very strongly, I put
     forth an effort which I cannot find words to describe. I was
     conscious of a mysterious influence of some sort permeating in
     my body, and had a distinct impression that I was exercising
     some force with which I had been hitherto unacquainted, but
     which I can now at certain times set in motion at will.

     "S. H. B."

The account given by Miss Verity is as follows:--

     "January 18th, 1883.

     "On a certain Sunday evening, about twelve months since, at our
     house in Hogarth Road, Kensington, I distinctly saw Mr B. in my
     room, about one o'clock. I was perfectly awake and was much
     terrified. I awoke my sister by screaming, and she saw the
     apparition herself. Three days after, when I saw Mr B., I told
     him what had happened; but it was some time before I could
     recover from the shock I had received, and the remembrance is
     too vivid to be ever erased from my memory.

     "L. S. Verity."

Miss E. C. Verity says:

     "I remember the occurrence of the event described by my sister
     in the annexed paragraph, and her description is quite correct.
     I saw the apparition which she saw, at the same time and under
     the same circumstances.

     "E. C. Verity."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "The witnesses (comments Gurney) have been very carefully
     cross-examined by the present writer. There is not the
     slightest doubt that their mention of the occurrence to S. H.
     B. was spontaneous. They had not at first intended to mention
     it; but when they saw him their sense of its oddness overcame
     their resolution. Miss Verity is a perfectly sober-minded and
     sensible witness, with no love of marvels, and with a
     considerable dread and dislike of this particular form of
     marvel."

On another occasion the agent announced privately to the investigator
that he would project himself at a stated time. He did so; and the lady
wrote as follows:--

     "44 Norland Square, W.

     "On Saturday night, March 22nd, 1884, at about midnight, I had
     a distinct impression that Mr S. H. B. was present in my room,
     and I distinctly saw him whilst I was quite widely awake. He
     came towards me, and stroked my hair. I _voluntarily_ gave him
     this information when he called to see me on Wednesday, April
     2nd, telling him the time and the circumstances of the
     apparition, without any suggestion on his part. The appearance
     in my room was most vivid and quite unmistakable.

     "L. S. Verity."

Mr B.'s own account runs thus:

     "On Saturday, March 22nd, I determined to make my presence
     perceptible to Miss V., at 44 Norland Square, Notting Hill, at
     twelve midnight, and as I had previously arranged with Mr
     Gurney that I should post him a letter on the evening on which
     I tried my next experiment (stating the time and other
     particulars), I sent a note to acquaint him with the above
     facts.

     "About ten days afterwards I called upon Miss V., and she
     voluntarily told me that on March 22nd, at twelve o'clock
     midnight, she had seen me so vividly in her room (whilst
     widely awake) that her nerves had been much shaken, and she had
     been obliged to send for a doctor in the morning.

     "S. H. B."

Another case of a similar nature is reported by the American branch of
the Society for Psychical Research:

     "On July 5th, 1887, I left my house in Lakewood to go to New
     York to spend a few days. My wife was not feeling well when I
     left, and after I had started I looked back and saw her
     standing in the door looking disconsolate and sad at my
     leaving. The picture haunted me all day, and at night, before I
     went to bed, I thought I would try to find out, if possible,
     her condition. I had undressed, and was sitting on the edge of
     the bed, when I covered my face with my hands and willed myself
     in Lakewood at home to see if I could see her. After a little
     while I seemed to be standing in her room before the bed, and
     saw her lying there looking much better. I felt satisfied she
     was better, and so spent the week more comfortably regarding
     her condition. On Saturday I went home. When she saw me she
     remarked: 'I don't know whether I am glad to see you or not,
     for I thought something had happened to you. I saw you standing
     in front of the bed the night (about 8.30 or before 9) you
     left, and as plain as could be, and I have been worrying myself
     about you ever since. I sent to the office and to the depot
     daily to get some message from you.' After explaining my effort
     to find out her condition, everything became plain to her. She
     had seen me when I was trying to see her and find out her
     condition. I thought at the time I was going to see her and
     make her see me.

     "B. F. Sinclair."

The foregoing is corroborated by Mrs Sinclair. She states that she saw
her husband, not as he was dressed at the moment of the experiment, but
"in a suit that hung in a closet at home." The apparition caused her
great anxiety, so that her husband's view of her improved appearance was
not really true. The son, Mr George Sinclair, avers that in his
mother's vision his father's face was "drawn and set, as if he was
either dead or trying to accomplish something which was beyond him."

Another case investigated by the Society is also striking. The date is
1896.

     "'One night, two or three years ago, I came back from the
     theatre to my mother's flat at 6 S---- Street; and after I had
     been into her bedroom and told her all about it, I went to bed
     about one A.M. I had not been asleep long when I started up
     frightened, fancying that I had heard someone walk down the
     passage towards my mother's room; but, hearing nothing more,
     went to sleep again. I started up alarmed in the same way three
     or four times before dawn.

     "'In the morning, upon inquiry, my mother (who was ill at the
     time) only told me that she had had a very disturbed night.

     "'Then I asked my brother, who told me that he had suffered in
     the same way as I had, starting up several times in a
     frightened manner. On hearing this my mother then told me that
     she had seen an apparition of Mr Pelham. Later in the day Mr
     Pelham came in, and my mother asked him casually if he had been
     doing anything last night; upon which he told us that he had
     come to bed willing that he should visit and appear to us. We
     made him promise not to repeat the experiment.'

     "Mrs E., the mother, states that she was recovering from
     influenza at the time. At half-past ten, as she lay reading:

     "'A strange, creepy sensation came over me, and I felt my eyes
     were drawn towards the left-hand side of the room. I felt I
     must look, and there, distinct against the curtain, was a blue
     luminous mist.

     "'This time I was impelled to cast my eyes downward to the side
     of my bed, and there, creeping upwards towards me, was the same
     blue luminous mist. I was too terrified to move, and remember
     keeping the book straight up before my face, as though to ward
     off a blow, at the same time exerting all my strength of will
     and determination not to be afraid--when, suddenly, as if with
     a jerk, above the top of my book came the brow and eyes of Mr
     Pelham.'

     "Instantly her fears ceased. She 'remembered that Mr Pelham had
     experimented on her before at night'; and 'in one moment mist
     and face were gone.'

     "For his part, Mr Pelham explains that he 'carefully imagined'
     himself going down the steps of his house, and so along the
     streets, to Mrs E.'s flat, and to her drawing-room and bedroom;
     he then went to bed with his mind fixed on the visit and soon
     fell asleep. He has made other trials, but without any positive
     success, though during one of them Mrs E. was wakened suddenly
     by the feeling that someone was in the room, and it occurred to
     her that Mr Pelham was again experimenting."

The occurrences above related are most significant, if true, and I am
bound to say the _bona fides_ of the narrators seems to me indisputable.
Is it a spirit showing itself partially dissociated from the living
organism; evincing independence, a certain intelligence and a certain
permanence? Or is this a mere image of the agent, conceived in his own
brain and projected telepathically to the brain of the percipient? So
far, we are merely groping our way. Yet, is it not possible that we have
laid hands upon a credible explanation of the eternal mystery of
"ghosts"? We shall see.




