PART II.

_HUME'S PHILOSOPHY._




CHAPTER I.

THE OBJECT AND SCOPE OF PHILOSOPHY.


Kant has said that the business of philosophy is to answer three
questions: What can I know? What ought I to do? and For what may I hope?
But it is pretty plain that these three resolve themselves, in the long
run, into the first. For rational expectation and moral action are alike
based upon beliefs; and a belief is void of justification, unless its
subject-matter lies within the boundaries of possible knowledge, and
unless its evidence satisfies the conditions which experience imposes as
the guarantee of credibility.

Fundamentally, then, philosophy is the answer to the question, What can
I know? and it is by applying itself to this problem, that philosophy is
properly distinguished as a special department of scientific research.
What is commonly called science, whether mathematical, physical, or
biological, consists of the answers which mankind have been able to
give to the inquiry, What do I know? They furnish us with the results of
the mental operations which constitute thinking; while philosophy, in
the stricter sense of the term, inquires into the foundation of the
first principles which those operations assume or imply.

But though, by reason of the special purpose of philosophy, its
distinctness from other branches of scientific investigation may be
properly vindicated, it is easy to see that, from the nature of its
subject-matter, it is intimately and, indeed, inseparably connected with
one branch of science. For it is obviously impossible to answer the
question, What can we know? unless, in the first place, there is a clear
understanding as to what is meant by knowledge; and, having settled this
point, the next step is to inquire how we come by that which we allow to
be knowledge; for, upon the reply, turns the answer to the further
question, whether, from the nature of the case, there are limits to the
knowable or not. While, finally, inasmuch as What can I know? not only
refers to knowledge of the past or of the present, but to the confident
expectation which we call knowledge of the future; it is necessary to
ask, further, what justification can be alleged for trusting to the
guidance of our expectations in practical conduct.

It surely needs no argumentation to show, that the first problem cannot
be approached without the examination of the contents of the mind; and
the determination of how much of these contents may be called knowledge.
Nor can the second problem be dealt with in any other fashion; for it is
only by the observation of the growth of knowledge that we can
rationally hope to discover how knowledge grows. But the solution of
the third problem simply involves the discussion of the data obtained
by the investigation of the foregoing two.

Thus, in order to answer three out of the four subordinate questions
into which What can I know? breaks up, we must have recourse to that
investigation of mental phenomena, the results of which are embodied in
the science of psychology.

Psychology is a part of the science of life or biology, which differs
from the other branches of that science, merely in so far as it deals
with the psychical, instead of the physical, phenomena of life.

As there is an anatomy of the body, so there is an anatomy of the mind;
the psychologist dissects mental phenomena into elementary states of
consciousness, as the anatomist resolves limbs into tissues, and tissues
into cells. The one traces the development of complex organs from simple
rudiments; the other follows the building up of complex conceptions out
of simpler constituents of thought. As the physiologist inquires into
the way in which the so-called "functions" of the body are performed, so
the psychologist studies the so-called "faculties" of the mind. Even a
cursory attention to the ways and works of the lower animals suggests a
comparative anatomy and physiology of the mind; and the doctrine of
evolution presses for application as much in the one field as in the
other.

But there is more than a parallel, there is a close and intimate
connexion between psychology and physiology. No one doubts that, at any
rate, some mental states are dependent for their existence on the
performance of the functions of particular bodily organs. There is no
seeing without eyes, and no hearing without ears. If the origin of the
contents of the mind is truly a philosophical problem, then the
philosopher who attempts to deal with that problem, without acquainting
himself with the physiology of sensation, has no more intelligent
conception of his business than the physiologist, who thinks he can
discuss locomotion, without an acquaintance with the principles of
mechanics; or respiration, without some tincture of chemistry.

On whatever ground we term physiology, science, psychology is entitled
to the same appellation; and the method of investigation which
elucidates the true relations of the one set of phenomena will discover
those of the other. Hence, as philosophy is, in great measure, the
exponent of the logical consequences of certain data established by
psychology; and as psychology itself differs from physical science only
in the nature of its subject-matter, and not in its method of
investigation, it would seem to be an obvious conclusion, that
philosophers are likely to be successful in their inquiries, in
proportion as they are familiar with the application of scientific
method to less abstruse subjects; just as it seems to require no
elaborate demonstration, that an astronomer, who wishes to comprehend
the solar system, would do well to acquire a preliminary acquaintance
with the elements of physics. And it is accordant with this presumption,
that the men who have made the most important positive additions to
philosophy, such as Descartes, Spinoza, and Kant, not to mention more
recent examples, have been deeply imbued with the spirit of physical
science; and, in some cases, such as those of Descartes and Kant, have
been largely acquainted with its details. On the other hand, the founder
of Positivism no less admirably illustrates the connexion of scientific
incapacity with philosophical incompetence. In truth, the laboratory is
the fore-court of the temple of philosophy; and whoso has not offered
sacrifices and undergone purification there, has little chance of
admission into the sanctuary.

Obvious as these considerations may appear to be, it would be wrong to
ignore the fact that their force is by no means universally admitted. On
the contrary, the necessity for a proper psychological and physiological
training to the student of philosophy is denied, on the one hand, by the
"pure metaphysicians," who attempt to base the theory of knowing upon
supposed necessary and universal truths, and assert that scientific
observation is impossible unless such truths are already known or
implied: which, to those who are not "pure metaphysicians," seems very
much as if one should say that the fall of a stone cannot be observed,
unless the law of gravitation is already in the mind of the observer.

On the other hand, the Positivists, so far as they accept the teachings
of their master, roundly assert, at any rate in words, that observation
of the mind is a thing inherently impossible in itself, and that
psychology is a chimera--a phantasm generated by the fermentation of the
dregs of theology. Nevertheless, if M. Comte had been asked what he
meant by "physiologic cerebrale," except that which other people call
"psychology;" and how he knew anything about the functions of the brain,
except by that very "observation interieure," which he declares to be an
absurdity--it seems probable that he would have found it hard to escape
the admission, that, in vilipending psychology, he had been propounding
solemn nonsense.

It is assuredly one of Hume's greatest merits that he clearly recognised
the fact that philosophy is based upon psychology; and that the inquiry
into the contents and the operations of the mind must be conducted upon
the same principles as a physical investigation, if what he calls the
"moral philosopher" would attain results of as firm and definite a
character as those which reward the "natural philosopher."[14] The title
of his first work, a "_Treatise of Human Nature, being an Attempt to
introduce the Experimental method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects_,"
sufficiently indicates the point of view from which Hume regarded
philosophical problems; and he tells us in the preface, that his object
has been to promote the construction of a "science of man."

     "'Tis evident that all the sciences have a relation, greater or
     less, to human nature; and that, however wide any of them may seem
     to run from it, they still return back by one passage or another.
     Even _Mathematics_, _Natural Philosophy_, and _Natural Religion_
     are in some measure dependent on the science of MAN; since they lie
     under the cognizance of men, and are judged of by their powers and
     qualities. 'Tis impossible to tell what changes and improvements we
     might make in these sciences were we thoroughly acquainted with the
     extent and force of human understanding, and could explain the
     nature of the ideas we employ and of the operations we perform in
     our reasonings.... To me it seems evident that the essence of mind
     being equally unknown to us with that of external bodies, it must
     be equally impossible to form any notion of its powers and
     qualities otherwise than from careful and exact experiments, and
     the observation of those particular effects which result from its
     different circumstances and situations. And though we must
     endeavour to render all our principles as universal as possible, by
     tracing up our experiments to the utmost, and explaining all
     effects from the simplest and fewest causes, 'tis still certain we
     cannot go beyond experience; and any hypothesis that pretends to
     discover the ultimate original qualities of human nature, ought at
     first to be rejected as presumptuous and chimerical....

     "But if this impossibility of explaining ultimate principles should
     be esteemed a defect in the science of man, I will venture to
     affirm, that it is a defect common to it with all the sciences, and
     all the arts, in which we can employ ourselves, whether they be
     such as are cultivated in the schools of the philosophers, or
     practised in the shops of the meanest artisans. None of them can go
     beyond experience, or establish any principles which are not
     founded on that authority. Moral philosophy has, indeed, this
     peculiar disadvantage, which is not found in natural, that in
     collecting its experiments, it cannot make them purposely, with
     premeditation, and after such a manner as to satisfy itself
     concerning every particular difficulty which may arise. When I am
     at a loss to know the effects of one body upon another in any
     situation, I need only put them in that situation, and observe what
     results from it. But should I endeavour to clear up in the same
     manner any[15] doubt in moral philosophy, by placing myself in the
     same case with that which I consider, 'tis evident this reflection
     and premeditation would so disturb the operation of my natural
     principles, as must render it impossible to form any just
     conclusion from the phenomenon. We must, therefore, glean up our
     experiments in this science from a cautious observation of human
     life, and take them as they appear in the common course of the
     world, by men's behaviour in company, in affairs, and in their
     pleasures. Where experiments of this kind are judiciously collected
     and compared, we may hope to establish on them a science which
     will not be inferior in certainty, and will be much superior in
     utility, to any other of human comprehension."--(I. pp. 7-11.)

All science starts with hypotheses--in other words, with assumptions
that are unproved, while they may be, and often are, erroneous; but
which are better than nothing to the seeker after order in the maze of
phenomena. And the historical progress of every science depends on the
criticism of hypotheses--on the gradual stripping off, that is, of their
untrue or superfluous parts--until there remains only that exact verbal
expression of as much as we know of the fact, and no more, which
constitutes a perfect scientific theory.

Philosophy has followed the same course as other branches of scientific
investigation. The memorable service rendered to the cause of sound
thinking by Descartes consisted in this: that he laid the foundation of
modern philosophical criticism by his inquiry into the nature of
certainty. It is a clear result of the investigation started by
Descartes, that there is one thing of which no doubt can be entertained,
for he who should pretend to doubt it would thereby prove its existence;
and that is the momentary consciousness we call a present thought or
feeling; that is safe, even if all other kinds of certainty are merely
more or less probable inferences. Berkeley and Locke, each in his way,
applied philosophical criticism in other directions; but they always, at
any rate professedly, followed the Cartesian maxim of admitting no
propositions to be true but such as are clear, distinct, and evident,
even while their arguments stripped off many a layer of hypothetical
assumption which their great predecessor had left untouched. No one has
more clearly stated the aims of the critical philosopher than Locke, in
a passage of the famous _Essay concerning Human Understanding_, which,
perhaps, I ought to assume to be well known to all English readers, but
which so probably is unknown to this full-crammed and much examined
generation that I venture to cite it:

     "If by this inquiry into the nature of the understanding I can
     discover the powers thereof, how far they reach, to what things
     they are in any degree proportionate, and where they fail us, I
     suppose it may be of use to prevail with the busy mind of man to be
     more cautious in meddling with things exceeding its comprehension:
     to stop when it is at the utmost extent of its tether; and to sit
     down in quiet ignorance of those things which, upon examination,
     are proved to be beyond the reach of our capacities. We should not
     then, perhaps, be so forward, out of an affectation of universal
     knowledge, to raise questions and perplex ourselves and others with
     disputes about things to which our understandings are not suited,
     and of which we cannot frame in our minds any clear and distinct
     perception, or whereof (as it has, perhaps, too often happened) we
     have not any notion at all.... Men may find matter sufficient to
     busy their heads and employ their hands with variety, delight, and
     satisfaction, if they will not boldly quarrel with their own
     constitution and throw away the blessings their hands are filled
     with because they are not big enough to grasp everything. We shall
     not have much reason to complain of the narrowness of our minds, if
     we will but employ them about what may be of use to us: for of that
     they are very capable: and it will be an unpardonable, as well as a
     childish peevishness, if we under-value the advantages of our
     knowledge, and neglect to improve it to the ends for which it was
     given us, because there are some things that are set out of the
     reach of it. It will be no excuse to an idle and untoward servant
     who would not attend to his business by candlelight, to plead that
     he had not broad sunshine. The candle that is set up in us shines
     bright enough for all our purposes.... Our business here is not to
     know all things, but those which concern our conduct."[16]

Hume develops the same fundamental conception in a somewhat different
way, and with a more definite indication of the practical benefits which
may be expected from a critical philosophy. The first and second parts
of the twelfth section of the _Inquiry_ are devoted to a condemnation of
excessive scepticism, or Pyrrhonism, with which Hume couples a
caricature of the Cartesian doubt; but, in the third part, a certain
"mitigated scepticism" is recommended and adopted, under the title of
"academical philosophy." After pointing out that a knowledge of the
infirmities of the human understanding, even in its most perfect state,
and when most accurate and cautious in its determinations, is the best
check upon the tendency to dogmatism, Hume continues:--

     "Another species of _mitigated_ scepticism, which may be of
     advantage to mankind, and which maybe the natural result of the
     PYRRHONIAN doubts and scruples, is the limitation of our inquiries
     to such subjects as are best adapted to the narrow capacity of
     human understanding. The _imagination_ of man is naturally sublime,
     delighted with whatever is remote and extraordinary, and running,
     without control, into the most distant parts of space and time in
     order to avoid the objects which custom has rendered too familiar
     to it. A correct _judgment_ observes a contrary method, and,
     avoiding all distant and high inquiries, confines itself to common
     life, and to such subjects as fall under daily practice and
     experience; leaving the more sublime topics to the embellishment of
     poets and orators, or to the arts of priests and politicians. To
     bring us to so salutary a determination, nothing can be more
     serviceable than to be once thoroughly convinced of the force of
     the PYRRHONIAN doubt, and of the impossibility that anything but
     the strong power of natural instinct could free us from it. Those
     who have a propensity to philosophy will still continue their
     researches; because they reflect, that, besides the immediate
     pleasure attending such an occupation, philosophical decisions are
     nothing but the reflections of common life, methodised and
     corrected. But they will never be tempted to go beyond common life,
     so long as they consider the imperfection of those faculties which
     they employ, their narrow reach, and their inaccurate operations.
     While we cannot give a satisfactory reason why we believe, after a
     thousand experiments, that a stone will fall or fire burn; can we
     ever satisfy ourselves concerning any determination which we may
     form with regard to the origin of worlds and the situation of
     nature from and to eternity?"--(IV. pp. 189--90.)

But further, it is the business of criticism not only to keep watch over
the vagaries of philosophy, but to do the duty of police in the whole
world of thought. Wherever it espies sophistry or superstition they are
to be bidden to stand; nay, they are to be followed to their very dens
and there apprehended and exterminated, as Othello smothered Desdemona,
"else she'll betray more men."

Hume warms into eloquence as he sets forth the labours meet for the
strength and the courage of the Hercules of "mitigated scepticism."

     "Here, indeed, lies the justest and most plausible objection
     against a considerable part of metaphysics, that they are not
     properly a science, but arise either from the fruitless efforts of
     human vanity, which would penetrate into subjects utterly
     inaccessible to the understanding, or from the craft of popular
     superstitions, which, being unable to defend themselves on fair
     ground, raise these entangling brambles to cover and protect their
     weakness. Chased from the open country, these robbers fly into the
     forest, and lie in wait to break in upon every unguarded avenue of
     the mind and overwhelm it with religious fears and prejudices. The
     stoutest antagonist, if he remits his watch a moment, is oppressed;
     and many, through cowardice and folly, open the gates to the
     enemies, and willingly receive them with reverence and submission
     as their legal sovereigns.

     "But is this a sufficient reason why philosophers should desist
     from such researches and leave superstition still in possession of
     her retreat? Is it not proper to draw an opposite conclusion, and
     perceive the necessity of carrying the war into the most secret
     recesses of the enemy?... The only method of freeing learning at
     once from these abstruse questions, is to inquire seriously into
     the nature of human understanding, and show, from an exact analysis
     of its powers and capacity, that it is by no means fitted for such
     remote and abstruse subjects. We must submit to this fatigue, in
     order to live at ease ever after; and must cultivate true
     metaphysics with some care, in order to destroy the false and
     adulterated."--(IV. pp. 10, 11.)

Near a century and a half has elapsed since these brave words were
shaped by David Hume's pen; and the business of carrying the war into
the enemy's camp has gone on but slowly. Like other campaigns, it long
languished for want of a good base of operations. But since physical
science, in the course of the last fifty years, has brought to the front
an inexhaustible supply of heavy artillery of a new pattern, warranted
to drive solid bolts of fact through the thickest skulls, things are
looking better; though hardly more than the first faint flutterings of
the dawn of the happy day, when superstition and false metaphysics shall
be no more and reasonable folks may "live at ease," are as yet
discernible by the _enfants perdus_ of the outposts.

If, in thus conceiving the object and the limitations of philosophy,
Hume shows himself the spiritual child and continuator of the work of
Locke, he appears no less plainly as the parent of Kant and as the
protagonist of that more modern way of thinking, which has been called
"agnosticism," from its profession of an incapacity to discover the
indispensable conditions of either positive or negative knowledge, in
many propositions, respecting which, not only the vulgar, but
philosophers of the more sanguine sort, revel in the luxury of
unqualified assurance.

The aim of the _Kritik der reinen Vernunft_ is essentially the same as
that of the _Treatise of Human Nature_, by which indeed Kant was led to
develop that "critical philosophy" with which his name and fame are
indissolubly bound up: and, if the details of Kant's criticism differ
from those of Hume, they coincide with them in their main result, which
is the limitation of all knowledge of reality to the world of phenomena
revealed to us by experience.

The philosopher of Koenigsberg epitomises the philosopher of Ninewells
when he thus sums up the uses of philosophy:--

     "The greatest and perhaps the sole use of all philosophy of pure
     reason is, after all, merely negative, since it serves, not as an
     organon for the enlargement [of knowledge], but as a discipline for
     its delimitation; and instead of discovering truth, has only the
     modest merit of preventing error."[17]

FOOTNOTES:

[14] In a letter to Hutcheson (September 17th, 1739) Hume
remarks:--"There are different ways of examining the mind as well as the
body. One may consider it either as an anatomist or as a painter: either
to discover its most secret springs and principles, or to describe the
grace and beauty of its actions;" and he proceeds to justify his own
mode of looking at the moral sentiments from the anatomist's point of
view.

[15] The manner in which Hume constantly refers to the results of the
observation of the contents and the processes of his own mind clearly
shows that he has here inadvertently overstated the case.

[16] Locke, _An Essay concerning Human Understanding_, Book I, chap. i,
Sec.Sec. 4, 5, 6.

[17] _Kritik der reinen Vernunft._ Ed. Hartenstein, p. 256.




