CHAPTER XI.

THE PRINCIPLES OF MORALS.


In his autobiography, Hume writes:--

     "In the same year [1752] was published at London my _Inquiry
     Concerning the Principles of Morals_; which in my own opinion (who
     ought not to judge on that subject) is of all my writings,
     historical, philosophical, and literary, incomparably the best. It
     came unnoticed and unobserved into the world."

It may commonly be noticed that the relative value which an author
ascribes to his own works rarely agrees with the estimate formed of them
by his readers; who criticise the products, without either the power or
the wish to take into account the pains which they may have cost the
producer. Moreover, the clear and dispassionate common sense of the
_Inquiry concerning the Principles of Morals_ may have tasted flat after
the highly-seasoned _Inquiry concerning the Human Understanding_.
Whether the public like to be deceived, or not, may be open to question;
but it is beyond a doubt that they love to be shocked in a pleasant and
mannerly way. Now Hume's speculations on moral questions are not so
remote from those of respectable professors, like Hutcheson, or saintly
prelates, such as Butler, as to present any striking novelty. And they
support the cause of righteousness in a cool, reasonable, indeed
slightly patronising fashion, eminently in harmony with the mind of the
eighteenth century; which admired virtue very much, if she would only
avoid the rigour which the age called fanaticism, and the fervour which
it called enthusiasm.

Having applied the ordinary methods of scientific inquiry to the
intellectual phenomena of the mind, it was natural that Hume should
extend the same mode of investigation to its moral phenomena; and, in
the true spirit of a natural philosopher, he commences by selecting a
group of those states of consciousness with which every one's personal
experience must have made him familiar: in the expectation that the
discovery of the sources of moral approbation and disapprobation, in
this comparatively easy case, may furnish the means of detecting them
where they are more recondite.

     "We shall analyse that complication of mental qualities which form
     what, in common life, we call PERSONAL MERIT: We shall consider
     every attribute of the mind, which renders a man an object either
     of esteem and affection, or of hatred and contempt; every habit or
     sentiment or faculty, which if ascribed to any person, implies
     either praise or blame, and may enter into any panegyric or satire
     of his character and manners. The quick sensibility which, on this
     head, is so universal among mankind, gives a philosopher sufficient
     assurance that he can never be considerably mistaken in framing the
     catalogue, or incurs any danger of misplacing the objects of his
     contemplation: He needs only enter into his own breast for a
     moment, and consider whether he should or should not desire to have
     this or that quality assigned to him, and whether such or such an
     imputation would proceed from a friend or an enemy. The very nature
     of language guides us almost infallibly in forming a judgment of
     this nature; and as every tongue possesses one set of words which
     are taken in a good sense, and another in the opposite, the least
     acquaintance with the idiom suffices, without any reasoning, to
     direct us in collecting and arranging the estimable or blamable
     qualities of men. The only object of reasoning is to discover the
     circumstances on both sides, which are common to these qualities;
     to observe that particular in which the estimable qualities agree
     on the one hand, and the blamable on the other, and thence to reach
     the foundation of ethics, and find their universal principles, from
     which all censure or approbation is ultimately derived. As this is
     a question of fact, not of abstract science, we can only expect
     success by following the experimental method, and deducing general
     maxims from a comparison of particular instances. The other
     scientifical method, where a general abstract principle is first
     established, and is afterwards branched out into a variety of
     inferences and conclusions, may be more perfect in itself, but
     suits less the imperfection of human nature, and is a common source
     of illusion and mistake, in this as well as in other subjects. Men
     are now cured of their passion for hypotheses and systems in
     natural philosophy, and will hearken to no arguments but those
     which are derived from experience. It is full time they should
     attempt a like reformation in all moral disquisitions; and reject
     every system of ethics, however subtile or ingenious, which is not
     founded on fact and observation."--(IV. pp. 242-4.)

No qualities give a man a greater claim to personal merit than
benevolence and justice; but if we inquire why benevolence deserves so
much praise, the answer will certainly contain a large reference to the
utility of that virtue to society; and as for justice, the very
existence of the virtue implies that of society; public utility is its
sole origin; and the measure of its usefulness is also the standard of
its merit. If every man possessed everything he wanted, and no one had
the power to interfere with such possession; or if no man desired that
which could damage his fellow-man, justice would have no part to play
in the universe. But as Hume observes:--

     "In the present disposition of the human heart, it would perhaps be
     difficult to find complete instances of such enlarged affections;
     but still we may observe that the case of families approaches
     towards it; and the stronger the mutual benevolence is among the
     individuals, the nearer it approaches, till all distinction of
     property be in a great measure lost and confounded among them.
     Between married persons, the cement of friendship is by the laws
     supposed so strong, as to abolish all division of possessions, and
     has often, in reality, the force assigned to it.[45] And it is
     observable that, during the ardour of new enthusiasms, when every
     principle is inflamed into extravagance, the community of goods has
     frequently been attempted; and nothing but experience of its
     inconveniences, from the returning or disguised selfishness of men,
     could make the imprudent fanatics adopt anew the ideas of justice
     and separate property. So true is it that this virtue derives its
     existence entirely from its necessary _use_ to the intercourse and
     social state of mankind."--(IV. p. 256.)

     "Were the human species so framed by nature as that each individual
     possessed within himself every faculty requisite both for his own
     preservation and for the propagation of his kind: Were all society
     and intercourse cut off between man and man by the primary
     intention of the Supreme Creator: It seems evident that so solitary
     a being would be as much incapable of justice as of social
     discourse and conversation. Where mutual regard and forbearance
     serve to no manner of purpose, they would never direct the conduct
     of any reasonable man. The headlong course of the passions would be
     checked by no reflection on future consequences. And as each man
     is here supposed to love himself alone, and to depend only on
     himself and his own activity for safety and happiness, he would, on
     every occasion, to the utmost of his power, challenge the
     preference above every other being, to none of which he is bound by
     any ties, either of nature or of interest.

     "But suppose the conjunction of the sexes to be established in
     nature, a family immediately arises; and particular rules being
     found requisite for its subsistence, these are immediately
     embraced, though without comprehending the rest of mankind within
     their prescriptions. Suppose that several families unite together
     in one society, which is totally disjoined from all others, the
     rules which preserve peace and order enlarge themselves to the
     utmost extent of that society; but becoming then entirely useless,
     lose their force when carried one step further. But again, suppose
     that several distinct societies maintain a kind of intercourse for
     mutual convenience and advantage, the boundaries of justice still
     grow larger, in proportion to the largeness of men's views and the
     force of their mutual connexion. History, experience, reason,
     sufficiently instruct us in this natural progress of human
     sentiments, and in the gradual enlargement of our regard to justice
     in proportion as we become acquainted with the extensive utility of
     that virtue."--(IV. pp. 262-4.)

The moral obligation of justice and the rights of property are by no
means diminished by this exposure of the purely utilitarian basis on
which they rest:--

     "For what stronger foundation can be desired or conceived for any
     duty, than to observe that human society, or even human nature,
     could not subsist without the establishment of it, and will still
     arrive at greater degrees of happiness and perfection, the more
     inviolable the regard is which is paid to that duty?

     "The dilemma seems obvious: As justice evidently tends to promote
     public utility, and to support civil society, the sentiment of
     justice is either derived from our reflecting on that tendency, or,
     like hunger, thirst, and other appetites, resentment, love of life,
     attachment to offspring, and other passions, arises from a simple
     original instinct in the human heart, which nature has implanted
     for like salutary purposes. If the latter be the case, it follows
     that property, which is the object of justice, is also
     distinguished by a simple original instinct, and is not ascertained
     by any argument or reflection. But who is there that ever heard of
     such an instinct? Or is this a subject in which new discoveries can
     be made? We may as well expect to discover in the body new senses
     which had before escaped the observation of all mankind."--(IV. pp.
     273, 4.)

The restriction of the object of justice to property, in this passage,
is singular. Pleasure and pain can hardly be included under the term
property, and yet justice surely deals largely with the withholding of
the former, or the infliction of the latter, by men on one another. If a
man bars another from a pleasure which he would otherwise enjoy, or
actively hurts him without good reason, the latter is said to be injured
as much as if his property had been interfered with. Here, indeed, it
may be readily shown, that it is as much the interest of society that
men should not interfere with one another's freedom, or mutually inflict
positive or negative pain, as that they should not meddle with one
another's property; and hence the obligation of justice in such matters
may be deduced. But, if a man merely thinks ill of another, or feels
maliciously towards him without due cause, he is properly said to be
unjust. In this case it would be hard to prove that any injury is done
to society by the evil thought; but there is no question that it will be
stigmatised as an injustice; and the offender himself, in another frame
of mind, is often ready enough to admit that he has failed to be just
towards his neighbour. However, it may plausibly be said, that so slight
a barrier lies between thought and speech, that any moral quality
attached to the latter is easily transferred to the former; and that,
since open slander is obviously opposed to the interests of society,
injustice of thought, which is silent slander, must become inextricably
associated with the same blame.

But, granting the utility to society of all kinds of benevolence and
justice, why should the quality of those virtues involve the sense of
moral obligation?

Hume answers this question in the fifth section, entitled, _Why Utility
Pleases_. He repudiates the deduction of moral approbation from
self-love, and utterly denies that we approve of benevolent or just
actions because we think of the benefits which they are likely to confer
indirectly on ourselves. The source of the approbation with which we
view an act useful to society must be sought elsewhere; and, in fact, is
to be found in that feeling which is called sympathy.

     "No man is absolutely indifferent to the happiness and misery of
     others. The first has a natural tendency to give pleasure, the
     second pain. This every one may find in himself. It is not probable
     that these principles can be resolved into principles more simple
     and universal, whatever attempts may have been made for that
     purpose."--(IV. p. 294, _Note_.)

Other men's joys and sorrows are not spectacles at which we remain
unmoved:--

     " ... The view of the former, whether in its causes or effects,
     like sunshine, or the prospect of well-cultivated plains (to carry
     our pretensions no higher) communicates a secret joy and
     satisfaction; the appearance of the latter, like a lowering cloud
     or barren landscape, throws a melancholy damp over the imagination.
     And this concession being once made, the difficulty is over; and a
     natural unforced interpretation of the phenomena of human life will
     afterwards, we hope, prevail among all speculative
     inquirers."--(IV. p. 320.)

The moral approbation, therefore, with which we regard acts of justice
or benevolence rests upon their utility to society, because the
perception of that utility or, in other words, of the pleasure which
they give to other men, arouses a feeling of sympathetic pleasure in
ourselves. The feeling of obligation to be just, or of the duty of
justice, arises out of that association of moral approbation or
disapprobation with one's own actions, which is what we call conscience.
To fail in justice, or in benevolence, is to be displeased with oneself.
But happiness is impossible without inward self-approval; and, hence,
every man who has any regard to his own happiness and welfare, will find
his best reward in the practice of every moral duty. On this topic Hume
expends much eloquence.

     "But what philosophical truths can be more advantageous to society
     than these here delivered, which represent virtue in all her
     genuine and most engaging charms, and make us approach her with
     ease, familiarity, and affection? The dismal dress falls off, with
     which many divines and some philosophers have covered her; and
     nothing appears but gentleness, humanity, beneficence, affability;
     nay, even at proper intervals, play, frolic, and gaiety. She talks
     not of useless austerities and rigours, suffering and self-denial.
     She declares that her sole purpose is to make her votaries, and all
     mankind, during every period of their existence, if possible,
     cheerful and happy; nor does she ever willingly part with any
     pleasure but in hopes of ample compensation in some other period of
     their lives. The sole trouble which she demands is that of just
     calculation, and a steady preference of the greater happiness. And
     if any austere pretenders approach her, enemies to joy and
     pleasure, she either rejects them as hypocrites and deceivers, or
     if she admit them in her train, they are ranked, however, among the
     least favoured of her votaries.

     "And, indeed, to drop all figurative expression, what hopes can we
     ever have of engaging mankind to a practice which we confess full
     of austerity and rigour? Or what theory of morals can ever serve
     any useful purpose, unless it can show, by a particular detail,
     that all the duties which it recommends are also the true interest
     of each individual? The peculiar advantage of the foregoing system
     seem to be, that it furnishes proper mediums for that
     purpose."--(IV. p. 360.)

In this paean to virtue, there is more of the dance measure than will
sound appropriate in the ears of most of the pilgrims who toil
painfully, not without many a stumble and many a bruise, along the rough
and steep roads which lead to the higher life.

Virtue is undoubtedly beneficent; but the man is to be envied to whom
her ways seem in anywise playful. And, though she may not talk much
about suffering and self-denial, her silence on that topic may be
accounted for on the principle _ca va sans dire_. The calculation of the
greatest happiness is not performed quite so easily as a rule of three
sum; while, in the hour of temptation, the question will crop up,
whether, as something has to be sacrificed, a bird in the hand is not
worth two in the bush; whether it may not be as well to give up the
problematical greater happiness in the future, for a certain great
happiness in the present, and


             "Buy the merry madness of one hour
     With the long irksomeness of following time."[46]


If mankind cannot be engaged in practices "full of austerity and
rigour," by the love of righteousness and the fear of evil, without
seeking for other compensation than that which flows from the
gratification of such love and the consciousness of escape from
debasement, they are in a bad case. For they will assuredly find that
virtue presents no very close likeness to the sportive leader of the
joyous hours in Hume's rosy picture; but that she is an awful Goddess,
whose ministers are the Furies, and whose highest reward is peace.

It is not improbable that Hume would have qualified all this as
enthusiasm or fanaticism, or both; but he virtually admits it:--

     "Now, as virtue is an end, and is desirable on its own account,
     without fee or reward, merely for the immediate satisfaction which
     it conveys, it is requisite that there should be some sentiment
     which it touches; some internal taste or feeling, or whatever you
     please to call it, which distinguishes moral good and evil, and
     which embraces the one and rejects the other.

     "Thus the distinct boundaries and offices of _reason_ and of
     _taste_ are easily ascertained. The former conveys the knowledge of
     truth and falsehood: The latter gives the sentiment of beauty and
     deformity, vice and virtue. The one discovers objects as they
     really stand in nature, without addition or diminution: The other
     has a productive faculty, and gilding and staining all natural
     objects with the colours borrowed from internal sentiment, raises
     in a manner a new creation. Reason being cool and disengaged, is no
     motive to action, and directs only the impulse received from
     appetite or inclination, by showing us the means of attaining
     happiness or avoiding misery. Taste, as it gives pleasure or pain,
     and thereby constitutes happiness or misery, becomes a motive to
     action, and is the first spring or impulse to desire and volition.
     From circumstances and relations known or supposed, the former
     leads us to the discovery of the concealed and unknown. After all
     circumstances and relations are laid before us, the latter makes us
     feel from the whole a new sentiment of blame or approbation. The
     standard of the one, being founded on the nature of things, is
     external and inflexible, even by the will of the Supreme Being: The
     standard of the other, arising from the internal frame and
     constitution of animals, is ultimately derived from the Supreme
     Will, which bestowed on each being its peculiar nature, and
     arranged the several classes and orders of existence."--(IV. pp.
     376-7.)

Hume has not discussed the theological theory of the obligations of
morality, but it is obviously in accordance with his view of the nature
of those obligations. Under its theological aspect, morality is
obedience to the will of God; and the ground for such obedience is
two-fold; either we ought to obey God because He will punish us if we
disobey Him, which is an argument based on the utility of obedience; or
our obedience ought to flow from our love towards God, which is an
argument based on pure feeling and for which no reason can be given.
For, if any man should say that he takes no pleasure in the
contemplation of the ideal of perfect holiness, or, in other words, that
he does not love God, the attempt to argue him into acquiring that
pleasure would be as hopeless as the endeavour to persuade Peter Bell of
the "witchery of the soft blue sky."

In whichever way we look at the matter, morality is based on feeling,
not on reason; though reason alone is competent to trace out the effects
of our actions and thereby dictate conduct. Justice is founded on the
love of one's neighbour; and goodness is a kind of beauty. The moral
law, like the laws of physical nature, rests in the long run upon
instinctive intuitions, and is neither more nor less "innate" and
"necessary" than they are. Some people cannot by any means be got to
understand the first book of Euclid; but the truths of mathematics are
no less necessary and binding on the great mass of mankind. Some there
are who cannot feel the difference between the _Sonata Appassionata_,
and _Cherry Ripe_; or between a gravestone-cutter's cherub and the
Apollo Belvidere; but the canons of art are none the less acknowledged.
While some there may be, who, devoid of sympathy are incapable of a
sense of duty; but neither does their existence affect the foundations
of morality. Such pathological deviations from true manhood are merely
the halt, the lame, and the blind of the world of consciousness; and the
anatomist of the mind leaves them aside, as the anatomist of the body
would ignore abnormal specimens.

And as there are Pascals and Mozarts, Newtons and Raffaelles, in whom
the innate faculty for science or art seems to need but a touch to
spring into full vigour, and through whom the human race obtains new
possibilities of knowledge and new conceptions of beauty: so there have
been men of moral genius, to whom we owe ideals of duty and visions of
moral perfection, which ordinary mankind could never have attained;
though, happily for them, they can feel the beauty of a vision, which
lay beyond the reach of their dull imaginations, and count life well
spent in shaping some faint image of it in the actual world.

THE END

LONDON: R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, BREAD STREET HILL.

FOOTNOTES:

[45] Family affection in the eighteenth century may have been stronger
than in the nineteenth; but Hume's bachelor inexperience can surely
alone explain his strange account of the suppositions of the marriage
law of that day, and their effects. The law certainly abolished all
division of possessions, but it did so by making the husband sole
proprietor.

[46] Ben Jonson's _Cynthia's Revels_, act i.




ADVERTISEMENTS


ENGLISH MEN OF LETTERS.

EDITED BY JOHN MORLEY.


_These Short Books are addressed to the general public with a view both
to stirring and satisfying an interest in literature and its great
topics in the minds of those who have to run as they read. An immense
class is growing up, and must every year increase, whose education will
have made them alive to the importance of the masters of our literature,
and capable of intelligent curiosity as to their performances. The
Series is intended to give the means of nourishing this curiosity, to an
extent that shall be copious enough to be profitable for knowledge and
life, and yet be brief enough to serve those whose leisure is scanty._

_The following are arranged for:_--


_SPENSER      The Dean of St. Paul's._

_HUME         Professor Huxley.        [Ready._

_BUNYAN       James Anthony Froude._

_JOHNSON      Leslie Stephen.          [Ready._

_GOLDSMITH    William Black.           [Ready._

_MILTON       Mark Pattison._

_WORDSWORTH   Goldwin Smith._

_SWIFT        John Morley._

_BURNS        Principal Shairp.        [Ready._

_SCOTT        Richard H. Hutton.       [Ready._

_SHELLEY      J. A. Symonds.           [Ready._

_GIBBON       J. C. Morison.           [Ready._

_BYRON        Professor Nichol._

_DEFOE        W. Minto.                [In the Press._

_GRAY         John Morley._

_HAWTHORNE    Henry James, Jnr._

_CHAUCER      A. W. Ward._

[_OTHERS WILL BE ANNOUNCED._]


OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

     "The new series opens well with Mr. Leslie Stephen's sketch of Dr.
     Johnson. It could hardly have been done better; and it will convey
     to the readers for whom it is intended a juster estimate of Johnson
     than either of the two essays of Lord Macaulay."--_Pall Mall
     Gazette._


     "We have come across few writers who have had a clearer insight
     into Johnson's character, or who have brought to the study of it a
     better knowledge of the time in which Johnson lived and the men
     whom he knew."--_Saturday Review._


     "We could not wish for a more suggestive introduction to Scott and
     his poems and novels."--_Examiner._


     "The tone of the volume is excellent throughout."--_Athenaeum_
     Review of "Scott."


     "As a clear, thoughtful, and attractive record of the life and
     works of the greatest among the world's historians, it deserves the
     highest praise."--_Examiner_ Review of "Gibbon."


     "The lovers of this great poet (Shelley) are to be congratulated at
     having at their command so fresh, clear, and intelligent a
     presentment of the subject written by a man of adequate and wide
     culture."--_Athenaeum._

                  *       *       *       *       *

MACMILLAN'S GLOBE LIBRARY.

_Beautifully printed on toned paper, price 3s. 6d. Also kept in a
variety of calf and morocco bindings, at moderate prices._

     _The_ SATURDAY REVIEW _says: "The Globe Editions are admirable for
     their scholarly editing, their typographical excellence, their
     compendious form, and their cheapness." The_ BRITISH QUARTERLY
     REVIEW _says: "In compendiousness, elegance, and scholarliness the
     Globe Editions of Messrs. Macmillan surpass any popular series of
     our classics hitherto given to the public. As near an approach to
     miniature perfection as has ever been made._"

+Shakespeare's Complete Works.+ Edited by W. G. CLARK, M.A., and W. ALDIS
WRIGHT, M.A., Editors of the "Cambridge Shakespeare." With Glossary. pp.
1075.

     _The_ ATHENAEUM _says this edition is "a marvel of beauty,
     cheapness, and compactness.... For the busy man, above all for the
     working student, this is the best of all existing Shakespeares._"

+Spenser's Complete Works.+ Edited from the Original Editions and
Manuscripts, by R. MORRIS, with a Memoir by J. W. HALES, M.A. With
Glossary. pp. lv., 736.

     "_Worthy--and higher praise it needs not--of the beautiful 'Globe
     Series._'"--DAILY NEWS.

+Sir Walter Scott's Poetical Works.+ Edited, with a Biographical and
Critical Memoir, by FRANCIS TURNER PALGRAVE, and Copious Notes. pp.
xliii., 559.

     "_We can almost sympathise with a middle-aged grumbler, who, after
     reading Mr. Palgrave's Memoir and Introduction, should exclaim,
     'Why was there not such an edition of Scott when I was a
     school-boy?_'"--GUARDIAN.

+Complete Works of Robert Burns.+ Edited from the best Printed and
Manuscript authorities, with Glossarial Index, Notes, and a Biographical
Memoir by ALEXANDER SMITH. pp. lxii., 636.

     "_Admirable in all respects._"--SPECTATOR.

+Robinson Crusoe+. Edited after the Original Editions, with a Biographical
Introduction by HENRY KINGSLEY. pp. xxxii *07.

     "_A most excellent and in every way desirable edition._"--COURT
     CIRCULAR.

+Goldsmith's Miscellaneous Works.+ Edited with Biographical Introduction,
by Professor MASSON. pp. lx., 695.

     "_Such an admirable compendium of the facts of Goldsmith's life,
     and so careful and minute a delineation of the mixed traits of his
     peculiar character as to be a very model of a literary biography in
     little._"--SCOTSMAN.

+Pope's Poetical Works.+ Edited, with Notes, and Introductory Memoir by A.
W. WARD, M.A., Professor of History in Owens College Manchester, pp.
lii., 508.

     _The_ LITERARY CHURCHMAN _remarks: "The Editor's own notes and
     introductory memoir are excellent, the memoir alone would be cheap
     and well worth buying at the price of the whole volume._"

+Dryden's Poetical Works.+ Edited, with a Memoir, Revised Text, and Notes,
by W. D. CHRISTIE, M.A., of Trinity College, Cambridge, pp. lxxxvii.,
662.

     "_An admirable edition, the result of great research and of a
     careful revision of the text._"--PALL MALL GAZETTE.

+Cowper's Poetical Works.+ Edited, with Notes and Biographical
Introduction, by WILLIAM BENHAM, Vicar of Margate, pp. lxxiii., 536.

     "_Mr. Benham's edition of Cowper is one of permanent
     value._"-SATURDAY REVIEW.

+Morte d'Arthur.+--SIR THOMAS MALORY'S BOOK OF KING ARTHUR AND OF HIS
NOBLE KNIGHTS OF THE ROUND TABLE. The original Edition of CAXTON,
revised for Modern Use. With an Introduction by Sir EDWARD STRACHEY,
Bart. pp. xxxvii., 509.

     "_It is with perfect confidence that we recommend this edition of
     the old romance to every class of readers._"--PALL MALL GAZETTE.

+The Works of Virgil.+ Rendered into English Prose, with Introductions,
Notes, Running Analysis, and an Index. By JAMES LONSDALE, M.A., and
SAMUEL LEE, M.A. pp. 228.

     "_A more complete Edition of Virgil in English it is scarcely
     possible to conceive than the scholarly work before us._"--GLOBE.

+The Works of Horace.+ Rendered into English Prose, with Introductions,
Running Analysis, Notes, and Index. By JOHN LONSDALE, M.A., and SAMUEL
LEE, M.A.

     _The_ STANDARD _says, "To classical and non-classical readers it
     will be invaluable._"

+Milton's Poetical Works.+--Edited, with Introductions, by Professor
MASSON.

     "_In every way an admirable book._"--PALL MALL GAZETTE.


MACMILLAN & CO., LONDON.







