The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hume
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hume

Author: Thomas Henry Huxley


        
Release date: July 13, 2006 [eBook #18819]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/18819

Credits: Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Martin Pettit and
        the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Martin Pettit and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






English Men of Letters

EDITED BY JOHN MORLEY


HUME

[Illustration: Publisher's logo]

HUME

BY

PROFESSOR HUXLEY


London
MACMILLAN AND CO
1879

_The Right of Translation and Reproduction is Reserved_

LONDON:
R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR,
BREAD STREET HILL.


              *       *       *       *       *


                          CONTENTS.



                   _PART I.--HUME'S LIFE._


                         CHAPTER I.
                                                         PAGE
EARLY LIFE: LITERARY AND POLITICAL WRITINGS                 1


                         CHAPTER II.

LATER YEARS: THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND                        26



                 _PART II.--HUME'S PHILOSOPHY._


                         CHAPTER I.

THE OBJECT AND SCOPE OF PHILOSOPHY                         48


                         CHAPTER II.

THE CONTENTS OF THE MIND                                   60


                        CHAPTER III.

THE ORIGIN OF THE IMPRESSIONS.                             74


                        CHAPTER IV.

THE CLASSIFICATION AND THE NOMENCLATURE OF MENTAL
OPERATIONS                                                 89


                        CHAPTER V.

THE MENTAL PHENOMENA OF ANIMALS                           103


                        CHAPTER VI.

LANGUAGE--PROPOSITIONS CONCERNING NECESSARY TRUTHS        114


                       CHAPTER VII.

THE ORDER OF NATURE: MIRACLES                             129


                       CHAPTER VIII.

THEISM: EVOLUTION OF THEOLOGY                             140


                        CHAPTER IX.

THE SOUL: THE DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY                     165


                        CHAPTER X.

VOLITION: LIBERTY AND NECESSITY                           183


                        CHAPTER XI.

THE PRINCIPLES OF MORALS                                  197


              *       *       *       *       *


HUME.




PART I.

_HUME'S LIFE._




CHAPTER I.

EARLY LIFE: LITERARY AND POLITICAL WRITINGS.


David Hume was born, in Edinburgh on the 26th of April (O.S.), 1711. His
parents were then residing in the parish of the Tron church, apparently
on a visit to the Scottish capital, as the small estate which his father
Joseph Hume, or Home, inherited, lay in Berwickshire, on the banks of
the Whitadder or Whitewater, a few miles from the border, and within
sight of English ground. The paternal mansion was little more than a
very modest farmhouse,[1] and the property derived its name of
Ninewells from a considerable spring, which breaks out on the slope in
front of the house, and falls into the Whitadder.

Both mother and father came of good Scottish families--the paternal line
running back to Lord Home of Douglas, who went over to France with the
Douglas during the French wars of Henry V. and VI. and was killed at the
battle of Verneuil. Joseph Hume died when David was an infant, leaving
himself and two elder children, a brother and a sister, to the care of
their mother, who is described by David Hume in _My Own Life_ as "a
woman of singular merit, who though young and handsome devoted herself
entirely to the rearing and education of her children." Mr. Burton says:
"Her portrait, which I have seen, represents a thin but pleasing
countenance, expressive of great intellectual acuteness;" and as Hume
told Dr. Black that she had "precisely the same constitution with
himself" and died of the disorder which proved fatal to him, it is
probable that the qualities inherited from his mother had much to do
with the future philosopher's eminence. It is curious, however, that her
estimate of her son in her only recorded, and perhaps slightly
apocryphal utterance, is of a somewhat unexpected character. "Our
Davie's a fine goodnatured crater, but uncommon wake-minded." The first
part of the judgment was indeed verified by "Davie's" whole life; but
one might seek in vain for signs of what is commonly understood as
"weakness of mind" in a man who not only showed himself to be an
intellectual athlete, but who had an eminent share of practical wisdom
and tenacity of purpose. One would like to know, however, when it was
that Mrs. Hume committed herself to this not too flattering judgment of
her younger son. For as Hume reached the mature age of four and thirty,
before he obtained any employment of sufficient importance to convert
the meagre pittance of a middling laird's younger brother into a decent
maintenance, it is not improbable that a shrewd Scots wife may have
thought his devotion to philosophy and poverty to be due to mere
infirmity of purpose. But she lived till 1749, long enough to see more
than the dawn of her son's literary fame and official importance, and
probably changed her mind about "Davie's" force of character.

David Hume appears to have owed little to schools or universities. There
is some evidence that he entered the Greek class in the University of
Edinburgh in 1723--when he was a boy of twelve years of age--but it is
not known how long his studies were continued, and he did not graduate.
In 1727, at any rate, he was living at Ninewells, and already possessed
by that love of learning and thirst for literary fame, which, as _My Own
Life_ tells us, was the ruling passion of his life and the chief source
of his enjoyments. A letter of this date, addressed to his friend
Michael Ramsay, is certainly a most singular production for a boy of
sixteen. After sundry quotations from Virgil the letter proceeds:--

     "The perfectly wise man that outbraves fortune, is much greater
     than the husbandman who slips by her; and, indeed, this pastoral
     and saturnian happiness I have in a great measure come at just now.
     I live like a king, pretty much by myself, neither full of action
     nor perturbation--_molles somnos_. This state, however, I can
     foresee is not to be relied on. My peace of mind is not
     sufficiently confirmed by philosophy to withstand the blows of
     fortune. This greatness and elevation of soul is to be found only
     in study and contemplation. This alone can teach us to look down on
     human accidents. You must allow [me] to talk thus like a
     philosopher: 'tis a subject I think much on, and could talk all day
     long of."

If David talked in this strain to his mother her tongue probably gave
utterance to "Bless the bairn!" and, in her private soul, the epithet
"wake-minded" may then have recorded itself. But, though few lonely,
thoughtful, studious boys of sixteen give vent to their thoughts in such
stately periods, it is probable that the brooding over an ideal is
commoner at this age, than fathers and mothers, busy with the cares of
practical life, are apt to imagine.

About a year later, Hume's family tried to launch him into the
profession of the law; but, as he tells us, "while they fancied I was
poring upon Voet and Vinnius, Cicero and Virgil were the authors which I
was secretly devouring," and the attempt seems to have come to an abrupt
termination. Nevertheless, as a very competent authority[2] wisely
remarks:--

     "There appear to have been in Hume all the elements of which a good
     lawyer is made: clearness of judgment, power of rapidly acquiring
     knowledge, untiring industry, and dialectic skill: and if his mind
     had not been preoccupied, he might have fallen into the gulf in
     which many of the world's greatest geniuses lie
     buried--professional eminence; and might have left behind him a
     reputation limited to the traditional recollections of the
     Parliament house, or associated with important decisions. He was
     through life an able, clear-headed, man of business, and I have
     seen several legal documents, written in his own hand and evidently
     drawn by himself. They stand the test of general professional
     observation; and their writer, by preparing documents of facts of
     such a character on his own responsibility, showed that he had
     considerable confidence in his ability to adhere to the forms
     adequate for the occasion. He talked of it as 'an ancient prejudice
     industriously propagated by the dunces in all countries, that _a
     man of genius is unfit for business_,' and he showed, in his
     general conduct through life, that he did not choose to come
     voluntarily under this proscription."

Six years longer Hume remained at Ninewells before he made another
attempt to embark in a practical career--this time commerce--and with a
like result. For a few months' trial proved that kind of life, also, to
be hopelessly against the grain.

It was while in London, on his way to Bristol, where he proposed to
commence his mercantile life, that Hume addressed to some eminent London
physician (probably, as Mr. Burton suggests, Dr. George Cheyne) a
remarkable letter. Whether it was ever sent seems doubtful; but it shows
that philosophers as well as poets have their Werterian crises, and it
presents an interesting parallel to John Stuart Mill's record of the
corresponding period of his youth. The letter is too long to be given in
full, but a few quotations may suffice to indicate its importance to
those who desire to comprehend the man.

     "You must know then that from my earliest infancy I found always a
     strong inclination to books and letters. As our college education
     in Scotland, extending little further than the languages, ends
     commonly when we are about fourteen or fifteen years of age, I was
     after that left to my own choice in my reading, and found it
     incline me almost equally to books of reasoning and philosophy, and
     to poetry and the polite authors. Every one who is acquainted
     either with the philosophers or critics, knows that there is
     nothing yet established in either of these two sciences, and that
     they contain little more than endless disputes, even in the most
     fundamental articles. Upon examination of these, I found a certain
     boldness of temper growing on me, which was not inclined to submit
     to any authority in these subjects, but led me to seek out some new
     medium, by which truth might be established. After much study and
     reflection on this, at last, when I was about eighteen years of
     age, there seemed to be opened up to me a new scene of thought,
     which transported me beyond measure, and made me, with an ardour
     natural to young men, throw up every other pleasure or business to
     apply entirely to it. The law, which was the business I designed to
     follow, appeared nauseous to me, and I could think of no other way
     of pushing my fortune in the world, but that of a scholar and
     philosopher. I was infinitely happy in this course of life for some
     months; till at last, about the beginning of September, 1729, all
     my ardour seemed in a moment to be extinguished, and I could no
     longer raise my mind to that pitch, which formerly gave me such
     excessive pleasure."

This "decline of soul" Hume attributes, in part, to his being smitten
with the beautiful representations of virtue in the works of Cicero,
Seneca, and Plutarch, and being thereby led to discipline his temper and
his will along with his reason and understanding.

     "I was continually fortifying myself with reflections against
     death, and poverty, and shame, and pain, and all the other
     calamities of life."

And he adds very characteristically:--

     "These no doubt are exceeding useful when joined with an active
     life, because the occasion being presented along with the
     reflection, works it into the soul, and makes it take a deep
     impression: but, in solitude, they serve to little other purpose
     than to waste the spirits, the force of the mind meeting no
     resistance, but wasting itself in the air, like our arm when it
     misses its aim."

Along with all this mental perturbation, symptoms of scurvy, a disease
now almost unknown among landsmen, but which, in the days of winter salt
meat, before root crops flourished in the Lothians, greatly plagued our
forefathers, made their appearance. And, indeed, it may be suspected
that physical conditions were, at first, at the bottom of the whole
business; for, in 1731, a ravenous appetite set in and, in six weeks
from being tall, lean, and raw-boned, Hume says he became sturdy and
robust, with a ruddy complexion and a cheerful countenance--eating,
sleeping, and feeling well, except that the capacity for intense mental
application seemed to be gone. He, therefore, determined to seek out a
more active life; and, though he could not and would not "quit his
pretensions to learning, but with his last breath," he resolved "to lay
them aside for some time, in order the more effectually to resume them."

The careers open to a poor Scottish gentleman in those days were very
few; and, as Hume's option lay between a travelling tutorship and a
stool in a merchant's office, he chose the latter.

     "And having got recommendation to a considerable trader in Bristol,
     I am just now hastening thither, with a resolution to forget
     myself, and everything that is past, to engage myself, as far as is
     possible, in that course of life, and to toss about the world from
     one pole to the other, till I leave this distemper behind me."[3]

But it was all of no use--Nature would have her way--and in the middle
of 1736, David Hume, aged twenty-three, without a profession or any
assured means of earning a guinea; and having doubtless, by his apparent
vacillation, but real tenacity of purpose, once more earned the title of
"wake-minded" at home; betook himself to a foreign country.

     "I went over to France, with a view of prosecuting my studies in a
     country retreat: and there I laid that plan of life which I have
     steadily and successfully pursued. I resolved to make a very rigid
     frugality supply my deficiency of fortune, to maintain unimpaired
     my independency, and to regard every object as contemptible except
     the improvement of my talents in literature."[4]

Hume passed through Paris on his way to Rheims, where he resided for
some time; though the greater part of his three years' stay was spent at
La Fleche, in frequent intercourse with the Jesuits of the famous
college in which Descartes was educated. Here he composed his first
work, the _Treatise of Human Nature_; though it would appear from the
following passage in the letter to Cheyne, that he had been accumulating
materials to that end for some years before he left Scotland.

     "I found that the moral philosophy transmitted to us by antiquity
     laboured under the same inconvenience that has been found in their
     natural philosophy, of being entirely hypothetical, and depending
     more upon invention than experience: every one consulted his fancy
     in erecting schemes of virtue and happiness, without regarding
     human nature, upon which every moral conclusion must depend."

This is the key-note of the _Treatise_; of which Hume himself says
apologetically, in one of his letters, that it was planned before he was
twenty-one and composed before he had reached the age of twenty-five.[5]

Under these circumstances, it is probably the most remarkable
philosophical work, both intrinsically and in its effects upon the
course of thought, that has ever been written. Berkeley, indeed,
published the _Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision_, the _Treatise
Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge_, and the _Three
Dialogues_, between the ages of twenty-four and twenty-eight; and thus
comes very near to Hume, both in precocity and in influence; but his
investigations are more limited in their scope than those of his
Scottish contemporary.

The first and second volumes of the _Treatise_, containing Book I., "Of
the Understanding," and Book II., "Of the Passions," were published in
January, 1739.[6] The publisher gave fifty pounds for the copyright;
which is probably more than an unknown writer of twenty-seven years of
age would get for a similar work, at the present time. But, in other
respects, its success fell far short of Hume's expectations. In a letter
dated the 1st of June, 1739, he writes,--

     "I am not much in the humour of such compositions at present,
     having received news from London of the success of my _Philosophy_,
     which is but indifferent, if I may judge by the sale of the book,
     and if I may believe my bookseller."

This, however, indicates a very different reception from that which
Hume, looking through the inverted telescope of old age, ascribes to the
_Treatise_ in _My Own Life_.

     "Never literary attempt was more unfortunate than my _Treatise of
     Human Nature_. It fell _deadborn from the press_ without reaching
     such a distinction as even to excite a murmur among the zealots."

As a matter of fact, it was fully, and, on the whole, respectfully and
appreciatively, reviewed in the _History of the Works of the Learned_
for November, 1739.[7] Whoever the reviewer may have been, he was a man
of discernment, for he says that the work bears "incontestable marks of
a great capacity, of a soaring genius, but young, and not yet thoroughly
practised;" and he adds, that we shall probably have reason to consider
"this, compared with the later productions, in the same light as we view
the juvenile works of a Milton, or the first manner of a Raphael or
other celebrated painter." In a letter to Hutcheson, Hume merely speaks
of this article as "somewhat abusive;" so that his vanity, being young
and callow, seems to have been correspondingly wide-mouthed and hard to
satiate.

It must be confessed that, on this occasion, no less than on that of his
other publications, Hume exhibits no small share of the craving after
mere notoriety and vulgar success, as distinct from the pardonable, if
not honourable, ambition for solid and enduring fame, which would have
harmonised better with his philosophy. Indeed, it appears to be by no
means improbable that this peculiarity of Hume's moral constitution was
the cause of his gradually forsaking philosophical studies, after the
publication of the third part (_On Morals_) of the _Treatise_, in 1740,
and turning to those political and historical topics which were likely
to yield, and did in fact yield, a much better return of that sort of
success which his soul loved. The _Philosophical Essays Concerning the
Human Understanding_, which afterwards became the _Inquiry_, is not much
more than an abridgment and recast, for popular use, of parts of the
_Treatise_, with the addition of the essays on Miracles and on
Necessity. In style, it exhibits a great improvement on the _Treatise_;
but the substance, if not deteriorated, is certainly not improved. Hume
does not really bring his mature powers to bear upon his early
speculations, in the later work. The crude fruits have not been ripened,
but they have been ruthlessly pruned away, along with the branches which
bore them. The result is a pretty shrub enough; but not the tree of
knowledge, with its roots firmly fixed in fact, its branches perennially
budding forth into new truths, which Hume might have reared. Perhaps,
after all, worthy Mrs. Hume was, in the highest sense, right. Davie was
"wake-minded," not to see that the world of philosophy was his to
overrun and subdue, if he would but persevere in the work he had begun.
But no--he must needs turn aside for "success": and verily he had his
reward; but not the crown he might have won.

In 1740, Hume seems to have made an acquaintance which rapidly ripened
into a life long friendship. Adam Smith was, at that time, a boy student
of seventeen at the University of Glasgow; and Hume sends a copy of the
_Treatise_ to "Mr. Smith," apparently on the recommendation of the
well-known Hutcheson, Professor of Moral Philosophy in the university.
It is a remarkable evidence of Adam Smith's early intellectual
development, that a youth of his age should be thought worthy of such a
present.

In 1741 Hume published anonymously, at Edinburgh, the first volume of
_Essays Moral and Political_, which was followed in 1742 by the second
volume.

These pieces are written in an admirable style and, though arranged
without apparent method, a system of political philosophy may be
gathered from their contents. Thus the third essay, _That Politics may
be reduced to a Science_, defends that thesis, and dwells on the
importance of forms of government.

     "So great is the force of laws and of particular forms of
     government, and so little dependence have they on the humours and
     tempers of men, that consequences almost as general and certain may
     sometimes be deduced from them as any which the mathematical
     sciences afford us."--(III. 15.) (_See_ p. 45.)

Hume proceeds to exemplify the evils which inevitably flow from
universal suffrage, from aristocratic privilege, and from elective
monarchy, by historical examples, and concludes:--

     "That an hereditary prince, a nobility without vassals, and a
     people voting by their representatives, form the best monarchy,
     aristocracy, and democracy."--(III. 18.)

If we reflect that the following passage of the same essay was written
nearly a century and a half ago, it would seem that whatever other
changes may have taken place, political warfare remains _in statu
quo_:--

     "Those who either attack or defend a minister in such a government
     as ours, where the utmost liberty is allowed, always carry matters
     to an extreme, and exaggerate his merit or demerit with regard to
     the public. His enemies are sure to charge him with the greatest
     enormities, both in domestic and foreign management; and there is
     no meanness or crime, of which, in their judgment, he is not
     capable. Unnecessary wars, scandalous treaties, profusion of public
     treasure, oppressive taxes, every kind of maladministration is
     ascribed to him. To aggravate the charge, his pernicious conduct,
     it is said, will extend its baneful influence even to posterity, by
     undermining the best constitution in the world, and disordering
     that wise system of laws, institutions, and customs, by which our
     ancestors, during so many centuries, have been so happily governed.
     He is not only a wicked minister in himself, but has removed every
     security provided against wicked ministers for the future.

     "On the other hand, the partisans of the minister make his
     panegyric rise as high as the accusation against him, and celebrate
     his wise, steady, and moderate conduct in every part of his
     administration. The honour and interest of the nation supported
     abroad, public credit maintained at home, persecution restrained,
     faction subdued: the merit of all these blessings is ascribed
     solely to the minister. At the same time, he crowns all his other
     merits by a religious care of the best government in the world,
     which he has preserved in all its parts, and has transmitted
     entire, to be the happiness and security of the latest
     posterity."--(III. 26.)

Hume sagely remarks that the panegyric and the accusation cannot both be
true; and, that what truth there may be in either, rather tends to show
that our much-vaunted constitution does not fulfil its chief object,
which is to provide a remedy against maladministration. And if it does
not--

     "we are rather beholden to any minister who undermines it and
     affords us the opportunity of erecting a better in its
     place."--III. 28.

The fifth Essay discusses the _Origin of Government_:--

     "Man, born in a family, is compelled to maintain society from
     necessity, from natural inclination, and from habit. The same
     creature, in his farther progress, is engaged to establish
     political society, in order to administer justice, without which
     there can be no peace among them, nor safety, nor mutual
     intercourse. We are therefore to look upon all the vast apparatus
     of our government, as having ultimately no other object or purpose
     but the distribution of justice, or, in other words, the support of
     the twelve judges. Kings and parliaments, fleets and armies,
     officers of the court and revenue, ambassadors, ministers and privy
     councillors, are all subordinate in the end to this part of
     administration. Even the clergy, as their duty leads them to
     inculcate morality, may justly be thought, so far as regards this
     world, to have no other useful object of their institution."--(III.
     37.)

The police theory of government has never been stated more tersely:
and, if there were only one state in the world; and if we could be
certain by intuition, or by the aid of revelation, that it is wrong for
society, as a corporate body, to do anything for the improvement of its
members and, thereby, indirectly support the twelve judges, no objection
could be raised to it.

Unfortunately the existence of rival or inimical nations furnishes
"kings and parliaments, fleets and armies," with a good deal of
occupation beyond the support of the twelve judges; and, though the
proposition that the State has no business to meddle with anything but
the administration of justice, seems sometimes to be regarded as an
axiom, it can hardly be said to be intuitively certain, inasmuch as a
great many people absolutely repudiate it; while, as yet, the attempt to
give it the authority of a revelation has not been made.

As Hume says with profound truth in the fourth essay, _On the First
Principles of Government_:--

     "As force is always on the side of the governed, the governors have
     nothing to support them but opinion. It is, therefore, on opinion
     only that government is founded; and this maxim extends to the most
     despotic and most military governments, as well as to the most free
     and the most popular."--(III. 31.)

But if the whole fabric of social organisation rests on opinion, it may
surely be fairly argued that, in the interests of self-preservation, if
for no better reason, society has a right to see that the means of
forming just opinions are placed within the reach of every one of its
members; and, therefore, that due provision for education, at any rate,
is a right and, indeed, a duty, of the state.

The three opinions upon which all government, or the authority of the
few over the many, is founded, says Hume, are public interest, right to
power, and right to property. No government can permanently exist,
unless the majority of the citizens, who are the ultimate depositary of
Force, are convinced that it serves the general interest, that it has
lawful authority, and that it respects individual rights:--

     "A government may endure for several ages, though the balance of
     power and the balance of property do not coincide.... But where the
     original constitution allows any share of power, though small, to
     an order of men who possess a large share of property, it is easy
     for them gradually to stretch their authority, and bring the
     balance of power to coincide with that of property. This has been
     the case with the House of Commons in England."--(III. 34.)

Hume then points out that, in his time, the authority of the Commons was
by no means equivalent to the property and power it represented, and
proceeds:--

     "Were the members obliged to receive instructions from their
     constituents, like the Dutch deputies, this would entirely alter
     the case; and if such immense power and riches as those of all the
     Commons of Great Britain, were brought into the scale, it is not
     easy to conceive that the crown could either influence that
     multitude of people, or withstand that balance of property. It is
     true, the crown has great influence over the collective body in the
     elections of members; but were this influence, which at present is
     only exerted once in seven years, to be employed in bringing over
     the people to every vote, it would soon be wasted, and no skill,
     popularity, or revenue could support it. I must, therefore, be of
     opinion that an alteration in this particular would introduce a
     total alteration in our government, would soon reduce it to a pure
     republic; and, perhaps, to a republic of no inconvenient
     form."--(III. 35.)

Viewed by the light of subsequent events, this is surely a very
remarkable example of political sagacity. The members of the House of
Commons are not yet delegates; but, with the widening of the suffrage
and the rapidly increasing tendency to drill and organise the
electorate, and to exact definite pledges from candidates, they are
rapidly becoming, if not delegates, at least attorneys for committees of
electors. The same causes are constantly tending to exclude men, who
combine a keen sense of self-respect with large intellectual capacity,
from a position in which the one is as constantly offended, as the other
is neutralised. Notwithstanding the attempt of George the Third to
resuscitate the royal authority, Hume's foresight has been so completely
justified that no one now dreams of the crown exerting the slightest
influence upon elections.

In the seventh essay, Hume raises a very interesting discussion as to
the probable ultimate result of the forces which were at work in the
British Constitution in the first part of the eighteenth century:--

     "There has been a sudden and sensible change in the opinions of
     men, within these last fifty years, by the progress of learning and
     of liberty. Most people in this island have divested themselves of
     all superstitious reverence to names and authority; the clergy have
     much lost their credit; their pretensions and doctrines have been
     much ridiculed; and even religion can scarcely support itself in
     the world. The mere name of _king_ commands little respect; and to
     talk of a king as God's vicegerent on earth, or to give him any of
     those magnificent titles which formerly dazzled mankind, would but
     excite laughter in every one."--(III. 54.)

In fact, at the present day, the danger to monarchy in Britain would
appear to lie, not in increasing love for equality, for which, except as
regards the law, Englishmen have never cared, but rather entertain an
aversion; nor in any abstract democratic theories, upon which the mass
of Englishmen pour the contempt with which they view theories in
general; but in the constantly increasing tendency of monarchy to become
slightly absurd, from the ever-widening discrepancy between modern
political ideas and the theory of kingship. As Hume observes, even in
his time, people had left off making believe that a king was a different
species of man from, other men; and, since his day, more and more such
make-believes have become impossible; until the maintenance of kingship
in coming generations seems likely to depend, entirely, upon whether it
is the general opinion, that a hereditary president of our virtual
republic will serve the general interest better than an elective one or
not. The tendency of public feeling in this direction is patent, but it
does not follow that a republic is to be the final stage of our
government. In fact, Hume thinks not:--

     "It is well known, that every government must come to a period, and
     that death is unavoidable to the political, as well as to the
     animal body. But, as one kind of death may be preferable to
     another, it may be inquired, whether it be more desirable for the
     British constitution to terminate in a popular government, or in an
     absolute monarchy? Here, I would frankly declare, that though
     liberty be preferable to slavery, in almost every case; yet I
     should rather wish to see an absolute monarch than a republic in
     this island. For let us consider what kind of republic we have
     reason to expect. The question is not concerning any fine imaginary
     republic of which a man forms a plan in his closet. There is no
     doubt but a popular government may be imagined more perfect than
     an absolute monarchy, or even than our present constitution. But
     what reason have we to expect that any such government will ever be
     established in Great Britain, upon the dissolution of our monarchy?
     If any single person acquire power enough to take our constitution
     to pieces, and put it up anew, he is really an absolute monarch;
     and we have already had an instance of this kind, sufficient to
     convince us, that such a person will never resign his power, or
     establish any free government. Matters, therefore, must be trusted
     to their natural progress and operation; and the House of Commons,
     according to its present constitution, must be the only legislature
     in such a popular government. The inconveniences attending such a
     situation of affairs present themselves by thousands. If the House
     of Commons, in such a case, ever dissolve itself, which is not to
     be expected, we may look for a civil war every election. If it
     continue itself, we shall suffer all the tyranny of a faction
     subdivided into new factions. And, as such a violent government
     cannot long subsist, we shall at last, after many convulsions and
     civil wars, find repose in absolute monarchy, which it would have
     been happier for us to have established peaceably from the
     beginning. Absolute monarchy, therefore, is the easiest death, the
     true _Euthanasia_ of the British constitution.

     "Thus if we have more reason to be jealous of monarchy, because the
     danger is more imminent from that quarter; we have also reason to
     be more jealous of popular government, because that danger is more
     terrible. This may teach us a lesson of moderation in all our
     political controversies."--(III. 55.)

One may admire the sagacity of these speculations, and the force and
clearness with which they are expressed, without altogether agreeing
with them. That an analogy between the social and bodily organism
exists, and is, in many respects, clear and full of instructive
suggestion, is undeniable. Yet a state answers, not to an individual,
but to a generic type; and there is no reason, in the nature of things,
why any generic type should die out. The type of the pearly _Nautilus_,
highly organised as it is, has persisted with but little change from the
Silurian epoch till now; and, so long as terrestrial conditions remain
approximately similar to what they are at present, there is no more
reason why it should cease to exist in the next, than in the past,
hundred million years or so. The true ground for doubting the
possibility of the establishment of absolute monarchy in Britain is,
that opinion seems to have passed through, and left far behind, the
stage at which such a change would be possible; and the true reason for
doubting the permanency of a republic, if it is ever established, lies
in the fact, that a republic requires for its maintenance a far higher
standard of morality and of intelligence in the members of the state
than any other form of government. Samuel gave the Israelites a king
because they were not righteous enough to do without one, with a pretty
plain warning of what they were to expect from the gift. And, up to this
time, the progress of such republics as have been established in the
world has not been such, as to lead to any confident expectation that
their foundation is laid on a sufficiently secure subsoil of public
spirit, morality, and intelligence. On the contrary, they exhibit
examples of personal corruption and of political profligacy as fine as
any hotbed of despotism has ever produced; while they fail in the
primary duty of the administration of justice, as none but an effete
despotism has ever failed.

Hume has been accused of departing, in his old age, from the liberal
principles of his youth; and, no doubt, he was careful, in the later
editions of the _Essays_, to expunge everything that savoured of
democratic tendencies. But the passage just quoted shows that this was
no recantation, but simply a confirmation, by his experience of one of
the most debased periods of English history, of those evil tendencies
attendant on popular government, of which, from the first, he was fully
aware.

In the ninth essay, _On the Parties of Great Britain_, there occurs a
passage which, while it affords evidence of the marvellous change which
has taken place in the social condition of Scotland since 1741, contains
an assertion respecting the state of the Jacobite party at that time,
which at first seems surprising:--

     "As violent things have not commonly so long a duration as
     moderate, we actually find that the Jacobite party is almost
     entirely vanished from among us, and that the distinction of
     _Court_ and _Country_, which is but creeping in at London, is the
     only one that is ever mentioned in this kingdom. Beside the
     violence and openness of the Jacobite party, another reason has
     perhaps contributed to produce so sudden and so visible an
     alteration in this part of Britain. There are only two ranks of men
     among us; gentlemen who have some fortune and education, and the
     meanest slaving poor; without any considerable number of that
     middling rank of men, which abound more in England, both in cities
     and in the country, than in any other part of the world. The
     slaving poor are incapable of any principles; gentlemen may be
     converted to true principles, by time and experience. The middling
     rank of men have curiosity and knowledge enough to form principles,
     but not enough to form true ones, or correct any prejudices that
     they may have imbibed. And it is among the middling rank of people
     that Tory principles do at present prevail most in England."--(III.
     80, _note_.)

Considering that the Jacobite rebellion of 1745 broke out only four
years after this essay was published, the assertion that the Jacobite
party had "almost entirely vanished in 1741" sounds strange enough: and
the passage which contains it is omitted in the third edition of the
_Essays_, published in 1748. Nevertheless, Hume was probably right, as
the outbreak of '45 was little better than a Highland raid, and the
Pretender obtained no important following in the Lowlands.

No less curious, in comparison with what would be said nowadays, is
Hume's remark in the Essay on the _Rise of the Arts and Sciences_ that--

     "The English are become sensible of the scandalous licentiousness
     of their stage from the example of the French decency and
     morals."--(III. 135.)

And it is perhaps as surprising to be told, by a man of Hume's literary
power, that the first polite prose in the English language was written
by Swift. Locke and Temple (with whom Sprat is astoundingly conjoined)
"knew too little of the rules of art to be esteemed elegant writers,"
and the prose of Bacon, Harrington, and Milton is "altogether stiff and
pedantic." Hobbes, who whether he should be called a "polite" writer or
not, is a master of vigorous English; Clarendon, Addison, and Steele
(the last two, surely, were "polite" writers in all conscience) are not
mentioned.

On the subject of _National Character_, about which more nonsense, and
often very mischievous nonsense, has been and is talked than upon any
other topic, Hume's observations are full of sense and shrewdness. He
distinguishes between the _moral_ and the _physical_ causes of national
character, enumerating under the former--

     "The nature of the government, the revolutions of public affairs,
     the plenty or penury in which people live, the situation of the
     nation with regard to its neighbours, and such like
     circumstances."--(III. 225.)

and under the latter:--

     "Those qualities of the air and climate, which are supposed to work
     insensibly on the temper, by altering the tone and habit of the
     body, and giving a particular complexion, which, though reflexion
     and reason may sometimes overcome it, will yet prevail among the
     generality of mankind, and have an influence on their
     manners."--(III. 225.)

While admitting and exemplifying the great influence of moral causes,
Hume remarks--

     "As to physical causes, I am inclined to doubt altogether of their
     operation in this particular; nor do I think that men owe anything
     of their temper or genius to the air, food, or climate."--(III.
     227.)

Hume certainly would not have accepted the "rice theory" in explanation
of the social state of the Hindoos; and, it may be safely assumed, that
he would not have had recourse to the circumambience of the "melancholy
main" to account for the troublous history of Ireland. He supports his
views by a variety of strong arguments, among which, at the present
conjuncture, it is worth noting that the following occurs--

     "Where any accident, as a difference in language or religion, keeps
     two nations, inhabiting the same country, from mixing with one
     another, they will preserve during several centuries a distinct and
     even opposite set of manners. The integrity, gravity, and bravery
     of the Turks, form an exact contrast to the deceit, levity, and
     cowardice of the modern Greeks."--(III. 233.)

The question of the influence of race, which plays so great a part in
modern political speculations, was hardly broached in Hume's time, but
he had an inkling of its importance:--

     "I am apt to suspect the Negroes to be naturally inferior to the
     Whites. There scarcely ever was a civilised nation of that
     complexion, nor even any individual, eminent either in action or
     speculation.... Such a uniform and constant difference [between the
     negroes and the whites] could not happen in so many countries and
     ages, if nature had not made an original distinction between these
     breeds of men.... In Jamaica, indeed, they talk of one Negro as a
     man of parts and learning; but it is likely he is admired for
     slender accomplishments, like a parrot who speaks a few words
     plainly."--(III. 236.)

The _Essays_ met with the success they deserved. Hume wrote to Henry
Home in June, 1742:--

     "The Essays are all sold in London, as I am informed by two letters
     from English gentlemen of my acquaintance. There is a demand for
     them; and, as one of them tells me, Innys, the great bookseller in
     Paul's Churchyard, wonders there is not a new edition, for he
     cannot find copies for his customers. I am also told that Dr.
     Butler has everywhere recommended them; so that I hope that they
     will have some success."

Hume had sent Butler a copy of the _Treatise_ and had called upon him,
in London, but he was out of town; and being shortly afterwards made
Bishop of Bristol, Hume seems to have thought that further advances on
his part might not be well received.

Greatly comforted by this measure of success, Hume remained at
Ninewells, rubbing up his Greek, until 1745; when, at the mature age of
thirty-four, he made his entry into practical life, by becoming
bear-leader to the Marquis of Annandale, a young nobleman of feeble
body and feebler mind. As might have been predicted, this venture was
not more fortunate than his previous ones; and, after a year's
endurance, diversified latterly with pecuniary squabbles, in which
Hume's tenacity about a somewhat small claim is remarkable, the
engagement came to an end.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] A picture of the house, taken from Drummond's _History of Noble
British Families_, is to be seen in Chambers's _Book of Days_ (April
26th); and if, as Drummond says, "It is a favourable specimen of the
best Scotch lairds' houses," all that can be said is worst Scotch lairds
must have been poorly lodged indeed.

[2] Mr. John Hill Burton, in his valuable _Life of Hume_, on which, I
need hardly say, I have drawn freely for the materials of the present
biographical sketch.

[3] One cannot but be reminded of young Descartes' renunciation of study
for soldiering.

[4] _My Own Life._

[5] Letter to Gilbert Elliot of Minto, 1751. "So vast an undertaking,
planned before I was one-and-twenty, and composed before twenty-five,
must necessarily be very defective. I have repented my haste a hundred
and a hundred times."

[6] So says Mr. Burton, and that he is right is proved by a letter of
Hume's, dated February 13, 1739, in which he writes, "'Tis now a
fortnight since my book was published." But it is a curious illustration
of the value of testimony, that Hume, in _My Own Life_, states: "In the
end of 1738 I published my Treatise, and immediately went down to my
mother and my brother."

[7] Burton, _Life_, vol. i. p. 109.




