CHAPTER II.

LATER YEARS: THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND.


In 1744, Hume's friends had endeavoured to procure his nomination to the
Chair of "Ethics and pneumatic philosophy"[8] in the University of
Edinburgh. About this matter he writes to his friend William Mure:--

     "The accusation of heresy, deism, scepticism, atheism, &c., &c.,
     &c. was started against me; but never took, being bore down by the
     contrary authority of all the good company in town."

If the "good company in town" bore down the first three of these
charges, it is to be hoped, for the sake of their veracity, that they
knew their candidate chiefly as the very good company that he always
was; and had paid as little attention, as good company usually does, to
so solid a work as the _Treatise_. Hume expresses a naive surprise, not
unmixed with indignation, that Hutcheson and Leechman, both clergymen
and sincere, though liberal, professors of orthodoxy, should have
expressed doubts as to his fitness for becoming a professedly
presbyterian teacher of presbyterian youth. The town council, however,
would not have him, and filled up the place with a safe nobody.

In May, 1746, a new prospect opened. General St. Clair was appointed to
the command of an expedition to Canada, and he invited Hume, at a week's
notice, to be his secretary; to which office that of judge advocate was
afterwards added.

Hume writes to a friend: "The office is very genteel, 10_s_. a day,
perquisites, and no expenses;" and, to another, he speculates on the
chance of procuring a company in an American regiment. "But this I build
not on, nor indeed am I very fond of it," he adds; and this was
fortunate, for the expedition, after dawdling away the summer in port,
was suddenly diverted to an attack on L'Orient, where it achieved a huge
failure and returned ignominiously to England.

A letter to Henry Home, written when this unlucky expedition was
recalled, shows that Hume had already seriously turned his attention to
history. Referring to an invitation to go over to Flanders with the
General, he says:

     "Had I any fortune which would give me a prospect of leisure and
     opportunity to prosecute my _historical projects_, nothing could be
     more useful to me, and I should pick up more literary knowledge in
     one campaign by being in the General's family, and being introduced
     frequently to the Duke's, than most officers could do after many
     years' service. But to what can all this serve? I am a philosopher,
     and so I suppose must continue."

But this vaticination was shortly to prove erroneous. Hume seems to
have made a very favourable impression on General St. Clair, as he did
upon every one with whom he came into personal contact; for, being
charged with a mission to the court of Turin, in 1748, the General
insisted upon the appointment of Hume as his secretary. He further made
him one of his aides-de-camp; so that the philosopher was obliged to
encase his more than portly, and by no means elegant, figure in a
military uniform. Lord Charlemont, who met him at Turin, says he was
"disguised in scarlet," and that he wore his uniform "like a grocer of
the train-bands." Hume, always ready for a joke at his own expense,
tells of the considerate kindness with which, at a reception at Vienna,
the Empress-dowager released him and his friends from the necessity of
walking backwards. "We esteemed ourselves very much obliged to her for
this attention, especially my companions, who were desperately afraid of
my falling on them and crushing them."

Notwithstanding the many attractions of this appointment, Hume writes
that he leaves home "with infinite regret, where I had treasured up
stores of study and plans of thinking for many years;" and his only
consolation is that the opportunity of becoming conversant with state
affairs may be profitable:--

     "I shall have an opportunity of seeing courts and camps: and if I
     can afterward be so happy as to attain leisure and other
     opportunities, this knowledge may even turn to account to me as a
     man of letters, which I confess has always been the sole object of
     my ambition. I have long had an intention, in my riper years, of
     composing some history; and I question not but some greater
     experience in the operations of the field and the intrigues of the
     cabinet will be requisite, in order to enable me to speak with
     judgment on these subjects."

Hume returned to London in 1749, and, during his stay there, his mother
died, to his heartfelt sorrow. A curious story in connection with this
event is told by Dr. Carlyle, who knew Hume well, and whose authority is
perfectly trustworthy.

     "Mr. Boyle hearing of it, soon after went to his apartment, for
     they lodged in the same house, where he found him in the deepest
     affliction and in a flood of tears. After the usual topics and
     condolences Mr. Boyle said to him, 'My friend, you owe this
     uncommon grief to having thrown off the principles of religion: for
     if you had not, you would have been consoled with the firm belief
     that the good lady, who was not only the best of mothers, but the
     most pious of Christians, was completely happy in the realms of the
     just. To which David replied, 'Though I throw out my speculations
     to entertain the learned and metaphysical world, yet in other
     things I do not think so differently from the rest of the world as
     you imagine.'"

If Hume had told this story to Dr. Carlyle, the latter would have said
so; it must therefore have come from Mr. Boyle; and one would like to
have the opportunity of cross-examining that gentleman as to Hume's
exact words and their context, before implicitly accepting his version
of the conversation. Mr. Boyle's experience of mankind must have been
small, if he had not seen the firmest of believers overwhelmed with
grief by a like loss, and as completely inconsolable. Hume may have
thrown off Mr. Boyle's "principles of religion," but he was none the
less a very honest man, perfectly open and candid, and the last person
to use ambiguous phraseology, among his friends; unless, indeed, he saw
no other way of putting a stop to the intrusion of unmannerly twaddle
amongst the bitter-sweet memories stirred in his affectionate nature by
so heavy a blow.

The _Philosophical Essays_ or _Inquiry_ was published in 1748, while
Hume was away with General St. Clair, and, on his return to England, he
had the mortification to find it overlooked in the hubbub caused by
Middleton's _Free Inquiry_, and its bold handling of the topic of the
_Essay on Miracles_, by which Hume doubtless expected the public to be
startled.

Between 1749 and 1751, Hume resided at Ninewells, with his brother and
sister, and busied himself with the composition of his most finished, if
not his most important works, the _Dialogues on Natural Religion_, the
_Inquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals_, and the _Political
Discourses_.

_The Dialogues on Natural Religion_ were touched and re-touched, at
intervals, for a quarter of a century, and were not published till after
Hume's death: but the _Inquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals_
appeared in 1751, and the _Political Discourses_ in 1752. Full reference
will be made to the two former in the exposition of Hume's philosophical
views. The last has been well said to be the "cradle of political
economy: and much as that science has been investigated and expounded in
later times, these earliest, shortest, and simplest developments of its
principles are still read with delight even by those who are masters of
all the literature of this great subject."[9]

The _Wealth of Nations_, the masterpiece of Hume's close friend, Adam
Smith, it must be remembered, did not appear before 1776, so that, in
political economy, no less than in philosophy, Hume was an original, a
daring, and a fertile innovator.

The _Political Essays_ had a great and rapid success; translated into
French in 1753, and again in 1754, they conferred a European reputation
upon their author; and, what was more to the purpose, influenced the
later French school of economists of the eighteenth century.

By this time, Hume had not only attained a high reputation in the world
of letters, but he considered himself a man of independent fortune. His
frugal habits had enabled him to accumulate L1,000, and he tells Michael
Ramsay in 1751:--

     "While interest remains as at present, I have L50 a year, a hundred
     pounds worth of books, great store of linens and fine clothes, and
     near L100 in my pocket; along with order, frugality, a strong
     spirit of independency, good health, a contented humour, and an
     unabated love of study. In these circumstances I must esteem myself
     one of the happy and fortunate; and so far from being willing to
     draw my ticket over again in the lottery of life, there are very
     few prizes with which I would make an exchange. After some
     deliberation, I am resolved to settle in Edinburgh, and hope I
     shall be able with these revenues to say with Horace:--


     'Est bona librorum et provisae frugis in annum
     Copia.'"


It would be difficult to find a better example of the honourable
independence and cheerful self-reliance which should distinguish a man
of letters, and which characterised Hume throughout his career. By
honourable effort, the boy's noble ideal of life, became the man's
reality; and, at forty, Hume had the happiness of finding that he had
not wasted his youth in the pursuit of illusions, but that "the solid
certainty of waking bliss" lay before him, in the free play of his
powers in their appropriate sphere.

In 1751, Hume removed to Edinburgh and took up his abode on a flat in
one of those prodigious houses in the Lawnmarket, which still excite the
admiration of tourists; afterwards moving to a house in the Canongate.
His sister joined him, adding L30 a year to the common stock; and, in
one of his charmingly playful letters to Dr. Clephane, he thus describes
his establishment, in 1753.

     "I shall exult and triumph to you a little that I have now at
     last--being turned of forty, to my own honour, to that of learning,
     and to that of the present age--arrived at the dignity of being a
     householder.

     "About seven months ago, I got a house of my own, and completed a
     regular family, consisting of a head, viz., myself, and two
     inferior members, a maid and a cat. My sister has since joined me,
     and keeps me company. With frugality, I can reach, I find,
     cleanliness, warmth, light, plenty, and contentment. What would you
     have more? Independence? I have it in a supreme degree. Honour?
     That is not altogether wanting. Grace? That will come in time. A
     wife? That is none of the indispensable requisites of life. Books?
     That is one of them; and I have more than I can use. In short, I
     cannot find any pleasure of consequence which I am not possessed of
     in a greater or less degree; and, without any great effort of
     philosophy, I may be easy and satisfied.

     "As there is no happiness without occupation, I have begun a work
     which will occupy me several years, and which yields me much
     satisfaction. 'Tis a History of Britain from the Union of the
     Crowns to the present time. I have already finished the reign of
     King James. My friends flatter me (by this I mean that they don't
     flatter me) that I have succeeded."

In 1752, the Faculty of Advocates elected Hume their librarian, an
office which, though it yielded little emolument--the salary was only
forty pounds a year--was valuable as it placed the resources of a large
library at his disposal. The proposal to give Hume even this paltry
place caused a great outcry, on the old score of infidelity. But as Hume
writes, in a jubilant letter to Clephane (February 4, 1752):--

     "I carried the election by a considerable majority.... What is more
     extraordinary, the cry of religion could not hinder the ladies from
     being violently my partisans, and I owe my success in a great
     measure to their solicitations. One has broke off all commerce with
     her lover because he voted against me! And Mr. Lockhart, in a
     speech to the Faculty, said there was no walking the streets, nor
     even enjoying one's own fireside, on account of their importunate
     zeal. The town says that even his bed was not safe for him, though
     his wife was cousin-german to my antagonist.

     "'Twas vulgarly given out that the contest was between Deists and
     Christians, and when the news of my success came to the playhouse,
     the whisper rose that the Christians were defeated. Are you not
     surprised that we could keep our popularity, notwithstanding this
     imputation, which my friends could not deny to be well founded?"

It would seem that the "good company" was less enterprising in its
asseverations in this canvass than in the last.

The first volume of the _History of Great Britain, containing the reign
of James I. and Charles I._, was published in 1754. At first, the sale
was large, especially in Edinburgh, and if notoriety _per se_ was Hume's
object, he attained it. But he liked applause as well as fame and, to
his bitter disappointment, he says:--

     "I was assailed by one cry of reproach, disapprobation, and even
     detestation: English, Scotch, and Irish, Whig and Tory, Churchman
     and Sectary, Freethinker and Religionist, Patriot and Courtier,
     united in their rage against the man who had presumed to shed a
     generous tear for the fate of Charles I. and the Earl of Strafford;
     and after the first ebullitions of their fury were over, what was
     still more mortifying, the book seemed to fall into oblivion. Mr.
     Millar told me that in a twelvemonth he sold only forty-five copies
     of it. I scarcely, indeed, heard of one man in the three kingdoms,
     considerable for rank or letters, that could endure the book. I
     must only except the primate of England, Dr. Herring, and the
     primate of Ireland, Dr. Stone, which seem two odd exceptions. These
     dignified prelates separately sent me messages not to be
     discouraged."

It certainly is odd to think of David Hume being comforted in his
affliction by the independent and spontaneous sympathy of a pair of
archbishops. But the instincts of the dignified prelates guided them
rightly; for, as the great painter of English history in Whig pigments
has been careful to point out,[10] Hume's historical picture, though a
great work, drawn by a master hand, has all the lights Tory, and all the
shades Whig.

Hume's ecclesiastical enemies seem to have thought that their
opportunity had now arrived; and an attempt was made to get the General
Assembly of 1756 to appoint a committee to inquire into his writings.
But, after a keen debate, the proposal was rejected by fifty votes to
seventeen. Hume does not appear to have troubled himself about the
matter, and does not even think it worth mention in _My Own Life_.

In 1756 he tells Clephane that he is worth L1,600 sterling, and
consequently master of an income which must have been wealth to a man of
his frugal habits. In the same year, he published the second volume of
the _History_, which met with a much better reception than the first;
and, in 1757, one of his most remarkable works, the _Natural History of
Religion_, appeared. In the same year, he resigned his office of
librarian to the Faculty of Advocates, and he projected removal to
London, probably to superintend the publication of the additional volume
of the _History_.

     "I shall certainly be in London next summer; and probably to remain
     there during life: at least, if I can settle myself to my mind,
     which I beg you to have an eye to. A room in a sober discreet
     family, who would not be averse to admit a sober, discreet,
     virtuous, regular, quiet, goodnatured man of a bad character--such
     a room, I say, would suit me extremely."[11]

The promised visit took place in the latter part of the year 1758, and
he remained in the metropolis for the greater part of 1759. The two
volumes of the _History of England under the House of Tudor_ were
published in London, shortly after Hume's return to Edinburgh; and,
according to his own account, they raised almost as great a clamour as
the first two had done.

Busily occupied with the continuation of his historical labours, Hume
remained in Edinburgh until 1763; when, at the request of Lord Hertford,
who was going as ambassador to France, he was appointed to the embassy;
with the promise of the secretaryship, and, in the meanwhile,
performing the duties of that office. At first, Hume declined the offer;
but, as it was particularly honourable to so well abused a man, on
account of Lord Hertford's high reputation for virtue and piety,[12] and
no less advantageous by reason of the increase of fortune which it
secured to him, he eventually accepted it.

In France, Hume's reputation stood far higher than in Britain; several
of his works had been translated; he had exchanged letters with
Montesquieu and with Helvetius; Rousseau had appealed to him; and the
charming Madame de Boufflers had drawn him into a correspondence, marked
by almost passionate enthusiasm on her part, and as fair an imitation of
enthusiasm as Hume was capable of, on his. In the extraordinary mixture
of learning, wit, humanity, frivolity, and profligacy which then
characterised the highest French society, a new sensation was worth
anything, and it mattered little whether the cause thereof was a
philosopher or a poodle; so Hume had a great success in the Parisian
world. Great nobles feted him, and great ladies were not content unless
the "gros David" was to be seen at their receptions, and in their boxes
at the theatre. "At the opera his broad unmeaning face was usually to be
seen _entre deux jolis minois_," says Lord Charlemont.[13] Hume's cool
head was by no means turned; but he took the goods the gods provided
with much satisfaction; and everywhere won golden opinions by his
unaffected good sense and thorough kindness of heart.

Over all this part of Hume's career, as over the surprising episode of
the quarrel with Rousseau, if that can be called quarrel which was
lunatic malignity on Rousseau's side and thorough generosity and
patience on Hume's, I may pass lightly. The story is admirably told by
Mr. Burton, to whose volumes I refer the reader. Nor need I dwell upon
Hume's short tenure of office in London, as Under-Secretary of State,
between 1767 and 1769. Success and wealth are rarely interesting, and
Hume's case is no exception to the rule.

According to his own description the cares of official life were not
overwhelming.

     "My way of life here is very uniform and by no means disagreeable.
     I have all the forenoon in the Secretary's house, from ten till
     three, when there arrive from time to time messengers that bring me
     all the secrets of the kingdom, and, indeed, of Europe, Asia,
     Africa, and America. I am seldom hurried; but have leisure at
     intervals to take up a book, or write a private letter, or converse
     with a friend that may call for me; and from dinner to bed-time is
     all my own. If you add to this that the person with whom I have the
     chief, if not only, transactions, is the most reasonable,
     equal-tempered, and gentleman-like man imaginable, and Lady
     Aylesbury the same, you will certainly think I have no reason to
     complain; and I am far from complaining. I only shall not regret
     when my duty is over; because to me the situation can lead to
     nothing, at least in all probability; and reading, and sauntering,
     and lounging, and dozing, which I call thinking, is my supreme
     happiness--I mean my full contentment."

Hume's duty was soon over, and he returned to Edinburgh in 1769, "very
opulent" in the possession of L1,000 a year, and determined to take what
remained to him of life pleasantly and easily. In October, 1769, he
writes to Elliot:--

     "I have been settled here two months, and am here body and soul,
     without casting the least thought of regret to London, or even to
     Paris.... I live still, and must for a twelvemonth, in my old house
     in James's Court, which is very cheerful and even elegant, but too
     small to display my great talent for cookery, the science to which
     I intend to addict the remaining years of my life. I have just now
     lying on the table before me a receipt for making _soupe a la
     reine_, copied with my own hand; for beef and cabbage (a charming
     dish) and old mutton and old claret nobody excels me. I make also
     sheep's-head broth in a manner that Mr. Keith speaks of for eight
     days after; and the Duc de Nivernois would bind himself apprentice
     to my lass to learn it. I have already sent a challenge to David
     Moncreiff: you will see that in a twelvemonth he will take to the
     writing of history, the field I have deserted; for as to the giving
     of dinners, he can now have no further pretensions. I should have
     made a very bad use of my abode in Paris if I could not get the
     better of a mere provincial like him. All my friends encourage me
     in this ambition; as thinking it will redound very much to my
     honour."

In 1770, Hume built himself a house in the new town of Edinburgh, which
was then springing up. It was the first house in the street, and a
frolicsome young lady chalked upon the wall "St. David's Street." Hume's
servant complained to her master, who replied, "Never mind, lassie, many
a better man has been made a saint of before," and the street retains
its title to this day.

In the following six years, the house in St. David's Street was the
centre of the accomplished and refined society which then distinguished
Edinburgh. Adam Smith, Blair, and Ferguson were within easy reach; and
what remains of Hume's correspondence with Sir Gilbert Elliot, Colonel
Edmonstone, and Mrs. Cockburn gives pleasant glimpses of his social
surroundings, and enables us to understand his contentment with his
absence from the more perturbed, if more brilliant, worlds of Paris and
London.

Towards London, Londoners, and indeed Englishmen in general, Hume
entertained a dislike, mingled with contempt, which was as nearly
rancorous as any emotion of his could be. During his residence in Paris,
in 1764 and 1765, he writes to Blair:--

     "The taste for literature is neither decayed nor depraved here, as
     with the barbarians who inhabit the banks of the Thames."

And he speaks of the "general regard paid to genius and learning" in
France as one of the points in which it most differs from England. Ten
years later, he cannot even thank Gibbon for his History without the
left-handed compliment, that he should never have expected such an
excellent work from the pen of an Englishman. Early in 1765, Hume writes
to Millar:--

     "The rage and prejudice of parties frighten me, and above all, this
     rage against the Scots, which is so dishonourable, and indeed so
     infamous, to the English nation. We hear that it increases every
     day without the least appearance of provocation on our part. It has
     frequently made me resolve never in my life to set foot on English
     ground. I dread, if I should undertake a more modern history, the
     impertinence and ill-manners to which it would expose me; and I was
     willing to know from you whether former prejudices had so far
     subsided as to ensure me of a good reception."

His fears were kindly appeased by Millar's assurance that the English
were not prejudiced against the Scots in general, but against the
particular Scot, Lord Bute, who was supposed to be the guide,
philosopher, and friend, of both Dowager Queen and King.

To care nothing about literature, to dislike Scotchmen, and to be
insensible to the merits of David Hume, was a combination of iniquities
on the part of the English nation, which would have been amply
sufficient to ruffle the temper of the philosophic historian, who,
without being foolishly vain, had certainly no need of what has been
said to be the one form of prayer in which his countrymen, torn as they
are by theological differences, agree; "Lord! gie us a gude conceit o'
oursels." But when, to all this, these same Southrons added a passionate
admiration for Lord Chatham, who was in Hume's eyes a charlatan; and
filled up the cup of their abominations by cheering for "Wilkes and
Liberty," Hume's wrath knew no bounds, and, between 1768 and 1770, he
pours a perfect Jeremiad into the bosom of his friend Sir Gilbert
Elliot.

     "Oh! how I long to see America and the East Indies revolted,
     totally and finally--the revenue reduced to half--public credit
     fully discredited by bankruptcy--the third of London in ruins, and
     the rascally mob subdued! I think I am not too old to despair of
     being witness to all these blessings.

     "I am delighted to see the daily and hourly progress of madness and
     folly and wickedness in England. The consummation of these
     qualities are the true ingredients for making a fine narrative in
     history, especially if followed by some signal and ruinous
     convulsion--as I hope will soon be the case with that pernicious
     people!"

Even from the secure haven of James's Court, the maledictions continue
to pour forth:--

     "Nothing but a rebellion and bloodshed will open the eyes of that
     deluded people; though were they alone concerned, I think it is no
     matter what becomes of them.... Our government has become a
     chimera, and is too perfect, in point of liberty, for so rude a
     beast as an Englishman; who is a man, a bad animal too, corrupted
     by above a century of licentiousness. The misfortune is that this
     liberty can scarcely be retrenched without danger of being entirely
     lost; at least the fatal effects of licentiousness must first be
     made palpable by some extreme mischief resulting from it. I may
     wish that the catastrophe should rather fall on our posterity, but
     it hastens on with such large strides as to leave little room for
     hope.

     I am running over again the last edition of my History, in order to
     correct it still further. I either soften or expunge many
     villainous seditious Whig strokes which had crept into it. I wish
     that my indignation at the present madness, encouraged by lies,
     calumnies, imposture, and every infamous act usual among popular
     leaders, may not throw me into the opposite extreme."

A wise wish, indeed. Posterity respectfully concurs therein; and
subjects Hume's estimate of England and things English to such
modifications as it would probably have undergone had the wish been
fulfilled.

In 1775, Hume's health began to fail; and, in the spring of the
following year, his disorder, which appears to have been haemorrhage of
the bowels, attained such a height that he knew it must be fatal. So he
made his will, and wrote _My Own Life_, the conclusion of which is one
of the most cheerful, simple, and dignified leave-takings of life and
all its concerns, extant.

     "I now reckon upon a speedy dissolution. I have suffered very
     little pain from my disorder; and what is more strange, have,
     notwithstanding the great decline of my person, never suffered a
     moment's abatement of spirits; insomuch that were I to name the
     period of my life which I should most choose to pass over again, I
     might be tempted to point to this later period. I possess the same
     ardour as ever in study and the same gaiety in company; I consider,
     besides, that a man of sixty-five, by dying, cuts off only a few
     years of infirmities; and though I see many symptoms of my literary
     reputation's breaking out at last with additional lustre, I know
     that I could have but few years to enjoy it. It is difficult to be
     more detached from life than I am at present.

     "To conclude historically with my own character, I am, or rather
     was (for that is the style I must now use in speaking of myself,
     which emboldens me the more to speak my sentiments); I was, I say,
     a man of mild dispositions, of command of temper, of an open,
     social, and cheerful humour, capable of attachment, but little
     susceptible of enmity, and of great moderation in all my passions.
     Even my love of literary fame, my ruling passion, never soured my
     temper, notwithstanding my frequent disappointments. My company was
     not unacceptable to the young and careless, as well as to the
     studious and literary; and as I took a particular pleasure in the
     company of modest women, I had no reason to be displeased with the
     reception I met with from them. In a word, though most men any wise
     eminent, have found reason to complain of calumny, I never was
     touched or even attacked by her baleful tooth; and though I
     wantonly exposed myself to the rage of both civil and religious
     factions, they seemed to be disarmed in my behalf of their wonted
     fury. My friends never had occasion to vindicate any one
     circumstance of my character and conduct; not but that the zealots,
     we may well suppose, would have been glad to invent and propagate
     any story to my disadvantage, but they could never find any which
     they thought would wear the face of probability. I cannot say there
     is no vanity in making this funeral oration of myself, but I hope
     it is not a misplaced one; and this is a matter of fact which is
     easily cleared and ascertained."

Hume died in Edinburgh on the 25th of August, 1776, and, a few days
later, his body, attended by a great concourse of people, who seem to
have anticipated for it the fate appropriate to the remains of wizards
and necromancers, was deposited in a spot selected by himself, in an old
burial-ground on the eastern slope of the Calton Hill.

From the summit of this hill, there is a prospect unequalled by any to
be seen from the midst of a great city. Westward lies the Forth, and
beyond it, dimly blue, the far away Highland hills; eastward, rise the
bold contours of Arthur's Seat and the rugged crags of the Castle rock,
with the grey Old Town of Edinburgh; while, far below, from a maze of
crowded thoroughfares, the hoarse murmur of the toil of a polity of
energetic men is borne upon the ear. At times, a man may be as solitary
here as in a veritable wilderness; and may meditate undisturbedly upon
the epitome of nature and of man--the kingdoms of this world--spread out
before him.

Surely, there is a fitness in the choice of this last resting-place by
the philosopher and historian, who saw so clearly that these two
kingdoms form but one realm, governed by uniform laws and alike based on
impenetrable darkness and eternal silence: and faithful to the last to
that profound veracity which was the secret of his philosophic
greatness, he ordered that the simple Roman tomb which marks his grave
should bear no inscription but


                               DAVID HUME

                        BORN 1711.     DIED 1776.

                _Leaving it to posterity to add the rest._


It was by the desire and at the suggestion of my friend, the Editor of
this Series, that I undertook to attempt to help posterity in the
difficult business of knowing what to add to Hume's epitaph; and I
might, with justice, throw upon him the responsibility of my apparent
presumption in occupying a place among the men of letters, who are
engaged with him, in their proper function of writing about English Men
of Letters.

That to which succeeding generations have made, are making, and will
make, continual additions, however, is Hume's fame as a philosopher;
and, though I know that my plea will add to my offence in some quarters,
I must plead, in extenuation of my audacity, that philosophy lies in the
province of science, and not in that of letters.

In dealing with Hume's Life, I have endeavoured, as far as possible, to
make him speak for himself. If the extracts from his letters and essays
which I have given do not sufficiently show what manner of man he was,
I am sure that nothing I could say would make the case plainer. In the
exposition of Hume's philosophy which follows, I have pursued the same
plan, and I have applied myself to the task of selecting and arranging
in systematic order, the passages which appeared to me to contain the
clearest statements of Hume's opinions.

I should have been glad to be able to confine myself to this duty, and
to limit my own comments to so much as was absolutely necessary to
connect my excerpts. Here and there, however, it must be confessed that
more is seen of my thread than of Hume's beads. My excuse must be an
ineradicable tendency to try to make things clear; while, I may further
hope, that there is nothing in what I may have said, which is
inconsistent with the logical development of Hume's principles.

My authority for the facts of Hume's life is the admirable biography,
published in 1846, by Mr. John Hill Burton. The edition of Hume's works
from which all citations are made is that published by Black and Tait in
Edinburgh, in 1826. In this edition, the Essays are reprinted from the
edition of 1777, corrected by the author for the press a short time
before his death. It is well printed in four handy volumes; and as my
copy has long been in my possession, and bears marks of much reading, it
would have been troublesome for me to refer to any other. But, for the
convenience of those who possess some other edition, the following table
of the contents of the edition of 1826, with the paging of the four
volumes, is given:--


                              VOLUME I.

                      TREATISE OF HUMAN NATURE.

       Book I. _Of the Understanding_, p. 5 to the end, p. 347.


                              VOLUME II.

                      TREATISE OF HUMAN NATURE.

               Book II. _Of the Passions_, p. 3-p. 215.

                 Book III. _Of Morals_, p. 219-p. 415.

         DIALOGUES CONCERNING NATURAL RELIGION, p. 419-p. 548.

               APPENDIX TO THE TREATISE, p. 551-p. 560.


                            VOLUME III.

              ESSAYS, MORAL AND POLITICAL, p. 3-p. 282.

                 POLITICAL DISCOURSES, p. 285-p. 579.


                            VOLUME IV.

      AN INQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING, p. 3-p. 233.

   AN INQUIRY CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLES OF MORALS, p. 237-p. 431.

           THE NATURAL HISTORY OF RELIGION, p. 435-p. 513.

                  ADDITIONAL ESSAYS, p. 517-p. 577.


As the volume and the page of the volume are given in my references, it
will be easy, by the help of this table, to learn where to look for any
passage cited, in differently arranged editions.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] "Pneumatic philosophy" must not be confounded with the theory of
elastic fluids; though, as Scottish chairs have, before now, combined
natural with civil history, the mistake would be pardonable.

[9] Burton's _Life of David Hume_, i. p. 354.

[10] Lord Macaulay, Article on History, _Edinburgh Review_, vol. lxvii.

[11] Letter to Clephane, 3rd September, 1757.

[12] "You must know that Lord Hertford has so high a character for
piety, that his taking me by the hand is a kind of regeneration to me,
and all past offences are now wiped off. But all these views are
trifling to one of my age and temper."--_Hume to Edmonstone_, 9th
January, 1764. Lord Hertford had procured him a pension of L200 a year
for life from the King, and the secretaryship was worth L1000 a year.

[13] Madame d'Epinay gives a ludicrous account of Hume's performance
when pressed into a _tableau_, as a Sultan between two slaves,
personated for the occasion by two of the prettiest women in Paris:--

"Il les regarde attentivement, _il se frappe le ventre_ et les genoux a
plusieurs reprises et ne trouve jamais autre chose a leur dire que _Eh
bien! mes demoiselles.--Eh bien! vous voila donc.... Eh bien! vous voila
... vous voila ici?_ Cette phrase dura un quart d'heure sans qu'il put
en sortir. Une d'elles se leva d'impatience: Ah, dit-elle, je m'en etois
bien doutee, cet homme n'est bon qu'a manger du veau!"--Burton's _Life
of Hume_, vol. ii. p. 224.




