CHAPTER II. THE PAGAN EMPIRE.


One of the first facts that must strike a student who examines the ethical
teaching of the ancient civilisations is how imperfectly that teaching was
represented, and how feebly it was influenced by the popular creed. The
moral ideas had at no time been sought in the actions of the gods, and
long before the triumph of Christianity, polytheism had ceased to have any
great influence upon the more cultivated intellects of mankind.

In Greece we may trace from the earliest time the footsteps of a religion
of nature, wholly different from the legends of the mythology. The
language in which the first Greek dramatists asserted the supreme
authority and universal providence of Zeus was so emphatic, that the
Christian Fathers commonly attributed it either to direct inspiration or
to a knowledge of the Jewish writings, while later theologians of the
school of Cudworth have argued from it in favour of the original
monotheism of our race. The philosophers were always either contemptuous
or hostile to the prevailing legends. Pythagoras is said to have declared
that he had seen Hesiod tied to a brazen pillar in hell, and Homer hung
upon a tree surrounded by serpents, on account of the fables they had
invented about the gods.(148) Plato, for the same reason, banished the
poets from his republic. Stilpo turned to ridicule the whole system of
sacrifices,(149) and was exiled from Athens for denying that the Athene of
Phidias was a goddess.(150) Xenophanes remarked that each nation
attributed to the gods its distinctive national type, the gods of the
Æthiopians being black, the gods of the Thracians fair and blue-eyed.(151)
Diagoras and Theodorus are said to have denied, and Protagoras to have
questioned the existence of the gods,(152) while the Epicureans deemed
them wholly indifferent to human affairs, and the Pyrrhonists pronounced
our faculties absolutely incapable of attaining any sure knowledge, either
human or divine. The Cynic Antisthenes said that there were many popular
gods, but there was only one god of nature.(153) The Stoics, reproducing
an opinion which was supported by Aristotle and attributed to
Pythagoras,(154) believed in an all-pervading soul of nature, but unlike
some modern schools which have adopted this view, they asserted in
emphatic language the doctrine of Providence, and the self-consciousness
of the Deity.

In the Roman republic and empire, a general scepticism had likewise arisen
among the philosophers as the first fruit of intellectual development, and
the educated classes were speedily divided between avowed or virtual
atheists, like the Epicureans,(155) and pure theists, like the Stoics and
the Platonists. The first, represented by such writers as Lucretius and
Petronius, regarded the gods simply as the creations of fear, denied every
form of Providence, attributed the world to a concurrence of atoms, and
life to spontaneous generation, and regarded it as the chief end of
philosophy to banish as illusions of the imagination every form of
religious belief. The others formed a more or less pantheistic conception
of the Deity, asserted the existence of a Providence,(156) but treated
with great contempt the prevailing legends which they endeavoured in
various ways to explain. The first systematic theory of explanation
appears to have been that of the Sicilian Euhemerus, whose work was
translated by Ennius. He pretended that the gods were originally kings,
whose history and genealogies he professed to trace, and who after death
had been deified by mankind.(157) Another attempt, which in the first
period of Roman scepticism was more generally popular, was that of some of
the Stoics, who regarded the gods as personifications of the different
attributes of the Deity, or of different forces of nature. Thus Neptune
was the sea, Pluto was fire, Hercules represented the strength of God,
Minerva His wisdom, Ceres His fertilising energy.(158) More than a hundred
years before the Empire, Varro had declared that “the soul of the world is
God, and that its parts are true divinities.”(159) Virgil and Manilius
described, in lines of singular beauty, that universal spirit, the
principle of all life, the efficient cause of all motion, which permeates
and animates the globe. Pliny said that “the world and sky, in whose
embrace all things are enclosed, must be deemed a god, eternal, immense,
never begotten, and never to perish. To seek things beyond this is of no
profit to man, and they transcend the limits of his faculties.”(160)
Cicero had adopted the higher Platonic conception of the Deity as mind
freed from all taint of matter,(161) while Seneca celebrated in
magnificent language “Jupiter the guardian and ruler of the universe, the
soul and spirit, the lord and master of this mundane sphere, ... the cause
of causes, upon whom all things hang.... Whose wisdom oversees the world
that it may move uncontrolled in its course, ... from whom all things
proceed, by whose spirit we live, ... who comprises all we see.”(162)
Lucan, the great poet of stoicism, rose to a still higher strain, and to
one which still more accurately expressed the sentiments of his school,
when he described Jupiter as that majestic, all-pervasive spirit, whose
throne is virtue and the universe.(163) Quintilian defended the
subjugation of the world beneath the sceptre of a single man, on the
ground that it was an image of the government of God. Other philosophers
contented themselves with asserting the supreme authority of Jupiter
Maximus, and reducing the other divinities to mere administrative and
angelic functions, or, as the Platonists expressed it, to the position of
dæmons. According to some of the Stoics, a final catastrophe would consume
the universe, the resuscitated spirits of men and all these minor gods,
and the whole creation being absorbed into the great parent spirit, God
would be all in all. The very children and old women ridiculed Cerberus
and the Furies(164) or treated them as mere metaphors of conscience.(165)
In the deism of Cicero the popular divinities were discarded, the oracles
refuted and ridiculed, the whole system of divination pronounced a
political imposture, and the genesis of the miraculous traced to the
exuberance of the imagination, and to certain diseases of the
judgment.(166) Before the time of Constantine, numerous books had been
written against the oracles.(167) The greater number of these had actually
ceased, and the ablest writers justly saw in this cessation an evidence of
the declining credulity of the people, and a proof that the oracles had
been a fruit of that credulity.(168) The Stoics, holding, as was their
custom, aloof from direct religious discussion, dissuaded their disciples
from consulting them, on the ground that the gifts of fortune were of no
account, and that a good man should be content with his conscience, making
duty and not success the object of his life.(169) Cato wondered that two
augurs could meet with gravity.(170) The Roman general Sertorius made the
forgery of auspicious omens a continual resource in warfare.(171) The
Roman wits made divination the favourite subject of their ridicule.(172)
The denunciation which the early Greek moralists launched against the
popular ascription of immoral deeds to the gods was echoed by a long
series of later philosophers,(173) while Ovid made these fables the theme
of his mocking _Metamorphoses_, and in his most immoral poem proposed
Jupiter as a model of vice. With an irony not unlike that of Isaiah,
Horace described the carpenter deliberating whether he should convert a
shapeless log into a bench or into a god.(174) Cicero, Plutarch, Maximus
of Tyre, and Dion Chrysostom either denounced idolatry or defended the use
of images simply on the ground that they were signs and symbols of the
Deity,(175) well suited to aid the devotions of the ignorant. Seneca(176)
and the whole school of Pythagoras objected to the sacrifices.

These examples will be sufficient to show how widely the philosophic
classes in Rome were removed from the professed religion of the State, and
how necessary it is to seek elsewhere the sources of their moral life. But
the opinions of learned men never reflect faithfully those of the vulgar,
and the chasm between the two classes was even wider than at present
before the dawn of Christianity and the invention of printing. The
atheistic enthusiasm of Lucretius and the sceptical enthusiasm of some of
the disciples of Carneades were isolated phenomena, and the great majority
of the ancient philosophers, while speculating with the utmost freedom in
private, or in writings that were read by the few, countenanced,
practised, and even defended the religious rites that they despised. It
was believed that many different paths adapted to different nations and
grades of knowledge converge to the same Divinity, and that the most
erroneous religion is good if it forms good dispositions and inspires
virtuous actions. The oracle of Delphi had said that the best religion is
that of a man’s own city. Polybius and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, who
regarded all religions simply as political agencies, dilated in rapturous
terms upon the devotion of the Romans and the comparative purity of their
creed.(177) Varro openly professed the belief that there are religious
truths which it is expedient that the people should not know, and
falsehoods which they should believe to be true.(178) The Academic Cicero
and the Epicurean Cæsar were both high officers of religion. The Stoics
taught that every man should duly perform the religious ceremonies of his
country.(179)

But the Roman religion, even in its best days, though an admirable system
of moral discipline, was never an independent source of moral enthusiasm.
It was the creature of the State, and derived its inspiration from
political feeling. The Roman gods were not, like those of the Greeks, the
creations of an unbridled and irreverent fancy, nor, like those of the
Egyptians, representations of the forces of nature; they were for the most
part simple allegories, frigid personifications of different virtues, or
presiding spirits imagined for the protection of different departments of
industry. The religion established the sanctity of an oath, it gave a kind
of official consecration to certain virtues, and commemorated special
instances in which they had been displayed; its local character
strengthened patriotic feeling, its worship of the dead fostered a vague
belief in the immortality of the soul,(180) it sustained the supremacy of
the father in the family, surrounded marriage with many imposing
solemnities, and created simple and reverent characters profoundly
submissive to an over-ruling Providence and scrupulously observant of
sacred rites. But with all this it was purely selfish. It was simply a
method of obtaining prosperity, averting calamity, and reading the future.
Ancient Rome produced many heroes, but no saint. Its self-sacrifice was
patriotic, not religious. Its religion was neither an independent teacher
nor a source of inspiration, although its rites mingled with and
strengthened some of the best habits of the people.

But these habits, and the religious reverence with which they were
connected, soon disappeared amid the immorality and decomposition that
marked the closing years of the Republic and the dawn of the Empire. The
stern simplicity of life, which the censors had so zealously and often so
tyrannically enforced,(181) was exchanged for a luxury which first
appeared after the return of the army of Manlius from Asia,(182) increased
to immense proportions after the almost simultaneous conquests of
Carthage, Corinth, and Macedonia,(183) received an additional stimulus
from the example of Antony,(184) and at last, under the Empire, rose to
excesses which the wildest Oriental orgies have never surpassed.(185) The
complete subversion of the social and political system of the Republic,
the anarchy of civil war, the ever-increasing concourse of strangers,
bringing with them new philosophies, customs, and gods, had dissolved or
effaced all the old bonds of virtue. The simple juxtaposition of many
forms of worship effected what could not have been effected by the most
sceptical literature or the most audacious philosophy. The moral influence
of religion was almost annihilated. The feeling of reverence was almost
extinct. Augustus solemnly degraded the statue of Neptune because his
fleet had been wrecked.(186) When Germanicus died, the populace stoned or
overthrew the altars of the gods.(187) The idea of sanctity was so far
removed from the popular divinities that it became a continual complaint
that prayers were offered which the most depraved would blush to pronounce
aloud.(188) Amid the corruption of the Empire, we meet with many noble
efforts of reform made by philosophers or by emperors, but we find
scarcely a trace of the moral influence of the old religion. The
apotheosis of the emperors consummated its degradation. The foreign gods
were identified with those of Rome, and all their immoral legends
associated with the national creed.(189) The theatre greatly extended the
area of scepticism. Cicero mentions the assenting plaudits with which the
people heard the lines of Ennius, declaring that the gods, though real
beings, take no care for the things of man.(190) Plutarch tells of a
spectator at a theatre rising up with indignation after a recital of the
crimes of Diana, and exclaiming to the actor, “May you have a daughter
like her whom you have described!”(191) St. Augustine and other of the
Fathers long after ridiculed the pagans who satirised in the theatres the
very gods they worshipped in the temples.(192) Men were still profoundly
superstitious, but they resorted to each new religion as to a charm or
talisman of especial power, or a system of magic revealing the future.
There existed, too, to a very large extent, a kind of superstitious
scepticism which occupies a very prominent place in religious history.
There were multitudes who, declaring that there were no gods, or that the
gods never interfered with human affairs, professed with the same breath
an absolute faith in all portents, auguries, dreams, and miracles.
Innumerable natural objects, such as comets, meteors, earthquakes, or
monstrous births, were supposed to possess a kind of occult or magical
virtue, by which they foreshadowed, and in some cases influenced, the
destinies of men. Astrology, which is the special representative of this
mode of thought, rose to great prominence. The elder Pliny notices that in
his time a belief was rapidly gaining ground, both among the learned and
among the vulgar, that the whole destiny of man is determined by the star
that presides over his nativity; that God, having ordained this, never
interferes with human affairs, and that the reality of the portents is due
to this pre-ordainment.(193) One of the later historians of the Empire
remarks that numbers who denied the existence of any divinity believed
nevertheless that they could not safely appear in public, or eat or bathe,
unless they had first carefully consulted the almanac to ascertain the
position of the planet Mercury, or how far the moon was from the
Crab.(194) Except, perhaps, among the peasants in the country districts,
the Roman religion, in the last years of the Republic, and in the first
century of the Empire, scarcely existed, except in the state of a
superstition, and he who would examine the true moral influence of the
time must turn to the great schools of philosophy which had been imported
from Greece.

The vast place which the rival systems of Zeno and Epicurus occupy in the
moral history of mankind, and especially in the closing years of the
empire of paganism, may easily lead us to exaggerate the creative genius
of their founders, who, in fact, did little more than give definitions or
intellectual expression to types of excellence that had at all times
existed in the world. There have ever been stern, upright,
self-controlled, and courageous men, actuated by a pure sense of duty,
capable of high efforts of self-sacrifice, somewhat intolerant of the
frailties of others, somewhat hard and unsympathising in the ordinary
intercourse of society, but rising to heroic grandeur as the storm lowered
upon their path, and more ready to relinquish life than the cause they
believed to be true. There have also always been men of easy tempers and
of amiable disposition, gentle, benevolent, and pliant, cordial friends
and forgiving enemies, selfish at heart, yet ever ready, when it is
possible, to unite their gratifications with those of others, averse to
all enthusiasm, mysticism, utopias, and superstition, with little depth of
character or capacity for self-sacrifice, but admirably fitted to impart
and to receive enjoyment, and to render the course of life easy and
harmonious. The first are by nature Stoics, and the second Epicureans, and
if they proceed to reason about the _summum bonum_ or the affections, it
is more than probable that in each case their characters will determine
their theories. The first will estimate self-control above all other
qualities, will disparage the affections, and will endeavour to separate
widely the ideas of duty and of interest, while the second will
systematically prefer the amiable to the heroic, and the utilitarian to
the mystical.

But while it is undoubtedly true that in these matters character usually
determines opinion, it is not less true that character is itself in a
great measure governed by national circumstances. The refined, artistic,
sensual civilisations of Greece and Asia Minor might easily produce fine
examples of the Epicurean type, but Rome was from the earliest times
pre-eminently the home of stoicism. Long before the Romans had begun to
reason about philosophy, they had exhibited it in action, and in their
speculative days it was to this doctrine that the noblest minds naturally
tended. A great nation engaged in perpetual wars in an age when success in
warfare depended neither upon wealth nor upon mechanical genius, but upon
the constant energy of patriotic enthusiasm, and upon the unflinching
maintenance of military discipline, the whole force of the national
character tended to the production of a single definite type. In the
absolute authority accorded to the father over the children, to the
husband over the wife, to the master over the slave, we may trace the same
habits of discipline that proved so formidable in the field. Patriotism
and military honour were indissolubly connected in the Roman mind. They
were the two sources of national enthusiasm, the chief ingredients of the
national conception of greatness. They determined irresistibly the moral
theory which was to prove supreme.

Now war, which brings with it so many demoralising influences, has, at
least, always been the great school of heroism. It teaches men how to die.
It familiarises the mind with the idea of noble actions performed under
the influence, not of personal interest, but of honour and of enthusiasm.
It elicits in the highest degree strength of character, accustoms men to
the abnegation needed for simultaneous action, compels them to repress
their fears, and establish a firm control over their affections.
Patriotism, too, leads them to subordinate their personal wishes to the
interests of the society in which they live. It extends the horizon of
life, teaching men to dwell among the great men of the past, to derive
their moral strength from the study of heroic lives, to look forward
continually, through the vistas of a distant future, to the welfare of an
organisation which will continue when they have passed away. All these
influences were developed in Roman life to a degree which can now never be
reproduced. War, for the reasons I have stated, was far more than at
present the school of heroic virtues. Patriotism, in the absence of any
strong theological passion, had assumed a transcendent power. The citizen,
passing continually from political to military life, exhibited to
perfection the moral effects of both. The habits of command formed by a
long period of almost universal empire, and by the aristocratic
organisation of the city, contributed to the elevation, and also to the
pride, of the national character.

It will appear, I think, sufficiently evident, from these considerations,
that the circumstances of the Roman people tended inevitably to the
production of a certain type of character, which, in its essential
characteristics, was the type of stoicism. In addition to the
predisposition which leads men in their estimate of the comparative
excellence of different qualities to select for the highest eulogy those
which are most congruous to their own characters, this fact derives a
great importance from the large place which the biographical element
occupied in ancient ethical teaching. Among Christians the ideals have
commonly been either supernatural beings or men who were in constant
connection with supernatural beings, and these men have usually been
either Jews or saints, whose lives were of such a nature as to isolate
them from most human sympathies, and to efface as far as possible the
national type. Among the Greeks and Romans the examples of virtue were
usually their own fellow-countrymen; men who had lived in the same moral
atmosphere, struggled for the same ends, acquired their reputation in the
same spheres, exhibited in all their intensity the same national
characteristics as their admirers. History had assumed a didactic
character it has now almost wholly lost. One of the first tasks of every
moralist was to collect traits of character illustrating the precepts he
enforced. Valerius Maximus represented faithfully the method of the
teachers of antiquity when he wrote his book giving a catalogue of
different moral qualities, and illustrating each by a profusion of
examples derived from the history of his own or of foreign nations.

“Whenever,” said Plutarch, “we begin an enterprise, or take possession of
a charge, or experience a calamity, we place before our eyes the example
of the greatest men of our own or of bygone ages, and we ask ourselves how
Plato or Epaminondas, Lycurgus or Agesilaus, would have acted. Looking
into these personages as into a faithful mirror, we can remedy our defects
in word or deed.... Whenever any perplexity arrives, or any passion
disturbs the mind, the student of philosophy pictures to himself some of
those who have been celebrated for their virtue, and the recollection
sustains his tottering steps and prevents his fall.”(195)

Passages of this kind continually occur in the ancient moralists,(196) and
they show how naturally the highest type of national excellence determined
the prevailing school of moral philosophy, and also how the influence of
the heroic period of national history would act upon the best minds in the
subsequent and wholly different phases of development. It was therefore
not surprising that during the Empire, though the conditions of national
life were profoundly altered, Stoicism should still be the philosophical
religion, the great source and regulator of moral enthusiasm. Epicureanism
had, indeed, spread widely in the Empire,(197) but it proved little more
than a principle of disintegration or an apology for vice, or at best the
religion of tranquil and indifferent natures animated by no strong moral
enthusiasm. It is indeed true that Epicurus had himself been a man of the
most blameless character, that his doctrines were at first carefully
distinguished from the coarse sensuality of the Cyrenaic school which had
preceded them, that they admitted in theory almost every form of virtue,
and that the school had produced many disciples who, if they had not
attained the highest grades of excellence, had at least been men of
harmless lives, intensely devoted to their master, and especially noted
for the warmth and constancy of their friendships.(198) But a school which
placed so high a value on ease and pleasure was eminently unfit to
struggle against the fearful difficulties that beset the teachers of
virtue amid the anarchy of a military despotism, and the virtues and the
vices of the Romans were alike fatal to its success. All the great ideals
of Roman excellence belonged to a different type. Such men as a Decius or
a Regulus would have been impossible in an Epicurean society, for even if
their actuating emotion were no nobler than a desire for posthumous fame,
such a desire could never grow powerful in a moral atmosphere charged with
the shrewd, placid, unsentimental utilitarianism of Epicurus. On the other
hand, the distinctions the Epicureans had drawn between more or less
refined pleasures and their elevated conceptions of what constitutes the
true happiness of men, were unintelligible to the Romans, who knew how to
sacrifice enjoyment, but who, when pursuing it, gravitated naturally to
the coarsest forms. The mission of Epicureanism was therefore chiefly
negative. The anti-patriotic tendency of its teaching contributed to that
destruction of national feeling which was necessary to the rise of
cosmopolitanism, while its strong opposition to theological beliefs,
supported by the genius and enthusiasm of Lucretius, told powerfully upon
the decaying faith.

Such being the functions of Epicureanism, the constructive or positive
side of ethical teaching devolved almost exclusively upon Stoicism; for
although there were a few philosophers who expressed themselves in strong
opposition to some portions of the Stoical system, their efforts usually
tended to no more than a modification of its extreme and harshest
features. The Stoics asserted two cardinal principles—that virtue was the
sole legitimate object to be aspired to, and that it involved so complete
an ascendancy of the reason as altogether to extinguish the affections.
The Peripatetics and many other philosophers, who derived their opinions
chiefly from Plato, endeavoured to soften down the exaggeration of these
principles. They admitted that virtue was an object wholly distinct from
interest, and that it should be the leading motive of life; but they
maintained that happiness was also a good, and a certain regard for it
legitimate. They admitted that virtue consisted in the supremacy of the
reason over the affections, but they allowed the exercise of the latter
within restricted limits. The main distinguishing features, however, of
Stoicism, the unselfish ideal and the controlling reason, were acquiesced
in, and each represents an important side of the ancient conception of
excellence which we must now proceed to examine.

In the first we may easily trace the intellectual expression of the high
spirit of self-sacrifice which the patriotic enthusiasm had elicited. The
spirit of patriotism has this peculiar characteristic, that, while it has
evoked acts of heroism which are both very numerous and very sublime, it
has done so without presenting any prospect of personal immortality as a
reward. Of all the forms of human heroism, it is probably the most
unselfish. The Spartan and the Roman died for his country because he loved
it. The martyr’s ecstasy of hope had no place in his dying hour. He gave
up all he had, he closed his eyes, as he believed, for ever, and he asked
for no reward in this world or in the next. Even the hope of posthumous
fame—the most refined and supersensual of all that can be called
reward—could exist only for the most conspicuous leaders. It was examples
of this nature that formed the culminations or ideals of ancient systems
of virtue, and they naturally led men to draw a very clear and deep
distinction between the notions of interest and of duty. It may, indeed,
be truly said, that while the conception of what constituted duty was
often very imperfect in antiquity, the conviction that duty, as
distinguished from every modification of selfishness, should be the
supreme motive of life was more clearly enforced among the Stoics than in
any later society.

The reader will probably have gathered from the last chapter that there
are four distinct motives which moral teachers may propose for the purpose
of leading men to virtue. They may argue that the disposition of events is
such that prosperity will attend a virtuous life, and adversity a vicious
one—a proposition they may prove by pointing to the normal course of
affairs, and by asserting the existence of a special Providence in behalf
of the good in the present world, and of rewards and punishments in the
future. As far as these latter arguments are concerned, the efficacy of
such teaching rests upon the firmness with which certain theological
tenets are held, while the force of the first considerations will depend
upon the degree and manner in which society is organised, for there are
undoubtedly some conditions of society in which a perfectly upright life
has not even a general tendency to prosperity. The peculiar circumstances
and dispositions of individuals will also influence largely the way in
which they receive such teaching, and, as Cicero observed, “what one
utility has created, another will often destroy.”

They may argue, again, that vice is to the mind what disease is to the
body, and that a state of virtue is in consequence a state of health. Just
as bodily health is desired for its own sake, as being the absence of a
painful, or at least displeasing state, so a well-ordered and virtuous
mind may be valued for its own sake, and independently of all the external
good to which it may lead, as being a condition of happiness; and a mind
distracted by passion and vice may be avoided, not so much because it is
an obstacle in the pursuit of prosperity, as because it is in itself
essentially painful and disturbing. This conception of virtue and vice as
states of health or sickness, the one being in itself a good and the other
in itself an evil, was a fundamental proposition in the ethics of
Plato.(199) It was admitted, but only to a subsidiary place, by the
Stoics,(200) and has passed more or less into all the succeeding systems.
It is especially favourable to large and elevating conceptions of
self-culture, for it leads men to dwell much less upon isolated acts of
virtue or vice than upon the habitual condition of mind from which they
spring.

It is possible, in the third place, to argue in favour of virtue by
offering as a motive that sense of pleasure which follows the deliberate
performance of a virtuous act. This emotion is a distinct and isolated
gratification following a distinct action, and may therefore be easily
separated from that habitual placidity of temper which results from the
extinction of vicious and perturbing impulses. It is this theory which is
implied in the common exhortations to enjoy ’the luxury of doing good,’
and though especially strong in acts of benevolence, in which case
sympathy with the happiness created intensifies the feeling, this pleasure
attends every kind of virtue.

These three motives of action have all this common characteristic, that
they point as their ultimate end to the happiness of the agent. The first
seeks that happiness in external circumstances; the second and third in
psychological conditions. There is, however, a fourth kind of motive which
may be urged, and which is the peculiar characteristic of the intuitive
school of moralists and the stumbling-block of its opponents. It is
asserted that we are so constituted that the notion of duty furnishes in
itself a natural motive of action of the highest order, wholly distinct
from all the refinements and modifications of self-interest. The coactive
force of this motive is altogether independent of surrounding
circumstances, and of all forms of belief. It is equally true for the man
who believes and for the man who rejects the Christian faith, for the
believer in a future world and for the believer in the mortality of the
soul. It is not a question of happiness or unhappiness, of reward or
punishment, but of a generically different nature. Men feel that a certain
course of life is the natural end of their being, and they feel bound,
even at the expense of happiness, to pursue it. They feel that certain
acts are essentially good and noble, and others essentially base and vile,
and this perception leads them to pursue the one and to avoid the other,
irrespective of all considerations of enjoyment.

I have recurred to these distinctions, which were more fully discussed in
the last chapter, because the school of philosophy we are reviewing
furnishes the most perfect of all historical examples of the power which
the higher of these motives can exercise over the mind. The coarser forms
of self-interest were in stoicism absolutely condemned. It was one of the
first principles of these philosophers that all things that are not in our
power should be esteemed indifferent; that the object of all mental
discipline should be to withdraw the mind from all the gifts of fortune,
and that prudence must in consequence be altogether excluded from the
motives of virtue. To enforce these principles they continually dilated
upon the vanity of human things, and upon the majesty of the independent
mind, and they indulged, though scarcely more than other sects, in many
exaggerations about the impassive tranquillity of the sage.(201) In the
Roman empire stoicism flourished at a period which, beyond almost any
other, seemed unfavourable to such teaching. There were reigns when, in
the emphatic words of Tacitus, “virtue was a sentence of death.” In no
period had brute force more completely triumphed, in none was the thirst
for material advantages more intense, in very few was vice more
ostentatiously glorified. Yet in the midst of all these circumstances the
Stoics taught a philosophy which was not a compromise, or an attempt to
moderate the popular excesses, but which was rather in its austere
sanctity the extreme antithesis of all that the prevailing examples and
their own interests could dictate. And these men were no impassioned
fanatics, fired with the prospect of coming glory. They were men from
whose motives of action the belief in the immortality of the soul was
resolutely excluded. In the scepticism that accompanied the first
introduction of philosophy into Rome, in the dissolution of the old fables
about Tartarus and the Styx, and the dissemination of Epicureanism among
the people, this doctrine had sunk very low, notwithstanding the beautiful
reasonings of Cicero and the religious faith of a few who clung like
Plutarch to the mysteries in which it was perpetuated. An interlocutor in
Cicero expressed what was probably a common feeling when he acknowledged
that, with the writings of Plato before him, he could believe and realise
it; but when he closed the book, the reasonings seemed to lose their
power, and the world of spirits grew pale and unreal.(202) If Ennius could
elicit the plaudits of a theatre when he proclaimed that the gods took no
part in human affairs, Cæsar could assert in the senate, without scandal
and almost without dissent, that death was the end of all things.(203)
Pliny, perhaps the greatest of Roman scholars, adopting the sentiment of
all the school of Epicurus, describes the belief in a future life as a
form of madness, a puerile and a pernicious illusion.(204) The opinions of
the Stoics were wavering and uncertain. Their first doctrine was that the
soul of man has a future and independent, but not an eternal existence,
that it survives until the last conflagration which was to destroy the
world, and absorb all finite things into the all-pervading soul of nature.
Chrysippus, however, restricted to the best and noblest souls this future
existence, which Cleanthes had awarded to all,(205) and among the Roman
Stoics even this was greatly doubted. The belief that the human soul is a
detached fragment of the Deity naturally led to the belief that after
death it would be reabsorbed into the parent Spirit. The doctrine that
there is no real good but virtue deprived the Stoics of the argument for a
future world derived from unrequited merit and unpunished crime, and the
earnestness with which they contended that a good man should act
irrespectively of reward inclined them, as it is said to have inclined
some Jewish thinkers,(206) to the denial of the existence of the
reward.(207) Panætius, the founder of Roman stoicism, maintained that the
soul perished with the body,(208) and his opinion was followed by
Epictetus,(209) and Cornutus.(210) Seneca contradicted himself on the
subject.(211) Marcus Aurelius never rose beyond a vague and mournful
aspiration. Those who believed in a future world believed in it faintly
and uncertainly, and even when they accepted it as a fact, they shrank
from proposing it as a motive. The whole system of Stoical ethics, which
carried self-sacrifice to a point that has scarcely been equalled, and
exercised an influence which has rarely been surpassed, was evolved
without any assistance from the doctrine of a future life.(212) Pagan
antiquity has bequeathed us few nobler treatises of morals than the “De
Officiis” of Cicero, which was avowedly an expansion of a work of
Panætius.(213) It has left us no grander example than that of Epictetus,
the sickly, deformed slave of a master who was notorious for his
barbarity, enfranchised late in life, but soon driven into exile by
Domitian; who, while sounding the very abyss of human misery, and looking
forward to death as to simple decomposition, was yet so filled with the
sense of the Divine presence that his life was one continued hymn to
Providence, and his writings and his example, which appeared to his
contemporaries almost the ideal of human goodness, have not lost their
consoling power through all the ages and the vicissitudes they have
survived.(214)

There was, however, another form of immortality which exercised a much
greater influence among the Roman moralists. The desire for reputation,
and especially for posthumous reputation—that “last infirmity of noble
minds”(215)—assumed an extraordinary prominence among the springs of Roman
heroism, and was also the origin of that theatrical and overstrained
phraseology which the greatest of ancient moralists rarely escaped.(216)
But we should be altogether in error if we inferred, as some have done,
that paganism never rose to the conception of virtue concealing itself
from the world, and consenting voluntarily to degradation. No characters
were more highly appreciated in antiquity than those of men who, through a
sense of duty, opposed the strong current of popular favour; of men like
Fabius, who consented for the sake of their country to incur the
reputation that is most fatal to a soldier;(217) of men like Cato, who
remained unmoved among the scoffs, the insults, and the ridicule of an
angry crowd.(218) Cicero, expounding the principles of Stoicism, declared
that no one has attained to true philosophy who has not learnt that all
vice should be avoided, “though it were concealed from the eyes of gods
and men,”(219) and that no deeds are more laudable than those which are
done without ostentation, and far from the sight of men.(220) The writings
of the Stoics are crowded with sentences to the same effect. “Nothing for
opinion, all for conscience.”(221) “He who wishes his virtue to be blazed
abroad is not labouring for virtue but for fame.”(222) “No one is more
virtuous than the man who sacrifices the reputation of a good man rather
than sacrifice his conscience.”(223) “I do not shrink from praise, but I
refuse to make it the end and term of right.”(224) “If you do anything to
please men, you have fallen from your estate.”(225) “Even a bad reputation
nobly earned is pleasing.”(226) “A great man is not the less great when he
lies vanquished and prostrate in the dust.”(227) “Never forget that it is
possible to be at once a divine man, yet a man unknown to all the
world.”(228) “That which is beautiful is beautiful in itself; the praise
of man adds nothing to its quality.”(229) Marcus Aurelius, following an
example that is ascribed to Pythagoras, made it a special object of mental
discipline, by continually meditating on death, and evoking, by an effort
of the imagination, whole societies that had passed away, to acquire a
realised sense of the vanity of posthumous fame. The younger Pliny painted
faithfully the ideal of Stoicism when he described one of his friends as a
man “who did nothing for ostentation, but all for conscience; who sought
the reward of virtue in itself, and not in the praise of man.”(230) Nor
were the Stoics less emphatic in distinguishing the obligation from the
attraction of virtue. It was on this point that they separated from the
more refined Epicureans, who were often willing to sublimate to the
highest degree the kind of pleasure they proposed as an object, provided
only it were admitted that pleasure is necessarily the ultimate end of our
actions. But this the Stoics firmly denied. “Pleasure,” they argued, “is
the companion, not the guide, of our course.”(231) “We do not love virtue
because it gives us pleasure, but it gives us pleasure because we love
it.”(232) “The wise man will not sin, though both gods and men should
overlook the deed, for it is not through the fear of punishment or of
shame that he abstains from sin. It is from the desire and obligation of
what is just and good.”(233) “To ask to be paid for virtue is as if the
eye demanded a recompense for seeing, or the feet for walking.”(234) In
doing good, man “should be like the vine which has produced grapes, and
asks for nothing more after it has produced its proper fruit.”(235) His
end, according to these teachers, is not to find peace either in life or
in death. It is to do his duty, and to tell the truth.

The second distinguishing feature of Stoicism I have noticed was the
complete suppression of the affections to make way for the absolute
ascendancy of reason. There are two great divisions of character
corresponding very nearly to the Stoical and Epicurean temperaments I have
described—that in which the will predominates, and that in which the
desires are supreme. A good man of the first class is one whose will,
directed by a sense of duty, pursues the course he believes to be right,
in spite of strong temptations to pursue an opposite course, arising
either from his own passions and tendencies, or from the circumstances
that surround him. A good man of the second class is one who is so happily
constituted that his sympathies and desires instinctively tend to virtuous
ends. The first character is the only one to which we can, strictly
speaking, attach the idea of merit, and it is also the only one which is
capable of rising to high efforts of continuous and heroic self-sacrifice;
but on the other hand there is a charm in the spontaneous action of the
unforced desires which disciplined virtue can perhaps never attain. The
man who is consistently generous through a sense of duty, when his natural
temperament impels him to avarice and when every exercise of benevolence
causes him a pang, deserves in the very highest degree our admiration; but
he whose generosity costs him no effort, but is the natural gratification
of his affections, attracts a far larger measure of our love.
Corresponding to these two casts of character, we find two distinct
theories of education, the aim of the one being chiefly to strengthen the
will, and that of the other to guide the desires. The principal examples
of the first are the Spartan and Stoical systems of antiquity, and, with
some modifications, the asceticism of the Middle Ages. The object of these
systems was to enable men to endure pain, to repress manifest and
acknowledged desires, to relinquish enjoyments, to establish an absolute
empire over their emotions. On the other hand, there is a method of
education which was never more prevalent than in the present day, which
exhausts its efforts in making virtue attractive, in associating it with
all the charms of imagination and of prosperity, and in thus insensibly
drawing the desires in the wished-for direction. As the first system is
especially suited to a disturbed and military society, which requires and
elicits strong efforts of the will, and is therefore the special sphere of
heroic virtues, so the latter belongs naturally to a tranquil and highly
organised civilisation, which is therefore very favourable to the amiable
qualities, and it is probable that as civilisation advances, the heroic
type will, in consequence, become more and more rare, and a kind of
self-indulgent goodness more common. The circumstances of the ancient
societies led them to the former type, of which the Stoics furnished the
extreme expression in their doctrine that the affections are of the nature
of a disease(236)—a doctrine which they justified by the same kind of
arguments as those which are now often employed by metaphysicians to prove
that love, anger, and the like can only be ascribed by a figure of speech
to the Deity. Perturbation, they contended, is necessarily imperfection,
and none of its forms can in consequence be ascribed to a perfect being.
We have a clear intuitive perception that reason is the highest, and
should be the directing, power of an intelligent being; but every act
which is performed at the instigation of the emotions is withdrawn from
the empire of reason. Hence it was inferred that while the will should be
educated to act habitually in the direction of virtue, even the emotions
that seem most fitted to second it should be absolutely proscribed. Thus
Seneca has elaborated at length the distinction between clemency and pity,
the first being one of the highest virtues, and the latter a positive
vice. Clemency, he says, is an habitual disposition to gentleness in the
application of punishments. It is that moderation which remits something
of an incurred penalty, it is the opposite of cruelty, which is an
habitual disposition to rigour. Pity, on the other hand, bears to clemency
the same kind of relation as superstition to religion. It is the weakness
of a feeble mind that flinches at the sight of suffering. Clemency is an
act of judgment, but pity disturbs the judgment. Clemency adjudicates upon
the proportion between suffering and guilt. Pity contemplates only
suffering, and gives no thought to its cause. Clemency, in the midst of
its noblest efforts, is perfectly passionless; pity is unreasoning
emotion. Clemency is an essential characteristic of the sage; pity is only
suited for weak women and for diseased minds. “The sage will console those
who weep, but without weeping with them; he will succour the shipwrecked,
give hospitality to the proscribed, and alms to the poor, ... restore the
son to the mother’s tears, save the captive from the arena, and even bury
the criminal; but in all this his mind and his countenance will be alike
untroubled. He will feel no pity. He will succour, he will do good, for he
is born to assist his fellows, to labour for the welfare of mankind, and
to offer to each one his part.... His countenance and his soul will betray
no emotion as he looks upon the withered legs, the tattered rags, the bent
and emaciated frame of the beggar. But he will help those who are worthy,
and, like the gods, his leaning will be towards the wretched.... It is
only diseased eyes that grow moist in beholding tears in other eyes, as it
is no true sympathy, but only weakness of nerves, that leads some to laugh
always when others laugh, or to yawn when others yawn.”(237)

Cicero, in a sentence which might be adopted as the motto of Stoicism,
said that Homer “attributed human qualities to the gods; it would have
been better to have imparted divine qualities to men.” The remarkable
passage I have just cited serves to show the extremes to which the Stoics
pushed this imitation. And indeed, if we compare the different virtues
that have flourished among Pagans and Christians, we invariably find that
the prevailing type of excellence among the former is that in which the
will and judgment, and among the latter that in which the emotions, are
most prominent. Friendship rather than love, hospitality rather than
charity, magnanimity rather than tenderness, clemency rather than
sympathy, are the characteristics of ancient goodness. The Stoics, who
carried the suppression of the emotions farther than any other school,
laboured with great zeal to compensate the injury thus done to the
benevolent side of our nature, by greatly enlarging the sphere of reasoned
and passionless philanthropy. They taught, in the most emphatic language,
the fraternity of all men, and the consequent duty of each man
consecrating his life to the welfare of others. They developed this
general doctrine in a series of detailed precepts, which, for the range,
depth, and beauty of their charity, have never been surpassed. They even
extended their compassion to crime, and adopting the paradox of Plato,
that all guilt is ignorance,(238) treated it as an involuntary disease,
and declared that the only legitimate ground of punishment is
prevention.(239) But, however fully they might reconcile in theory their
principles with the widest and most active benevolence, they could not
wholly counteract the practical evil of a system which declared war
against the whole emotional side of our being, and reduced human virtue to
a kind of majestic egotism; proposing as examples Anaxagoras, who, when
told that his son had died, simply observed, “I never supposed that I had
begotten an immortal;”(240) or Stilpo, who, when his country had been
ruined, his native city captured, and his daughters carried away as slaves
or as concubines, boasted that he had lost nothing, for the sage is
independent of circumstances. The framework or theory of benevolence might
be there, but the animating spirit was absent. Men who taught that the
husband or the father should look with perfect indifference on the death
of his wife or his child, and that the philosopher, though he may shed
tears of pretended sympathy in order to console his suffering friend, must
suffer no real emotion to penetrate his breast,(241) could never found a
true or lasting religion of benevolence. Men who refused to recognise pain
and sickness as evils were scarcely likely to be very eager to relieve
them in others.

In truth, the Stoics, who taught that all virtue was conformity to nature,
were, in this respect, eminently false to their own principle. Human
nature, as revealed to us by reason, is a composite thing, a constitution
of many parts differing in kind and dignity, a hierarchy in which many
powers are intended to co-exist, but in different positions of ascendancy
or subordination. To make the higher part of our nature our whole nature,
is not to restore but to mutilate humanity, and this mutilation has never
been attempted without producing grave evils. As philanthropists, the
Stoics, through their passion for unity, were led to the extirpation of
those emotions which nature intended as the chief springs of benevolence.
As speculative philosophers, they were entangled by the same desire in a
long train of pitiable paradoxes. Their famous doctrines that all virtues
are equal, or, more correctly, are the same, that all vices are equal,
that nothing is an evil which does not affect our will, and that pain and
bereavement are, in consequence, no ills,(242) though partially explained
away and frequently disregarded by the Roman Stoics, were yet sufficiently
prominent to give their teaching something of an unnatural and affected
appearance. Prizing only a single object, and developing only a single
side of their nature, their minds became narrow and their views
contracted. Thus, while the Epicureans, urging men to study nature in
order to banish superstition, endeavoured to correct that ignorance of
physical science which was one of the chief impediments to the progress of
the ancient mind, the Stoics for the most part disdained a study which was
other than the pursuit of virtue.(243) While the Epicurean poet painted in
magnificent language the perpetual progress of mankind, the Stoic was
essentially retrospective, and exhausted his strength in vain efforts to
restore the simplicity of a by-gone age. While, too, the school of Zeno
produced many of the best and greatest men who have ever lived, it must be
acknowledged that its records exhibit a rather unusual number of examples
of high professions falsified in action, and of men who, displaying in
some forms the most undoubted and transcendent virtue, fell in others far
below the average of mankind. The elder Cato, who, though not a
philosopher, was a model of philosophers, was conspicuous for his
inhumanity to his slaves.(244) Brutus was one of the most extortionate
usurers of his time, and several citizens of Salamis died of starvation,
imprisoned because they could not pay the sum he demanded.(245) No one
eulogised more eloquently the austere simplicity of life which Stoicism
advocated than Sallust, who in a corrupt age was notorious for his
rapacity. Seneca himself was constitutionally a nervous and timid man,
endeavouring, not always with success, to support himself by a sublime
philosophy. He guided, under circumstances of extreme difficulty, the
cause of virtue, and his death is one of the noblest antiquity records;
but his life was deeply marked by the taint of flattery, and not free from
the taint of avarice, and it is unhappily certain that he lent his pen to
conceal or varnish one of the worst crimes of Nero. The courage of Lucan
failed signally under torture, and the flattery which he bestowed upon
Nero, in his “Pharsalia,” ranks with the Epigrams of Martial as probably
the extreme limit of sycophancy to which Roman literature descended.

While, too, the main object of the Stoics was to popularise philosophy,
the high standard of self-control they exacted rendered their system
exceedingly unfit for the great majority of mankind, and for the ordinary
condition of affairs. Life is history, not poetry. It consists mainly of
little things, rarely illumined by flashes of great heroism, rarely broken
by great dangers, or demanding great exertions. A moral system, to govern
society, must accommodate itself to common characters and mingled motives.
It must be capable of influencing natures that can never rise to an heroic
level. It must tincture, modify, and mitigate where it cannot eradicate or
transform. In Christianity there are always a few persons seeking by
continual and painful efforts to reverse or extinguish the ordinary
feelings of humanity, but in the great majority of cases the influence of
the religious principle upon the mind, though very real, is not of a
nature to cause any serious strain or struggle. It is displayed in a
certain acquired spontaneity of impulse. It softens the character,
purifies and directs the imagination, blends insensibly with the habitual
modes of thought, and, without revolutionising, gives a tone and bias to
all the forms of action. But Stoicism was simply a school of heroes. It
recognised no gradations of virtue or vice. It condemned all emotions, all
spontaneity, all mingled motives, all the principles, feelings, and
impulses upon which the virtue of common men mainly depends. It was
capable of acting only on moral natures that were strung to the highest
tension, and it was therefore naturally rejected by the multitude.

The central conception of this philosophy of self-control was the dignity
of man. Pride, which looks within, making man seek his own approbation, as
distinguished from vanity, which looks without, and shapes its conduct
according to the opinions of others, was not only permitted in Stoicism,
it was even its leading moral agent. The sense of virtue, as I have
elsewhere observed, occupies in this system much the same place as the
sense of sin in Christianity. Sin, in the conception of the ancients, was
simply disease, and they deemed it the part of a wise man to correct it,
but not to dwell upon its circumstances. In the many disquisitions which
Epictetus and others have left us concerning the proper frame of mind in
which man should approach death, repentance for past sin has absolutely no
place, nor do the ancients appear to have ever realised the purifying and
spiritualising influence it exercises upon character. And while the
reality of moral disease was fully recognised, while a lofty and indeed
unattainable ideal was continually proposed, no one doubted the essential
excellence of human nature, and very few doubted the possibility of man
acquiring by his own will a high degree of virtue. In this last respect
there was a wide difference between the teaching of the Roman moralists
and of the Greek poets.(246) Homer continually represents courage, anger,
and the like, as the direct inspiration of Heaven. Æschylus, the great
poet of fatalism, regards every human passion as but a single link in the
great chain of causes forged by the inexorable will of Zeus. There are,
indeed, few grander things in poetry than his picture of the many and
various motives that urged Clytemnestra to the slaughter of
Agamemnon—revenge for her murdered daughter, love for Ægisthus, resentment
at past breaches of conjugal duty, jealousy of Cassandra, all blending in
that fierce hatred that nerved her arm against her husband’s life; while
above all this tumult of passion the solemn song of Cassandra proclaimed
that the deed was but the decree of Heaven, the harvest of blood springing
from the seed of crime, the accomplishment of the ancient curse that was
destined to cling for ever to the hapless race of Atreus. Before the body
of the murdered king, and in presence of the wildest paroxysms of human
passion, the bystanders bowed their heads, exclaiming, “Zeus has willed
it—Zeus the supreme Ruler, the God who does all; for what can happen in
the world without the will of Zeus?”

But conceptions of this kind had little or no place in the philosophy of
Rome. The issue of human enterprises and the disposition of the gifts of
fortune were recognised as under the control of Providence; but man was
master of his own feelings, and was capable of attaining such excellence
that he might even challenge comparison with the gods. Audacious as such
sentiments may now appear, they were common to most schools of Roman
moralists. “We boast justly of our own virtue,” said the eclectic Cicero,
“which we could not do if we derived it from the Deity and not from
ourselves.”

“All mortals judge that fortune is to be received from the gods and wisdom
from ourselves.”(247) The Epicurean Horace, in his noblest ode, described
the just man, confident in his virtue, undaunted amid the crash of worlds,
and he tells us to pray only for those things which Jupiter gives and
takes away. “He gives life, he gives wealth; an untroubled mind I secure
for myself.”(248) “The calm of a mind blest in the consciousness of its
virtue,” was the expression of supreme felicity the Epicureans had derived
from their master.(249) Lucretius, in a magnificent passage, designates
Epicurus as a god, and boasts that the popular divinities dwindle into
insignificance before him. Ceres, he says, gave men corn, and Bacchus
wine, but Epicurus the principles of virtue. Hercules conquered monsters,
Epicurus conquered vice.(250) “Pray,” said Juvenal, “for a healthy mind in
a healthy body. Ask for a brave soul unscared by death.... But there are
things you can give yourself.”(251) “Misfortune, and losses, and calumny,”
said Seneca, “disappear before virtue as the taper before the sun.”(252)
“In one point the sage is superior to God. God owes it to His nature not
to fear, but the sage owes it to himself. Sublime condition! he joins the
frailty of a man to the security of a god.”(253) “Except for immortality,”
he elsewhere writes, “the sage is like to God.”(254) “It is the
characteristic of a wise man,” added Epictetus, “that he looks for all his
good and evil from himself.”(255) “As far as his rational nature is
concerned, he is in no degree inferior to the gods.”(256)

There were, however, other veins of thought exhibited in stoicism which
greatly modified and sometimes positively contradicted this view of the
relations of man to the Deity. The theology of the Stoics was an
ill-defined, uncertain, and somewhat inconsistent Pantheism; the Divinity
was especially worshipped under the two aspects of Providence and moral
goodness, and the soul of man was regarded as “a detached fragment of the
Deity,”(257) or as at least pervaded and accompanied by a divine energy.
“There never,” said Cicero, “was a great man, without an inspiration from
on high.”(258) “Nothing,” said Seneca, “is closed to God. He is present in
our conscience. He intervenes in our thoughts.”(259) “I tell thee,
Lucilius,” he elsewhere writes, “a sacred spirit dwells within us, the
observer and the guardian of our good and evil deeds.... No man is good
without God. Who, save by His assistance, can rise above fortune? He gives
noble and lofty counsels. A God (what God I know not) dwells in every good
man.”(260) “Offer to the God that is in thee,” said Marcus Aurelius, “a
manly being, a citizen, a soldier at his post ready to depart from life as
soon as the trumpet sounds.”(261) “It is sufficient to believe in the
Genius who is within us, and to honour him by a pure worship.”(262)

Passages of this kind are not unfrequent in Stoical writings. More
commonly, however, virtue is represented as a human act imitating God.
This was the meaning of the Platonic maxim, “follow God,” which the Stoics
continually repeated, which they developed in many passages of the most
touching and beautiful piety, and to which they added the duty of the most
absolute and unquestioning submission to the decrees of Providence. Their
doctrine on this latter point harmonised well with their antipathy to the
emotional side of our being. “To weep, to complain, to groan, is to
rebel;”(263) “to fear, to grieve, to be angry, is to be a deserter.”(264)
“Remember that you are but an actor, acting whatever part the Master has
ordained. It may be short, or it may be long. If He wishes you to
represent a poor man, do so heartily; if a cripple, or a magistrate, or a
private man, in each case act your part with honour.”(265) “Never say of
anything that you have lost it, but that you have restored it; your wife
and child die—you have restored them; your farm is taken from you—that
also is restored. It is seized by an impious man. What is it to you by
whose instrumentality He who gave it reclaims it?”(266) “God does not keep
a good man in prosperity; He tries, He strengthens him, He prepares him
for Himself.”(267) “Those whom God approves, whom He loves, He hardens, He
proves, He exercises; but those whom He seems to indulge and spare, He
preserves for future ills.”(268) With a beautiful outburst of submissive
gratitude, Marcus Aurelius exclaims, “Some have said, Oh, dear city of
Cecrops!—but thou, canst thou say, Oh, dear city of Jupiter?... All that
is suitable to thee, oh world, is suitable to me.”(269)

These passages, which might be indefinitely multiplied, serve to show how
successfully the Stoics laboured, by dilating upon the conception of
Providence, to mitigate the arrogance which one aspect of their teaching
unquestionably displayed. But in this very attempt another danger was
incurred, upon which a very large proportion of the moral systems of all
ages have been wrecked. A doctrine which thus enjoins absolute submission
to the decrees of Providence,(270) which proscribes the affections, and
which represents its disciples as altogether independent of surrounding
circumstances, would in most conditions of society have led necessarily to
quietism, and proved absolutely incompatible with active virtue.
Fortunately, however, in the ancient civilisations the idea of virtue had
from the earliest times been so indissolubly connected with that of
political activity that the danger was for a long period altogether
avoided. The State occupied in antiquity a prominence in the thoughts of
men which it never has attained in modern times. The influence of
patriotism thrilled through every fibre of moral and intellectual life.
The most profound philosophers, the purest moralists, the most sublime
poets, had been soldiers or statesmen. Hence arose the excessive
predominance occasionally accorded to civic virtues in ancient systems of
ethics, and also not a few of their most revolting paradoxes. Plato
advocated community of wives mainly on the ground that the children
produced would be attached more exclusively to their country.(271)
Aristotle may be almost said to have made the difference between Greek and
barbarian the basis of his moral code. The Spartan legislation was
continually extolled as an ideal, as the Venetian constitution by the
writers of the seventeenth century. On the other hand, the contact of the
spheres of speculation and of political activity exercised in one respect
a very beneficial influence upon ancient philosophies. Patriotism almost
always occupied a prominence in the scale of duties, which forms a
striking contrast to the neglect or discredit into which it has fallen
among modern teachers. We do, indeed, read of an Anaxagoras pointing to
heaven as to his true country, and pronouncing exile to be no evil, as the
descent to the infernal regions is the same from every land;(272) but such
sentiments, though not unknown among the Epicureans and the Cynics, were
diametrically opposed to the prevailing tone. Patriotism was represented
as a moral duty, and a duty of the highest order. Cicero only echoed the
common opinion of antiquity in that noble passage, in which he asserts
that the love we owe our country is even holier and more profound than
that we owe our nearest kinsman, and that he can have no claim to the
title of a good man who even hesitates to die in its behalf.(273)

A necessary consequence of this prominence of patriotism was the practical
character of most ancient ethics. We find, indeed, moralists often
exhorting men to moderate their ambition, consoling them under political
adversity, and urging that there are some circumstances under which an
upright man should for a time withdraw from public affairs;(274) but the
general duty of taking part in political life was emphatically asserted,
and the vanity of the quietist theory of life not only maintained, but
even somewhat exaggerated. Thus Cicero declared that “all virtue is in
action.”(275) The younger Pliny mentions that he once lamented to the
Stoic Euphrates the small place which his official duties left for
philosophical pursuits; but Euphrates answered that the discharge of
public affairs and the administration of justice formed a part, and the
most important part, of philosophy, for he who is so engaged is but
practising the precepts of the schools.(276) It was a fundamental maxim of
the Stoics that humanity is a body in which each limb should act solely
and continually with a view to the interests of the whole. Marcus
Aurelius, the purest mind of the sect, was for nineteen years the active
ruler of the civilised globe. Thrasea, Helvidius, Cornutus, and a crowd of
others who had adopted Stoicism as a religion, lived, and in many cases
died, in obedience to its precepts, struggling for the liberties of their
country in the darkest hours of tyranny.

Men who had formed such high conceptions of duty, who had bridled so
completely the tumult of passion, and whose lives were spent in a calm
sense of virtue and of dignity, were little likely to be assailed by the
superstitious fears that are the nightmare of weaker men. The preparation
for death was deemed one of the chief ends of philosophy.(277) The thought
of a coming change assisted the mind in detaching itself from the gifts of
fortune, and the extinction of all superstitious terrors completed the
type of self-reliant majesty which Stoicism had chosen for its ideal. But
while it is certain that no philosophers expatiated upon death with a
grander eloquence, or met it with a more placid courage, it can hardly be
denied that their constant disquisitions forced it into an unhealthy
prominence, and somewhat discoloured their whole view of life. “The
Stoics,” as Bacon has said, “bestowed too much cost on death, and by their
preparations made it more fearful.”(278) There is a profound wisdom in the
maxims of Spinoza, that “the proper study of a wise man is not how to die,
but how to live,” and that “there is no subject on which the sage will
think less than death.”(279) A life of active duty is the best preparation
for the end, and so large a part of the evil of death lies in its
anticipation, that an attempt to deprive it of its terrors by constant
meditation almost necessarily defeats its object, while at the same time
it forms an unnaturally tense, feverish, and tragical character,
annihilates the ambition and enthusiasm that are essential to human
progress, and not unfrequently casts a chill and a deadness over the
affections.

Among the many half-pagan legends that were connected with Ireland during
the middle ages, one of the most beautiful is that of the islands of life
and of death. In a certain lake in Munster it is said there were two
islands; into the first death could never enter, but age and sickness, and
the weariness of life, and the paroxysms of fearful suffering were all
known there, and they did their work till the inhabitants, tired of their
immortality, learned to look upon the opposite island as upon a haven of
repose: they launched their barks upon the gloomy waters; they touched its
shore and they were at rest.(280)

This legend, which is far more akin to the spirit of paganism than to that
of Christianity, and is in fact only another form of the myth of Tithonus,
represents with great fidelity the aspect in which death was regarded by
the exponents of Stoicism. There was much difference of opinion and of
certitude in the judgments of the ancient philosophers concerning the
future destinies of the soul, but they were unanimous in regarding death
simply as a natural rest, and in attributing the terrors that were
connected with it to a diseased imagination. Death, they said, is the only
evil that does not afflict us when present. While we are, death is not,
when death has come we are not. It is a false belief that it only follows,
it also precedes, life. It is to be as we were before we were born. The
candle which has been extinguished is in the same condition as before it
was lit, and the dead man as the man unborn. Death is the end of all
sorrow. It either secures happiness or ends suffering. It frees the slave
from his cruel master, opens the prison door, calms the qualms of pain,
closes the struggles of poverty. It is the last and best boon of nature,
for it frees man from all his cares. It is at worst but the close of a
banquet we have enjoyed. Whether it be desired or whether it be shunned,
it is no curse and no evil, but simply the resolution of our being into
its primitive elements, the law of our nature to which it is our duty
cheerfully to conform.

Such were the leading topics that were employed in that beautiful
literature of “Consolations,” which the academic Crantor is said to have
originated, and which occupies so large a place in the writings of Cicero,
Plutarch, and the Stoics. Cicero, like all the school of Plato, added to
these motives a very firm and constant reference to the immortality of the
soul. Plutarch held the same doctrine with equal assurance, but he gave it
a much less conspicuous position in his “Consolations,” and he based it
not upon philosophical grounds, but upon the testimonies of the oracles,
and upon the mysteries of Bacchus.(281) Among the Stoics the doctrine
shone with a faint and uncertain light, and was seldom or never adopted as
a motive. But that which is most impressive to a student who turns from
the religious literature of Christianity to the pagan philosophies, is the
complete absence in the latter of all notion concerning the penal
character of death. Death, according to Socrates,(282) either extinguishes
life or emancipates it from the thraldom of the body. Even in the first
case it is a blessing, in the last it is the greatest of boons. “Accustom
yourself,” said Epicurus, “to the thought that death is indifferent; for
all good and all evil consist in feeling, and what is death but the
privation of feeling?”(283) “Souls either remain after death,” said
Cicero, “or they perish in death. If they remain they are happy; if they
perish they are not wretched.”(284) Seneca, consoling Polybius concerning
the death of his brother, exhorts his friend to think, “if the dead have
any sensations, then my brother, let loose as it were from a lifelong
prison, and at last enjoying his liberty, looks down from a loftier height
on the wonders of nature and on all the deeds of men, and sees more
clearly those divine things which he had so long sought in vain to
understand. But why should I be afflicted for one who is either happy or
is nothing? To lament the fate of one who is happy is envy; to lament the
fate of a nonentity is madness.”(285)

But while the Greek and Roman philosophers were on this point unanimous,
there was a strong opposing current in the popular mind. The Greek word
for superstition signifies literally, fear of gods or dæmons, and the
philosophers sometimes represent the vulgar as shuddering at the thought
of death, through dread of certain endless sufferings to which it would
lead them. The Greek mythology contains many fables on the subject. The
early Greek vases occasionally represent scenes of infernal torments, not
unlike those of the mediæval frescoes.(286) The rapture with which
Epicureanism was received, as liberating the human mind from the thraldom
of superstitious terrors, shows how galling must have been the yoke. In
the poem of Lucretius, in occasional passages of Cicero and other Latin
moralists, above all, in the treatise of Plutarch “On Superstition,” we
may trace the deep impression these terrors had made upon the populace,
even during the later period of the Republic, and during the Empire. To
destroy them was represented as the highest function of philosophy.
Plutarch denounced them as the worst calumny against the Deity, as more
pernicious than atheism, as the evil consequences of immoral fables, and
he gladly turned to other legends which taught a different lesson. Thus it
was related that when, during a certain festival at Argos, the horses that
were to draw the statue of Juno to the temple were detained, the sons of
the priestess yoked themselves to the car, and their mother, admiring
their piety, prayed the goddess to reward them with whatever boon was the
best for man. Her prayer was answered—they sank asleep and died.(287) In
like manner the architects of the great temple of Apollo at Delphi, prayed
the god to select that reward which was best. The oracle told them in
reply to spend seven days in rejoicing, and on the following night their
reward would come. They too died in sleep.(288) The swan was consecrated
to Apollo because its dying song was believed to spring from a prophetic
impulse.(289) The Spanish Celts raised temples, and sang hymns of praise
to death.(290) No philosopher of antiquity ever questioned that a good
man, reviewing his life, might look upon it without shame and even with
positive complacency, or that the reverence with which men regard heroic
deaths is a foretaste of the sentence of the Creator. To this confidence
may be traced the tranquil courage, the complete absence of all remorse,
so conspicuous in the closing hours of Socrates, and of many other of the
sages of antiquity. There is no fact in religious history more startling
than the radical change that has in this respect passed over the character
of devotion. It is said of Chilon, one of the seven sages of Greece, that
at the close of his career he gathered his disciples around him, and
congratulated himself that in a long life he could recall but a single act
that saddened his dying hour. It was that, in a perplexing dilemma, he had
allowed his love of a friend in some slight degree to obscure his sense of
justice.(291) The writings of Cicero in his old age are full of passionate
aspirations to a future world, unclouded by one regret or by one fear.
Seneca died tranquilly, bequeathing to his friends “the most precious of
his possessions, the image of his life.”(292) Titus on his deathbed
declared that he could remember only a single act with which to reproach
himself.(293) On the last night in which Antoninus Pius lived, the tribune
came to ask for the pass-word of the night. The dying emperor gave him
“æquanimitas.”(294) Julian, the last great representative of his expiring
creed, caught up the same majestic strain. Amid the curses of angry
priests, and the impending ruin of the cause he loved, he calmly died in
the consciousness of his virtue; and his death, which is among the most
fearless that antiquity records, was the last protest of philosophic
paganism against the new doctrine that had arisen.(295)

It is customary with some writers, when exhibiting the many points in
which the ancient philosophers anticipated Christian ethics, to represent
Christianity as if it were merely a development or authoritative
confirmation of the highest teaching of paganism, or as if the additions
were at least of such a nature that there is but little doubt that the
best and purest spirits of the pagan world, had they known them, would
have gladly welcomed them. But this conception, which contains a large
amount of truth if applied to the teaching of many Protestants, is either
grossly exaggerated or absolutely false if applied to that of the
patristic period or of mediæval Catholicism. On the very subject which the
philosophers deemed the most important their unanimous conclusion was the
extreme antithesis of the teaching of Catholicism. The philosophers taught
that death is “a law and not a punishment;”(296) the fathers taught that
it is a penal infliction introduced into the world on account of the sin
of Adam, which was also the cause of the appearance of all noxious plants,
of all convulsions in the material globe, and, as was sometimes asserted,
even of a diminution of the light of the sun. The first taught that death
was the end of suffering; they ridiculed as the extreme of folly the
notion that physical evils could await those whose bodies had been reduced
to ashes, and they dwelt with emphatic eloquence upon the approaching,
and, as they believed, final extinction of superstitious terrors. The
second taught that death to the vast majority of the human race is but the
beginning of endless and excruciating tortures—tortures before which the
most ghastly of terrestrial sufferings dwindle into
insignificance—tortures which no courage could defy—which none but an
immortal being could endure. The first represented man as pure and
innocent until his will had sinned; the second represented him as under a
sentence of condemnation at the very moment of his birth. “No funeral
sacrifices” said a great writer of the first school, “are offered for
children who die at an early age, and none of the ceremonies practised at
the funerals of adults are performed at their tombs, for it is believed
that infants have no hold upon earth or upon terrestrial affections....
The law forbids us to honour them because it is irreligious to lament for
those pure souls who have passed into a better life and a happier
dwelling-place.”(297) “Whosoever shall tell us,” said a distinguished
exponent of the patristic theology, “that infants shall be quickened in
Christ who die without partaking in His Sacrament, does both contradict
the Apostle’s teaching and condemn the whole Church.... And he that is not
quickened in Christ must remain in that condemnation of which the Apostle
speaks, ‘by one man’s offence condemnation came upon all men to
condemnation.’ To which condemnation infants are born liable as all the
Church believes.”(298) The one school endeavoured to plant its foundations
in the moral nature of mankind, by proclaiming that man can become
acceptable to the Deity by his own virtue, and by this alone, that all
sacrifices, rites, and forms are indifferent, and that the true worship of
God is the recognition and imitation of His goodness. According to the
other school, the most heroic efforts of human virtue are insufficient to
avert a sentence of eternal condemnation, unless united with an implicit
belief in the teachings of the Church, and a due observance of the rites
it enjoins. By the philosophers the ascription of anger and vengeance to
the Deity, and the apprehension of future torture at His hands, were
unanimously repudiated;(299) by the priests the opposite opinion was
deemed equally censurable.(300)

These are fundamental points of difference, for they relate to the
fundamental principles of the ancient philosophy. The main object of the
pagan philosophers was to dispel the terrors the imagination had cast
around death, and by destroying this last cause of fear to secure the
liberty of man. The main object of the Catholic priests has been to make
death in itself as revolting and appalling as possible, and by
representing escape from its terrors as hopeless, except by complete
subjection to their rule, to convert it into an instrument of government.
By multiplying the dancing or warning skeletons, and other sepulchral
images representing the loathsomeness of death without its repose; by
substituting inhumation for incremation, and concentrating the imagination
on the ghastliness of decay; above all, by peopling the unseen world with
demon phantoms and with excruciating tortures, the Catholic Church
succeeded in making death in itself unspeakably terrible, and in thus
preparing men for the consolations it could offer. Its legends, its
ceremonies, its art,(301) its dogmatic teaching, all conspired to this
end, and the history of its miracles is a striking evidence of its
success. The great majority of superstitions have ever clustered around
two centres—the fear of death and the belief that every phenomenon of life
is the result of a special spiritual interposition. Among the ancients
they were usually of the latter kind. Auguries, prophecies, interventions
in war, prodigies avenging the neglect of some rite or marking some epoch
in the fortunes of a nation or of a ruler, are the forms they usually
assumed. In the middle ages, although these were very common, the most
conspicuous superstitions took the form of visions of purgatory or hell,
conflicts with visible demons, or Satanic miracles. Like those mothers who
govern their children by persuading them that the dark is crowded with
spectres that will seize the disobedient, and who often succeed in
creating an association of ideas which the adult man is unable altogether
to dissolve, the Catholic priests resolved to base their power upon the
nerves; and as they long exercised an absolute control over education,
literature, and art, they succeeded in completely reversing the teaching
of ancient philosophy, and in making the terrors of death for centuries
the nightmare of the imagination.

There is, indeed, another side to the picture. The vague uncertainty with
which the best pagans regarded death passed away before the teaching of
the Church, and it was often replaced by a rapture of hope, which,
however, the doctrine of purgatory contributed at a later period largely
to quell. But, whatever may be thought of the justice of the Catholic
conception of death or of its influence upon human happiness, it is plain
that it is radically different from that of the pagan philosophers. That
man is not only an imperfect but a fallen being, and that death is the
penal consequence of his sin, was a doctrine profoundly new to mankind,
and it has exercised an influence of the most serious character upon the
moral history of the world.

The wide divergence of the classical from the Catholic conception of death
appears very plainly in the attitude which each system adopted towards
suicide. This is, perhaps, the most striking of all the points of contrast
between the teaching of antiquity, and especially of the Roman Stoics, on
the one hand, and that of almost all modern moralists on the other. It is
indeed true that the ancients were by no means unanimous in their approval
of the act. Pythagoras, to whom so many of the wisest sayings of antiquity
are ascribed, is said to have forbidden men “to depart from their guard or
station in life without the order of their commander, that is, of
God.”(302) Plato adopted similar language, though he permitted suicide
when the law required it, and also when men had been struck down by
intolerable calamity, or had sunk to the lowest depths of poverty.(303)
Aristotle condemned it on civic grounds, as being an injury to the
State.(304) The roll of Greek suicides is not long, though it contains
some illustrious names, among others those of Zeno and Cleanthes.(305) In
Rome, too, where suicide acquired a greater prominence, its lawfulness was
by no means accepted as an axiom, and the story of Regulus, whether it be
a history or a legend, shows that the patient endurance of suffering was
once the supreme ideal.(306) Virgil painted in gloomy colours the
condition of suicides in the future world.(307) Cicero strongly asserted
the doctrine of Pythagoras, though he praised the suicide of Cato.(308)
Apuleius, expounding the philosophy of Plato, taught that “the wise man
never throws off his body except by the will of God.”(309) Cæsar, Ovid,
and others urged that in extreme distress it is easy to despise life, and
that true courage is shown in enduring it.(310) Among the Stoics
themselves, the belief that no man may shrink from a duty co-existed with
the belief that every man has a right to dispose of his own life. Seneca,
who emphatically advocated suicide, admits that there were some who deemed
it wrong, and he himself attempted to moderate what he termed “the passion
for suicide”, that had arisen among his disciples.(311) Marcus Aurelius
wavers a little on the subject, sometimes asserting the right of every man
to leave life when he pleases, sometimes inclining to the Platonic
doctrine that man is a soldier of God, occupying a post which it is
criminal to abandon.(312) Plotinus and Porphyry argued strongly against
all suicide.(313)

But, notwithstanding these passages, there can be no question that the
ancient view of suicide was broadly and strongly opposed to our own. A
general approval of it floated down through most of the schools of
philosophy, and even to those who condemned it, it never seems to have
assumed its present aspect of extreme enormity. This was in the first
instance due to the ancient notion of death; and we have also to remember
that when a society once learns to tolerate suicide, the deed, in ceasing
to be disgraceful, loses much of its actual criminality, for those who are
most firmly convinced that the stigma and suffering it now brings upon the
family of the deceased do not constitute its entire guilt, will readily
acknowledge that they greatly aggravate it. In the conditions of ancient
thought, this aggravation did not exist. Epicurus exhorted men “to weigh
carefully, whether they would prefer death to come to them, or would
themselves go to death;”(314) and among his disciples, Lucretius, the
illustrious poet of the sect, died by his own hand,(315) as did also
Cassius the tyrannicide, Atticus the friend of Cicero,(316) the voluptuary
Petronius,(317) and the philosopher Diodorus.(318) Pliny described the lot
of man as in this respect at least superior to that of God, that man has
the power of flying to the tomb,(319) and he represented it as one of the
greatest proofs of the bounty of Providence, that it has filled the world
with herbs, by which the weary may find a rapid and a painless death.(320)
One of the most striking figures that a passing notice of Cicero brings
before us, is that of Hegesias, who was surnamed by the ancients “the
orator of death.” A conspicuous member of that Cyrenaic school which
esteemed the pursuit of pleasure the sole end of a rational being, he
taught that life was so full of cares, and its pleasure so fleeting and so
alloyed, that the happiest lot for man was death; and such was the power
of his eloquence, so intense was the fascination he cast around the tomb,
that his disciples embraced with rapture the consequence of his doctrine,
multitudes freed themselves by suicide from the troubles of the world, and
the contagion was so great, that Ptolemy, it is said, was compelled to
banish the philosopher from Alexandria.(321)

But it was in the Roman Empire and among the Roman Stoics that suicide
assumed its greatest prominence, and its philosophy was most fully
elaborated. From an early period self-immolation, like that of Curtius or
Decius, had been esteemed in some circumstances a religious rite, being,
as has been well suggested, probably a lingering remnant of the custom of
human sacrifices,(322) and towards the closing days of paganism many
influences conspired in the same direction. The example of Cato, who had
become the ideal of the Stoics, and whose dramatic suicide was the
favourite subject of their eloquence,(323) the indifference to death
produced by the great multiplication of gladiatorial shows, the many
instances of barbarian captives, who, sooner than slay their
fellow-countrymen, or minister to the pleasures of their conquerors,
plunged their lances into their own necks, or found other and still more
horrible roads to freedom,(324) the custom of compelling political
prisoners to execute their own sentence, and, more than all, the
capricious and atrocious tyranny of the Cæsars,(325) had raised suicide
into an extraordinary prominence. Few things are more touching than the
passionate joy with which, in the reign of Nero, Seneca clung to it as the
one refuge for the oppressed, the last bulwark of the tottering mind. “To
death alone it is due that life is not a punishment, that, erect beneath
the frowns of fortune, I can preserve my mind unshaken and master of
itself. I have one to whom I can appeal. I see before me the crosses of
many forms.... I see the rack and the scourge, and the instruments of
torture adapted to every limb and to every nerve; but I also see Death.
She stands beyond my savage enemies, beyond my haughty fellow-countrymen.
Slavery loses its bitterness when by a step I can pass to liberty. Against
all the injuries of life, I have the refuge of death.”(326) “Wherever you
look, there is the end of evils. You see that yawning precipice—there you
may descend to liberty. You see that sea, that river, that well—liberty
sits at the bottom.... Do you seek the way to freedom?—you may find it in
every vein of your body.”(327) “If I can choose between a death of torture
and one that is simple and easy, why should I not select the latter? As I
choose the ship in which I will sail, and the house I will inhabit, so I
will choose the death by which I will leave life.... In no matter more
than in death should we act according to our desire. Depart from life as
your impulse leads you, whether it be by the sword, or the rope, or the
poison creeping through the veins; go your way, and break the chains of
slavery. Man should seek the approbation of others in his life; his death
concerns himself alone. That is the best which pleases him most.... The
eternal law has decreed nothing better than this, that life should have
but one entrance and many exits. Why should I endure the agonies of
disease, and the cruelties of human tyranny, when I can emancipate myself
from all my torments, and shake off every bond? For this reason, but for
this alone, life is not an evil—that no one is obliged to live. The lot of
man is happy, because no one continues wretched but by his fault. If life
pleases you, live. If not, you have a right to return whence you
came.”(328)

These passages, which are but a few selected out of very many, will
sufficiently show the passion with which the most influential teacher of
Roman Stoicism advocated suicide. As a general proposition, the law
recognised it as a right, but two slight restrictions were after a time
imposed.(329) It had become customary with many men who were accused of
political offences to commit suicide before trial, in order to prevent the
ignominious exposure of their bodies and the confiscation of their goods;
but Domitian closed this resource by ordaining that the suicide of an
accused person should entail the same consequences as his condemnation.
Hadrian afterwards assimilated the suicide of a Roman soldier to
desertion.(330) With these exceptions, the liberty appears to have been
absolute, and the act was committed under the most various motives. The
suicide of Otho, who is said to have killed himself to avoid being a
second time a cause of civil war, was extolled as equal in grandeur to
that of Cato.(331) In the Dacian war, the enemy, having captured a
distinguished Roman general named Longinus, endeavoured to extort terms
from Trajan as a condition of his surrender, but Longinus, by taking
poison, freed the emperor from his embarrassment.(332) On the death of
Otho, some of his soldiers, filled with grief and admiration, killed
themselves before his corpse,(333) as did also a freedman of Agrippina, at
the funeral of the empress.(334) Before the close of the Republic, an
enthusiastic partisan of one of the factions in the chariot races flung
himself upon the pile on which the body of a favourite coachman was
consumed, and perished in the flames.(335) A Roman, unmenaced in his
fortune, and standing high in the favour of his sovereign, killed himself
under Tiberius, because he could not endure to witness the crimes of the
empire.(336) Another, being afflicted by an incurable malady, postponed
his suicide till the death of Domitian, that at least he might die free,
and on the assassination of the tyrant, hastened cheerfully to the
tomb.(337) The Cynic Peregrinus announced that, being weary of life, he
would on a certain day depart, and, in presence of a large concourse, he
mounted the funeral pile.(338) Most frequently, however, death was
regarded as “the last physician of disease,”(339) and suicide as the
legitimate relief from intolerable suffering. “Above all things,” said
Epictetus, “remember that the door is open. Be not more timid than boys at
play. As they, when they cease to take pleasure in their games, declare
they will no longer play, so do you, when, all things begin to pall upon
you, retire; but if you stay, do not complain.”(340) Seneca declared that
he who waits the extremity of old age is not “far removed from a coward,”
“as he is justly regarded as too much addicted to wine who drains the
flask to the very dregs.” “I will not relinquish old age,” he added, “if
it leaves my better part intact. But if it begins to shake my mind, if it
destroys its faculties one by one, if it leaves me not life but breath, I
will depart from the putrid or tottering edifice. I will not escape by
death from disease so long as it may be healed, and leaves my mind
unimpaired. I will not raise my hand against myself on account of pain,
for so to die is to be conquered. But if I know that I must suffer without
hope of relief, I will depart, not through fear of the pain itself, but
because it prevents all for which I would live.”(341) “Just as a
landlord,” said Musonius, “who has not received his rent, pulls down the
doors, removes the rafters, and fills up the well, so I seem to be driven
out of this little body, when nature, which has let it to me, takes away,
one by one, eyes and ears, hands and feet. I will not, therefore, delay
longer, but will cheerfully depart as from a banquet.”(342)

This conception of suicide as an euthanasia, an abridgment of the pangs of
disease, and a guarantee against the dotage of age, was not confined to
philosophical treatises. We have considerable evidence of its being
frequently put in practice. Among those who thus abridged their lives was
Silius Italicus, one of the last of the Latin poets.(343) The younger
Pliny describes in terms of the most glowing admiration the conduct of one
of his friends, who, struck down by disease, resolved calmly and
deliberately upon the path he should pursue. He determined, if the disease
was only dangerous and long, to yield to the wishes of his friends and
await the struggle; but if the issue was hopeless, to die by his own hand.
Having reasoned on the propriety of this course with all the tranquil
courage of a Roman, he summoned a council of physicians, and, with a mind
indifferent to either fate, he calmly awaited their sentence.(344) The
same writer mentions the case of a man who was afflicted with a horrible
disease, which reduced his body to a mass of sores. His wife, being
convinced that it was incurable, exhorted her husband to shorten his
sufferings; she nerved and encouraged him to the effort, and she claimed
it as her privilege to accompany him to the grave. Husband and wife, bound
together, plunged into a lake.(345) Seneca, in one of his letters, has
left us a detailed description of the death-bed of one of the Roman
suicides. Tullius Marcellinus, a young man of remarkable abilities and
very earnest character, who had long ridiculed the teachings of
philosophy, but had ended by embracing it with all the passion of a
convert, being afflicted with a grave and lingering though not incurable
disease, resolved at length upon suicide. He gathered his friends around
him, and many of them entreated him to continue in life. Among them,
however, was one Stoical philosopher, who addressed him in what Seneca
terms the very noblest of discourses. He exhorted him not to lay too much
stress upon the question he was deciding, as if existence was a matter of
great importance. He urged that life is a thing we possess in common with
slaves and animals, but that a noble death should indeed be prized, and he
concluded by recommending suicide. Marcellinus gladly embraced the counsel
which his own wishes had anticipated. According to the advice of his
friend, he distributed gifts among his faithful slaves, consoled them on
their approaching bereavement, abstained dining three days from all food,
and at last, when his strength had been wholly exhausted, passed into a
warm bath and calmly died, describing with his last breath the pleasing
sensations that accompanied receding life.(346)

The doctrine of suicide was indeed the culminating point of Roman
Stoicism. The proud, self-reliant, unbending character of the philosopher
could only be sustained when he felt that he had a sure refuge against the
extreme forms of suffering or of despair. Although virtue is not a mere
creature of interest, no great system has ever yet flourished which did
not present an ideal of happiness as well as an ideal of duty. Stoicism
taught men to hope little, but to fear nothing. It did not array death in
brilliant colours, as the path to positive felicity, but it endeavoured to
divest it, as the end of suffering, of every terror. Life lost much of its
bitterness when men had found a refuge from the storms of fate, a speedy
deliverance from dotage and pain. Death ceased to be terrible when it was
regarded rather as a remedy than as a sentence. Life and death in the
Stoical system were attuned to the same key. The deification of human
virtue, the total absence of all sense of sin, the proud stubborn will
that deemed humiliation the worst of stains, appeared alike in each. The
type of its own kind was perfect. All the virtues and all the majesty that
accompany human pride, when developed to the highest point, and directed
to the noblest ends, were here displayed. All those which accompany
humility and self-abasement were absent.

I desire at this stage of our enquiry to pause for a moment, in order to
retrace briefly the leading steps of the foregoing argument, and thus to
bring into the clearest light the connection which many details and
quotations may have occasionally obscured. Such a review will show at a
single glance in what respects Stoicism was a result of the pre-existent
state of society, and in what respects it was an active agent, how far its
influence was preparing the way for Christian ethics, and how far it was
opposed to them.

We have seen, then, that among the Romans, as among other people, a very
clear and definite type of moral excellence was created before men had
formed any clear intellectual notions of the nature and sanctions of
virtue. The characters of men are chiefly governed by their occupations,
and the republic being organised altogether with a view to military
success, it had attained all the virtues and vices of a military society.
We have seen, too, that at all times, but most especially under the
conditions of ancient warfare, military life is very unfavourable to the
amiable, and very favourable to the heroic virtues. The Roman had learnt
to value force very highly. Being continually engaged in inflicting pain,
his natural or instinctive humanity was very low. His moral feelings were
almost bounded by political limits, acting only, and with different
degrees of intensity, towards his class, his country, and its allies.
Indomitable pride was the most prominent element of his character. A
victorious army which is humble or diffident, or tolerant of insult, or
anxious to take the second place, is, indeed, almost a contradiction of
terms. The spirit of patriotism, in its relation to foreigners, like that
of political liberty in its relation to governors, is a spirit of constant
and jealous self-assertion; and although both are very consonant with high
morality and great self-devotion, we rarely find that the grace of genuine
humility can flourish in a society that is intensely pervaded by their
influence. The kind of excellence that found most favour in Roman eyes was
simple, forcible, massive, but coarse-grained. Subtilty of motives,
refinements of feelings, delicacies of susceptibility, were rarely
appreciated.

This was the darker side of the picture. On the other hand, the national
character, being formed by a profession in which mercenary considerations
are less powerful, and splendid examples of self-devotion more frequent,
than in any other, had early risen to a heroic level. Death being
continually confronted, to meet it with courage was the chief test of
virtue. The habits of men were unaffected, frugal, honourable, and
laborious. A stern discipline pervading all ages and classes of society,
the will was trained, to an almost unexampled degree, to repress the
passions, to endure suffering and opposition, to tend steadily and
fearlessly towards an unpopular end. A sense of duty was very widely
diffused, and a deep attachment to the interests of the city became the
parent of many virtues.

Such was the type of excellence the Roman people had attained at a time
when its intellectual cultivation produced philosophical discussions, and
when numerous Greek professors, attracted partly by political events, and
partly by the patronage of Scipio Æmilianus, arrived at Rome, bringing
with them the tenets of the great schools of Zeno and Epicurus, and of the
many minor sects that clustered around them. Epicureanism being
essentially opposed to the pre-existing type of virtue, though it spread
greatly, never attained the position of a school of virtue. Stoicism,
taught by Panætius of Rhodes, and soon after by the Syrian Posidonius,
became the true religion of the educated classes. It furnished the
principles of virtue, coloured the noblest literature of the time, and
guided all the developments of moral enthusiasm.

The Stoical system of ethics was in the highest sense a system of
independent morals. It taught that our reason reveals to us a certain law
of nature, and that a desire to conform to this law, irrespectively of all
considerations of reward or punishment, of happiness or the reverse, is a
possible and a sufficient motive of virtue. It was also in the highest
sense a system of discipline. It taught that the will, acting under the
complete control of the reason, is the sole principle of virtue, and that
all the emotional part of our being is of the nature of a disease. Its
whole tendency was therefore to dignify and strengthen the will, and to
degrade and suppress the desires. It taught, moreover, that man is capable
of attaining an extremely high degree of moral excellence, that he has
nothing to fear beyond the present life, that it is essential to the
dignity and consistence of his character that he should regard death
without dismay, and that he has a right to hasten it if he desires.

It is easy to see that this system of ethics was strictly consonant with
the type of character the circumstances of the Roman people had formed. It
is also manifest that while the force of circumstances had in the first
instance secured its ascendancy, the energy of will which it produced
would enable it to offer a powerful resistance to the tendencies of an
altered condition of society. This was pre-eminently shown in the history
of Roman Stoicism. The austere purity of the writings of Seneca and his
school is a fact probably unique in history, when we consider, on the one
hand, the intense and undisguised depravity of the Empire, and on the
other, the prominent position of most of the leading Stoics in the very
centre of the stream. More than once in later periods did great
intellectual brilliancy coincide with general depravity, but on none of
these occasions was this moral phenomenon reproduced. In the age of Leo
X., in the age of the French Regency, or of Lewis XV., we look in vain for
high moral teaching in the centre of Italian or of Parisian civilisation.
The true teachers of those ages were the reformers, who arose in obscure
towns of Germany or Switzerland, or that diseased recluse who, from his
solitude near Geneva, fascinated Europe by the gleams of a dazzling and
almost peerless eloquence, and by a moral teaching which, though often
feverish, paradoxical, and unpractical, abounded in passages of
transcendent majesty and of the most entrancing purity and beauty. But
even the best moral teachers who rose in the centres of the depraved
society felt the contagion of the surrounding vice. Their ideal was
depressed, their austerity was relaxed, they appealed to sordid and
worldly motives, their judgments of character were wavering and uncertain,
their whole teaching was of the nature of a compromise. But in ancient
Rome, if the teachers of virtue acted but feebly upon the surrounding
corruption, their own tenets were at least unstained. The splendour of the
genius of Cæsar never eclipsed the moral grandeur of the vanquished Cato,
and amid all the dramatic vicissitudes of civil war and of political
convulsion, the supreme authority of moral distinctions was never
forgotten. The eloquence of Livy was chiefly employed in painting virtue,
the eloquence of Tacitus in branding vice. The Stoics never lowered their
standard because of the depravity around them, and if we trace in their
teaching any reflection of the prevailing worship of enjoyment, it is only
in the passionate intensity with which they dwelt upon the tranquillity of
the tomb.

But it is not sufficient for a moral system to form a bulwark against
vice, it must also be capable of admitting those extensions and
refinements of moral sympathies which advancing civilisation produces, and
the inflexibility of its antagonism to evil by no means implies its
capacity of enlarging its conceptions of good. During the period which
elapsed between the importation of Stoical tenets into Rome and the
ascendancy of Christianity, an extremely important transformation of moral
ideas had been effected by political changes, and it became a question how
far the new elements could coalesce with the Stoical ideal, and how far
they tended to replace it by an essentially different type. These changes
were twofold, but were very closely connected. They consisted of the
increasing prominence of the benevolent or amiable, as distinguished from
the heroic qualities, and of the enlargement of moral sympathies, which
having at first comprised only a class or a nation, came at last, by the
destruction of many artificial barriers, to include all classes and all
nations. The causes of these changes—which were the most important
antecedents of the triumph of Christianity—are very complicated and
numerous, but it will, I think, be possible to give in a few pages a
sufficiently clear outline of the movement.

It originated in the Roman Empire at the time when the union of the Greek
and Latin civilisations was effected by the conquest of Greece. The
general humanity of the Greeks had always been incomparably greater than
that of the Romans. The refining influence of their art and literature,
their ignorance of gladiatorial games, and their comparative freedom from
the spirit of conquest, had separated them widely from their
semi-barbarous conquerors, and had given a peculiar softness and
tenderness to their ideal characters. Pericles, who, when the friends who
had gathered round his death-bed, imagining him to be insensible, were
recounting his splendid deeds, told them that they had forgotten his best
title to fame—that “no Athenian had ever worn mourning on his account;”
Aristides, praying the gods that those who had banished him might never be
compelled by danger or suffering to recall him; Phocion, when unjustly
condemned, exhorting his son never to avenge his death, all represent a
type of character of a milder kind than that which Roman influences
produced. The plays of Euripides had been to the ancient world the first
great revelation of the supreme beauty of the gentler virtues. Among the
many forms of worship that flourished at Athens, there was an altar which
stood alone, conspicuous and honoured beyond all others. The suppliants
thronged around it, but no image of a god, no symbol of dogma was there.
It was dedicated to Pity, and was venerated through all the ancient world
as the first great assertion among mankind of the supremo sanctity of
Mercy.(347)

But while the Greek spirit was from a very early period distinguished for
its humanity, it was at first as far removed from cosmopolitanism as that
of Rome. It is well known that Phrynichus was fined because in his
“Conquest of Miletus” he had represented the triumph of barbarians over
Greeks.(348) His successor, Æschylus, deemed it necessary to violate all
dramatic probabilities by making the Persian king and courtiers
continually speak of themselves as barbarians. Socrates, indeed, had
proclaimed himself a citizen of the world,(349) but Aristotle taught that
Greeks had no more duties to barbarians than to wild beasts, and another
philosopher was believed to have evinced an almost excessive range of
sympathy when he declared that his affections extended beyond his own
State, and included the whole people of Greece. But the dissolving and
disintegrating philosophical discussions that soon followed the death of
Socrates, strengthened by political events, tended powerfully to destroy
this feeling. The traditions that attached Greek philosophy to Egypt, the
subsequent admiration for the schools of India to which Pyrrho and
Anaxarchus are said to have resorted,(350) the prevalence of Cynicism and
Epicureanism, which agreed in inculcating indifference to political life,
the complete decomposition of the popular national religions, and the
incompatibility of a narrow local feeling with great knowledge and matured
civilisation, were the intellectual causes of the change, and the movement
of expansion received a great political stimulus when Alexander eclipsed
the glories of Spartan and Athenian history by the vision of universal
empire, accorded to the conquered nations the privileges of the
conquerors, and created in Alexandria a great centre both of commercial
intercourse and of philosophical eclecticism.(351)

It is evident, therefore, that the prevalence of Greek ideas in Rome would
be in a two-fold way destructive of narrow national feelings. It was the
ascendancy of a people who were not Romans, and of a people who had
already become in a great degree emancipated from local sentiments. It is
also evident that the Greeks having had for several centuries a splendid
literature, at a time when the Romans had none, and when the Latin
language was still too rude for literary purposes, the period in which the
Romans first emerged from a purely military condition into an intelligent
civilisation would bring with it an ascendancy of Greek ideas. Fabius
Pictor and Cincius Alimentus, the earliest native Roman historians, both
wrote in Greek,(352) and although the poems of Ennius, and the “Origines”
of Marcus Cato, contributed largely to improve and fix the Latin language,
the precedent was not at once discontinued.(353) After the conquest of
Greece, the political ascendancy of the Romans and the intellectual
ascendancy of Greece were alike universal.(354) The conquered people,
whose patriotic feelings had been greatly enfeebled by the influences I
have noticed, acquiesced readily in their new condition, and
notwithstanding the vehement exertions of the conservative party, Greek
manners, sentiments, and ideas soon penetrated into all classes, and
moulded all the forms of Roman life. The elder Cato, as an acute observer
has noticed, desired all Greek philosophers to be expelled from Rome. The
younger Cato made Greek philosophers his most intimate friends.(355) Roman
virtue found its highest expression in Stoicism. Roman vice sheltered
itself under the name of Epicurus. Diodorus of Sicily and Polybius first
sketched in Greek the outlines of universal history. Dionysius of
Halicarnassus explored Roman antiquities. Greek artists and Greek
architects thronged the city; but the first, under Roman influence,
abandoned the ideal for the portrait, and the second degraded the noble
Corinthian pillar into the bastard composite.(356) The theatre, which now
started into sudden life, was borrowed altogether from the Greeks. Ennius
and Pacuvius imitated Euripides; Cæcilius, Plautus, Terence, and Nævius
devoted themselves chiefly to Menander. Even the lover in the days of
Lucretius painted his lady’s charms in Greek.(357) Immense sums were given
for Greek literary slaves, and the attractions of the capital drew to Rome
nearly all that was brilliant in Athenian society.

While the complete ascendancy of the intellect and manners of Greece was
destroying the simplicity of the old Roman type, and at the same time
enlarging the range of Roman sympathies, an equally powerful influence was
breaking down the aristocratic and class feeling which had so long raised
an insurmountable barrier between the nobles and the plebeians. Their long
contentions had issued in the civil wars, the dictatorship of Julius
Cæsar, and the Empire, and these changes in a great measure obliterated
the old lines of demarcation. Foreign wars, which develop with great
intensity distinctive national types, and divert the public mind from
internal changes, are usually favourable to the conservative spirit; but
civil wars are essentially revolutionary, for they overwhelm all class
barriers and throw open the highest prizes to energy and genius. Two very
remarkable and altogether unprecedented illustrations of this truth
occurred at Rome. Ventidius Bassus, by his military skill, and by the
friendship of Julius Cæsar, and afterwards of Antony, rose from the
position of mule-driver to the command of a Roman army, and at last to the
consulate,(358) which was also attained, about 40 B.C., by the Spaniard
Cornelius Balbus.(359) Augustus, though the most aristocratic of emperors,
in order to discourage celibacy, permitted all citizens who were not
senators to intermarry with freedwomen. The empire was in several distinct
ways unfavourable to class distinctions. It was for the most part
essentially democratic, winning its popularity from the masses of the
people, and crushing the senate, which had been the common centre of
aristocracy and of freedom. A new despotic power, bearing alike on all
classes, reduced them to an equality of servitude. The emperors were
themselves in many cases the mere creatures of revolt, and their policy
was governed by their origin. Their jealousy struck down many of the
nobles, while others were ruined by the public games, which it became
customary to give, or by the luxury to which, in the absence of political
occupations, they were impelled, and the relative importance of all was
diminished by the new creations. The ascendancy of wealth began to pass
into new quarters. Delators, or political informers, encouraged by the
emperors, and enriched by the confiscated properties of those whose
condemnation they had procured, rose to great influence. From the time of
Caligula, for several reigns, the most influential citizens were freedmen,
who occupied the principal offices in the palace, and usually obtained
complete ascendancy over the emperors. Through them alone petitions were
presented. By their instrumentality the Imperial favours were distributed.
They sometimes dethroned the emperors. They retained their power unshaken
through a succession of revolutions. In wealth, in power, in the crowd of
their courtiers, in the splendour of their palaces in life, and of their
tombs in death, they eclipsed all others, and men whom the early Roman
patricians would have almost disdained to notice, saw the proudest
struggling for their favour.(360)

Together with these influences many others of a kindred nature may be
detected. The colonial policy which the Gracchi had advocated was carried
out at Narbonne, and during the latter days of Julius Cæsar, to the
amazement and scandal of the Romans, Gauls of this province obtained seats
in the senate.(361) The immense extent of the empire made it necessary for
numerous troops to remain during long periods of time in distant
provinces, and the foreign habits that were thus acquired began the
destruction of the exclusive feelings of the Roman army, which the
subsequent enrolment of barbarians completed. The public games, the
immense luxury, the concentration of power, wealth, and genius, made Rome
the centre of a vast and ceaseless concourse of strangers, the focus of
all the various philosophies and religions of the empire, and its
population soon became an amorphous, heterogeneous mass, in which all
nations, customs, languages, and creeds, all degrees of virtue and vice,
of refinement and barbarism, of scepticism and credulity, intermingled and
interacted. Travelling had become more easy and perhaps more frequent than
it has been at any other period before the nineteenth century. The
subjection of the whole civilised world to a single rule removed the chief
obstacles to locomotion. Magnificent roads, which modern nations have
rarely rivalled and never surpassed, intersected the entire empire, and
relays of post-horses enabled the voyager to proceed with an astonishing
rapidity. The sea, which, after the destruction of the fleets of Carthage,
had fallen almost completely under the dominion of pirates, had been
cleared by Pompey. The European shores of the Mediterranean and the port
of Alexandria were thronged with vessels. Romans traversed the whole
extent of the empire on political, military, or commercial errands, or in
search of health, or knowledge, or pleasure.(362) The entrancing beauties
of Como and of Tempe, the luxurious manners of Baiæ and Corinth, the
schools, commerce, climate, and temples of Alexandria, the soft winters of
Sicily, the artistic wonders and historic recollections of Athens and the
Nile, the great colonial interests of Gaul, attracted their thousands,
while Roman luxury needed the products of the remotest lands, and the
demand for animals for the amphitheatre spread Roman enterprise into the
wildest deserts. In the capital, the toleration accorded to different
creeds was such that the city soon became a miniature of the world. Almost
every variety of charlatanism and of belief displayed itself unchecked,
and boasted its train of proselytes. Foreign ideas were in every form in
the ascendant. Greece, which had presided over the intellectual
development of Rome, acquired a new influence under the favouring policy
of Hadrian, and Greek became the language of some of the later as it had
been of the earliest writers. Egyptian religions and philosophies excited
the wildest enthusiasm. As early as the reign of Augustus there were many
thousands of Jewish residents at Rome,(363) and their manners and creed
spread widely among the people.(364) The Carthaginian Apuleius,(365) the
Gauls Floras and Favorinus, the Spaniards Lucan, Columella, Martial,
Seneca, and Quintilian, had all in their different departments a high
place in Roman literature or philosophy.

In the slave world a corresponding revolution was taking place. The large
proportion of physicians and sculptors who were slaves, the appearance of
three or four distinguished authors in the slave class, the numerous
literary slaves imported from Greece, and the splendid examples of
courage, endurance, and devotion to their masters furnished by slaves
during the civil wars, and during some of the worst periods of the Empire,
were bridging the chasm between the servile and the free classes, and the
same tendency was more powerfully stimulated by the vast numbers and
overwhelming influence of the freedmen. The enormous scale and frequent
fluctuations of the great Roman establishments, and the innumerable
captives reduced to slavery after every war, rendered manumission both
frequent and easy, and it was soon regarded as a normal result of faithful
service. Many slaves bought their freedom out of the savings which their
masters always permitted them to make. Others paid for it by their labour
after their emancipation. Some masters emancipated their slaves in order
to obtain their part in the distribution of corn, others to prevent the
discovery of their own crimes by the torture of their slaves, others
through vanity, being desirous of having their funerals attended by a long
train of freedmen, very many simply as a reward for long service.(366) The
freedman was still under what was termed the patronage of his former
master; he was bound to him by what in a later age would have been called
a feudal tie, and the political and social importance of a noble depended
in a very great degree upon the multitude of his clients. The children of
the emancipated slave were in the same relation to the patron, and it was
only in the third generation that all disqualifications and restraints
were abrogated. In consequence of this system, manumission was often the
interest of the master. In the course of his life he enfranchised
individual slaves. On his death-bed or by his will he constantly
emancipated multitudes. Emancipation by testament acquired such
dimensions, that Augustus found it necessary to restrict the power; and he
made several limitations, of which the most important was that no one
should emancipate by his will more than one hundred of his slaves.(367) It
was once proposed that the slaves should be distinguished by a special
dress, but the proposition was abandoned because their number was so great
that to reveal to them their strength would be to place the city at their
mercy.(368) Even among those who were not slaves, the element that was
derived from slavery soon preponderated. The majority of the free
population had probably either themselves been slaves, or were descended
from slaves, and men with this tainted lineage penetrated to all the
offices of the State.(369) “There was,” as has been well said, “a
circulation of men from all the universe. Rome received them slaves, and
sent them back Romans.”(370)

It is manifest how profound a change had taken place since the Republican
days, when the highest dignities were long monopolised by a single class,
when the censors repressed with a stringent severity every form or
exhibition of luxury, when the rhetoricians were banished from the city,
lest the faintest tinge of foreign manners should impair the stern
simplicity of the people, and when the proposal to transfer the capital to
Veii, after a great disaster, was rejected on the ground that it would be
impious to worship the Roman deities anywhere but on the Capitol, or for
the Flamens and the Vestals to emigrate beyond the walls.(371)

The greater number of these tendencies to universal fusion or equality
were blind forces resulting from the stress of circumstances, and not from
any human forethought, or were agencies that were put in motion for a
different object. It must, however, be acknowledged that a definite theory
of policy had a considerable part in accelerating the movement. The policy
of the Republic may be broadly described as a policy of conquest, and that
of the Empire as a policy of preservation. The Romans having acquired a
vast dominion, were met by the great problem which every first-class power
is called upon to solve—by what means many communities, with different
languages, customs, characters, and traditions, can be retained peaceably
under a single ruler. In modern times, this difficulty has been most
successfully met by local legislatures, which, if they supply a “line of
cleavage,” a nucleus around which the spirit of opposition may form, have
on the other hand the priceless advantage of giving the annexed people a
large measure of self-government, a centre and safety-valve of local
public opinion, a sphere for local ambitions, and a hierarchy of
institutions adapted to the distinctive national type. Under no other
conditions can a complex empire be carried on with so little strain, or
effort, or humiliation, or its inevitable final dissolution be effected
with so little danger or convulsion. But local legislatures, which are the
especial glory of English statesmanship, belong exclusively to modern
civilisation. The Roman method of conciliation was, first of all, the most
ample toleration of the customs, religion, and municipal freedom of the
conquered, and then their gradual admission to the privileges of the
conqueror. By confiding to them in a great measure the defence of the
empire, by throwing open to them the offices of State, and especially by
according to them the right of Roman citizenship, which had been for
centuries jealously restricted to the inhabitants of Rome, and was
afterwards only conceded to Italy and Cisalpine Gaul, the emperors sought
to attach them to their throne. The process was very gradual, but the
whole movement of political emancipation attained its completion when the
Imperial throne was occupied by the Spaniard Trajan, and by Pertinax, the
son of a freedman, and when an edict of Caracalla extended the rights of
Roman citizenship to all the provinces of the empire.

It will appear evident, from the foregoing sketch, that the period which
elapsed between Panætius and Constantine exhibited an irresistible
tendency to cosmopolitanism. The convergence, when we consider the number,
force, and harmony of the influences that composed it, is indeed
unexampled in history. The movement extended through all the fields of
religious, philosophical, political, industrial, military, and domestic
life. The character of the people was completely transformed, the
landmarks of all its institutions were removed, the whole principle of its
organisation was reversed. It would be impossible to find a more striking
example of the manner in which events govern character, destroying old
habits and associations, and thus altering that national type of
excellence which is, for the most part, the expression or net moral result
of the national institutions and circumstances. The effect of the movement
was, no doubt, in many respects evil, and some of the best men, such as
the elder Cato and Tacitus, opposed it, as leading to the demoralisation
of the empire; but if it increased vice, it also gave a peculiar character
to virtue. It was impossible that the conception of excellence, formed in
a society where everything conspired to deepen class divisions and
national jealousies and antipathies, should be retained unaltered in a
period of universal intercourse and amalgamation. The moral expression of
the first period is obviously to be found in the narrower military and
patriotic virtues; that of the second period in enlarged philanthropy and
sympathy.

The Stoical philosophy was admirably fitted to preside over this extension
of sympathies. Although it proved itself in every age the chief school of
patriots, it recognised also, from the very first, and in the most
unequivocal manner, the fraternity of mankind. The Stoic taught that
virtue alone is a good, and that all other things are indifferent; and
from this position he inferred that birth, rank, country, or wealth are
the mere accidents of life, and that virtue alone makes one man superior
to another. He taught also that the Deity is an all-pervading Spirit,
animating the universe, and revealed with especial clearness in the soul
of man; and he concluded that all men are fellow-members of a single body,
united by participation in the same Divine Spirit. These two doctrines
formed part of the very first teaching of the Stoics, but it was the
special glory of the Roman teachers, and an obvious result of the
condition of affairs I have described, to have brought them into full
relief. One of the most emphatic as well as one of the earliest extant
assertions of the duty of “charity to the human race,”(372) occurs in the
treatise of Cicero upon duties, which was avowedly based upon Stoicism.
Writing at a period when the movement of amalgamation had for a generation
been rapidly proceeding,(373) and adopting almost without restriction the
ethics of the Stoics, Cicero maintained the doctrine of universal
brotherhood as distinctly as it was afterwards maintained by the Christian
Church. “This whole world,” he tells us, “is to be regarded as the common
city of gods and men.”(374) “Men were born for the sake of men, that each
should assist the others.”(375) “Nature ordains that a man should wish the
good of every man, whoever he may be, for this very reason, that he is a
man.”(376) “To reduce man to the duties of his own city and to disengage
him from duties to the members of other cities, is to break the universal
society of the human race.”(377) “Nature has inclined us to love men, and
this is the foundation of the law.”(378) The same principles were
reiterated with increasing emphasis by the later Stoics. Adopting the
well-known line which Terence had translated from Menander, they
maintained that man should deem nothing human foreign to his interest.
Lucan expatiated with all the fervour of a Christian poet upon the time
when “the human race will cast aside its weapons, and when all nations
will learn to love.”(379) “The whole universe,” said Seneca, “which you
see around you, comprising all things, both divine and human, is one. We
are members of one great body. Nature has made us relatives when it begat
us from the same materials and for the same destinies. She planted in us a
mutual love, and fitted us for a social life.”(380) “What is a Roman
knight, or freedman, or slave? These are but names springing from ambition
or from injury.”(381) “I know that my country is the world, and my
guardians are the gods.”(382) “You are a citizen,” said Epictetus, “and a
part of the world.... The duty of a citizen is in nothing to consider his
own interest distinct from that of others, as the hand or foot, if they
possessed reason and understood the law of nature, would do and wish
nothing that had not some relation to the rest of the body.”(383) “An
Antonine,” said Marcus Aurelius, “my country is Rome; as a man, it is the
world.”(384)

So far Stoicism appears fully equal to the moral requirements of the age.
It would be impossible to recognise more cordially or to enforce more
beautifully that doctrine of universal brotherhood for which the
circumstances of the Roman Empire had made men ripe. Plato had said that
no one is born for himself alone, but that he owes himself in part to his
country, in part to his parents, and in part to his friends. The Roman
Stoics, taking a wider survey, declared that man is born not for himself
but for the whole world.(385) And their doctrine was perfectly consistent
with the original principles of their school.

But while Stoicism was quite capable of representing the widening
movement, it was not equally capable of representing the softening
movement of civilisation. Its condemnation of the affections, and its
stern, tense ideal, admirably fitted for the struggles of a simple
military age, were unsuited for the mild manners and luxurious tastes of
the age of the Antonines. A class of writers began to arise who, like the
Stoics, believed virtue, rather than enjoyment, to be the supreme good,
and who acknowledged that virtue consisted solely of the control which the
enlightened will exercises over the desires, but who at the same time gave
free scope to the benevolent affections and a more religious and mystical
tone to the whole scheme of morals. Professing various speculative
doctrines, and calling themselves by many names—eclectics, peripatetics,
or Platonists—they agreed in forming or representing a moral character,
less strong, less sublime, less capable of endurance and heroism, less
conspicuous for energy of will, than that of the Stoics, but far more
tender and attractive. The virtues of force began to recede, and the
gentler virtues to advance, in the moral type. Insensibility to suffering
was no longer professed; indomitable strength was no longer idolised, and
it was felt that weakness and sorrow have their own appropriate
virtues.(386) The works of these writers are full of delicate touches
which nothing but strong and lively feelings could have suggested. We find
this in the well-known letter of Pliny on the death of his slaves,(387) in
the frequent protests against the ostentation of indifference with which
the Stoics regarded the loss of their friends, in many instances of
simple, artless pathos, which strike the finest chords of our nature. When
Plutarch, after the death of his daughter, was writing a letter of
consolation to his wife, we find him turning away from all the
commonplaces of the Stoics as the recollection of one simple trait of his
little child rushed upon his mind:—“She desired her nurse to press even
her dolls to the breast. She was so loving that she wished everything that
gave her pleasure to share in the best of what she had.”

Plutarch, whose fame as a biographer has, I think, unduly eclipsed his
reputation as a moralist, may be justly regarded as the leader of this
movement, and his moral writings may be profitably compared with those of
Seneca, the most ample exponent of the sterner school. Seneca is not
unfrequently self-conscious, theatrical, and overstrained. His precepts
have something of the affected ring of a popular preacher. The imperfect
fusion of his short sentences gives his style a disjointed and, so to
speak, granulated character, which the Emperor Caligula happily expressed
when he compared it to sand without cement; yet he often rises to a
majesty of eloquence, a grandeur both of thought and of expression, that
few moralists have ever rivalled. Plutarch, though far less sublime, is
more sustained, equable, and uniformly pleasing. The Montaigne of
antiquity, his genius coruscates playfully and gracefully around his
subject; he delights in illustrations which are often singularly vivid and
original, but which, by their excessive multiplication, appear sometimes
rather the texture than the ornament of his discourse. A gentle, tender
spirit, and a judgment equally free from paradox, exaggeration, and
excessive subtilty, are the characteristics of all he wrote. Plutarch
excels most in collecting motives of consolation; Seneca in forming
characters that need no consolation. There is something of the woman in
Plutarch; Seneca is all a man. The writings of the first resemble the
strains of the flute, to which the ancients attributed the power of
calming the passions and charming away the clouds of sorrow, and drawing
men by a gentle suasion into the paths of virtue; the writings of the
other are like the trumpet-blast, which kindles the soul with an heroic
courage. The first is most fitted to console a mother sorrowing over her
dead child, the second to nerve a brave man, without flinching and without
illusion, to grapple with an inevitable fate.

The elaborate letters which Seneca has left us on distinctive tenets of
the Stoical school, such as the equality of vices or the evil of the
affections, have now little more than an historic interest; but the
general tone of his writings gives them a permanent importance, for they
reflect and foster a certain type of excellence which, since the
extinction of Stoicism, has had no adequate expression in literature. The
prevailing moral tone of Plutarch, on the other hand, being formed mainly
on the prominence of the amiable virtues, has been eclipsed or transcended
by the Christian writers, but his definite contributions to philosophy and
morals are more important than those of Seneca. He has left us one of the
best works on superstition, and one of the most ingenious works on
Providence, we possess. He was probably the first writer who advocated
very strongly humanity to animals on the broad ground of universal
benevolence, as distinguished from the Pythagorean doctrine of
transmigration, and he was also remarkable, beyond all his contemporaries,
for his high sense of female excellence and of the sanctity of female
love.

The Romans had at all times cared more for the practical tendency of a
system of philosophy than for its logical or speculative consistency. One
of the chief attractions of Stoicism, in their eyes, had been that its
main object was not to build a system of opinion, but to propose a pattern
of life,(388) and Stoicism itself was only adapted to the Roman character
after it had been simplified by Panætius.(389) Although the system could
never free itself altogether from that hardness which rendered it so
unsuited for an advanced civilisation, it was profoundly modified by the
later Stoics, who rarely scrupled to temper it by the admixture of new
doctrines. Seneca himself was by no means an unmixed Stoic. If Epictetus
was more nearly so, this was probably because the extreme hardship he
underwent made him dwell more than his contemporaries upon the importance
of fortitude and endurance. Marcus Aurelius was surrounded by the
disciples of the most various schools, and his Stoicism was much tinctured
by the milder and more religious spirit of Platonism. The Stoics, like all
other men, felt the moral current of the time, though they yielded to it
less readily than some others. In Thrasea, who occupied in his age a
position analogous to that of Cato in an earlier period, we find little or
nothing of the asperity and hardness of his great prototype. In the
writings of the later Stoics, if we find the same elements as in those of
their predecessors, these elements are at least combined in different
proportions.

In the first place, Stoicism became more essentially religious. The
Stoical character, like all others of a high order, had always been
reverential; but its reverence differed widely from that of Christians. It
was concentrated much less upon the Deity than upon virtue, and especially
upon virtue as exhibited in great men. When Lucan, extolling his hero,
boasted that “the gods favoured the conquering cause, but Cato the
conquered,” or when Seneca described “the fortune of Sulla” as “the crime
of the gods,” these sentences, which sound to modern ears grossly
blasphemous, appear to have excited no murmur. We have already seen the
audacious language with which the sage claimed an equality with the
Divinity. On the other hand, the reverence for virtue apart from all
conditions of success, and especially for men of the stamp of Cato, who
through a strong moral conviction struggled bravely, though
unsuccessfully, against force, genius, or circumstances, was perhaps more
steady and more passionate than in any later age. The duty of absolute
submission to Providence, as I have already shown, was continually
inculcated, and the pantheistic notion of all virtue being a part or
emanation of the Deity was often asserted, but man was still the centre of
the Stoic’s scheme, the ideal to which his reverence and devotion aspired.
In later Stoicism this point of view was gradually changed. Without any
formal abandonment of their pantheistic conceptions, the language of
philosophers recognised with much greater clearness a distinct and
personal Divinity. Every page of Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius is
impregnated with the deepest religious feeling. “The first thing to
learn,” said the former, “is that there is a God, that His knowledge
pervades the whole universe, and that it extends not only to our acts but
to our thoughts and feelings.... He who seeks to please the gods must
labour as far as lies in him to resemble them. He must be faithful as God
is faithful, free as He is free, beneficent as He is beneficent,
magnanimous as He is magnanimous.”(390) “To have God for our maker and
father and guardian, should not that emancipate us from all sadness and
from all fear?”(391) “When you have shut your door and darkened your room,
say not to yourself you are alone. God is in your room, and your attendant
genius likewise. Think not that they need the light to see what you
do.(392) What can I, an old man and a cripple, do but praise God? If I
were a nightingale, I would discharge the office of a nightingale; if a
swan, that of a swan. But I am a reasonable being; my mission is to praise
God, and I fulfil it; nor shall I ever, as far as lies in me, shrink from
my task, and I exhort you to join in the same song of praise.”(393)

The same religious character is exhibited, if possible, in a still greater
degree in the “Meditations” of Marcus Aurelius; but in one respect the
ethics of the emperor differ widely from those of the slave. In Epictetus
we invariably find the strongest sense of the majesty of man. As the child
of the Deity, as a being capable of attaining the most exalted virtue, he
magnified him to the highest point, and never more so than in the very
passage in which he exhorted his disciples to beware of haughtiness. The
Jupiter Olympus of Phidias, he reminds them, exhibits no arrogance, but
the unclouded serenity of perfect confidence and strength.(394) Marcus
Aurelius, on the other hand, dwelt rather on the weakness than on the
force of man, and his meditations breathe a spirit, if not of Christian
humility, at least of the gentlest and most touching modesty. He was not,
it is true, like some later saints, who habitually apply to themselves
language of reprobation which would be exaggerated if applied to the
murderer or the adulterer. He did not shrink from recognising human virtue
as a reality, and thanking Providence for the degree in which he had
attained it, but he continually reviewed with an unsparing severity the
weaknesses of his character, he accepted and even solicited reproofs from
every teacher of virtue, he made it his aim, in a position of supreme
power, to check every emotion of arrogance and pride, and he set before
him an ideal of excellence which awed and subdued his mind.

Another very remarkable feature of later Stoicism was its increasingly
introspective character. In the philosophy of Cato and Cicero, virtue was
displayed almost exclusively in action. In the later Stoics,
self-examination and purity of thought were continually inculcated. There
are some writers who, with an obstinacy which it is more easy to explain
than to excuse, persist, in defiance of the very clearest evidence to the
contrary, in representing these virtues as exclusively Christian, and in
maintaining, without a shadow of proof, that the place they undeniably
occupy in the later Roman moralists was due to the direct or indirect
influence of the new faith. The plain fact is that they were fully known
to the Greeks, and both Plato and Zeno even exhorted men to study their
dreams, on the ground that these often reveal the latent tendencies of the
disposition.(395) Pythagoras urged his disciples daily to examine
themselves when they retired to rest,(396) and this practice soon became a
recognised part of the Pythagorean discipline.(397) It was introduced into
Rome with the school before the close of the Republic. It was known in the
time of Cicero(398) and Horace.(399) Sextius, one of the masters of
Seneca, a philosopher of the school of Pythagoras, who flourished chiefly
before the Christian era, was accustomed daily to devote a portion of time
to self-examination; and Seneca, who at first inclined much to the tenets
of Pythagoras,(400) expressly tells us that it was from Sextius he learnt
the practice.(401) The increasing prominence of the Pythagorean philosophy
which accompanied the invasion of Oriental creeds, the natural tendency of
the empire, by closing the avenues of political life, to divert the
attention from action to emotion, and also the increased latitude allowed
to the play of the sympathies or affections by the later Stoics, brought
this emotional part of virtue into great prominence. The letters of Seneca
are a kind of moral medicine applied for the most part to the cure of
different infirmities of character. Plutarch, in a beautiful treatise on
“The Signs of Moral Progress,” treated the culture of the feelings with
delicate skill. The duty of serving the Divinity with a pure mind rather
than by formal rites became a commonplace of literature, and
self-examination one of the most recognised of duties. Epictetus urged men
so to purify their imaginations, that at the sight of a beautiful woman
they should not even mentally exclaim, “Happy her husband!”(402) The
meditations of Marcus Aurelius, above all, are throughout an exercise of
self-examination, and the duty of watching over the thoughts is
continually inculcated.

It was a saying of Plutarch that Stoicism, which sometimes exercised a
prejudicial and hardening influence upon characters that were by nature
stern and unbending, proved peculiarly useful as a cordial to those which
were naturally gentle and yielding. Of this truth we can have no better
illustration than is furnished by the life and writings of Marcus
Aurelius, the last and most perfect representative of Roman Stoicism. A
simple, childlike, and eminently affectionate disposition, with little
strength of intellect or perhaps originally of will, much more inclined to
meditation, speculation, solitude, or friendship, than to active and
public life, with a profound aversion to the pomp of royalty and with a
rather strong natural leaning to pedantry, he had embraced the fortifying
philosophy of Zeno in its best form, and that philosophy made him perhaps
as nearly a perfectly virtuous man as has ever appeared upon our world.
Tried by the chequered events of a reign of nineteen years, presiding over
a society that was profoundly corrupt, and over a city that was notorious
for its license, the perfection of his character awed even calumny to
silence, and the spontaneous sentiment of his people proclaimed him rather
a god than a man.(403) Very few men have ever lived concerning whose inner
life we can speak so confidently. His “Meditations,” which form one of the
most impressive, form also one of the truest books in the whole range of
religious literature. They consist of rude fragmentary notes without
literary skill or arrangement, written for the most part in hasty, broken,
and sometimes almost unintelligible sentences amid the turmoil of a
camp,(404) and recording, in accents of the most penetrating sincerity,
the struggles, doubts, and aims of a soul of which, to employ one of his
own images, it may be truly said that it possessed the purity of a star,
which needs no veil to hide its nakedness. The undisputed master of the
whole civilised world, he set before him as models such men as Thrasea and
Helvidius, as Cato and Brutus, and he made it his aim to realise the
conception of a free State in which all citizens are equal, and of a
royalty which makes it its first duty to respect the liberty of the
citizens.(405) His life was passed in unremitting activity. For nearly
twelve years he was absent with armies in the distant provinces of the
empire; and although his political capacity has been much and perhaps
justly questioned, it is impossible to deny the unwearied zeal with which
he discharged the duties of his great position. Yet few men have ever
carried farther the virtue of little things, the delicate moral tact and
the minute scruples which, though often exhibited by women and by secluded
religionists, very rarely survive much contact with active life. The
solicitude with which he endeavoured to persuade two jealous rhetoricians
to abstain during their debates from retorts that might destroy their
friendship,(406) the careful gratitude with which, in a camp in Hungary,
he recalled every moral obligation he could trace, even to the most
obscure of his tutors,(407) his anxiety to avoid all pedantry and
mannerism in his conduct,(408) and to repel every voluptuous imagination
from his mind,(409) his deep sense of the obligation of purity,(410) his
laborious efforts to correct a habit of drowsiness into which he had
fallen, and his self-reproval when he had yielded to it,(411) become all,
I think, inexpressibly touching when we remember that they were exhibited
by one who was the supreme ruler of the civilised globe, and who was
continually engaged in the direction of the most gigantic interests. But
that which is especially remarkable in Marcus Aurelius is the complete
absence of fanaticism in his philanthropy. Despotic monarchs sincerely
anxious to improve mankind are naturally led to endeavour, by acts of
legislation, to force society into the paths which they believe to be
good, and such men, acting under such motives, have sometimes been the
scourges of mankind. Philip II. and Isabella the Catholic inflicted more
suffering in obedience to their consciences than Nero and Domitian in
obedience to their lusts. But Marcus Aurelius steadily resisted the
temptation. “Never hope,” he once wrote, “to realise Plato’s Republic. Let
it be sufficient that you have in some slight degree ameliorated mankind,
and do not think that amelioration a matter of small importance. Who can
change the opinions of men? and without a change of sentiments what can
you make but reluctant slaves and hypocrites?”(412) He promulgated many
laws inspired by a spirit of the purest benevolence. He mitigated the
gladiatorial shows. He treated with invariable deference the senate, which
was the last bulwark of political freedom. He endowed many chairs of
philosophy which were intended to diffuse knowledge and moral teaching
through the people. He endeavoured by the example of his Court to correct
the extravagances of luxury that were prevalent, and he exhibited in his
own career a perfect model of an active and conscientious administrator;
but he made no rash efforts to force the people by stringent laws out of
the natural channel of their lives. Of the corruption of his subjects he
was keenly sensible, and he bore it with a mournful but gentle patience.
We may trace in this respect the milder spirit of those Greek teachers who
had diverged from Stoicism, but it was especially from the Stoical
doctrine that all vice springs from ignorance that he derived his rule of
life, and this doctrine, to which he repeatedly recurred, imparted to all
his judgments a sad but tender charity. “Men were made for men; correct
them, then, or support them.”(413) “If they do ill, it is evidently in
spite of themselves and through ignorance.”(414) “Correct them if you can;
if not, remember that patience was given you to exercise it in their
behalf.”(415) “It would be shameful for a physician to deem it strange
that a man was suffering from fever.”(416) “The immortal gods consent for
countless ages to endure without anger, and even to surround with
blessings, so many and such wicked men; but thou who hast so short a time
to live, art thou already weary, and that when thou art thyself
wicked?”(417) “It is involuntarily that the soul is deprived of justice,
and temperance, and goodness, and all other virtues. Continually remember
this; the thought will make you more gentle to all mankind.”(418) “It is
right that man should love those who have offended him. He will do so when
he remembers that all men are his relations, and that it is through
ignorance and involuntarily that they sin—and then we all die so
soon.”(419)

The character of the virtue of Marcus Aurelius, though exhibiting the
softening influence of the Greek spirit which in his time pervaded the
empire, was in its essentials strictly Roman.(420) Though full of
reverential gratitude to Providence, we do not find in him that intense
humility and that deep and subtle religious feeling which were the
principles of Hebrew virtue, and which have given the Jewish writers so
great an ascendancy over the hearts of men. Though borne naturally and
instinctively to goodness, his “Meditations” do not display the keen
æsthetical sense of the beauty of virtue which was the leading motive of
Greek morals, and which the writing of Plotinus afterwards made very
familiar to the Roman world. Like most of the best Romans, the principle
of his virtue was the sense of duty, the conviction of the existence of a
law of nature to which it is the aim and purpose of our being to conform.
Of secondary motives he appears to have been little sensible. The belief
in a superintending Providence was the strongest of his religious
convictions, but even that was occasionally overcast. On the subject of a
future world his mind floated in a desponding doubt. The desire for
posthumous fame he deemed it his duty systematically to mortify. While
most writers of his school regarded death chiefly as the end of sorrows,
and dwelt upon it in order to dispel its terrors, in Marcus Aurelius it is
chiefly represented as the last great demonstration of the vanity of
earthly things. Seldom, indeed, has such active and unrelaxing virtue been
united with so little enthusiasm, and been cheered by so little illusion
of success. “There is but one thing,” he wrote, “of real value—to
cultivate truth and justice, and to live without anger in the midst of
lying and unjust men.”(421)

The command he had acquired over his feelings was so great that it was
said of him that his countenance was never known to betray either elation
or despondency.(422) We, however, who have before us the records of his
inner life, can have no difficulty in detecting the deep melancholy that
overshadowed his mind, and his closing years were darkened by many and
various sorrows. His wife, whom he dearly loved and deeply honoured, and
who, if we may believe the Court scandals that are reported by historians,
was not worthy of his affection,(423) had preceded him to the tomb. His
only surviving son had already displayed the vicious tendencies that
afterwards made him one of the worst of rulers. The philosophers, who had
instructed him in his youth, and to whom he had clung with an affectionate
friendship, had one by one disappeared, and no new race had arisen to
supply their place. After a long reign of self-denying virtue, he saw the
decadence of the empire continually more apparent. The Stoical school was
rapidly fading before the passion for Oriental superstitions. The
barbarians, repelled for a time, were again menacing the frontiers, and it
was not difficult to foresee their future triumph. The mass of the people
had become too inert and too corrupt for any efforts to regenerate them. A
fearful pestilence, followed by many minor calamities, had fallen upon the
land and spread misery and panic through many provinces. In the midst of
these calamities, the emperor was struck down with a mortal illness, which
he bore with the placid courage he had always displayed, exhibiting in
almost the last words he uttered his forgetfulness of self and his
constant anxiety for the condition of his people.(424) Shortly before his
death he dismissed his attendants, and, after one last interview, his son,
and he died as he long had lived, alone.(425)

Thus sank to rest in clouds and darkness the purest and gentlest spirit of
all the pagan world, the most perfect model of the later Stoics. In him
the hardness, asperity, and arrogance of the sect had altogether
disappeared, while the affectation its paradoxes tended to produce was
greatly mitigated. Without fanaticism, superstition, or illusion, his
whole life was regulated by a simple and unwavering sense of duty. The
contemplative and emotional virtues which Stoicism had long depressed, had
regained their place, but the active virtues had not yet declined. The
virtues of the hero were still deeply honoured, but gentleness and
tenderness had acquired a new prominence in the ideal type.

But while the force of circumstances was thus developing the ethical
conceptions of antiquity in new directions, the mass of the Roman people
were plunged in a condition of depravity which no mere ethical teaching
could adequately correct. The moral condition of the empire is, indeed, in
some respects one of the most appalling pictures on record, and writers
have much more frequently undertaken to paint or even to exaggerate its
enormity than to investigate the circumstances by which it may be
explained. Such circumstances, however, must unquestionably exist. There
is no reason to believe that the innate propensities of the people were
worse during the Empire than during the best days of the Republic. The
depravity of a nation is a phenomenon which, like all others, may be
traced to definite causes, and in the instance before us they are not
difficult to discover.

I have already said that the virtue of the Romans was a military and
patriotic virtue, formed by the national institutions, and to which
religious teaching was merely accessory. The domestic, military, and
censorial discipline, concurring with the general poverty and also with
the agricultural pursuits of the people, had created the simplest and most
austere habits, while the institutions of civic liberty provided ample
spheres for honourable ambition. The nobles, being the highest body in a
free State, and being at the same time continually confronted by a
formidable opposition under the guidance of the tribunes, were ardently
devoted to public life. The dangerous rivalry of the surrounding Italian
States, and afterwards of Carthage, demanded and secured a constant
vigilance. Roman education was skilfully designed to elicit heroic
patriotism, and the great men of the past became the ideal figures of the
imagination. Religion hallowed the local feeling by rites and legends,
instituted many useful and domestic habits, taught men the sanctity of
oaths, and, by fostering a continual sense of a superintending Providence,
gave a depth and solemnity to the whole character.

Such were the chief influences by which the national type of virtue had
been formed, but nearly all of these were corroded or perverted by
advancing civilisation. The domestic and local religion lost its
ascendancy amid the increase of scepticism and the invasion of a crowd of
foreign superstitions. The simplicity of manners, which sumptuary laws and
the institution of the censorship had long maintained, was replaced by the
extravagances of a Babylonian luxury. The aristocratic dignity perished
with the privileges on which it reposed. The patriotic energy and
enthusiasm died away in a universal empire which embraced all varieties of
language, custom, and nationality.

But although the virtues of a poor and struggling community necessarily
disappear before increasing luxury, they are in a normal condition of
society replaced by virtues of a different stamp. Gentler manners and
enlarged benevolence follow in the train of civilisation, greater
intellectual activity and more extended industrial enterprise give a new
importance to the moral qualities which each of these require, the circle
of political interests expands, and if the virtues that spring from
privilege diminish, the virtues that spring from equality increase.

In Rome, however, there were three great causes which impeded the normal
development—the Imperial system, the institution of slavery, and the
gladiatorial shows. Each of these exercised an influence of the widest and
most pernicious character on the morals of the people. To trace those
influences in all their ramifications would lead me far beyond the limits
I have assigned to the present work, but I shall endeavour to give a
concise view of their nature and general character.

The theory of the Roman Empire was that of a representative despotism. The
various offices of the Republic were not annihilated, but they were
gradually concentrated in a single man. The senate was still ostensibly
the depository of supreme power, but it was made in fact the mere creature
of the Emperor, whose power was virtually uncontrolled. Political spies
and private accusers, who in the latter days of the Republic had been
encouraged to denounce plots against the State, began under Augustus to
denounce plots against the Emperor; and the class being enormously
increased under Tiberius, and stimulated by the promise of part of the
confiscated property, they menaced every leading politician and even every
wealthy man. The nobles were gradually depressed, ruined, or driven by the
dangers of public life into orgies of private luxury. The poor were
conciliated, not by any increase of liberty or even of permanent
prosperity, but by gratuitous distributions of corn and by public games,
while, in order to invest themselves with a sacred character, the emperors
adopted the religious device of an apotheosis.

This last superstition, of which some traces may still be found in the
titles appropriated to royalty, was not wholly a suggestion of
politicians. Deified men had long occupied a prominent place in ancient
belief, and the founders of cities had been very frequently worshipped by
the inhabitants.(426) Although to more educated minds the ascription of
divinity to a sovereign was simply an unmeaning flattery, although it in
no degree prevented either innumerable plots against his life, or an
unsparing criticism of his memory, yet the popular reverence not
unfrequently anticipated politicians in representing the emperor as in
some special way under the protection of Providence. Around Augustus a
whole constellation of miraculous stories soon clustered. An oracle, it
was said, had declared his native city destined to produce a ruler of the
world. When a child, he had been borne by invisible hands from his cradle,
and placed on a lofty tower, where he was found with his face turned to
the rising sun. He rebuked the frogs that croaked around his grandfather’s
home, and they became silent for ever. An eagle snatched a piece of bread
from his hand, soared into the air, and then, descending, presented it to
him again. Another eagle dropped at his feet a chicken, bearing a
laurel-branch in its beak. When his body was burnt, his image was seen
rising to heaven above the flames. When another man tried to sleep in the
bed in which the Emperor had been born, the profane intruder was dragged
forth by an unseen hand. A patrician named Lætorius, having been condemned
for adultery, pleaded in mitigation of the sentence that he was the happy
possessor of the spot of ground on which Augustus was born.(427) An
Asiatic town, named Cyzicus, was deprived of its freedom by Tiberius,
chiefly because it had neglected the worship of Augustus.(428) Partly, no
doubt, by policy, but partly also by that spontaneous process by which in
a superstitious age conspicuous characters so often become the nuclei of
legends,(429) each emperor was surrounded by a supernatural aureole. Every
usurpation, every break in the ordinary line of succession, was adumbrated
by a series of miracles; and signs, both in heaven and earth, were
manifested whenever an emperor was about to die.

Of the emperors themselves, a great majority, no doubt, accepted their
divine honours as an empty pageant, and more than one exhibited beneath
the purple a simplicity of tastes and character which the boasted heroes
of the Republic had never surpassed. It is related of Vespasian that, when
dying, he jested mournfully on his approaching dignity, observing, as he
felt his strength ebbing away, “I think I am becoming a god.”(430)
Alexander Severus and Julian refused to accept the ordinary language of
adulation, and of those who did not reject it we know that many looked
upon it as a modern sovereign looks upon the phraseology of petitions or
the ceremonies of the Court. Even Nero was so far from being intoxicated
with his Imperial dignity that he continually sought triumphs as a singer
or an actor, and it was his artistic skill, not his divine prerogatives,
that excited his vanity.(431) Caligula, however, who appears to have been
literally deranged,(432) is said to have accepted his divinity as a
serious fact, to have substituted his own head for that of Jupiter on many
of the statues,(433) and to have once started furiously from his seat
during a thunderstorm that had interrupted a gladiatorial show, shouting
with frantic gestures his imprecations against Heaven, and declaring that
the divided empire was indeed intolerable, that either Jupiter or himself
must speedily succumb.(434) Heliogabalus, if we may give any credence to
his biographer, confounded all things, human and divine, in hideous and
blasphemous orgies, and designed to unite all forms of religion in the
worship of himself.(435)

A curious consequence of this apotheosis was that the images of the
emperors were invested with a sacred character like those of the gods.
They were the recognised refuge of the slave or the oppressed,(436) and
the smallest disrespect to them was resented as a heinous crime. Under
Tiberius, slaves and criminals were accustomed to hold in their hands an
image of the emperor, and, being thus protected, to pour with impunity a
torrent of defiant insolence upon their masters or judges.(437) Under the
same emperor, a man having, when drunk, accidentally touched a nameless
domestic utensil with a ring on which the head of the emperor was carved,
he was immediately denounced by a spy.(438) A man in this reign was
accused of high treason for having sold an image of the emperor with a
garden.(439) It was made a capital offence to beat a slave, or to undress,
near a statue of Augustus, or to enter a brothel with a piece of money on
which his head was engraved,(440) and at a later period a woman, it is
said, was actually executed for undressing before the statue of
Domitian.(441)

It may easily be conceived that men who had been raised to this pinnacle
of arrogance and power, men who exercised uncontrolled authority in the
midst of a society in a state of profound corruption, were often guilty of
the most atrocious extravagances. In the first period of the Empire more
especially, when traditions were not yet formed, and when experience had
not yet shown the dangers of the throne, the brains of some of its
occupants reeled at their elevation, and a kind of moral insanity ensued.
The pages of Suetonius remain as an eternal witness of the abysses of
depravity, the hideous, intolerable cruelty, the hitherto unimagined
extravagances of nameless lust that were then manifested on the Palatine,
and while they cast a fearful light upon the moral chaos into which pagan
society had sunk, they furnish ample evidence of the demoralising
influences of the empire. The throne was, it is true, occupied by some of
the best as well as by some of the worst men who have ever lived; but the
evil, though checked and mitigated, was never abolished. The corruption of
a Court, the formation of a profession of spies, the encouragement given
to luxury, the distributions of corn, and the multiplication of games,
were evils which varied greatly in their degrees of intensity, but the
very existence of the empire prevented the creation of those habits of
political life which formed the moral type of the great republics of
antiquity. Liberty, which is often very unfavourable to theological
systems, is almost always in the end favourable to morals; for the most
effectual method that has been devised for diverting men from vice is to
give free scope to a higher ambition. This scope was absolutely wanting in
the Roman Empire, and the moral condition, in the absence of lasting
political habits, fluctuated greatly with the character of the Emperors.

The results of the institution of slavery were probably even more serious.
In addition to its manifest effect in encouraging a tyrannical and
ferocious spirit in the masters, it cast a stigma upon all labour, and at
once degraded and impoverished the free poor. In modern societies the
formation of an influential and numerous middle class, trained in the
sober and regular habits of industrial life, is the chief guarantee of
national morality, and where such a class exists, the disorders of the
upper ranks, though undoubtedly injurious, are never fatal to society. The
influence of great outbursts of fashionable depravity, such as that which
followed the Restoration in England, is rarely more than superficial. The
aristocracy may revel in every excess of ostentatious vice, but the great
mass of the people, at the loom, the counter, or the plough, continue
unaffected by their example, and the habits of life into which they are
forced by the condition of their trades preserve them from gross
depravity. It was the most frightful feature of the corruption of ancient
Rome that it extended through every class of the community. In the absence
of all but the simplest machinery, manufactures, with the vast industrial
life they beget, were unknown. The poor citizen found almost all the
spheres in which an honourable livelihood might be obtained wholly or at
least in a very great degree preoccupied by slaves, while he had learnt to
regard trade with an invincible repugnance. Hence followed the immense
increase of corrupt and corrupting professions, as actors, pantomimes,
hired gladiators, political spies, ministers to passion, astrologers,
religious charlatans, pseudo-philosophers, which gave the free classes a
precarious and occasional subsistence, and hence, too, the gigantic
dimensions of the system of clientage. Every rich man was surrounded by a
train of dependants, who lived in a great measure at his expense, and
spent their lives in ministering to his passions and flattering his
vanity. And, above all, the public distribution of corn, and occasionally
of money, was carried on to such an extent, that, so far as the first
necessaries of life were concerned, the whole poor free population of Rome
was supported gratuitously by the Government. To effect this distribution
promptly and lavishly was the main object of the Imperial policy, and its
consequences were worse than could have resulted from the most extravagant
poor-laws or the most excessive charity. The mass of the people were
supported in absolute idleness by corn, which was given without any
reference to desert, and was received, not as a favour, but as a right,
while gratuitous public amusements still further diverted them from
labour.

Under these influences the population rapidly dwindled away. Productive
enterprise was almost extinct in Italy, and an unexampled concurrence of
causes made a vicious celibacy the habitual condition. Already in the days
of Augustus the evil was apparent, and the dangers which in later reigns
drove the patricians still more generally from public life, drove them
more and more into every extravagance of sensuality. Greece, since the
destruction of her liberty, and also the leading cities of Asia Minor and
of Egypt, had become centres of the wildest corruption, and Greek and
Oriental captives were innumerable in Rome. Ionian slaves of a surpassing
beauty, Alexandrian slaves, famous for their subtle skill in stimulating
the jaded senses of the confirmed and sated libertine, became the
ornaments of every patrician house, the companions and the instructors of
the young. The disinclination to marriage was so general, that men who
spent their lives in endeavouring by flatteries to secure the inheritance
of wealthy bachelors became a numerous and a notorious class. The slave
population was itself a hotbed of vice, and it contaminated all with which
it came in contact; while the attractions of the games, and especially of
the public baths, which became the habitual resort of the idle, combined
with the charms of the Italian climate, and with the miserable domestic
architecture that was general, to draw the poor citizens from indoor life.
Idleness, amusements, and a bare subsistence were alone desired, and the
general practice of abortion among the rich, and of infanticide and
exposition in all classes, still further checked the population.

The destruction of all public spirit in a population so situated was
complete and inevitable. In the days of the Republic a consul had once
advocated the admission of a brave Italian people to the right of Roman
citizenship, on the ground that “those who thought only of liberty
deserved to be Romans.”(442) In the Empire all liberty was cheerfully
bartered for games and corn, and the worst tyrant could by these means be
secure of popularity. In the Republic, when Marius threw open the houses
of those he had proscribed, to be plundered, the people, by a noble
abstinence, rebuked the act, for no Roman could be found to avail himself
of the permission.(443) In the Empire, when the armies of Vitellius and
Vespasian were disputing the possession of the city, the degenerate Romans
gathered with delight to the spectacle as to a gladiatorial show,
plundered the deserted houses, encouraged either army by their reckless
plaudits, dragged out the fugitives to be slain, and converted into a
festival the calamity of their country.(444) The degradation of the
national character was permanent. Neither the teaching of the Stoics, nor
the government of the Antonines, nor the triumph of Christianity could
restore it. Indifferent to liberty, the Roman now, as then, asks only for
an idle subsistence and for public spectacles, and countless monasteries
and ecclesiastical pageants occupy in modern Rome the same place as did
the distributions of corn and the games of the amphitheatre in the Rome of
the Cæsars.

It must be remembered, too, that while public spirit had thus decayed in
the capital of the empire, there existed no independent or rival power to
reanimate by its example the smouldering flame. The existence in modern
Europe of many distinct nations on the same level of civilisation, but
with different forms of government and conditions of national life,
secures the permanence of some measure of patriotism and liberty. If these
perish in one nation, they survive in another, and each people affects
those about it by its rivalry or example. But an empire which comprised
all the civilised globe could know nothing of this political interaction.
In religious, social, intellectual, and moral life, foreign ideas were
very discernible, but the enslaved provinces could have no influence in
rekindling political life in the centre, and those which rivalled Italy in
their civilisation, even surpassed it in their corruption and their
servility.

In reviewing, however, the conditions upon which the moral state of the
empire depended, there are still two very important centres or seed-plots
of virtue to which it is necessary to advert. I mean the pursuit of
agriculture and the discipline of the army. A very early tradition, which
was attributed to Romulus, had declared that warfare and agriculture were
the only honourable occupations for a citizen,(445) and it would be
difficult to overrate the influence of the last in forming temperate and
virtuous habits among the people. It is the subject of the only extant
work of the elder Cato. Virgil had adorned it with the lustre of his
poetry. A very large part of the Roman religion was intended to symbolise
its stages or consecrate its operations. Varro expressed an eminently
Roman sentiment in that beautiful sentence which Cowper has introduced
into English poetry, “Divine Providence made the country, but human art
the town.”(446) The reforms of Vespasian consisted chiefly of the
elevation to high positions of the agriculturists of the provinces.
Antoninus, who was probably the most perfect of all the Roman emperors,
was through his whole reign a zealous farmer.

As far as the distant provinces were concerned, it is probable that the
Imperial system was on the whole a good. The scandalous rapacity of the
provincial governors, which disgraced the closing years of the Republic,
and which is immortalised by the indignant eloquence of Cicero, appears to
have ceased, or at least greatly diminished, under the supervision of the
emperors. Ample municipal freedom, good roads, and for the most part wise
and temperate rulers, secured for the distant sections of the empire a
large measure of prosperity. But in Italy itself, agriculture, with the
habits of life that attended it, speedily and fatally decayed. The peasant
proprietor soon glided hopelessly into debt. The immense advantages which
slavery gave the rich gradually threw nearly all the Italian soil into
their hands. The peasant who ceased to be proprietor found himself
excluded by slave labour from the position of a hired cultivator, while
the gratuitous distributions of corn drew him readily to the metropolis.
The gigantic scale of these distributions induced the rulers to obtain
their corn in the form of a tribute from distant countries, chiefly from
Africa and Sicily, and it almost ceased to be cultivated in Italy. The
land fell to waste, or was cultivated by slaves or converted into pasture,
and over vast tracts the race of free peasants entirely disappeared.

This great revolution, which profoundly affected the moral condition of
Italy, had long been impending. The debts of the poor peasants, and the
tendency of the patricians to monopolise the conquered territory, had
occasioned some of the fiercest contests of the Republic, and in the
earliest days of the Empire the blight that seemed to have fallen on the
Italian soil was continually and pathetically lamented. Livy, Varro,
Columella, and Pliny have noticed it in the most emphatic terms,(447) and
Tacitus observed that as early as the reign of Claudius, Italy, which had
once supplied the distant provinces with corn, had become dependent for
the very necessaries of life upon the winds and the waves.(448) The evil
was indeed of an almost hopeless kind. Adverse winds, or any other
accidental interruption of the convoys of corn, occasioned severe distress
in the capital; but the prospect of the calamities that would ensue if any
misfortune detached the great corn-growing countries from the empire,
might well have appalled the politician. Yet the combined influence of
slavery, and of the gratuitous distributions of corn, acting in the manner
I have described, rendered every effort to revive Italian agriculture
abortive, and slavery had taken such deep root that it would have been
impossible to abolish it, while no emperor dared to encounter the
calamities and rebellion that would follow a suspension or even a
restriction of the distributions.(449) Many serious efforts were made to
remedy the evil.(450) Alexander Severus advanced money to the poor to buy
portions of land, and accepted a gradual payment without interest from the
produce of the soil. Pertinax settled poor men as proprietors on deserted
land, on the sole condition that they should cultivate it. Marcus Aurelius
began, and Aurelian and Valentinian continued, the system of settling
great numbers of barbarian captives upon the Italian soil, and compelling
them as slaves to till it. The introduction of this large foreign element
into the heart of Italy was eventually one of the causes of the downfall
of the empire, and it is also about this time that we first dimly trace
the condition of serfdom or servitude to the soil into which slavery
afterwards faded, and which was for some centuries the general condition
of the European poor. But the economical and moral causes that were
destroying agriculture in Italy were too strong to be resisted, and the
simple habits of life which agricultural pursuits promote had little or no
place in the later empire.

A somewhat less rapid but in the end not less complete decadence had taken
place in military life. The Roman army was at first recruited exclusively
from the upper classes, and the service, which lasted only during actual
warfare, was gratuitous. Before the close of the Republic, however, these
conditions had disappeared. Military pay is said to have been instituted
at the time of the siege of Veii.(451) Some Spaniards who were enrolled
during the rivalry of Rome and Carthage were the first example of the
employment of foreign mercenaries by the former.(452) Marius abolished the
property qualification of the recruits.(453) In long residences in Spain
and in the Asiatic provinces discipline gradually relaxed, and the
historian who traced the progress of Oriental luxury in Rome dwelt with a
just emphasis upon the ominous fact that it had first been introduced into
the city by soldiers.(454) The civil wars contributed to the destruction
of the old military traditions, but being conducted by able generals it is
probable that they had more effect upon the patriotism than upon the
discipline of the army. Augustus reorganised the whole military system,
establishing a body of soldiers known as the Prætorian guard, and
dignified with some special privileges, permanently in Rome, while the
other legions were chiefly mustered upon the frontiers. During his long
reign, and during that of Tiberius, both sections were quiescent, but the
murder of Caligula by his soldiers opened a considerable period of
insubordination. Claudius, it was observed, first set the fatal example of
purchasing his safety from his soldiers by bribes.(455) The armies of the
provinces soon discovered that it was possible to elect an emperor outside
Rome, and Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian were all the creatures of
revolt. The evil was, however, not yet past recovery. Vespasian and Trajan
enforced discipline with great stringency and success. The emperors began
more frequently to visit the camps. The number of the soldiers was small,
and for some time the turbulence subsided. The history of the worst period
of the Empire, it has been truly observed, is full of instances of brave
soldiers trying, under circumstances of extreme difficulty, simply to do
their duty. But the historian had soon occasion to notice again the
profound influence of the voluptuous Asiatic cities upon the legions.(456)
Removed for many years from Italy, they lost all national pride, their
allegiance was transferred from the sovereign to the general, and when the
Imperial sceptre fell into the hands of a succession of incompetent
rulers, they habitually urged their commanders to revolt, and at last
reduced the empire to a condition of military anarchy. A remedy was found
for this evil, though not for the luxurious habits that had been acquired,
in the division of the empire, which placed each army under the direct
supervision of an emperor, and it is probable that at a later period
Christianity diminished the insubordination, though it may have also
diminished the military fire, of the soldiers.(457) But other and still
more powerful causes were in operation preparing the military downfall of
Rome. The habits of inactivity which the Imperial policy had produced, and
which, through a desire for popularity, most emperors laboured to
encourage, led to a profound disinclination for the hardships of military
life. Even the Prætorian guard, which was long exclusively Italian, was
selected after Septimus Severus from the legions on the frontiers,(458)
while, Italy being relieved from the regular conscription, these were
recruited solely in the provinces, and innumerable barbarians were
subsidised. The political and military consequences of this change are
sufficiently obvious. In an age when, artillery being unknown, the
military superiority of civilised nations over barbarians was far less
than at present, the Italians had become absolutely unaccustomed to real
war, and had acquired habits that were beyond all others incompatible with
military discipline, while many of the barbarians who menaced and at last
subverted the empire had been actually trained by Roman generals. The
moral consequence is equally plain—military discipline, like agricultural
labour, ceased to have any part among the moral influences of Italy.

To those who have duly estimated the considerations I have enumerated, the
downfall and moral debasement of the empire can cause no surprise, though
they may justly wonder that its agony should have been so protracted, that
it should have produced a multitude of good and great men, both pagan and
Christian, and that these should have exercised so wide an influence as
they unquestionably did. Almost every institution or pursuit by which
virtuous habits would naturally have been formed had been tainted or
destroyed, while agencies of terrific power were impelling the people to
vice. The rich, excluded from most honourable paths of ambition, and
surrounded by countless parasites who inflamed their every passion, found
themselves absolute masters of innumerable slaves who were their willing
ministers, and often their teachers, in vice. The poor, hating industry
and destitute of all intellectual resources, lived in habitual idleness,
and looked upon abject servility as the normal road to fortune. But the
picture becomes truly appalling when we remember that the main amusement
of both classes was the spectacle of bloodshed, of the death, and
sometimes of the torture, of men.

The gladiatorial games form, indeed, the one feature of Roman society
which to a modern mind is almost inconceivable in its atrocity. That not
only men, but women, in an advanced period of civilisation—men and women
who not only professed but very frequently acted upon a high code of
morals—should have made the carnage of men their habitual amusement, that
all this should have continued for centuries, with scarcely a protest, is
one of the most startling facts in moral history. It is, however,
perfectly normal, and in no degree inconsistent with the doctrine of
natural moral perceptions, while it opens out fields of ethical enquiry of
a very deep though painful interest.

These games, which long eclipsed, both in interest and in influence, every
other form of public amusement at Rome,(459) were originally religious
ceremonies celebrated at the tombs of the great, and intended as human
sacrifices to appease the Manes of the dead.(460) They were afterwards
defended as a means of sustaining the military spirit by the constant
spectacle of courageous death,(461) and with this object it was customary
to give a gladiatorial show to soldiers before their departure to a
war.(462) In addition to these functions they had a considerable political
importance, for at a time when all the regular organs of liberty were
paralysed or abolished, the ruler was accustomed in the arena to meet tens
of thousands of his subjects, who availed themselves of the opportunity to
present their petitions, to declare their grievances, and to censure
freely the sovereign or his ministers.(463) The games are said to have
been of Etruscan origin; they were first introduced into Rome, B.C. 264,
when the two sons of a man named Brutus compelled three pair of gladiators
to fight at the funeral of their father,(464) and before the close of the
Republic they were common on great public occasions, and, what appears
even more horrible, at the banquets of the nobles.(465) The rivalry of
Cæsar and Pompey greatly multiplied them, for each sought by this means to
ingratiate himself with the people. Pompey introduced a new form of combat
between men and animals.(466) Cæsar abolished the old custom of
restricting the mortuary games to the funerals of men, and his daughter
was the first Roman lady whose tomb was desecrated by human blood.(467)
Besides this innovation, Cæsar replaced the temporary edifices in which
the games had hitherto been held by a permanent wooden amphitheatre,
shaded the spectators by an awning of precious silk, compelled the
condemned persons on one occasion to fight with silver lances,(468) and
drew so many gladiators into the city that the Senate was obliged to issue
an enactment restricting their number.(469) In the earliest years of the
Empire, Statilius Taurus erected the first amphitheatre of stone.(470)
Augustus ordered that not more than 120 men should fight on a single
occasion, and that no prætor should give more than two spectacles in a
single year,(471) and Tiberius again fixed the maximum of combatants,(472)
but notwithstanding these attempts to limit them the games soon acquired
the most gigantic proportions. They were celebrated habitually by great
men in honour of their dead relatives, by officials on coming into office,
by conquerors to secure popularity, and on every occasion of public
rejoicing, and by rich tradesmen who were desirous of acquiring a social
position.(473) They were also among the attractions of the public baths.
Schools of gladiators—often the private property of rich citizens—existed
in every leading city of Italy, and, besides slaves and criminals, they
were thronged with freemen, who voluntarily hired themselves for a term of
years. In the eyes of multitudes, the large sums that were paid to the
victor, the patronage of nobles and often of emperors, and still more the
delirium of popular enthusiasm that centred upon the successful gladiator,
outweighed all the dangers of the profession. A complete recklessness of
life was soon engendered both in the spectators and the combatants. The
“lanistæ,” or purveyors of gladiators, became an important profession.
Wandering bands of gladiators traversed Italy, hiring themselves for the
provincial amphitheatres. The influence of the games gradually pervaded
the whole texture of Roman life. They became the common-place of
conversation.(474) The children imitated them in their play.(475) The
philosophers drew from them their metaphors and illustrations. The artists
pourtrayed them in every variety of ornament.(476) The vestal virgins had
a seat of honour in the arena.(477) The Colosseum, which is said to have
been capable of containing more than 80,000 spectators, eclipsed every
other monument of Imperial splendour, and is even now at once the most
imposing and the most characteristic relic of pagan Rome.

In the provinces the same passion was displayed. From Gaul to Syria,
wherever the Roman influence extended, the spectacles of blood were
introduced, and the gigantic remains of amphitheatres in many lands still
attest by their ruined grandeur the scale on which they were pursued. In
the reign of Tiberius, more than 20,000 persons are said to have perished
by the fall of the amphitheatre at the suburban town of Fidenæ.(478) Under
Nero, the Syracusans obtained, as a special favour, an exemption from the
law which limited the number of gladiators.(479) Of the vast train of
prisoners brought by Titus from Judea, a large proportion were destined by
the conqueror for the provincial games.(480) In Syria, where they were
introduced by Antiochus Epiphanes, they at first produced rather terror
than pleasure; but the effeminate Syrians soon learned to contemplate them
with a passionate enjoyment,(481) and on a single occasion Agrippa caused
1,400 men to fight in the amphitheatre at Berytus.(482) Greece alone was
in some degree an exception. When an attempt was made to introduce the
spectacle into Athens, the cynic philosopher Demonax appealed successfully
to the better feelings of the people by exclaiming, “You must first
overthrow the altar of Pity.”(483) The games are said to have afterwards
penetrated to Athens, and to have been suppressed by Apollonius of
Tyana;(484) but with the exception of Corinth, where a very large foreign
population existed, Greece never appears to have shared the general
enthusiasm.(485)

One of the first consequences of this taste was to render the people
absolutely unfit for those tranquil and refined amusements which usually
accompany civilisation. To men who were accustomed to witness the fierce
vicissitudes of deadly combat, any spectacle that did not elicit the
strongest excitement was insipid. The only amusements that at all rivalled
the spectacles of the amphitheatre and the circus were those which
appealed strongly to the sensual passions, such as the games of Flora, the
postures of the pantomimes, and the ballet.(486) Roman comedy, indeed,
flourished for a short period, but only by throwing itself into the same
career. The pander and the courtesan are the leading characters of
Plautus, and the more modest Terence never attained an equal popularity.
The different forms of vice have a continual tendency to act and react
upon one another, and the intense craving after excitement which the
amphitheatre must necessarily have produced, had probably no small
influence in stimulating the orgies of sensuality which Tacitus and
Suetonius describe.

But if comedy could to a certain extent flourish with the gladiatorial
games, it was not so with tragedy. It is, indeed, true that the tragic
actor can exhibit displays of more intense agony and of a grander heroism
than were ever witnessed in the arena. His mission is not to paint nature
as it exists in the light of day, but nature as it exists in the heart of
man. His gestures, his tones, his looks, are such as would never have been
exhibited by the person he represents, but they display to the audience
the full intensity of the emotions which that person would have felt, but
which he would have been unable adequately to reveal. But to those who
were habituated to the intense realism of the amphitheatre, the idealised
suffering of the stage was unimpressive. All the genius of a Siddons or a
Ristori would fail to move an audience who had continually seen living men
fall bleeding and mangled at their feet. One of the first functions of the
stage is to raise to the highest point the susceptibility to disgust. When
Horace said that Medea should not kill her children upon the stage, he
enunciated not a mere arbitrary rule, but one which grows necessarily out
of the development of the drama. It is an essential characteristic of a
refined and cultivated taste to be shocked and offended at the spectacle
of bloodshed; and the theatre, which somewhat dangerously dissociates
sentiment from action, and causes men to waste their compassion on ideal
sufferings, is at least a barrier against the extreme forms of cruelty by
developing this susceptibility to the highest degree. The gladiatorial
games, on the other hand, destroyed all sense of disgust, and therefore
all refinement of taste, and they rendered the permanent triumph of the
drama impossible.(487)

It is abundantly evident, both from history and from present experience,
that the instinctive shock, or natural feeling of disgust, caused by the
sight of the sufferings of men is not generically different from that
which is caused by the sight of the sufferings of animals. The latter, to
those who are not accustomed to it, is intensely painful. The former
continually becomes by use a matter of absolute indifference. If the
repugnance which is felt in the one case appears greater than in the
other, it is not on account of any innate sentiment which commands us to
reverence our species, but simply because our imagination finds less
difficulty in realising human than animal suffering, and also because
education has strengthened our feelings in the one case much more than in
the other. There is, however, no fact more clearly established than that
when men have regarded it as not a crime to kill some class of their
fellow-men, they have soon learnt to do so with no more natural
compunction or hesitation than they would exhibit in killing a wild
animal. This is the normal condition of savage men. Colonists and Red
Indians even now often shoot each other with precisely the same
indifference as they shoot beasts of prey, and the whole history of
warfare—especially when warfare was conducted on more savage principles
than at present—is an illustration of the fact. Startling, therefore, as
it may now appear, it is in no degree unnatural that Roman spectators
should have contemplated with perfect equanimity the slaughter of men. The
Spaniard, who is brought in infancy to the bull-ring, soon learns to gaze
with indifference or with pleasure upon sights before which the
unpractised eye of the stranger quails with horror, and the same process
would be equally efficacious had the spectacle been the sufferings of men.

We now look back with indignation upon this indifference; but yet,
although it may be hard to realise, it is probably true that there is
scarcely a human being who might not by custom be so indurated as to share
it. Had the most benevolent person lived in a country in which the
innocence of these games was deemed axiomatic, had he been taken to them
in his very childhood, and accustomed to associate them with his earliest
dreams of romance, and had he then been left simply to the play of the
emotions, the first paroxysm of horror would have soon subsided, the
shrinking repugnance that followed would have grown weaker and weaker, the
feeling of interest would have been aroused, and the time would probably
come in which it would reign alone. But even this absolute indifference to
the sight of human suffering does not represent the full evil resulting
from the gladiatorial games. That some men are so constituted as to be
capable of taking a real and lively pleasure in the simple contemplation
of suffering as suffering, and without any reference to their own
interests, is a proposition which has been strenuously denied by those in
whose eyes vice is nothing more than a displacement, or exaggeration, of
lawful self-regarding feelings, and others, who have admitted the reality
of the phenomenon, have treated it as a very rare and exceptional
disease.(488) That it is so—at least in its extreme forms—in the present
condition of society, may reasonably be hoped, though I imagine that few
persons who have watched the habits of boys would question that to take
pleasure in giving at least some degree of pain is sufficiently common,
and though it is not quite certain that all the sports of adult men would
be entered into with exactly the same zest if their victims were not
sentient beings. But in every society in which atrocious punishments have
been common, this side of human nature has acquired an undoubted
prominence. It is related of Claudius that his special delight at the
gladiatorial shows was in watching the countenances of the dying, for he
had learnt to take an artistic pleasure in observing the variations of
their agony.(489) When the gladiator lay prostrate it was customary for
the spectators to give the sign with their thumbs, indicating whether they
desired him to be spared or slain, and the giver of the show reaped most
popularity when, in the latter case, he permitted no consideration of
economy to make him hesitate to sanction the popular award.(490)

Besides this, the mere desire for novelty impelled the people to every
excess or refinement of barbarity.(491) The simple combat became at last
insipid, and every variety of atrocity was devised to stimulate the
flagging interest. At one time a bear and a bull, chained together, rolled
in fierce contest along the sand; at another, criminals dressed in the
skins of wild beasts were thrown to bulls, which were maddened by red-hot
irons, or by darts tipped with burning pitch. Four hundred bears were
killed on a single day under Caligula; three hundred on another day under
Claudius. Under Nero, four hundred tigers fought with bulls and elephants;
four hundred bears and three hundred lions were slaughtered by his
soldiers. In a single day, at the dedication of the Colosseum by Titus,
five thousand animals perished. Under Trajan, the games continued for one
hundred and twenty-three successive days.(492) Lions, tigers, elephants,
rhinoceroses, hippopotami, giraffes, bulls, stags, even crocodiles and
serpents, were employed to give novelty to the spectacle. Nor was any form
of human suffering wanting. The first Gordian, when edile, gave twelve
spectacles, in each of which from one hundred and fifty to five hundred
pair of gladiators appeared.(493) Eight hundred pair fought at the triumph
of Aurelian.(494) Ten thousand men fought during the games of Trajan.(495)
Nero illumined his gardens during the night by Christians burning in their
pitchy shirts.(496) Under Domitian, an army of feeble dwarfs was compelled
to fight,(497) and, more than once, female gladiators descended to perish
in the arena.(498) A criminal personating a fictitious character was
nailed to a cross, and there torn by a bear.(499) Another, representing
Scævola, was compelled to hold his hand in a real flame.(500) A third, as
Hercules, was burnt alive upon the pile.(501) So intense was the craving
for blood, that a prince was less unpopular if he neglected the
distribution of corn than if he neglected the games; and Nero himself, on
account of his munificence in this respect, was probably the sovereign who
was most beloved by the Roman multitude. Heliogabalus and Galerius are
reported, when dining, to have regaled themselves with the sight of
criminals torn by wild beasts. It was said of the latter that “he never
supped without human blood.”(502)

It is well for us to look steadily on such facts as these. They display
more vividly than any mere philosophical disquisition the abyss of
depravity into which it is possible for human nature to sink. They furnish
us with striking proofs of the reality of the moral progress we have
attained, and they enable us in some degree to estimate the regenerating
influence that Christianity has exercised in the world. For the
destruction of the gladiatorial games is all its work. Philosophers,
indeed, might deplore them, gentle natures might shrink from their
contagion, but to the multitude they possessed a fascination which nothing
but the new religion could overcome.

Nor was this fascination surprising, for no pageant has ever combined more
powerful elements of attraction. The magnificent circus, the gorgeous
dresses of the assembled Court, the contagion of a passionate enthusiasm
thrilling almost visibly through the mighty throng, the breathless silence
of expectation, the wild cheers bursting simultaneously from eighty
thousand tongues, and echoing to the farthest outskirts of the city, the
rapid alternations of the fray, the deeds of splendid courage that were
manifested, were all well fitted to entrance the imagination. The crimes
and servitude of the gladiator were for a time forgotten in the blaze of
glory that surrounded him. Representing to the highest degree that courage
which the Romans deemed the first of virtues, the cynosure of countless
eyes, the chief object of conversation in the metropolis of the universe,
destined, if victorious, to be immortalised in the mosaic and the
sculpture,(503) he not unfrequently rose to heroic grandeur. The gladiator
Spartacus for three years defied the bravest armies of Rome. The greatest
of Roman generals had chosen gladiators for his body-guard.(504) A band of
gladiators, faithful even to death, followed the fortunes of the fallen
Antony, when all besides had deserted him.(505) Beautiful eyes, trembling
with passion, looked down upon the fight, and the noblest ladies in Rome,
even the empress herself, had been known to crave the victor’s love.(506)
We read of gladiators lamenting that the games occurred so seldom,(507)
complaining bitterly if they were not permitted to descend into the
arena,(508) scorning to fight except with the most powerful
antagonists,(509) laughing aloud as their wounds were dressed,(510) and at
last, when prostrate in the dust, calmly turning their throats to the
sword of the conqueror.(511) The enthusiasm that gathered round them was
so intense that special laws were found necessary, and were sometimes
insufficient to prevent patricians from enlisting in their ranks,(512)
while the tranquil courage with which they never failed to die supplied
the philosopher with his most striking examples.(513) The severe
continence that was required before the combat, contrasting vividly with
the licentiousness of Roman life, had even invested them with something of
a moral dignity; and it is a singularly suggestive fact that of all pagan
characters the gladiator was selected by the Fathers as the closest
approximation to a Christian model.(514) St. Augustine tells us how one of
his friends, being drawn to the spectacle, endeavoured by closing his eyes
to guard against a fascination he knew to be sinful. A sudden cry caused
him to break his resolution, and he never could withdraw his gaze
again.(515)

And while the influences of the amphitheatre gained a complete ascendancy
over the populace, the Roman was not without excuses that could lull his
moral feelings to repose. The games, as I have said, were originally human
sacrifices—religious rites sacred to the dead—and it was argued that the
death of the gladiator was both more honourable and more merciful than
that of the passive victim, who, in the Homeric age, was sacrificed at the
tomb. The combatants were either professional gladiators, slaves,
criminals, or military captives. The lot of the first was voluntary. The
second had for a long time been regarded as almost beneath or beyond a
freeman’s care; but when the enlarging circle of sympathy had made the
Romans regard their slaves as “a kind of second human nature,”(516) they
perceived the atrocity of exposing them in the games, and an edict of the
emperor forbade it.(517) The third had been condemned to death, and as the
victorious gladiator was at least sometimes pardoned,(518) a permission to
fight was regarded as an act of mercy. The fate of the fourth could not
strike the early Roman with the horror it would now inspire, for the right
of the conquerors to massacre their prisoners was almost universally
admitted.(519) But, beyond the point of desiring the games to be in some
degree restricted, extremely few of the moralists of the Roman Empire ever
advanced. That it was a horrible and demoralising thing to make the
spectacle of the deaths, even of guilty men, a form of popular amusement,
was a position which no Roman school had attained, and which was only
reached by a very few individuals. Cicero observes, “that the gladiatorial
spectacles appear to some cruel and inhuman,” and, he adds, “I know not
whether as they are now conducted it is not so, but when guilty men are
compelled to fight, no better discipline against suffering and death can
be presented to the eye.”(520) Seneca, it is true, adopts a far nobler
language. He denounced the games with a passionate eloquence. He refuted
indignantly the argument derived from the guilt of the combatants, and
declared that under every form and modification these amusements were
brutalising, savage, and detestable.(521) Plutarch went even farther, and
condemned the combats of wild beasts on the ground that we should have a
bond of sympathy with all sentient beings, and that the sight of blood and
of suffering is necessarily and essentially depraving.(522) To these
instances we may add Petronius, who condemned the shows in his poem on the
civil war; Junius Mauricus, who refused to permit the inhabitants of
Vienne to celebrate them, and replied to the remonstrances of the emperor,
“Would to Heaven it were possible to abolish such spectacles, even at
Rome!”(523) and, above all, Marcus Aurelius, who, by compelling the
gladiators to fight with blunted swords, rendered them for a time
comparatively harmless.(524) But these, with the Athenian remonstrances I
have already noticed, are almost the only instances now remaining of pagan
protests against the most conspicuous as well as the most atrocious
feature of the age. Juvenal, whose unsparing satire has traversed the
whole field of Roman manners, and who denounces fiercely all cruelty to
slaves, has repeatedly noticed the gladiatorial shows, but on no single
occasion does he intimate that they were inconsistent with humanity. Of
all the great historians who recorded them, not one seems to have been
conscious that he was recording a barbarity, not one appears to have seen
in them any greater evils than an increasing tendency to pleasure and the
excessive multiplication of a dangerous class. The Roman sought to make
men brave and fearless, rather than gentle and humane, and in his eyes
that spectacle was to be applauded which steeled the heart against the
fear of death, even at the sacrifice of the affections. Titus and Trajan,
in whose reigns, probably, the greatest number of shows were compressed
into a short time, were both men of conspicuous clemency, and no Roman
seems to have imagined that the fact of 3,000 men having been compelled to
fight under the one, and 10,000 under the other, cast the faintest shadow
upon their characters. Suetonius mentions, as an instance of the
amiability of Titus, that he was accustomed to jest with the people during
the combats of the gladiators,(525) and Pliny especially eulogised Trajan
because he did not patronise spectacles that enervate the character, but
rather those which impel men “to noble wounds and to the contempt of
death.”(526) The same writer, who was himself in many ways conspicuous for
his gentleness and charity, having warmly commended a friend for acceding
to a petition of the people of Verona, who desired a spectacle, adds this
startling sentence: “After so general a request, to have refused would not
have been firmness—it would have been cruelty.”(527) Even in the closing
years of the fourth century, the præfect Symmachus, who was regarded as
one of the most estimable pagans of his age, collected some Saxon
prisoners to fight in honour of his son. They strangled themselves in
prison, and Symmachus lamented the misfortune that had befallen him from
their “impious hands,” but endeavoured to calm his feelings by recalling
the patience of Socrates and the precepts of philosophy.(528)

While, however, I have no desire to disguise or palliate the extreme
atrocity of this aspect of Roman life, there are certain very natural
exaggerations, against which it is necessary for us to guard. There are in
human nature, and more especially in the exercise of the benevolent
affections, inequalities, inconsistencies, and anomalies, of which
theorists do not always take account. We should be altogether in error if
we supposed that a man who took pleasure in a gladiatorial combat in
ancient Rome was necessarily as inhuman as a modern would be who took
pleasure in a similar spectacle. A man who falls but a little below the
standard of his own merciful age is often in reality far worse than a man
who had conformed to the standard of a much more barbarous age, even
though the latter will do some things with perfect equanimity from which
the other would recoil with horror. We have a much greater power than is
sometimes supposed of localising both our benevolent and malevolent
feelings. If a man is very kind, or very harsh to some particular class,
this is usually, and on the whole justly, regarded as an index of his
general disposition, but the inference is not infallible, and it may
easily be pushed too far. There are some who appear to expend all their
kindly feelings on a single class, and to treat with perfect indifference
all outside it. There are others who regard a certain class as quite
outside the pale of their sympathies, while in other spheres their
affections prove lively and constant. There are many who would accede
without the faintest reluctance to a barbarous custom, but would be quite
incapable of an equally barbarous act which custom had not consecrated.
Our affections are so capricious in their nature that it is continually
necessary to correct by detailed experience the most plausible deductions.
Thus, for example, it is a very unquestionable and a very important truth
that cruelty to animals naturally indicates and promotes a habit of mind
which leads to cruelty to men; and that, on the other hand, an
affectionate and merciful disposition to animals commonly implies a gentle
and amiable nature. But, if we adopted this principle as an infallible
criterion of humanity, we should soon find ourselves at fault. To the
somewhat too hackneyed anecdote of Domitian gratifying his savage
propensities by killing flies,(529) we might oppose Spinoza, one of the
purest, most gentle, most benevolent of mankind, of whom it is related
that almost the only amusement of his life was putting flies into spiders’
webs, and watching their struggles and their deaths.(530) It has been
observed that a very large proportion of the men who during the French
Revolution proved themselves most absolutely indifferent to human
suffering were deeply attached to animals. Fournier was devoted to a
squirrel, Couthon to a spaniel, Panis to two gold pheasants, Chaumette to
an aviary, Marat kept doves.(531) Bacon has noticed that the Turks, who
are a cruel people, are nevertheless conspicuous for their kindness to
animals, and he mentions the instance of a Christian boy who was nearly
stoned to death for gagging a long-billed fowl.(532) In Egypt there are
hospitals for superannuated cats, and the most loathsome insects are
regarded with tenderness; but human life is treated as if it were of no
account, and human suffering scarcely elicits a care.(533) The same
contrast appears more or less in all Eastern nations. On the other hand,
travellers are unanimous in declaring that in Spain an intense passion for
the bull-fight is quite compatible with the most active benevolence and
the most amiable disposition. Again, to pass to another sphere, it is not
uncommon to find conquerors, who will sacrifice with perfect callousness
great masses of men to their ambition, but who, in their dealings with
isolated individuals, are distinguished by an invariable clemency.
Anomalies of this kind continually appear in the Roman population. The
very men who looked down with delight when the sand of the arena was
reddened with human blood, made the theatre ring with applause when
Terence, in his famous line, proclaimed the universal brotherhood of man.
When the senate, being unable to discover the murderer of a patrician,
resolved to put his four hundred slaves to death, the people rose in open
rebellion against the sentence.(534) A knight named Erixo, who in the days
of Augustus had so scourged his son that he died of the effects, was
nearly torn to pieces by the indignant population.(535) The elder Cato
deprived a senator of his rank, because he had fixed an execution at such
an hour that his mistress could enjoy the spectacle.(536) Even in the
amphitheatre there were certain traces of a milder spirit. Drusus, the
people complained, took too visible a pleasure at the sight of blood;(537)
Caligula was too curious in watching death;(538) Caracalla, when a boy,
won enthusiastic plaudits by shedding tears at the execution of
criminals.(539) Among the most popular spectacles at Rome was
rope-dancing, and then, as now, the cord being stretched at a great height
above the ground, the apparent, and indeed real, danger added an evil zest
to the performances. In the reign of Marcus Aurelius an accident had
occurred, and the emperor, with his usual sensitive humanity, ordered that
no rope-dancer should perform without a net or a mattress being spread out
below. It is a singularly curious fact that this precaution, which no
Christian nation has adopted, continued in force during more than a
century of the worst period of the Roman Empire, when the blood of
captives was poured out like water in the Colosseum.(540) The standard of
humanity was very low, but the sentiment was still manifest, though its
displays were capricious and inconsistent.

The sketch I have now drawn will, I think, be sufficient to display the
broad chasm that existed between the Roman moralists and the Roman people.
On the one hand we find a system of ethics, of which when we consider the
range and beauty of its precepts, the sublimity of the motives to which it
appealed, and its perfect freedom from superstitious elements, it is not
too much to say that though it may have been equalled, it has never been
surpassed. On the other hand, we find a society almost absolutely
destitute of moralising institutions, occupations, or beliefs, existing
under an economical and political system which inevitably led to general
depravity, and passionately addicted to the most brutalising amusements.
The moral code, while it expanded in theoretical catholicity, had
contracted in practical application. The early Romans had a very narrow
and imperfect standard of duty, but their patriotism, their military
system, and their enforced simplicity of life had made that standard
essentially popular. The later Romans had attained a very high and
spiritual conception of duty, but the philosopher with his group of
disciples, or the writer with his few readers, had scarcely any point of
contact with the people. The great practical problem of the ancient
philosophers was how they could act upon the masses. Simply to tell men
what is virtue, and to extol its beauty, is insufficient. Something more
must be done if the characters of nations are to be moulded and inveterate
vices eradicated.

This problem the Roman Stoics were incapable of meeting, but they did what
lay in their power, and their efforts, though altogether inadequate to the
disease, were by no means contemptible. In the first place they raised up
many great and good rulers who exerted all the influence of their position
in the cause of virtue. In most cases these reforms were abolished on the
accession of the first bad emperor, but there were at least some that
remained. It has been observed that the luxury of the table, which had
acquired the most extravagant proportions during the period that elapsed
between the battle of Actium and the reign of Galba, began from this
period to decline, and the change is chiefly attributed to Vespasian, who
had in a measure reformed the Roman aristocracy by the introduction of
many provincials, and who made his court an example of the strictest
frugality.(541) The period from the accession of Nerva to the death of
Marcus Aurelius, comprising no less than eighty-four years, exhibits a
uniformity of good government which no other despotic monarchy has
equalled. Each of the five emperors who then reigned deserves to be placed
among the best rulers who have ever lived. Trajan and Hadrian, whose
personal characters were most defective, were men of great and conspicuous
genius. Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius, though less distinguished as
politicians, were among the most perfectly virtuous men who have ever sat
on a throne. During forty years of this period, perfect, unbroken peace
reigned over the entire civilised globe. The barbarian encroachments had
not yet begun. The distinct nationalities that composed the Empire,
gratified by perfect municipal and by perfect intellectual freedom, had
lost all care for political liberty, and little more than three hundred
thousand soldiers guarded a territory which is now protected by much more
than three millions.(542)

In creating this condition of affairs, Stoicism, as the chief moral agent
of the Empire, had a considerable though not a preponderating influence.
In other ways its influence was more evident and exclusive. It was a
fundamental maxim of the sect, “that the sage should take part in public
life,”(543) and it was therefore impossible that Stoicism should flourish
without producing a resuscitation of patriotism. The same moral impulse
which transformed the Neoplatonist into a dreaming mystic and the Catholic
into a useless hermit, impelled the Stoic to the foremost post of danger
in the service of his country. While landmark after landmark of Roman
virtue was submerged, while luxury and scepticism and foreign habits and
foreign creeds were corroding the whole framework of the national life,
amid the last paroxysms of expiring liberty, amid the hideous carnival of
vice that soon followed upon its fall, the Stoic remained unchanged, the
representative and the sustainer of the past. A party which had acquired
the noble title of the Party of Virtue, guided by such men as Cato or
Thrasea or Helvidius or Burrhus, upheld the banner of Roman virtue and
Roman liberty in the darkest hours of despotism and of apostasy. Like all
men who carry an intense religious fervour into politics, they were often
narrow-minded and intolerant, blind to the inevitable changes of society,
incapable of compromise, turbulent and inopportune in their demands,(544)
but they more than redeemed their errors by their noble constancy and
courage. The austere purity of their lives, and the heroic grandeur of
their deaths, kept alive the tradition of Roman liberty even under a Nero
or a Domitian. While such men existed it was felt that all was not lost.
There was still a rallying point of freedom, a seed of virtue that might
germinate anew, a living protest against the despotism and the corruption
of the Empire.

A third and still more important service which Stoicism rendered to
popular morals was in the formation of Roman jurisprudence.(545) Of all
the many forms of intellectual exertion in which Greece and Rome struggled
for the mastery this is perhaps the only one in which the superiority of
the latter is indisputable. “To rule the nations” was justly pronounced by
the Roman poet the supreme glory of his countrymen, and their
administrative genius is even now unrivalled in history. A deep reverence
for law was long one of their chief moral characteristics, and in order
that it might be inculcated from the earliest years it was a part of the
Roman system of education to oblige the children to repeat by rote the
code of the decemvirs.(546) The laws of the Republic, however, being an
expression of the contracted, local, military, and sacerdotal spirit that
dominated among the people, were necessarily unfit for the political and
intellectual expansion of the Empire, and the process of renovation which
was begun under Augustus by the Stoic Labeo,(547) was continued with great
zeal under Hadrian and Alexander Severus, and issued in the famous
compilations of Theodosius and Justinian. In this movement we have to
observe two parts. There were certain general rules of guidance laid down
by the great Roman lawyers which constituted what may be called the ideal
of the jurisconsults—the ends to which their special enactments tended—the
principles of equity to guide the judge when the law was silent or
ambiguous. There were also definite enactments to meet specific cases. The
first part was simply borrowed from the Stoics, whose doctrines and method
thus passed from the narrow circle of a philosophical academy and became
the avowed moral beacons of the civilised globe. The fundamental
difference between Stoicism and early Roman thought was that the former
maintained the existence of a bond of unity among mankind which
transcended or annihilated all class or national limitations. The
essential characteristic of the Stoical method was the assertion of the
existence of a certain law of nature to which it was the end of philosophy
to conform. These tenets were laid down in the most unqualified language
by the Roman lawyers. “As far as natural law is concerned,” said Ulpian,
“all men are equal.”(548) “Nature,” said Paul, “has established among us a
certain relationship.”(549) “By natural law,” Ulpian declared, “all men
are born free.”(550) “Slavery” was defined by Florentinus as “a custom of
the law of nations, by which one man, contrary to the law of nature, is
subjected to the dominion of another.”(551) In accordance with these
principles it became a maxim among the Roman lawyers that in every
doubtful case where the alternative of slavery or freedom was at issue,
the decision of the judge should be towards the latter.(552)

The Roman legislation was in a twofold manner the child of philosophy. It
was in the first place itself formed upon the philosophical model, for,
instead of being a mere empirical system adjusted to the existing
requirements of society, it laid down abstract principles of right to
which it endeavoured to conform;(553) and, in the next place, these
principles were borrowed directly from Stoicism. The prominence the sect
had acquired among Roman moralists, its active intervention in public
affairs, and also the precision and brevity of its phraseology, had
recommended it to the lawyers,(554) and the union then effected between
the legal and philosophical spirit is felt to the present day. To the
Stoics and the Roman lawyers is mainly due the clear recognition of the
existence of a law of nature above and beyond all human enactments which
has been the basis of the best moral and of the most influential though
most chimerical political speculation of later ages, and the renewed study
of Roman law was an important element in the revival that preceded the
Reformation.

It is not necessary for my present purpose to follow into very minute
detail the application of these principles to practical legislation. It is
sufficient to say, that there were few departments into which the catholic
and humane principles of Stoicism were not in some degree carried. In the
political world, as we have already seen, the right of Roman citizenship,
with the protection and the legal privileges attached to it, from being
the monopoly of a small class, was gradually but very widely diffused. In
the domestic sphere, the power which the old laws had given to the father
of the family, though not destroyed, was greatly abridged, and an
important innovation, which is well worthy of a brief notice, was thus
introduced into the social system of the Empire.

It is probable that in the chronology of morals, domestic virtue takes the
precedence of all others; but in its earliest phase it consists of a
single article—the duty of absolute submission to the head of the
household. It is only at a later period, and when the affections have been
in some degree evoked, that the reciprocity of duty is felt, and the whole
tendency of civilisation is to diminish the disparity between the
different members of the family. The process by which the wife from a
simple slave becomes the companion and equal of her husband, I shall
endeavour to trace in a future chapter. The relations of the father to his
children are profoundly modified by the new position the affections assume
in education, which in a rude nation rests chiefly upon authority, but in
a civilised community upon sympathy. In Rome the absolute authority of the
head of the family was the centre and archetype of that whole system of
discipline and subordination which it was the object of the legislator to
sustain. Filial reverence was enforced as the first of duties. It is the
one virtue which Virgil attributed in any remarkable degree to the founder
of the race. The marks of external respect paid to old men were scarcely
less than in Sparta.(555) It was the boast of the lawyers that in no other
nation had the parent so great an authority over his children.(556) The
child was indeed the absolute slave of his father, who had a right at any
time to take away his life and dispose of his entire property. He could
look to no time during the life of his father in which he would be freed
from the thraldom. The man of fifty, the consul, the general, or the
tribune, was in this respect in the same position as the infant, and might
at any moment be deprived of all the earnings of his labour, driven to the
most menial employments, or even put to death, by the paternal
command.(557)

There can, I think, be little question that this law, at least in the
latter period of its existence, defeated its own object. There are few
errors of education to which more unhappy homes may be traced than
this—that parents have sought to command the obedience, before they have
sought to win the confidence, of their children. This was the path which
the Roman legislator indicated to the parent, and its natural consequence
was to chill the sympathies and arouse the resentment of the young. Of all
the forms of virtue filial affection is perhaps that which appears most
rarely in Roman history. In the plays of Plautus it is treated much as
conjugal fidelity was treated in England by the playwriters of the
Restoration. An historian of the reign of Tiberius has remarked that the
civil wars were equally remarkable for the many examples they supplied of
the devotion of wives to their husbands, of the devotion of slaves to
their masters, and of the treachery or indifference of sons to their
fathers.(558)

The reforms that were effected during the pagan empire did not reconstruct
the family, but they at least greatly mitigated its despotism. The
profound change of feeling that had taken place on the subject is shown by
the contrast between the respectful, though somewhat shrinking,
acquiescence, with which the ancient Romans regarded parents who had put
their children to death,(559) and the indignation excited under Augustus
by the act of Erixo. Hadrian, apparently by a stretch of despotic power,
banished a man who had assassinated his son.(560) Infanticide was
forbidden, though not seriously repressed, but the right of putting to
death an adult child had long been obsolete, when Alexander Severus
formally withdrew it from the father. The property of children was also in
some slight degree protected. A few instances are recorded of wills that
were annulled because they had disinherited legitimate sons,(561) and
Hadrian, following a policy that had been feebly initiated by his two
predecessors, gave the son an absolute possession of whatever he might
gain in the military service. Diocletian rendered the sale of children by
the fathers, in all cases, illegal.(562)

In the field of slavery the legislative reforms were more important. This
institution, indeed, is one that meets us at every turn of the moral
history of Rome, and on two separate occasions in the present chapter I
have already had occasion to notice it. I have shown that the great
prominence of the slave element in Roman life was one of the causes of the
enlargement of sympathies that characterises the philosophy of the Empire,
and also that slavery was in a very high degree, and in several distinct
ways, a cause of the corruption of the free classes. In considering the
condition of the slaves themselves, we may distinguish, I think, three
periods. In the earlier and simpler days of the Republic, the head of the
family was absolute master of his slaves, but circumstances in a great
measure mitigated the evil of the despotism. The slaves were very few in
number. Each Roman proprietor had commonly one or two who assisted him in
cultivating the soil, and superintended his property when he was absent in
the army. In the frugal habits of the time, the master was brought into
the most intimate connection with his slaves. He shared their labours and
their food, and the control he exercised over them, in most cases probably
differed little from that which he exercised over his sons. Under such
circumstances, great barbarity to slaves, though always possible, was not
likely to be common, and the protection of religion was added to the force
of habit. Hercules, the god of labour, was the special patron of slaves.
There was a legend that Sparta had once been nearly destroyed by an
earthquake sent by Neptune to avenge the treacherous murder of some
Helots.(563) In Rome, it was said, Jupiter had once in a dream
commissioned a man to express to the senate the divine anger at the cruel
treatment of a slave during the public games.(564) By the pontifical law,
slaves were exempted from field labours on the religious festivals.(565)
The Saturnalia and Matronalia, which were especially intended for their
benefit, were the most popular holidays in Rome, and on these occasions
the slaves were accustomed to sit at the same table with their
masters.(566)

Even at this time, however, it is probable that great atrocities were
occasionally committed. Everything was permitted by law, although it is
probable that the censor in cases of extreme abuse might interfere, and
the aristocratic feelings of the early Roman, though corrected in a
measure by the associations of daily labour, sometimes broke out in a
fierce scorn for all classes but his own. The elder Cato, who may be
regarded as a type of the Romans of the earlier period, speaks of slaves
simply as instruments for obtaining wealth, and he encouraged masters,
both by his precept and his example, to sell them as useless when aged and
infirm.(567)

In the second period, the condition of slaves had greatly deteriorated.
The victories of Rome, especially in the East, had introduced into the
city innumerable slaves(568) and the wildest luxury, and the despotism of
the master remained unqualified by law, while the habits of life that had
originally mitigated it had disappeared. The religious sentiments of the
people were at the same time fatally impaired, and many new causes
conspired to aggravate the evil. The passion for gladiatorial shows had
begun, and it continually produced a savage indifference to the infliction
of pain. The servile wars of Sicily, and the still more formidable revolt
of Spartacus, had shaken Italy to the centre, and the shock was felt in
every household. “As many enemies as slaves,” had become a Roman proverb.
The fierce struggles of barbarian captives were repaid by fearful
punishments, and many thousands of revolted slaves perished on the cross.
An atrocious law, intended to secure the safety of the citizens, provided
that if a master were murdered, all the slaves in his house, who were not
in chains or absolutely helpless through illness, should be put to
death.(569)

Numerous acts of the most odious barbarity were committed. The well-known
anecdotes of Flaminius ordering a slave to be killed to gratify, by the
spectacle, the curiosity of a guest; of Vedius Pollio feeding his fish on
the flesh of slaves; and of Augustus sentencing a slave, who had killed
and eaten a favourite quail, to crucifixion, are the extreme examples that
are recorded; for we need not regard as an historical fact the famous
picture in Juvenal of a Roman lady, in a moment of caprice, ordering her
unoffending servant to be crucified. We have, however, many other very
horrible glimpses of slave life at the close of the Republic and in the
early days of the Empire. The marriage of slaves was entirely unrecognised
by law, and in their case the words adultery, incest, or polygamy had no
legal meaning. Their testimony was in general only received in the
law-courts when they were under torture. When executed for a crime, their
deaths were of a most hideous kind. The ergastula, or private prisons, of
the masters were frequently their only sleeping-places. Old and infirm
slaves were constantly exposed to perish on an island of the Tiber. We
read of slaves chained as porters to the doors, and cultivating the fields
in chains. Ovid and Juvenal describe the fierce Roman ladies tearing their
servants’ faces, and thrusting the long pins of their brooches into their
flesh. The master, at the close of the Republic, had full power to sell
his slave as a gladiator, or as a combatant with wild beasts.(570)

All this is very horrible, but it must not be forgotten that there was
another side to the picture. It is the custom of many ecclesiastical
writers to paint the pagan society of the Empire as a kind of pandemonium,
and with this object they collect the facts I have cited, which are for
the most part narrated by Roman satirists or historians, as examples of
the most extreme and revolting cruelty; they represent them as fair
specimens of the ordinary treatment of the servile class, and they simply
exclude from their consideration the many qualifying facts that might be
alleged. Although the marriage of a slave was not legally recognised, it
was sanctioned by custom, and it does not appear to have been common to
separate his family.(571) Two customs to which I have already referred
distinguish ancient slavery broadly from that of modern times. The
peculium, or private property of slaves, was freely recognised by masters,
to whom, however, after the death of the slave, part or all of it usually
reverted,(572) though some masters permitted their slaves to dispose of it
by will.(573) The enfranchisement of slaves was also carried on to such an
extent as seriously to affect the population of the city. It appears from
a passage in Cicero that an industrious and well-conducted captive might
commonly look forward to his freedom in six years.(574) Isolated acts of
great cruelty undoubtedly occurred; but public opinion strongly
reprehended them, and Seneca assures us that masters who ill-treated their
slaves were pointed at and insulted in the streets.(575) The slave was not
necessarily the degraded being he has since appeared. The physician who
tended the Roman in his sickness, the tutor to whom he confided the
education of his son, the artists whose works commanded the admiration of
the city, were usually slaves. Slaves sometimes mixed with their masters
in the family, ate habitually with them at the same table,(576) and were
regarded by them with the warmest affection. Tiro, the slave and
afterwards the freedman of Cicero, compiled his master’s letters, and has
preserved some in which Cicero addressed him in terms of the most sincere
and delicate friendship. I have already referred to the letter in which
the younger Pliny poured out his deep sorrow for the death of some of his
slaves, and endeavoured to console himself with the thought that as he had
emancipated them before their death, at least they had died free.(577)
Epictetus passed at once from slavery to the friendship of an
emperor.(578) The great multiplication of slaves, though it removed them
from the sympathy of their masters, must at least have in most cases
alleviated their burdens. The application of torture to slave witnesses,
horrible as it was, was a matter of rare occurrence, and was carefully
restricted by law.(579) Much vice was undoubtedly fostered, but yet the
annals of the civil wars and of the Empire are crowded with the most
splendid instances of the fidelity of slaves. In many cases they refused
the boon of liberty and defied the most horrible tortures rather than
betray their masters, accompanied them in their flight when all others had
abandoned them, displayed undaunted courage and untiring ingenuity in
rescuing them from danger, and in some cases saved the lives of their
owners by the deliberate sacrifice of their own.(580) This was, indeed,
for some time the pre-eminent virtue of Rome, and it proves conclusively
that the masters were not so tyrannical, and that the slaves were not so
degraded, as is sometimes alleged.

The duty of humanity to slaves had been at all times one of those which
the philosophers had most ardently inculcated. Plato and Aristotle, Zeno
and Epicurus, were, on this point, substantially agreed.(581) The Roman
Stoics gave the duty a similar prominence in their teaching, and Seneca
especially has filled pages with exhortations to masters to remember that
the accident of position in no degree affects the real dignity of men,
that the slave may be free by virtue while the master may be a slave by
vice, and that it is the duty of a good man to abstain not only from all
cruelty, but even from all feeling of contempt towards his slaves.(582)
But these exhortations, in which some have imagined that they have
discovered the influence of Christianity, were, in fact, simply an echo of
the teaching of ancient Greece, and especially of Zeno, the founder of
Stoicism, who had laid down, long before the dawn of Christianity, the
broad principles that ’all men are by nature equal, and that virtue alone
establishes a difference between them.’(583) The softening influence of
the peace of the Antonines assisted this movement of humanity, and the
slaves derived a certain incidental benefit from one of the worst features
of the despotism of the Cæsars. The emperors, who continually apprehended
plots against their lives or power, encouraged numerous spies around the
more important of their subjects, and the facility with which slaves could
discover the proceedings of their masters inclined the Government in their
favour.

Under all these influences many laws were promulgated which profoundly
altered the legal position of the slaves, and opened what may be termed
the third period of Roman slavery. The Petronian law, which was issued by
Augustus, or, more probably, by Nero, forbade the master to condemn his
slave to combat with wild beasts without a sentence from a judge.(584)
Under Claudius, some citizens exposed their sick slaves on the island of
Æsculapius in the Tiber, to avoid the trouble of tending them, and the
emperor decreed that if the slave so exposed recovered from his sickness
he should become free, and also, that masters who killed their slaves
instead of exposing them should be punished as murderers.(585) It is
possible that succour was afforded to the abandoned slave in the temple of
Æsculapius,(586) and it would appear from these laws that the wanton
slaughter of a slave was already illegal. About this time the statue of
the emperor had become an asylum for slaves.(587) Under Nero, a judge was
appointed to hear their complaints, and was instructed to punish masters
who treated them with barbarity, made them the instruments of lust, or
withheld from them a sufficient quantity of the necessaries of life.(588)
A considerable pause appears to have ensued; but Domitian made a law,
which was afterwards reiterated, forbidding the Oriental custom of
mutilating slaves for sensual purposes, and the reforms were renewed with
great energy in the period of the Antonines. Hadrian and his two
successors formally deprived masters of the right of killing their slaves;
forbade them to sell slaves to the lanistæ, or speculators in gladiators;
destroyed the ergastula, or private prisons; ordered that, when a master
was murdered, those slaves only should be tortured who were within
hearing;(589) appointed officers through all the provinces to hear the
complaints of slaves; enjoined that no master should treat his slaves with
excessive severity; and commanded that, when such severity was proved, the
master should be compelled to sell the slave he had ill-treated.(590) When
we add to these laws the broad maxims of equity asserting the essential
equality of the human race, which the jurists had borrowed from the
Stoics, and which supplied the principles to guide the judges in their
decisions, it must be admitted that the slave code of Imperial Rome
compares not unfavourably with those of some Christian nations.

While a considerable portion of the principles, and even much of the
phraseology, of Stoicism passed into the system of public law, the Roman
philosophers had other more direct means of acting on the people. On
occasions of family bereavement, when the mind is most susceptible of
impressions, they were habitually called in to console the survivors.
Dying men asked their comfort and support in the last hours of their life.
They became the directors of conscience to numbers who resorted to them
for a solution of perplexing cases of practical morals, or under the
influence of despondency or remorse.(591) They had their special
exhortations for every vice, and their remedies adapted to every variety
of character. Many cases were cited of the conversion of the vicious or
the careless, who had been sought out and fascinated by the
philosopher,(592) and who, under his guidance, had passed through a long
course of moral discipline, and had at last attained a high degree of
virtue. Education fell in a great degree into their hands. Many great
families kept a philosopher among them in what in modern language might be
termed the capacity of a domestic chaplain,(593) while a system of popular
preaching was created and widely diffused.

Of these preachers there were two classes who differed greatly in their
characters and their methods. The first, who have been very happily termed
the “monks of Stoicism,”(594) were the Cynics, who appear to have assumed
among the later moralists of the Pagan empire a position somewhat
resembling that of the mendicant orders in Catholicism. In a singularly
curious dissertation of Epictetus,(595) we have a picture of the ideal at
which a Cynic should aim, and it is impossible in reading it not to be
struck by the resemblance it bears to the missionary friar. The Cynic
should be a man devoting his entire life to the instruction of mankind. He
must be unmarried, for he must have no family affections to divert or to
dilute his energies. He must wear the meanest dress, sleep upon the bare
ground, feed upon the simplest food, abstain from all earthly pleasures,
and yet exhibit to the world the example of uniform cheerfulness and
content. No one, under pain of provoking the Divine anger, should embrace
such a career, unless he believes himself to be called and assisted by
Jupiter. It is his mission to go among men as the ambassador of God,
rebuking, in season and out of season, their frivolity, their cowardice,
and their vice. He must stop the rich man in the market-place. He must
preach to the populace in the highway. He must know no respect and no
fear. He must look upon all men as his sons, and upon all women as his
daughters. In the midst of a jeering crowd, he must exhibit such a placid
calm that men may imagine him to be of stone. Ill-treatment, and exile,
and death must have no terror in his eyes, for the discipline of his life
should emancipate him from every earthly tie; and, when he is beaten, “he
should love those who beat him, for he is at once the father and the
brother of all men.”

A curious contrast to the Cynic was the philosophic rhetorician, who
gathered around his chair all that was most brilliant in Roman or Athenian
society. The passion for oratory which the free institutions of Greece had
formed, had survived the causes that produced it, and given rise to a very
singular but a very influential profession; which, though excluded from
the Roman Republic, acquired a great development after the destruction of
political liberty. The rhetoricians were a kind of itinerant lecturers,
who went about from city to city, delivering harangues that were often
received with the keenest interest. For the most part, neither their
characters nor their talents appear to have deserved much respect.
Numerous anecdotes are recorded of their vanity and rapacity, and their
success was a striking proof of the decadence of public taste.(596) They
had cultivated the histrionic part of oratory with the most minute
attention. The arrangement of their hair, the folds of their dresses, all
their postures and gestures were studied with artistic care. They had
determined the different kinds of action that are appropriate for each
branch of a discourse and for each form of eloquence. Sometimes they
personated characters in Homer or in ancient Greek history, and delivered
speeches which those characters might have delivered in certain
conjunctures of their lives. Sometimes they awakened the admiration of
their audience by making a fly, a cockroach, dust, smoke, a mouse, or a
parrot the subject of their eloquent eulogy.(597) Others, again, exercised
their ingenuity in defending some glaring paradox or sophism, or in
debating some intricate case of law or morals, or they delivered literary
lectures remarkable for a minute but captious and fastidious criticism.
Some of the rhetoricians recited only harangues prepared with the most
elaborate care, others were ready debaters, and they travelled from city
to city, challenging opponents to discuss some subtle and usually
frivolous question. The poet Juvenal and the satirist Lucian had both for
a time followed this profession. Many of the most eminent acquired immense
wealth, travelled with a splendid retinue, and excited transports of
enthusiasm in the cities they visited. They were often charged by cities
to appear before the emperor to plead for a remission of taxes, or of the
punishment due for some offence. They became in a great measure the
educators of the people, and contributed very largely to form and direct
their taste.

It had been from the first the custom of some philosophers to adopt this
profession, and to expound in the form of rhetorical lectures the
principles of their school. In the Flavian period and in the age of the
Antonines, this alliance of philosophy, and especially of Stoical
philosophy, with rhetoric became more marked, and the foundation of
liberally endowed chairs of rhetoric and philosophy by Vespasian, Hadrian,
and Marcus Aurelius contributed to sustain it. Discourses of the Platonist
Maximus of Tyre, and of the Stoic Dion Chrysostom, have come down to us,
and they are both of a high order of intrinsic merit. The first turn
chiefly on such subjects as the comparative excellence of active and
contemplative life, the pure and noble conceptions of the Divine nature
which underlie the fables or allegories of Homer, the dæmon of Socrates,
the Platonic notions of the Divinity, the duty of prayer, the end of
philosophy, and the ethics of love.(598) Dion Chrysostom, in his orations,
expounded the noblest and purest theism, examined the place which images
should occupy in worship, advocated humanity to slaves, and was, perhaps,
the earliest writer in the Roman Empire who denounced hereditary slavery
as illegitimate.(599) His life was very eventful and very noble. He had
become famous as a sophist and rhetorician, skilled in the laborious
frivolities of the profession. Calamity, however, and the writings of
Plato induced him to abandon them and devote himself exclusively to the
improvement of mankind. Having defended with a generous rashness a man who
had been proscribed by the tyranny of Domitian, he was compelled to fly
from Rome in the garb of a beggar; and, carrying with him only a work of
Plato and a speech of Demosthenes, he travelled to the most distant
frontiers of the empire. He gained his livelihood by the work of his
hands, for he refused to receive money for his discourses; but he taught
and captivated the Greek colonists who were scattered among the
barbarians, and even the barbarians themselves. Upon the assassination of
Domitian, when the legions hesitated to give their allegiance to Nerva,
the eloquence of Dion Chrysostom overcame their irresolution. By the same
eloquence he more than once appeased seditions in Alexandria and the Greek
cities of Asia Minor. He preached before Trajan on the duties of royalty,
taking a line of Homer for his text. He electrified the vast and polished
audience assembled at Athens for the Olympic games as he had before done
the rude barbarians of Scythia. Though his taste was by no means untainted
by the frivolities of the rhetorician, he was skilled in all the arts that
awaken curiosity and attention, and his eloquence commanded the most
various audiences in the most distant lands. His special mission, however,
was to popularise Stoicism by diffusing its principles through the masses
of mankind.(600)

The names, and in some cases a few fragments, of the writings of many
other rhetorical philosophers, such as Herod Atticus, Favorinus, Fronto,
Taurus, Fabianus, and Julianus, have come down to us, and each was the
centre of a group of passionate admirers, and contributed to form a
literary society in the great cities of the empire. We have a vivid
picture of this movement in the “Attic Nights” of Aulus Gellius—a work
which is, I think, one of the most curious and instructive in Latin
literature, and which bears to the literary society of the period of the
Antonines much the same relation as the writings of Helvétius bear to the
Parisian society on the eve of the Revolution. Helvétius, it is said,
collected the materials for his great work on “Mind” chiefly from the
conversation of the drawing-rooms of Paris at a time when that
conversation had attained a degree of perfection which even Frenchmen had
never before equalled. He wrote in the age of the “Encyclopædia,” when the
social and political convulsions of the Revolution were as yet unfelt;
when the first dazzling gleams of intellectual freedom had flashed upon a
society long clouded by superstition and aristocratic pride; when the
genius of Voltaire and the peerless conversational powers of Diderot,
irradiating the bold philosophies of Bacon and Locke, had kindled an
intellectual enthusiasm through all the ranks of fashion;(601) and when
the contempt for the wisdom and the methods of the past was only equalled
by the prevailing confidence in the future. Brilliant, graceful,
versatile, and superficial, with easy eloquence and lax morals, with a
profound disbelief in moral excellence, and an intense appreciation of
intellectual beauty, disdaining all pedantry, superstition, and mystery,
and with an almost fanatical persuasion of the omnipotence of analysis, he
embodied the principles of his contemporaries in a philosophy which
represents all virtue and heroism as but disguised self-interest; he
illustrated every argument, not by the pedantic learning of the schools,
but by the sparkling anecdotes and acute literary criticisms of the
drawing-room, and he thus produced a work which, besides its intrinsic
merits, was the most perfect mirror of the society from which it
sprang.(602) Very different, both in form, subject, and tendency, but no
less truly representative, was the work of Aulus Gellius. It is the
journal, or common-place book, or miscellany of a scholar moving in the
centre of the literary society of both Rome and Athens during the latter
period of the Antonines, profoundly imbued with its spirit, and devoting
his leisure to painting its leading figures, and compiling the substance
of their teaching. Few books exhibit a more curious picture of the
combination of intense child-like literary and moral enthusiasm with the
most hopeless intellectual degeneracy. Each prominent philosopher was
surrounded by a train of enthusiastic disciples, who made the lecture-room
resound with their applause,(603) and accepted him as their monitor in all
the affairs of life. He rebuked publicly every instance of vice or of
affectation he had observed in their conduct, received them at his own
table, became their friend and confidant in their troubles, and sometimes
assisted them by his advice in their professional duties.(604) Taurus,
Favorinus, Fronto, and Atticus were the most prominent figures, and each
seems to have formed, in the centre of a corrupt society, a little company
of young men devoted with the simplest and most ardent earnestness to the
cultivation of intellectual and moral excellence. Yet this society was
singularly puerile. The age of genius had closed, and the age of pedantry
had succeeded it. Minute, curious, and fastidious verbal criticism of the
great writers of the past was the chief occupation of the scholar, and the
whole tone of his mind had become retrospective and even archaic. Ennius
was esteemed a greater poet than Virgil, and Cato a greater prose writer
than Cicero. It was the affectation of some to tesselate their
conversation with antiquated and obsolete words.(605) The study of
etymologies had risen into great favour, and curious questions of grammar
and pronunciation were ardently debated. Logic, as in most ages of
intellectual poverty, was greatly studied and prized. Bold speculations
and original thought had almost ceased, but it was the delight of the
philosophers to throw the arguments of great writers into the form of
syllogisms, and to debate them according to the rules of the schools. The
very amusements of the scholars took the form of a whimsical and puerile
pedantry. Gellius recalls, with a thrill of emotion, those enchanting
evenings when, their more serious studies being terminated, the disciples
of Taurus assembled at the table of their master to pass the happy hours
in discussing such questions as when a man can be said to die, whether in
the last moment of life or in the first moment of death; or when he can be
said to get up, whether when he is still on his bed or when he has just
left it.(606) Sometimes they proposed to one another literary questions,
as what old writer had employed some common word in a sense that had since
become obsolete; or they discussed such syllogisms as these:—“You have
what you have not lost; you have not lost horns, therefore you have
horns.” “You are not what I am. I am a man; therefore you are not a
man.”(607) As moralists, they exhibited a very genuine love of moral
excellence, but the same pedantic and retrospective character. They were
continually dilating on the regulations of the censors and the customs of
the earliest period of the Republic. They acquired the habit of never
enforcing the simplest lesson without illustrating it by a profusion of
ancient examples and by detached sentences from some philosopher, which
they employed much as texts of Scripture are often employed in the
writings of the Puritans.(608) Above all, they delighted in cases of
conscience, which they discussed with the subtilty of the schoolmen.

Lactantius has remarked that the Stoics were especially noted for the
popular or democratic character of their teaching.(609) To their success
in this respect their alliance with the rhetoricians probably largely
contributed; but in other ways it hastened the downfall of the school. The
useless speculations, refinements, and paradoxes which the subtle genius
of Chrysippus had connected with the simple morals of Stoicism, had been
for the most part thrown into the background by the early Roman Stoics;
but in the teaching of the rhetoricians they became supreme. The
endowments given by the Antonines to philosophers attracted a multitude of
impostors, who wore long beards and the dress of the philosopher, but
whose lives were notoriously immoral. The Cynics especially, professing to
reject the ordinary conventionalities of society, and being under none of
that discipline or superintendence which in the worst period has secured
at least external morality among the mendicant monks, continually threw
off every vestige of virtue and of decency. Instead of moulding great
characters and inspiring heroic actions, Stoicism became a school of the
idlest casuistry, or the cloak for manifest imposture.(610) The very
generation which saw Marcus Aurelius on the throne, saw also the
extinction of the influence of his sect.

The internal causes of the decadence of Stoicism, though very powerful,
are insufficient to explain this complete eclipse. The chief cause must be
found in the fact that the minds of men had taken a new turn, and their
enthusiasm was flowing rapidly in the direction of Oriental religions,
and, under the guidance of Plotinus, Porphyry, Iamblichus, and Proclus, of
a mythical philosophy which was partly Egyptian and partly Platonic. It
remains for me, in concluding this review of the Pagan empire, to indicate
and explain this last transformation of Pagan morals.

It was in the first place a very natural reaction against the extreme
aridity of the Stoical casuistry, and also against the scepticism which
Sextus Empiricus had revived, and in this respect it represents a law of
the human mind which has been more than once illustrated in later times.
Thus, the captious, unsatisfying, intellectual subtleties of the schoolmen
were met by the purely emotional and mystical school of St. Bonaventura,
and afterwards of Tauler, and thus the adoration of the human intellect,
that was general in the philosophy of the last century, prepared the way
for the complete denial of its competency by De Maistre and by Lamennais.

In the next place, mysticism was a normal continuation of the
spiritualising movement which had long been advancing. We have already
seen that the strong tendency of ethics, from Cato to Marcus Aurelius, was
to enlarge the prominence of the emotions in the type of virtue. The
formation of a gentle, a spiritual, and, in a word, a religious character
had become a prominent part of moral culture, and it was regarded not
simply as a means, but as an end. Still, both Marcus Aurelius and Cato
were Stoics. They both represented the same general cast or conception of
virtue, although in Marcus Aurelius the type had been profoundly modified.
But the time was soon to come when the balance between the practical and
the emotional parts of virtue, which had been steadily changing, should be
decisively turned in favour of the latter, and the type of Stoicism was
then necessarily discarded.

A concurrence of political and commercial causes had arisen, very
favourable to the propagation of Oriental beliefs. Commerce had produced a
constant intercourse between Egypt and Italy. Great numbers of Oriental
slaves, passionately devoted to their national religions, existed in Rome;
and Alexandria, which combined a great intellectual development with a
geographical and commercial position exceedingly favourable to a fusion of
many doctrines, soon created a school of thought which acted powerfully
upon the world. Four great systems of eclecticism arose; Aristobulus and
Philo tinctured Judaism with Greek and Egyptian philosophy. The Gnostics
and the Alexandrian fathers united, though in very different proportions,
Christian doctrines with the same elements; while Neoplatonism, at least
in its later forms, represented a fusion of the Greek and Egyptian mind. A
great analogy was discovered between the ideal philosophy of Plato and the
mystical philosophy that was indigenous to the East, and the two systems
readily blended.(611)

But the most powerful cause of the movement was the intense desire for
positive religious belief, which had long been growing in the Empire. The
period when Roman incredulity reached its extreme point had been the
century that preceded and the half century that followed the birth of
Christ. The sudden dissolution of the old habits of the Republic effected
through political causes, the first comparison of the multitudinous
religions of the Empire and also the writings of Euhemerus had produced an
absolute religious disbelief which Epicureanism represented and
encouraged. This belief, however, as I have already noticed, co-existed
with numerous magical and astrological superstitions, and the ignorance of
physical science was so great, and the conception of general laws so
faint, that the materials for a great revival of superstition still
remained. From the middle of the first century, a more believing and
reverent spirit began to arise. The worship of Isis and Serapis forced its
way into Rome in spite of the opposition of the rulers. Apollonius of
Tyana, at the close of the Flavian period, had endeavoured to unite moral
teaching with religious practices; the oracles, which had long ceased,
were partially restored under the Antonines; the calamities and visible
decline of the Empire withdrew the minds of men from that proud patriotic
worship of Roman greatness, which was long a substitute for religious
feeling; and the frightful pestilence that swept over the land in the
reigns of Marcus Aurelius and his successor was followed by a blind,
feverish, and spasmodic superstition. Besides this, men have never
acquiesced for any considerable time in a neglect of the great problems of
the origin, nature, and destinies of the soul, or dispensed with some form
of religious worship and aspiration. That religious instincts are as truly
a part of our nature as are our appetites and our nerves, is a fact which
all history establishes, and which forms one of the strongest proofs of
the reality of that unseen world to which the soul of man continually
tends. Early Roman Stoicism, which in this respect somewhat resembled the
modern positive school, diverted for the most part its votaries from the
great problems of religion, and attempted to evolve its entire system of
ethics out of existing human nature, without appealing to any external
supernatural sanction. But the Platonic school, and the Egyptian school
which connected itself with the name of Pythagoras, were both essentially
religious. The first aspired to the Deity as the source and model of
virtue, admitted dæmons or subordinate spiritual agents acting upon
mankind, and explained and purified, in no hostile spirit, the popular
religions. The latter made the state of ecstasy or quietism its ideal
condition, and sought to purify the mind by theurgy or special religious
rites. Both philosophies conspired to effect a great religious
reformation, in which the Greek spirit usually represented the rational,
and the Egyptian the mystical, element.

Of the first, Plutarch was the head. He taught the supreme authority of
reason. He argued elaborately that superstition is worse than atheism, for
it calumniates the character of the Deity, and its evils are not negative,
but positive. At the same time, he is far from regarding the Mythology as
a tissue of fables. Some things he denies. Others he explains away. Others
he frankly accepts. He teaches for the most part a pure monotheism, which
he reconciles with the common belief, partly by describing the different
divinities as simply popular personifications of Divine attributes, and
partly by the usual explanation of dæmons. He discarded most of the fables
of the poets, applying to them with fearless severity the tests of human
morality, and rejecting indignantly those which attribute to the Deity
cruel or immoral actions. He denounces all religious terrorism, and draws
a broad line of distinction between both the superstitious and idolatrous
conception of the Deity on the one hand, and the philosophical conception
on the other. “The superstitious man believes in the gods, but he has a
false idea of their nature. Those good beings whose providence watches
over us with so much care, those beings so ready to forget our faults, he
represents as ferocious and cruel tyrants, taking pleasure in tormenting
us. He believes the founders of brass, the sculptors of stone, the
moulders of wax; he attributes to the gods a human form; he adorns and
worships the image he has made, and he listens not to the philosophers,
and men of knowledge who associate the Divine image, not with bodily
beauty, but with grandeur and majesty, with gentleness and goodness.”(612)
On the other hand, Plutarch believed that there was undoubtedly a certain
supernatural basis in the Pagan creed; he believed in oracles; he
defended, in a very ingenious essay, hereditary punishment, and the
doctrine of a special Providence; he admitted a future retribution, though
he repudiated the notion of physical torment; and he brought into clear
relief the moral teaching conveyed in some of the fables of the poets.

The position which Plutarch occupied under Trajan, Maximus of Tyre
occupied in the next generation. Like Plutarch, but with a greater
consistency, he maintained a pure monotheistic doctrine, declaring that
“Zeus is that most ancient and guiding mind that begot all things—Athene
is prudence—Apollo is the sun.”(613) Like Plutarch, he developed the
Platonic doctrine of dæmons as an explanation of much of the mythology,
and he applied an allegorical interpretation with great freedom to the
fables of Homer, which formed the text-book or the Bible of Paganism. By
these means he endeavoured to clarify the popular creed from all elements
inconsistent with a pure monotheism, and from all legends of doubtful
morality, while he sublimated the popular worship into a harmless
symbolism. “The gods,” he assures us, “themselves need no images,” but the
infirmity of human nature requires visible signs “on which to rest.”
“Those who possess such faculties, that with a steady mind they can rise
to heaven, and to God, are in no need of statues. But such men are very
rare.” He then proceeds to recount the different ways by which men have
endeavoured to represent or symbolise the Divine nature, as the statues of
Greece, the animals of Egypt, or the sacred flame of Persia. “The God,” he
continues, “the Father and the Founder of all that exists, older than the
sun, older than the sky, greater than all time, than every age, and than
all the works of nature, whom no words can express, whom no eye can
see.... What can we say concerning his images? Only let men understand
that there is but one Divine nature; but whether the art of Phidias
chiefly preserves his memory among the Greeks, or the worship of animals
among the Egyptians, a river among these, or a flame among those, I do not
blame the variety of the representations—only let men understand that
there is but one; only let them love one, let them preserve one in their
memory.”(614)

A third writer who, nearly at the same time as Maximus of Tyre, made some
efforts in the same direction, was Apuleius, who, however, both as a moral
teacher, and in his freedom from superstition, was far inferior to the
preceding. The religion he most admired was the Egyptian; but in his
philosophy he was a Platonist, and in that capacity, besides an exposition
of the Platonic code of morals, he has left us a singularly clear and
striking disquisition on the doctrine of dæmons. “These dæmons,” he says,
“are the bearers of blessings and prayers between the inhabitants of earth
and heaven, carrying prayers from the one and assistance from the
other.... By them also, as Plato maintained in his ‘Banquet,’ all
revelations, all the various miracles of magicians, all kinds of omens,
are ruled. They have their several tasks to perform, their different
departments to govern; some directing dreams, others the disposition of
the entrails, others the flight of birds.... The supreme deities do not
descend to these things—they leave them to the intermediate
divinities.”(615) But these intermediate spirits are not simply the agents
of supernatural phenomena—they are also the guardians of our virtue and
the recorders of our actions. “Each man has in life witnesses and guards
of his deeds, visible to no one, but always present, witnessing not only
every act but every thought. When life has ended and we must return whence
we came, the same genius who had charge over us, takes us away and hurries
us in his custody to judgment, and then assists us in pleading our cause.
If any thing is falsely asserted he corrects it—if true, he substantiates
it, and according to his witness our sentence is determined.”(616)

There are many aspects in which these attempts at religious reform are
both interesting and important. They are interesting, because the doctrine
of dæmons, mingled, it is true, with the theory of Euhemerus about the
origin of the deities, was universally accepted by the Fathers as the true
explanation of the Pagan theology, because the notion and, after the third
century, even the artistic type of the guardian genius reappeared in that
of the guardian angel, and because the transition from polytheism to the
conception of a single deity acting by the delegation or ministration of
an army of subsidiary spirits, was manifestly fitted to prepare the way
for the reception of Christianity. They are interesting, too, as showing
the anxiety of the human mind to sublimate its religious creed to the
level of the moral and intellectual standard it had attained, and to make
religious ordinances in some degree the instruments of moral improvement.
But they are interesting above all, because the Greek and Egyptian methods
of reform represent with typical distinctness the two great tendencies of
religious thought in all succeeding periods. The Greek spirit was
essentially rationalistic and eclectic; the Egyptian spirit was
essentially mystical and devotional. The Greek sat in judgment upon his
religion. He modified, curtailed, refined, allegorised, or selected. He
treated its inconsistencies or absurdities, or immoralities, with
precisely the same freedom of criticism as those he encountered in
ordinary life. The Egyptian, on the other hand, bowed low before the
Divine presence. He veiled his eyes, he humbled his reason, he represented
the introduction of a new element into the moral life of Europe, the
spirit of religious reverence and awe.

“The Egyptian deities,” it was observed by Apuleius, “were chiefly
honoured by lamentations, and the Greek divinities by dances.”(617) The
truth of the last part of this very significant remark appears in every
page of Greek history. No nation had a richer collection of games and
festivals growing out of its religious system; in none did a light,
sportive, and often licentious fancy play more fearlessly around the
popular creed, in none was religious terrorism more rare. The Divinity was
seldom looked upon as holier than man, and a due observance of certain
rites and ceremonies was deemed an ample tribute to pay to him. In the
Egyptian system the religious ceremonies were veiled in mystery and
allegory. Chastity, abstinence from animal food, ablutions, long and
mysterious ceremonies of preparation or initiation, were the most
prominent features of worship. The deities representing the great forces
of nature, and shrouded by mysterious symbols, excited a degree of awe
which no other ancient religion approached.

The speculative philosophy, and the conceptions of morals, that
accompanied the inroad of Oriental religions, were of a kindred nature.
The most prominent characteristic of the first was its tendency to
supersede the deductions of the reason by the intuitions of ecstasy.
Neoplatonism, and the philosophies that were allied to it, were
fundamentally pantheistic,(618) but they differed widely from the
pantheism of the Stoics. The Stoics identified man with God, for the
purpose of glorifying man—the Neoplatonists for the purpose of
aggrandising God. In the conception of the first, man, independent,
self-controlled, and participating in the highest nature of the universe,
has no superior in creation. According to the latter, man is almost a
passive being, swayed and permeated by a divine impulse. Yet he is not
altogether divine. The divinity is latent in his soul, but dulled, dimmed,
and crushed by the tyranny of the body. “To bring the God that is in us
into conformity with the God that is in the universe,” to elicit the ideas
that are graven in the mind, but obscured and hidden by the passions of
the flesh—above all, to subdue the body, which is the sole obstacle to our
complete fruition of the Deity—was the main object of life. Porphyry
described all philosophy as an anticipation of death—not in the Stoical
sense of teaching us to look calmly on our end, but because death realises
the ideal of philosophy, the complete separation of soul and body. Hence
followed an ascetic morality, and a supersensual philosophy. “The greatest
of all evils,” we are told, “is pleasure; because by it the soul is nailed
or riveted to the body, and thinks that true which the body persuades it,
and is thus deprived of the sense of divine things.”(619) “Justice,
beauty, and goodness, and all things that are formed by them, no eye has
ever seen, no bodily sense can apprehend. Philosophy must be pursued by
pure and unmingled reason and with deadened senses; for the body disturbs
the mind, so that it cannot follow after wisdom. As long as it is lost and
mingled in the clay, we shall never sufficiently possess the truth we
desire.”(620)

But the reason which is thus extolled as the revealer of truth must not be
confounded with the process of reasoning. It is something quite different
from criticism, analysis, comparison, or deduction. It is essentially
intuitive, but it only acquires its power of transcendental intuition
after a long process of discipline. When a man passes from the daylight
into a room which is almost dark, he is at first absolutely unable to see
the objects around him; but gradually his eye grows accustomed to the
feeble light, the outline of the room becomes dimly visible, object after
object emerges into sight, until at last, by intently gazing, he acquires
the power of seeing around him with tolerable distinctness. In this fact
we have a partial image of the Neoplatonic doctrine of the knowledge of
divine things. Our soul is a dark chamber, darkened by contact with the
flesh, but in it there are graven divine ideas, there exists a living
divine element. The eye of reason, by long and steady introspection, can
learn to decipher these characters; the will, aided by an appointed course
of discipline, can evoke this divine element, and cause it to blend with
the universal spirit from which it sprang. The powers of mental
concentration, and of metaphysical abstraction, are therefore the highest
intellectual gifts; and quietism, or the absorption of our nature in God,
is the last stage of virtue. “The end of man,” said Pythagoras, “is God.”
The mysterious ’One,’ the metaphysical abstraction without attributes and
without form which constitutes the First Person of the Alexandrian
Trinity, is the acme of human thought, and the condition of ecstasy is the
acme of moral perfection. Plotinus, it was said, had several times
attained it. Porphyry, after years of discipline, once, and but once.(621)
The process of reasoning is here not only useless, but pernicious. “An
innate knowledge of the gods is implanted in our minds prior to all
reasoning.”(622) In divine things the task of man is not to create or to
acquire, but to educe. His means of perfection are not dialectics or
research, but long and patient meditation, silence, abstinence from the
distractions and occupations of life, the subjugation of the flesh, a life
of continual discipline, a constant attendance on those mysterious rites
which detach him from material objects, overawe and elevate his mind, and
quicken his realisation of the Divine presence.(623)

The system of Neoplatonism represents a mode of thought which in many
forms, and under many names, may be traced through the most various ages
and creeds. Mysticism, transcendentalism, inspiration, and grace, are all
words expressing the deep-seated belief that we possess fountains of
knowledge apart from all the acquisitions of the senses; that there are
certain states of mind, certain flashes of moral and intellectual
illumination, which cannot be accounted for by any play or combination of
our ordinary faculties. For the sobriety, the timidity, the fluctuations
of the reasoning spirit, Neoplatonism substituted the transports of the
imagination; and, though it cultivated the power of abstraction, every
other intellectual gift was sacrificed to the discipline of asceticism. It
made men credulous, because it suppressed that critical spirit which is
the sole barrier to the ever-encroaching imagination; because it
represented superstitious rites as especially conducive to that state of
ecstasy which was the condition of revelation; because it formed a
nervous, diseased, expectant temperament, ever prone to hallucinations,
ever agitated by vague and uncertain feelings that were readily attributed
to inspiration. As a moral system it carried, indeed, the purification of
the feelings and imagination to a higher perfection than any preceding
school, but it had the deadly fault of separating sentiment from action.
In this respect it was well fitted to be the close, the final suicide, of
Roman philosophy. Cicero assigned a place of happiness in the future world
to all who faithfully served the State.(624) The Stoics had taught that
all virtue was vain that did not issue in action. Even Epictetus, in his
portrait of the ascetic cynic—even Marcus Aurelius, in his minute
self-examination—had never forgotten the outer world. The early
Platonists, though they dwelt very strongly on mental discipline, were
equally practical. Plutarch reminds us that the same word is used for
light, and for man,(625) for the duty of man is to be the light of the
world; and he shrewdly remarked that Hesiod exhorted the husbandman to
pray for the harvest, but to do so with his hand upon the plough.
Apuleius, expounding Plato, taught “that he who is inspired by nature to
seek after good must not deem himself born for himself alone, but for all
mankind, though with diverse kinds and degrees of obligation, for he is
formed first of all for his country, then for his relations, then for
those with whom he is joined by occupation or knowledge.” Maximus of Tyre
devoted two noble essays to showing the vanity of all virtue which
exhausts itself in mental transports without radiating in action among
mankind. “What use,” he asked, “is there in knowledge unless we do those
things for which knowledge is profitable? What use is there in the skill
of the physician unless by that skill he heals the sick, or in the art of
Phidias unless he chisels the ivory or the gold.... Hercules was a wise
man, but not for himself, but that by his wisdom he might diffuse benefits
over every land and sea.... Had he preferred to lead a life apart from
men, and to follow an idle wisdom, Hercules would indeed have been a
Sophist, and no one would call him the son of Zeus. For God himself is
never idle; were He to rest, the sky would cease to move, and the earth to
produce, and the rivers to flow into the ocean, and the seasons to pursue
their appointed course.”(626) But the Neoplatonists, though they sometimes
spoke of civic virtues, regarded the condition of ecstasy as not only
transcending, but including all, and that condition could only be arrived
at by a passive life. The saying of Anaxagoras, that his mission was “to
contemplate the sun, the stars, and the course of nature, and that this
contemplation was wisdom,” was accepted as an epitome of their
philosophy.(627) A senator named Rogantianus, who had followed the
teaching of Plotinus, acquired so intense a disgust for the things of
life, that he left all his property, refused to fulfil the duties of a
prætor, abandoned his senatorial functions, and withdrew himself from
every form of business and pleasure. Plotinus, instead of reproaching him,
overwhelmed him with eulogy, selected him as his favourite disciple, and
continually represented him as the model of a philosopher.(628)

The two characteristics I have noticed—the abandonment of civic duties,
and the discouragement of the critical spirit—had from a very early period
been manifest in the Pythagorean school.(629) In the blending philosophies
of the third and fourth centuries, they became continually more apparent.
Plotinus was still an independent philosopher, inheriting the traditions
of Greek thought, though not the traditions of Greek life, building his
system avowedly by a rational method, and altogether rejecting theurgy or
religious magic. His disciple, Porphyry, first made Neoplatonism
anti-Christian, and, in his violent antipathy to the new faith, began to
convert it into a religious system. Iamblichus, who was himself an
Egyptian priest, completed the transformation,(630) resolved all moral
discipline into theurgy, and sacrificed all reasoning to faith.(631)
Julian attempted to realise the conception of a revived Paganism, blending
with and purified by philosophy. In every form the appetite for miracles
and for belief was displayed. The theory of dæmons completely superseded
the old Stoical naturalism, which regarded the different Pagan divinities
as allegories or personifications of the Divine attributes. The Platonic
ethics were again, for the most part, in the ascendant, but they were
deeply tinctured by a foreign element. Thus, suicide was condemned by the
Neoplatonists, not merely on the principle of Plato, that it is an
abandonment of the post of duty to which the Deity has called us, but also
on the quietist ground, that perturbation is necessarily a pollution of
the soul, and that, as mental perturbation accompanies the act, the soul
of the suicide departs polluted from the body.(632) The belief in a future
world, which was the common glory of the schools of Pythagoras and of
Plato, had become universal. As Roman greatness, in which men had long
seen the reward of virtue, faded rapidly away, the conception of “a city
of God” began to grow more clearly in the minds of men, and the countless
slaves who were among the chief propagators of Oriental faiths, and who
had begun to exercise an unprecedented influence in Roman life, turned
with a natural and a touching eagerness towards a happier and a freer
world.(633) The incredulity of Lucretius, Cæsar, and Pliny had
disappeared. Above all, a fusion had been effected between moral
discipline and religion, and the moralist sought his chief means of
purification in the ceremonies of the temple.

I have now completed the long and complicated task to which the present
chapter has been devoted. I have endeavoured to exhibit, so far as can be
done, by a description of general tendencies, and by a selection of
quotations, the spirit of the long series of Pagan moralists who taught at
Rome during the period that elapsed between the rise of Roman philosophy
and the triumph of Christianity. My object has not been to classify these
writers with minute accuracy, according to their speculative tenets, but
rather, as I had proposed, to exhibit the origin, the nature, and the
fortunes of the general notion or type of virtue which each moralist had
regarded as supremely good. History is not a mere succession of events
connected only by chronology. It is a chain of causes and effects. There
is a great natural difference of degree and direction in both the moral
and intellectual capacities of individuals, but it is not probable that
the general average of natural morals in great bodies of men materially
varies. When we find a society very virtuous or very vicious—when some
particular virtue or vice occupies a peculiar prominence, or when
important changes pass over the moral conceptions or standard of the
people—we have to trace in these things simply the action of the
circumstances that were dominant. The history of Roman ethics represents a
steady and uniform current, guided by the general conditions of society,
and its progress may be marked by the successive ascendancy of the Roman,
the Greek, and the Egyptian spirit.

In the age of Cato and Cicero the character of the ideal was wholly Roman,
although the philosophical expression of that character was derived from
the Greek Stoics. It exhibited all the force, the grandeur, the hardness,
the practical tendency which Roman circumstances had early created,
combined with that catholicity of spirit which resulted from very recent
political and intellectual changes. In the course of time, the Greek
element, which represented the gentler and more humane spirit of
antiquity, gained an ascendancy. It did so by simple propagandism, aided
by the long peace of the Antonines, by the effeminate habits produced by
the increasing luxury, by the attractions of the metropolis, which had
drawn multitudes of Greeks to Rome, by the patronage of the Emperors, and
also by the increasing realisation of the doctrine of universal
brotherhood, which Panætius and Cicero had asserted, but of which the full
consequences were only perceived by their successors. The change in the
type of virtue was shown in the influence of eclectic, and for the most
part Platonic, moralists, whose special assaults were directed against the
Stoical condemnation of the emotions, and in the gradual softening of the
Stoical type. In Seneca the hardness of the sect, though very apparent, is
broken by precepts of a real and extensive benevolence, though that
benevolence springs rather from a sense of duty than from tenderness of
feeling. In Dion Chrysostom the practical benevolence is not less
prominent, but there is less both of pride and of callousness. Epictetus
embodied the sternest Stoicism in his Manual, but his dissertations
exhibit a deep religious feeling and a wide range of sympathies. In Marcus
Aurelius the emotional elements had greatly increased, and the amiable
qualities began to predominate over the heroic ones. We find at the same
time a new stress laid upon purity of thought and imagination, a growing
feeling of reverence, and an earnest desire to reform the popular
religion.

This second stage exhibits a happy combination of the Roman and Greek
spirits. Disinterested, strictly practical, averse to the speculative
subtilties of the Greek intellect, Stoicism was still the religion of a
people who were the rulers and the organisers of the world, whose
enthusiasm was essentially patriotic, and who had learnt to sacrifice
everything but pride to the sense of duty. It had, however, become
amiable, gentle, and spiritual. It had gained much in beauty, while it had
lost something in force. In the world of morals, as in the world of
physics, strength is nearly allied to hardness. He who feels keenly is
easily moved, and a sensitive sympathy which lies at the root of an
amiable character is in consequence a principle of weakness. The race of
great Roman Stoics, which had never ceased during the tyranny of Nero or
Domitian, began to fail. In the very moment when the ideal of the sect had
attained its supreme perfection, a new movement appeared, the philosophy
sank into disrepute, and the last act of the drama began.

In this, as in the preceding ones, all was normal and regular. The long
continuance of despotic government had gradually destroyed the active
public spirit of which Stoicism was the expression. The predominance of
the subtle intellect of Greece, and the multiplication of rhetoricians,
had converted the philosophy into a school of disputation and of
casuistry. The increasing cultivation of the emotions continued, till what
may be termed the moral centre was changed, and the development of feeling
was deemed more important than the regulation of actions. This cultivation
of the emotions predisposed men to religion. A reaction, intensified by
many minor causes, set in against the scepticism of the preceding
generation, and Alexandria gradually became the moral capital of the
empire. The Roman type speedily disappeared. A union was effected between
superstitious rites and philosophy, and the worship of Egyptian deities
prepared the way for the teaching of the Neoplatonists, who combined the
most visionary part of the speculations of Plato with the ancient
philosophies of the East. In Plotinus we find most of the first; in
Iamblichus most of the second. The minds of men, under their influence,
grew introspective, credulous, and superstitious, and found their ideal
states in the hallucinations of ecstasy and the calm of an unpractical
mysticism.

Such were the influences which acted in turn upon a society which, by
despotism, by slavery, and by atrocious amusements, had been debased and
corrupted to the very core. Each sect which successively arose contributed
something to remedy the evil. Stoicism placed beyond cavil the great
distinctions between right and wrong. It inculcated the doctrine of
universal brotherhood, it created a noble literature and a noble
legislation, and it associated its moral system with the patriotic spirit
which was then the animating spirit of Roman life. The early Platonists of
the Empire corrected the exaggerations of Stoicism, gave free scope to the
amiable qualities, and supplied a theory of right and wrong, suited not
merely for heroic characters and for extreme emergencies, but also for the
characters and the circumstances of common life. The Pythagorean and
Neoplatonic schools revived the feeling of religious reverence, inculcated
humility, prayerfulness, and purity of thought, and accustomed men to
associate their moral ideals with the Deity, rather than with themselves.

The moral improvement of society was now to pass into other hands. A
religion which had long been increasing in obscurity began to emerge into
the light. By the beauty of its moral precepts, by the systematic skill
with which it governed the imagination and habits of its worshippers, by
the strong religious motives to which it could appeal, by its admirable
ecclesiastical organisation, and, it must be added, by its unsparing use
of the arm of power, Christianity soon eclipsed or destroyed all other
sects, and became for many centuries the supreme ruler of the moral world.
Combining the Stoical doctrine of universal brotherhood, the Greek
predilection for the amiable qualities, and the Egyptian spirit of
reverence and religious awe, it acquired from the first an intensity and
universality of influence which none of the philosophies it had superseded
had approached. I have now to examine the moral causes that governed the
rise of this religion in Rome, the ideal of virtue it presented, the
degree and manner in which it stamped its image upon the character of
nations, and the perversions and distortions it underwent.





