CHAPTER III. THE CONVERSION OF ROME.


There is no fact in the history of the human mind more remarkable than the
complete unconsciousness of the importance and the destinies of
Christianity, manifested by the Pagan writers before the accession of
Constantine. So large an amount of attention has been bestowed on the ten
or twelve allusions to it they furnish, that we are sometimes apt to
forget how few and meagre those allusions are, and how utterly impossible
it is to construct from them, with any degree of certainty, a history of
the early Church. Plutarch and the elder Pliny, who probably surpass all
other writers of their time in the range of their illustrations, and
Seneca, who was certainly the most illustrious moralist of his age, never
even mention it. Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius have each adverted to it
with a passing and contemptuous censure. Tacitus describes in detail the
persecution by Nero, but treats the suffering religion merely as “an
execrable superstition;” while Suetonius, employing the same expression,
reckons the persecution among the acts of the tyrant that were either
laudable or indifferent. Our most important document is the famous letter
of the younger Pliny. Lucian throws some light both on the extent of
Christian charity, and on the aspect in which Christians were regarded by
the religious jugglers of their age, and the long series of Pagans who
wrote the lives of the Emperors in that most critical period from the
accession of Hadrian, almost to the eve of the triumph of the Church,
among a crowd of details concerning the dresses, games, vices, and follies
of the Court, supply us with six or seven short notices of the religion
that was transforming the world.

The general silence of the Pagan writers on this subject did not arise
from any restrictions imposed upon them by authority, for in this field
the widest latitude was conceded, nor yet from the notions of the dignity
of history, or the importance of individual exertions, which have induced
some historians to resolve their task into a catalogue of the achievements
of kings, statesmen, and generals. The conception of history, as the
record and explanation of moral revolutions, though of course not
developed to the same prominence as among some modern writers, was by no
means unknown in antiquity,(634) and in many branches our knowledge of the
social changes of the Roman Empire is extremely copious. The dissolution
of old beliefs, the decomposition of the entire social and moral system
that had arisen under the Republic, engaged in the very highest degree the
attention of the literary classes, and they displayed the most commendable
diligence in tracing its stages. It is very curious and instructive to
contrast the ample information they have furnished us concerning the
growth of Roman luxury, with their almost absolute silence concerning the
growth of Christianity. The moral importance of the former movement they
clearly recognised, and they have accordingly preserved so full a record
of all the changes in dress, banquets, buildings, and spectacles, that it
would be possible to write with the most minute detail the whole history
of Roman luxury, from the day when a censor deprived an elector of his
vote because his garden was negligently cultivated, to the orgies of Nero
or Heliogabalus. The moral importance of the other movement they
altogether overlooked, and their oversight leaves a chasm in history which
can never be supplied.

That the greatest religious change in the history of mankind should have
taken place under the eyes of a brilliant galaxy of philosophers and
historians, who were profoundly conscious of the decomposition around
them, that all of these writers should have utterly failed to predict the
issue of the movement they were observing, and that, during the space of
three centuries, they should have treated as simply contemptible an agency
which all men must now admit to have been, for good or for evil, the most
powerful moral lever that has ever been applied to the affairs of man, are
facts well worthy of meditation in every period of religious transition.
The explanation is to be found in that broad separation between the
spheres of morals and of positive religion we have considered in the last
chapter. In modern times, men who were examining the probable moral future
of the world, would naturally, and in the first place, direct their
attention to the relative positions and the probable destinies of
religious institutions. In the Stoical period of the Roman Empire,
positive religion had come to be regarded as merely an art for obtaining
preternatural assistance in the affairs of life, and the moral
amelioration of mankind was deemed altogether external to its sphere.
Philosophy had become to the educated most literally a religion. It was
the rule of life, the exposition of the Divine nature, the source of
devotional feeling. The numerous Oriental superstitions that had deluged
the city were regarded as peculiarly pernicious and contemptible, and of
these none was less likely to attract the favour of the philosophers than
that of the Jews,(635) who were notorious as the most sordid, the most
turbulent,(636) and the most unsocial(637) of the Oriental colonists. Of
the ignorance of their tenets, displayed even by the most eminent Romans,
we have a striking illustration in the long series of grotesque fables
concerning their belief, probably derived from some satirical pamphlet,
which Tacitus has gravely inserted in his history.(638) Christianity, in
the eyes of the philosopher, was simply a sect of Judaism.

Although I am anxious in the present work to avoid, as far as possible,
all questions that are purely theological, and to consider Christianity
merely in its aspect as a moral agent, it will be necessary to bestow a
few preliminary pages upon its triumph in the Roman Empire, in order to
ascertain how far that triumph was due to moral causes, and what were its
relations to the prevailing philosophy. There are some writers who have
been so struck with the conformity between some of the doctrines of the
later Stoics and those of Christianity that they have imagined that
Christianity had early obtained a decisive influence over philosophy, and
that the leading teachers of Rome had been in some measure its disciples.
There are others who reduce the conversion of the Roman Empire to a mere
question of evidences, to the overwhelming proofs the Christian teachers
produced of the authenticity of the Gospel narratives. There are others,
again, who deem the triumph of Christianity simply miraculous. Everything,
they tell us, was against it. The course of the Church was like that of a
ship sailing rapidly and steadily to the goal, in direct defiance of both
wind and tide, and the conversion of the Empire was as literally
supernatural as the raising of the dead, or the sudden quelling of the
storm.

On the first of these theories it will not, I think, be necessary, after
the last chapter, to expatiate at length. It is admitted that the greatest
moralists of the Roman Empire either never mentioned Christianity, or
mentioned it with contempt; that they habitually disregarded the many
religions which had arisen among the ignorant; and that we have no direct
evidence of the slightest value of their ever having come in contact with
or favoured the Christians. The supposition that they were influenced by
Christianity rests mainly upon their enforcement of the Christian duty of
self-examination, upon their strong assertion of the universal brotherhood
of mankind, and upon the delicate and expansive humanity they at last
evinced. But although on all these points the later Stoics approximated
much to Christianity, we have already seen that it is easy to discover in
each case the cause of the tendency. The duty of self-examination was
simply a Pythagorean precept, enforced in that school long before the rise
of Christianity, introduced into Stoicism when Pythagoreanism became
popular in Rome, and confessedly borrowed from this source. The doctrine
of the universal brotherhood of mankind was the manifest expression of
those political and social changes which reduced the whole civilised globe
to one great empire, threw open to the most distant tribes the right of
Roman citizenship, and subverted all those class divisions around which
moral theories had been formed. Cicero asserted it as emphatically as
Seneca. The theory of pantheism, representing the entire creation as one
great body, pervaded by one Divine soul, harmonised with it; and it is a
curious fact that the very phraseology concerning the fellow-membership of
all things in God, which has been most confidently adduced by some modern
writers as proving the connection between Seneca and Christianity, was
selected by Lactantius as the clearest illustration of the pantheism of
Stoicism.(639) The humane character of the later Stoical teaching was
obviously due to the infusion of the Greek element into Roman life, which
began before the foundation of the Empire, and received a new impulse in
the reign of Hadrian, and also to the softening influence of a luxurious
civilisation, and of the long peace of the Antonines. While far inferior
to the Greeks in practical and realised humanity, the Romans never
surpassed their masters in theoretical humanity except in one respect. The
humanity of the Greeks, though very earnest, was confined within a narrow
circle. The social and political circumstances of the Roman Empire
destroyed the barrier.

The only case in which any plausible arguments have been urged in favour
of the notion that the writings of the Stoics were influenced by the New
Testament is that of Seneca. This philosopher was regarded by all the
mediæval writers as a Christian, on the ground of a correspondence with
St. Paul, which formed part of a forged account of the martyrdom of St.
Peter and St. Paul, attributed to St. Linus. These letters, which were
absolutely unnoticed during the first three centuries, and are first
mentioned by St. Jerome, are now almost universally abandoned as
forgeries;(640) but many curious coincidences of phraseology have been
pointed out between the writings of Seneca and the epistles of St. Paul;
and the presumption derived from them has been strengthened by the facts
that the brother of Seneca was that Gallio who refused to hear the
disputes between St. Paul and the Jews, and that Burrhus, who was the
friend and colleague of Seneca, was the officer to whose custody St. Paul
had been entrusted at Rome. Into the minute verbal criticism to which this
question had given rise,(641) it is not necessary for me to enter. It has
been shown that much of what was deemed Christian phraseology grew out of
the pantheistic notion of one great body including, and one Divine mind
animating and guiding, all existing things; and many other of the
pretended coincidences are so slight as to be altogether worthless as an
argument. Still I think most persons who review what has been written on
the subject will conclude that it is probable some fragments at least of
Christian language had come to the ears of Seneca. But to suppose that his
system of morals is in any degree formed after the model or under the
influence of Christianity, is to be blind to the most obvious
characteristics of both Christianity and Stoicism; for no other moralist
could be so aptly selected as representing their extreme divergence.
Reverence and humility, a constant sense of the supreme majesty of God and
of the weakness and sinfulness of man, and a perpetual reference to
another world, were the essential characteristics of Christianity, the
source of all its power, the basis of its distinctive type. Of all these,
the teaching of Seneca is the direct antithesis. Careless of the future
world, and profoundly convinced of the supreme majesty of man, he laboured
to emancipate his disciples “from every fear of God and man;” and the
proud language in which he claimed for the sage an equality with the gods
represents, perhaps, the highest point to which philosophic arrogance has
been carried. The Jews, with whom the Christians were then universally
identified, he emphatically describes as “an accursed race.”(642) One man,
indeed, there was among the later Stoics who had almost realised the
Christian type, and in whose pure and gentle nature the arrogance of his
school can be scarcely traced; but Marcus Aurelius, who of all the Pagan
world, if we argued by internal evidence alone, would have been most
readily identified with Christianity, was a persecutor of the faith, and
he has left on record in his “Meditations” his contempt for the Christian
martyrs.(643)

The relation between the Pagan philosophers and the Christian religion was
a subject of much discussion and of profound difference of opinion in the
early Church.(644) While the writers of one school apologised for the
murder of Socrates, described the martyred Greek as the ’buffoon of
Athens,’(645) and attributed his inspiration to diabolical influence;(646)
while they designated the writings of the philosophers as “the schools of
heretics,” and collected with a malicious assiduity all the calumnies that
had been heaped upon their memory—there were others who made it a leading
object to establish a close affinity between Pagan philosophy and the
Christian revelation. Imbued in many instances, almost from childhood,
with the noble teaching of Plato, and keenly alive to the analogies
between his philosophy and their new faith, these writers found the
exhibition of this resemblance at once deeply grateful to themselves and
the most successful way of dispelling the prejudices of their Pagan
neighbours. The success that had attended the Christian prophecies
attributed to the Sibyls and the oracles, the passion for eclecticism,
which the social and commercial position of Alexandria had generated, and
also the example of the Jew Aristobulus, who had some time before
contended that the Jewish writings had been translated into Greek, and had
been the source of much of the Pagan wisdom, encouraged them in their
course. The most conciliatory, and at the same time the most philosophical
school, was the earliest in the Church. Justin Martyr—the first of the
Fathers whose writings possess any general philosophical
interest—cordially recognises the excellence of many parts of the Pagan
philosophy, and even attributes it to a Divine inspiration, to the action
of the generative or “seminal Logos,” which from the earliest times had
existed in the world, had inspired teachers like Socrates and Musonius,
who had been persecuted by the dæmons, and had received in Christianity
its final and perfect manifestation.(647) The same generous and expansive
appreciation may be traced in the writings of several later Fathers,
although the school was speedily disfigured by some grotesque
extravagances. Clement of Alexandria—a writer of wide sympathies,
considerable originality, very extensive learning, but of a feeble and
fantastic judgment—who immediately succeeded Justin Martyr, attributed all
the wisdom of antiquity to two sources. The first source was tradition;
for the angels, who had been fascinated by the antediluvian ladies, had
endeavoured to ingratiate themselves with their fair companions by giving
them an abstract of the metaphysical and other learning which was then
current in heaven, and the substance of these conversations, being
transmitted by tradition, supplied the Pagan philosophers with their
leading notions. The angels did not know everything, and therefore the
Greek philosophy was imperfect; but this event formed the first great
epoch in literary history. The second and most important source of Pagan
wisdom was the Old Testament,(648) the influence of which many of the
early Christians traced in every department of ancient wisdom. Plato had
borrowed from it all his philosophy, Homer the noblest conceptions of his
poetry, Demosthenes the finest touches of his eloquence. Even Miltiades
owed his military skill to an assiduous study of the Pentateuch, and the
ambuscade by which he won the battle of Marathon was imitated from the
strategy of Moses.(649) Pythagoras, moreover, had been himself a
circumcised Jew.(650) Plato had been instructed in Egypt by the prophet
Jeremiah. The god Serapis was no other than the patriarch Joseph, his
Egyptian name being manifestly derived from his great-grandmother
Sarah.(651)

Absurdities of this kind, of which I have given extreme but by no means
the only examples, were usually primarily intended to repel arguments
against Christianity, and they are illustrations of the tendency which has
always existed in an uncritical age to invent, without a shadow of
foundation, the most elaborate theories of explanation rather than
recognise the smallest force in an objection. Thus, when the Pagans
attempted to reduce Christianity to a normal product of the human mind, by
pointing to the very numerous Pagan legends which were precisely parallel
to the Jewish histories, it was answered that the dæmons were careful
students of prophecy, that they foresaw with terror the advent of their
Divine Conqueror, and that, in order to prevent men believing in him, they
had invented, by anticipation, a series of legends resembling the events
which were foretold.(652) More frequently, however, the early Christians
retorted the accusations of plagiarism, and by forged writings attributed
to Pagan authors, or, by pointing out alleged traces of Jewish influence
in genuine Pagan writings, they endeavoured to trace through the past the
footsteps of their faith. But this method of assimilation, which
culminated in the Gnostics, the Neoplatonists, and especially in Origen,
was directed not to the later Stoics of the Empire, but to the great
philosophers who had preceded Christianity. It was in the writings of
Plato, not in those of Epictetus or Marcus Aurelius, that the Fathers of
the first three centuries found the influence of the Jewish Scriptures,
and at the time when the passion for discovering these connections was
most extravagant, the notion of Seneca and his followers being inspired by
the Christians was unknown.

Dismissing then, as altogether groundless, the notion that Christianity
had obtained a complete or even a partial influence over the philosophic
classes during the period of Stoical ascendancy, we come to the opinion of
those who suppose that the Roman Empire was converted by a system of
evidences—by the miraculous proofs of the divinity of Christianity,
submitted to the adjudication of the people. To estimate this view aright,
we have to consider both the capacity of the men of that age for judging
miracles, and also—which is a different question—the extent to which such
evidence would weigh upon their minds. To treat this subject
satisfactorily, it may be advisable to enter at some little length into
the broad question of the evidence of the miraculous.

With the exception of a small minority of the priests of the Catholic
Church, a general incredulity on the subject of miracles now underlies the
opinions of almost all educated men. Nearly every one, however cordially
he may admit some one particular class of miracles, as a general rule
regards the accounts of such events, which are so frequent in all old
historians, as false and incredible, even when he fully believes the
natural events that are authenticated by the same testimony. The reason of
this incredulity is not altogether the impossibility or even extreme
natural improbability of miracles; for, whatever may be the case with
some, there is at least one class or conception of them which is perfectly
free from logical difficulty. There is no contradiction involved in the
belief that spiritual beings, of power and wisdom immeasurably
transcending our own, exist, or that, existing, they might, by the normal
exercise of their powers, perform feats as far surpassing the
understanding of the most gifted of mankind, as the electric telegraph and
the prediction of an eclipse surpass the faculties of a savage. Nor does
the incredulity arise, I think, as is commonly asserted, from the want of
that amount and kind of evidence which in other departments is deemed
sufficient. Very few of the minor facts of history are authenticated by as
much evidence as the Stigmata of St. Francis, or the miracle of the holy
thorn, or those which were said to have been wrought at the tomb of the
Abbé Paris. We believe, with tolerable assurance, a crowd of historical
events on the testimony of one or two Roman historians; but when Tacitus
and Suetonius describe how Vespasian restored a blind man to sight, and a
cripple to strength,(653) their deliberate assertions do not even beget in
our minds a suspicion that the narrative may possibly be true. We are
quite certain that miracles were not ordinary occurrences in classical or
mediæval times, but nearly all the contemporary writers from whom we
derive our knowledge of those periods were convinced that they were.

If, then, I have correctly interpreted the opinions of ordinary educated
people on this subject, it appears that the common attitude towards
miracles is not that of doubt, of hesitation, of discontent with the
existing evidence, but rather of absolute, derisive, and even unexamining
incredulity. Such a fact, when we consider that the antecedent possibility
of at least some miracles is usually admitted, and in the face of the vast
mass of tradition that may be adduced in their favour, appears at first
sight a striking anomaly, and the more so because it can be shown that the
belief in miracles had in most cases not been reasoned down, but had
simply faded away.

In order to ascertain the process by which this state of mind has been
attained, we may take an example in a sphere which is happily removed from
controversy. There are very few persons with whom the fictitious character
of fairy tales has not ceased to be a question, or who would hesitate to
disbelieve or even to ridicule any anecdote of this nature which was told
them, without the very smallest examination of its evidence. Yet, if we
ask in what respect the existence of fairies is naturally contradictory or
absurd, it would be difficult to answer the question. A fairy is simply a
being possessing a moderate share of human intelligence, with little or no
moral faculty, with a body pellucid, winged, and volatile, like that of an
insect, with a passion for dancing, and, perhaps, with an extraordinary
knowledge of the properties of different plants. That such beings should
exist, or that, existing, they should be able to do many things beyond
human power, are propositions which do not present the smallest
difficulty. For many centuries their existence was almost universally
believed. There is not a country, not a province, scarcely a parish, in
which traditions of their appearance were not long preserved. So great a
weight of tradition, so many independent trains of evidence attesting
statements perfectly free from intrinsic absurdity, or even improbability,
might appear sufficient, if not to establish conviction, at least to
supply a very strong _primâ facie_ case, and ensure a patient and
respectful investigation of the subject.

It has not done so, and the reason is sufficiently plain. The question of
the credibility of fairy tales has not been resolved by an examination of
evidence, but by an observation of the laws of historic development.
Wherever we find an ignorant and rustic population, the belief in fairies
is found to exist, and circumstantial accounts of their apparitions are
circulated. But invariably with increased education this belief passes
away. It is not that the fairy tales are refuted or explained away, or
even narrowly scrutinised. It is that the fairies cease to appear. From
the uniformity of this decline, we infer that fairy tales are the normal
product of a certain condition of the imagination; and this position is
raised to a moral certainty when we find that the decadence of fairy tales
is but one of a long series of similar transformations.

When the savage looks around upon the world and begins to form his
theories of existence, he falls at once into three great errors, which
become the first principles of his subsequent opinions. He believes that
this earth is the centre of the universe, and that all the bodies
encircling it are intended for its use; that the disturbances and
dislocations it presents, and especially the master curse of death, are
connected with some event in his history, and also that the numerous
phenomena and natural vicissitudes he sees around him are due to direct
and isolated volitions, either of spirits presiding over, or of
intelligences inherent in, matter. Around these leading conceptions a
crowd of particular legends speedily cluster. If a stone falls beside him,
he naturally infers that some one has thrown it. If it be an aërolite, it
is attributed to some celestial being. Believing that each comet, tempest,
or pestilence results from a direct and isolated act, he proceeds to make
theories regarding the motives that have induced his spiritual persecutors
to assail him, and the methods by which he may assuage their anger.
Finding numerous distinct trains or series of phenomena, he invents for
each appropriate presiding spirits. Miracles are to him neither strange
events nor violations of natural law, but simply the unveiling or
manifestation of the ordinary government of the world.

With these broad intellectual conceptions several minor influences concur.
A latent fetichism, which is betrayed in that love of direct
personification, or of applying epithets derived from sentient beings to
inanimate nature, which appears so largely in all poetry and eloquence,
and especially in those of an early period of society, is the root of a
great part of our opinions. If—to employ a very familiar illustration—the
most civilised and rational of mankind will observe his own emotions, when
by some accident he has struck his head violently against a door-post, he
will probably find that his first exclamation was not merely of pain but
of anger, and of anger directed against the wood. In a moment reason
checks the emotion; but if he observes carefully his own feelings, he may
easily convince himself of the unconscious fetichism which, is latent in
his mind, and which, in the case of a child or a savage, displays itself
without reserve. Man instinctively ascribes volition to whatever
powerfully affects him. The feebleness of his imagination conspires with
other causes to prevent an uncivilised man from rising above the
conception of an anthropomorphic Deity, and the capricious or isolated
acts of such a being form his exact notion of miracles. The same
feebleness of imagination makes him clothe all intellectual tendencies,
all conflicting emotions, all forces, passions, or fancies, in material
forms. His mind naturally translates the conflict between opposing
feelings into a history of the combat between rival spirits. A vast
accumulation of myths is spontaneously formed—each legend being merely the
material expression of a moral fact. The simple love of the wonderful, and
the complete absence of all critical spirit, aid the formation.

In this manner we find that in certain stages of society, and under the
action of the influences I have stated, an accretion of miraculous legends
is naturally formed around prominent personages or institutions. We look
for them as we look for showers in April, or for harvest in autumn. We can
very rarely show with any confidence the precise manner in which a
particular legend is created or the nucleus of truth it contains, but we
can analyse the general causes that have impelled men towards the
miraculous; we can show that these causes have never failed to produce the
effect, and we can trace the gradual alteration of mental conditions
invariably accompanying the decline of the belief. When men are destitute
of critical spirit, when the notion of uniform law is yet unborn, and when
their imaginations are still incapable of rising to abstract ideas,
histories of miracles are always formed and always believed, and they
continue to flourish and to multiply until these conditions have altered.
Miracles cease when men cease to believe and to expect them. In periods
that are equally credulous, they multiply or diminish in proportion to the
intensity with which the imagination is directed to theological topics. A
comparison of the histories of the most different nations shows the
mythical period to have been common to all; and we may trace in many
quarters substantially the same miracles, though varied by national
characteristics, and with a certain local cast and colouring. As among the
Alps the same shower falls as rain in the sunny valleys, and as snow among
the lofty peaks, so the same intellectual conceptions which in one moral
latitude take the form of nymphs, or fairies, or sportive legends, appear
in another as dæmons or appalling apparitions. Sometimes we can discover
the precise natural fact which the superstition had misread. Thus,
epilepsy, the phenomenon of nightmare, and that form of madness which
leads men to imagine themselves transformed into some animal, are,
doubtless, the explanation of many tales of demoniacal possession, of
incubi, and of lycanthropy. In other cases we may detect a single error,
such as the notion that the sky is close to the earth, or that the sun
revolves around the globe, which had suggested the legend. But more
frequently we can give only a general explanation, enabling us to assign
these legends to their place, as the normal expression of a certain stage
of knowledge or intellectual power; and this explanation is their
refutation. We do not say that they are impossible, or even that they are
not authenticated by as much evidence as many facts we believe. We only
say that, in certain conditions of society, illusions of the kind
inevitably appear. No one can prove that there are no such things as
ghosts; but if a man whose brain is reeling with fever declares that he
has seen one, we have no great difficulty in forming an opinion about his
assertion.

The gradual decadence of miraculous narratives which accompanies advancing
civilisation may be chiefly traced to three causes. The first is that
general accuracy of observation and of statement which all education tends
more or less to produce, which checks the amplifications of the
undisciplined imagination, and is speedily followed by a much stronger
moral feeling on the subject of truth than ever exists in a rude
civilisation. The second is an increased power of abstraction, which is
likewise a result of general education, and which, by correcting the early
habit of personifying all phenomena, destroys one of the most prolific
sources of legends, and closes the mythical period of history. The third
is the progress of physical science, which gradually dispels that
conception of a universe governed by perpetual and arbitrary interference,
from which, for the most part, these legends originally sprang. The whole
history of physical science is one continued revelation of the reign of
law. The same law that governs the motions of a grain of dust, or the
light of the glowworm’s lamp, is shown to preside over the march of the
most majestic planet or the fire of the most distant sun. Countless
phenomena, which were for centuries universally believed to be the results
of spiritual agency, portents of calamity, or acts of Divine vengeance,
have been one by one explained, have been shown to rise from blind
physical causes, to be capable of prediction, or amenable to human
remedies. Forms of madness which were for ages supposed to result from
possession, are treated successfully in our hospitals. The advent of the
comet is predicted. The wire invented by the sceptic Franklin defends the
crosses on our churches from the lightning stroke of heaven. Whether we
examine the course of the planets or the world of the animalculæ; to
whatever field of physical nature our research is turned, the uniform,
invariable result of scientific enquiry is to show that even the most
apparently irregular and surprising phenomena are governed by natural
antecedents, and are parts of one great connected system. From this vast
concurrence of evidence, from this uniformity of experience in so many
spheres, there arises in the minds of scientific men a conviction,
amounting to absolute moral certainty, that the whole course of physical
nature is governed by law, that the notion of the perpetual interference
of the Deity with some particular classes of its phenomena is false and
unscientific, and that the theological habit of interpreting the
catastrophes of nature as Divine warnings or punishments, or disciplines,
is a baseless and a pernicious superstition.

The effects of these discoveries upon miraculous legends are of various
kinds. In the first place, a vast number which have clustered around the
notion of the irregularity of some phenomenon which is proved to be
regular—such as the innumerable accounts collected by the ancients to
corroborate their opinion of the portentous nature of comets—are directly
overthrown. In the next place, the revelation of the interdependence of
phenomena greatly increases the improbability of some legends which it
does not actually disprove. Thus, when men believed the sun to be simply a
lamp revolving around and lighting our world, they had no great difficulty
in believing that it was one day literally arrested in its course, to
illuminate an army which was engaged in massacring its enemies; but the
case became different when it was perceived that the sun was the centre of
a vast system of worlds, which a suspension of the earth’s motion must
have reduced to chaos, without a miracle extending through it all. Thus,
again, the old belief that some animals became for the first time
carnivorous in consequence of the sin of Adam, appeared tolerably simple
so long as this revolution was supposed to be only a change of habits or
of tastes; but it became more difficult of belief when it was shown to
involve a change of teeth; and the difficulty was, I suppose, still
further aggravated when it was proved that, every animal having digestive
organs specially adapted to its food, these also must have been changed.

In the last place, physical science exercises a still wider influence by
destroying what I have called the centre ideas out of which countless
particular theories were evolved, of which they were the natural
expression, and upon which their permanence depends. Proving that our
world is not the centre of the universe, but is a simple planet, revolving
with many others around a common sun; proving that the disturbances and
sufferings of the world do not result from an event which occurred but
6,000 years ago; that long before that period the earth was dislocated by
the most fearful convulsions; that countless generations of sentient
animals, and also, as recent discoveries appear conclusively to show, of
men, not only lived but died; proving, by an immense accumulation of
evidence, that the notion of a universe governed by isolated acts of
special intervention is untrue—physical science had given new directions
to the currents of the imagination, supplied the judgment with new
measures of probability, and thus affected the whole circle of our
beliefs.

With most men, however, the transition is as yet but imperfectly
accomplished, and that part of physical nature which science has hitherto
failed to explain is regarded as a sphere of special interposition. Thus,
multitudes who recognise the fact that the celestial phenomena are subject
to inflexible law, imagine that the dispensation of rain is in some sense
the result of arbitrary interpositions, determined by the conduct of
mankind. Near the equator, it is true, it is tolerably constant and
capable of prediction; but in proportion as we recede from the equator,
the rainfall becomes more variable, and consequently, in the eyes of some,
supernatural, and although no scientific man has the faintest doubt that
it is governed by laws as inflexible as those which determine the motions
of the planets, yet because, owing to the great complexity of the
determining causes, we are unable fully to explain them, it is still
customary to speak of “plagues of rain and water” sent on account of our
sins, and of “scarcity and dearth, which we most justly suffer for our
iniquity.” Corresponding language is employed about the forms of disease
and death which science has but imperfectly explained. If men are employed
in some profession which compels them to inhale steel filings or noxious
vapours, or if they live in a pestilential marsh, the diseases that result
from these conditions are not regarded as a judgment or a discipline, for
the natural cause is obvious and decisive. But if the conditions that
produced the disease are very subtle and very complicated; if physicians
are incapable of tracing with certainty its nature or its effects; if,
above all, it assumes the character of an epidemic, it is continually
treated as a Divine judgment. The presumption against this view arises not
only from the fact that, in exact proportion as medical science advances,
diseases are proved to be the necessary consequence of physical
conditions, but also from many characteristics of unexplained disease
which unequivocally prove it to be natural. Thus, cholera, which is
frequently treated according to the theological method, varies with the
conditions of temperature, is engendered by particular forms of diet,
follows the course of rivers, yields in some measure to medical treatment,
can be aggravated or mitigated by courses of conduct that have no relation
to vice or virtue, takes its victims indiscriminately from all grades of
morals or opinion. Usually, when definite causes are assigned for a
supposed judgment, they lead to consequences of the most grotesque
absurdity. Thus, when a deadly and mysterious disease fell upon the cattle
of England, some divines, not content with treating it as a judgment,
proceeded to trace it to certain popular writings containing what were
deemed heterodox opinions about the Pentateuch, or about the eternity of
punishment. It may be true that the disease was imported from a country
where such speculations are unknown; that the authors objected to had no
cattle; that the farmers, who chiefly suffered by the disease, were for
the most part absolutely unconscious of the existence of these books, and
if they knew them would have indignantly repudiated them; that the town
populations, who chiefly read them, were only affected indirectly by a
rise in the price of food, which falls with perfect impartiality upon the
orthodox and upon the heterodox; that particular counties were peculiarly
sufferers, without being at all conspicuous for their scepticism; that
similar writings appeared in former periods, without cattle being in any
respect the worse; and that, at the very period at which the plague was
raging, other countries, in which far more audacious speculations were
rife, enjoyed an absolute immunity. In the face of all these consequences,
the theory has been confidently urged and warmly applauded.

It is not, I think, sufficiently observed how large a proportion of such
questions are capable of a strictly inductive method of discussion. If it
is said that plagues or pestilences are sent as a punishment of error or
of vice, the assertion must be tested by a comprehensive examination of
the history of plagues on the one hand, and of periods of great vice and
heterodoxy on the other. If it be said that an influence more powerful
than any military agency directs the course of battles, the action of this
force must be detected as we would detect electricity, or any other force,
by experiment. If the attribute of infallibility be ascribed to a
particular Church, an inductive reasoner will not be content with
enquiring how far an infallible Church would be a desirable thing, or how
far certain ancient words may be construed as a prediction of its
appearance; he will examine, by a wide and careful survey of
ecclesiastical history, whether this Church has actually been immutable
and consistent in its teaching; whether it has never been affected by the
ignorance or the passion of the age; whether its influence has uniformly
been exerted on the side which proved to be true; whether it has never
supported by its authority scientific views which were afterwards
demonstrated to be false, or countenanced and consolidated popular errors,
or thrown obstacles in the path of those who were afterwards recognised as
the enlighteners of mankind. If ecclesiastical deliberations are said to
be specially inspired or directed by an illuminating and supernatural
power, we should examine whether the councils and convocations of
clergymen exhibit a degree and harmony of wisdom that cannot reasonably be
accounted for by the play of our unassisted faculties. If institutions are
said to owe their growth to special supernatural agencies, distinct from
the ordinary system of natural laws, we must examine whether their courses
are so striking and so peculiar that natural laws fail to explain them.
Whenever, as in the case of a battle, very many influences concur to the
result, it will frequently happen that that result will baffle our
predictions. It will also happen that strange coincidences, such as the
frequent recurrence of the same number in a game of chance, will occur.
But there are limits to these variations from what we regard as probable.
If, in throwing the dice, we uniformly attained the same number, or if in
war the army which was most destitute of all military advantages was
uniformly victorious, we should readily infer that some special cause was
operating to produce the result. We must remember, too, that in every
great historical crisis the prevalence of either side will bring with it a
long train of consequences, and that we only see one side of the picture.
If Hannibal, after his victory at Cannæ, had captured and burnt Rome, the
vast series of results that have followed from the ascendancy of the Roman
Empire would never have taken place, but the supremacy of a maritime,
commercial, and comparatively pacific power would have produced an
entirely different series, which would have formed the basis and been the
essential condition of all the subsequent progress; a civilisation, the
type and character of which it is now impossible to conjecture, would have
arisen, and its theologians would probably have regarded the career of
Hannibal as one of the most manifest instances of special interposition on
record.

If we would form sound opinions on these matters, we must take a very wide
and impartial survey of the phenomena of history. We must examine whether
events have tended in a given direction with a uniformity or a persistence
that is not naturally explicable. We must examine not only the facts that
corroborate our theory, but also those which oppose it.

That such a method is not ordinarily adopted must be manifest to all. As
Bacon said, men “mark the hits, but not the misses;” they collect
industriously the examples in which many, and sometimes improbable,
circumstances have converged to a result which they consider good, and
they simply leave out of their consideration the circumstances that tend
in the opposite direction. They expatiate with triumph upon the careers of
emperors who have been the unconscious pioneers or agents in some great
movement of human progress, but they do not dwell upon those whose genius
was expended in a hopeless resistance, or upon those who, like Bajazet or
Tamerlane, having inflicted incalculable evils upon mankind, passed away,
leaving no enduring fruit behind them. A hundred missionaries start upon
an enterprise, the success of which appears exceedingly improbable.
Ninety-nine perish and are forgotten. One missionary succeeds, and his
success is attributed to supernatural interference, because the
probabilities were so greatly against him. It is observed that a long
train of political or military events ensured the triumph of Protestantism
in certain nations and periods. It is forgotten that another train of
events destroyed the same faith in other lands, and paralysed the efforts
of its noblest martyrs. We are told of showers of rain that followed
public prayer; but we are not told how often prayers for rain proved
abortive, or how much longer than usual the dry weather had already
continued when they were offered.(654) As the old philosopher observed,
the votive tablets of those who escaped are suspended in the temple, while
those who were shipwrecked are forgotten.

Unfortunately, these inconsistencies do not arise simply from intellectual
causes. A feeling which was intended to be religious, but which was in
truth deeply the reverse, once led men to shrink from examining the causes
of some of the more terrible of physical phenomena, because it was thought
that these should be deemed special instances of Divine interference, and
should, therefore, be regarded as too sacred for investigation.(655) In
the world of physical science this mode of thought has almost vanished,
but a corresponding sentiment may be often detected in the common
judgments of history. Very many well-meaning men—censuring the pursuit of
truth in the name of the God of Truth—while they regard it as commendable
and religious to collect facts illustrating or corroborating the
theological theory of life, consider it irreverent and wrong to apply to
those facts, and to that theory, the ordinary severity of inductive
reasoning.

What I have written is not in any degree inconsistent with the belief
that, by the dispensation of Providence, moral causes have a natural and
often overwhelming influence upon happiness and upon success, nor yet with
the belief that our moral nature enters into a very real, constant, and
immediate contact with a higher power. Nor does it at all disprove the
possibility of Divine interference with the order even of physical nature.
A world governed by special acts of intervention, such as that which
mediæval theologians imagined, is perfectly conceivable, though it is
probable that most impartial enquirers will convince themselves that this
is not the system of the planet we inhabit; and if any instance of such
interference be sufficiently attested, it should not be rejected as
intrinsically impossible. It is, however, the fundamental error of most
writers on miracles, that they confine their attention to two points—the
possibility of the fact, and the nature of the evidence. There is a third
element, which in these questions is of capital importance: the
predisposition of men in certain stages of society towards the miraculous,
which is so strong that miraculous stories are then invariably circulated
and credited, and which makes an amount of evidence that would be quite
sufficient to establish a natural fact, altogether inadequate to establish
a supernatural one. The positions for which I have been contending are
that a perpetual interference of the Deity with the natural course of
events is the earliest and simplest notion of miracles, and that this
notion, which is implied in so many systems of belief, arose in part from
an ignorance of the laws of nature, and in part also from an incapacity
for inductive reasoning, which led men merely to collect facts coinciding
with their preconceived opinions, without attending to those that were
inconsistent with them. By this method there is no superstition that could
not be defended. Volumes have been written giving perfectly authentic
histories of wars, famines, and pestilences that followed the appearance
of comets. There is not an omen, not a prognostic, however childish, that
has not, in the infinite variety of events, been occasionally verified,
and to minds that are under the influence of a superstitious imagination
these occasional verifications more than outweigh all the instances of
error. Simple knowledge is wholly insufficient to correct the disease. No
one is so firmly convinced of the reality of lucky and unlucky days, and
of supernatural portents, as the sailor, who has spent his life in
watching the deep, and has learnt to read with almost unerring skill the
promise of the clouds. No one is more persuaded of the superstitions about
fortune than the habitual gambler. Sooner than abandon his theory, there
is no extravagance of hypothesis to which the superstitious man will not
resort. The ancients were convinced that dreams were usually supernatural.
If the dream was verified, this was plainly a prophecy. If the event was
the exact opposite of what the dream foreshadowed, the latter was still
supernatural, for it was a recognised principle that dreams should
sometimes be interpreted by contraries. If the dream bore no relation to
subsequent events, unless it were transformed into a fantastic allegory,
it was still supernatural, for allegory was one of the most ordinary forms
of revelation. If no ingenuity of interpretation could find a prophetic
meaning in a dream, its supernatural character was even then not
necessarily destroyed; for Homer said there was a special portal through
which deceptive visions passed into the mind, and the Fathers declared
that it was one of the occupations of the dæmons to perplex and bewilder
us with unmeaning dreams.

To estimate aright the force of the predisposition to the miraculous
should be one of the first tasks of the enquirer into its reality; and no
one, I think, can examine the subject with impartiality without arriving
at the conclusion that in many periods of history it has been so strong as
to accumulate around pure delusions an amount of evidence far greater than
would be sufficient to establish even improbable natural facts. Through
the entire duration of Pagan Rome, it was regarded as an unquestionable
truth, established by the most ample experience, that prodigies of various
kinds announced every memorable event, and that sacrifices had the power
of mitigating or arresting calamity. In the Republic, the Senate itself
officially verified and explained the prodigies.(656) In the Empire there
is not an historian, from Tacitus down to the meanest writer in the
Augustan history, who was not convinced that numerous prodigies
foreshadowed the accession and death of every sovereign, and every great
catastrophe that fell upon the people. Cicero could say with truth that
there was not a single nation of antiquity, from the polished Greek to the
rudest savage, which did not admit the existence of a real art enabling
men to foretell the future, and that the splendid temples of the oracles,
which for so many centuries commanded the reverence of mankind,
sufficiently attested the intensity of the belief.(657) The reality of the
witch miracles was established by a critical tribunal, which, however
imperfect, was at least the most searching then existing in the world, by
the judicial decisions of the law courts of every European country,
supported by the unanimous voice of public opinion, and corroborated by
the investigation of some of the ablest men during several centuries. The
belief that the king’s touch can cure scrofula flourished in the most
brilliant periods of English history.(658) It was unshaken by the most
numerous and public experiments. It was asserted by the privy council, by
the bishops of two religions, by the general voice of the clergy in the
palmiest days of the English Church, by the University of Oxford, and by
the enthusiastic assent of the people. It survived the ages of the
Reformation, of Bacon, of Milton, and of Hobbes. It was by no means
extinct in the age of Locke, and would probably have lasted still longer,
had not the change of dynasty at the Revolution assisted the tardy
scepticism.(659) Yet there is now scarcely an educated man who will defend
these miracles. Considered abstractedly, indeed, it is perfectly
conceivable that Providence might have announced coming events by
prodigies, or imparted to some one a miraculous power, or permitted evil
spirits to exist among mankind and assist them in their enterprises. The
evidence establishing these miracles is cumulative, and it is immeasurably
greater than the evidence of many natural facts, such as the earthquakes
at Antioch, which no one would dream of questioning. We disbelieve the
miracles, because an overwhelming experience proves that in certain
intellectual conditions, and under the influence of certain errors which
we are enabled to trace, superstitions of this order invariably appear and
flourish, and that, when these intellectual conditions have passed, the
prodigies as invariably cease, and the whole fabric of superstition melts
silently away.

It is extremely difficult for an ordinary man, who is little conversant
with the writings of the past, and who unconsciously transfers to other
ages the critical spirit of his own, to realise the fact that histories of
the most grotesquely extravagant nature could, during the space of many
centuries, be continually propounded without either provoking the smallest
question or possessing the smallest truth. We may, however, understand
something of this credulity when we remember the diversion of the ancient
mind from physical science to speculative philosophy; the want of the many
checks upon error which printing affords; the complete absence of that
habit of cautious, experimental research which Bacon and his
contemporaries infused into modern philosophy; and, in Christian times,
the theological notion that the spirit of belief is a virtue, and the
spirit of scepticism a sin. We must remember, too, that before men had
found the key to the motions of the heavenly bodies—before the false
theory of the vortices and the true theory of gravitation—when the
multitude of apparently capricious phenomena was very great, the notion
that the world was governed by distinct and isolated influences was that
which appeared most probable even to the most rational intellect. In such
a condition of knowledge—which was that of the most enlightened days of
the Roman Empire—the hypothesis of universal law was justly regarded as a
rash and premature generalisation. Every enquirer was confronted with
innumerable phenomena that were deemed plainly miraculous. When Lucretius
sought to banish the supernatural from the universe, he was compelled to
employ much ingenuity in endeavouring to explain, by a natural law, why a
miraculous fountain near the temple of Jupiter Ammon was hot by night and
cold by day, and why the temperature of wells was higher in winter than in
summer.(660) Eclipses were supposed by the populace to foreshadow
calamity; but the Roman soldiers believed that by beating drums and
cymbals they could cause the moon’s disc to regain its brightness.(661) In
obedience to dreams, the great Emperor Augustus went begging money through
the streets of Rome,(662) and the historian who records the act himself
wrote to Pliny, entreating the postponement of a trial.(663) The stroke of
the lightning was an augury,(664) and its menace was directed especially
against the great, who cowered in abject terror during a thunder-storm.
Augustus used to guard himself against thunder by wearing the skin of a
sea-calf.(665) Tiberius, who professed to be a complete freethinker, had
greater faith in laurel leaves.(666) Caligula was accustomed during a
thunderstorm to creep beneath his bed.(667) During the games in honour of
Julius Cæsar, a comet appearing for seven days in the sky, the people
believed it to be the soul of the dead,(668) and a temple was erected in
its honour.(669) Sometimes we find this credulity broken by curious
inconsistencies of belief, or semi-rationalistic explanations. Livy, who
relates with perfect faith innumerable prodigies, has observed,
nevertheless, that the more prodigies are believed, the more they are
announced.(670) Those who admitted most fully the reality of the oracles
occasionally represented them as natural contending that a prophetic
faculty was innate in all men, though dormant in most; that it might be
quickened into action by sleep, by a pure and ascetic life, or in the
prostration that precedes death, or in the delirium produced by certain
vapours; and that the gradual enfeebling of the last was the cause of the
cessation of the oracles.(671) Earthquakes were believed to result from
supernatural interpositions, and to call for expiatory sacrifices, but at
the same time they had direct natural antecedents. The Greeks believed
that they were caused by subterranean waters, and they accordingly
sacrificed to Poseidon. The Romans were uncertain as to their physical
antecedents, and therefore inscribed no name on the altar of
expiation.(672) Pythagoras is said to have attributed them to the
strugglings of the dead.(673) Pliny, after a long discussion, decided that
they were produced by air forcing itself through fissures of the earth,
but he immediately proceeds to assert that they are invariably the
precursors of calamity.(674) The same writer, having recounted the triumph
of astronomers in predicting and explaining eclipses, bursts into an
eloquent apostrophe to those great men who had thus reclaimed man from the
dominion of superstition, and in high and enthusiastic terms urges them to
pursue still further their labour in breaking the thraldom of
ignorance.(675) A few chapters later he professes his unhesitating belief
in the ominous character of comets.(676) The notions, too, of magic and
astrology, were detached from all theological belief, and might be found
among many who were absolute atheists.(677)

These few examples will be sufficient to show how fully the Roman soil was
prepared for the reception of miraculous histories, even after the
writings of Cicero and Seneca, in the brilliant days of Augustus and the
Antonines. The feebleness of the uncultivated mind, which cannot rise
above material conceptions, had indeed passed away, the legends of the
popular theology had lost all power over the educated, but at the same
time an absolute ignorance of physical science and of inductive reasoning
remained. The facility of belief that was manifested by some of the most
eminent men, even on matters that were not deemed supernatural, can only
be realised by those who have an intimate acquaintance with their works.
Thus, to give but a few examples, that great naturalist whom I have so
often cited tells us with the utmost gravity how the fiercest lion
trembles at the crowing of a cock;(678) how elephants celebrate their
religious ceremonies;(679) how the stag draws serpents by its breath from
their holes, and then tramples them to death;(680) how the salamander is
so deadly that the food cooked in water, or the fruit grown on trees it
has touched, are fatal to man;(681) how, when a ship is flying before so
fierce a tempest that no anchors or chains can hold it, if only the remora
or echinus fastens on its keel, it is arrested in its course, and remains
motionless and rooted among the waves.(682) On matters that would appear
the most easily verified, he is equally confident. Thus, the human saliva,
he assures us, has many mysterious properties. If a man, especially when
fasting, spits into the throat of a serpent, it is said that the animal
speedily dies.(683) It is certain that to anoint the eyes with spittle is
a sovereign remedy against ophthalmia.(684) If a pugilist, having struck
his adversary, spits into his own hand, the pain he caused instantly
ceases. If he spits into his hand before striking, the blow is the more
severe.(685) Aristotle, the greatest naturalist of Greece, had observed
that it was a curious fact that on the sea-shore no animal ever dies
except during the ebbing of the tide. Several centuries later, Pliny, the
greatest naturalist of an empire that was washed by many tidal seas,
directed his attention to this statement. He declared that, after careful
observations which had been made in Gaul, it had been found to be
inaccurate, for what Aristotle stated of all animals was in fact only true
of man.(686) It was in 1727 and the two following years, that scientific
observations made at Rochefort and at Brest finally dissipated the
delusion.(687)

Volumes might be filled with illustrations of how readily, in the most
enlightened days of the Roman Empire, strange, and especially miraculous,
tales were believed, even under circumstances that would appear to give
every facility for the detection of the imposture. In the field of the
supernatural, however, it should be remembered that a movement, which I
have traced in the last chapter, had produced a very exceptional amount of
credulity during the century and a half that preceded the conversion of
Constantine. Neither the writings of Cicero and Seneca, nor even those of
Pliny and Plutarch, can be regarded as fair samples of the belief of the
educated. The Epicurean philosophy which rejected, the Academic philosophy
which doubted, and the Stoic philosophy which simplified and sublimated
superstition, had alike disappeared. The “Meditations” of Marcus Aurelius
closed the period of Stoical influence, and the “Dialogues” of Lucian were
the last solitary protest of expiring scepticism.(688) The aim of the
philosophy of Cicero had been to ascertain truth by the free exercise of
the critical powers. The aim of the Pythagorean philosophy was to attain
the state of ecstasy, and to purify the mind by religious rites. Every
philosopher soon plunged into magical practices, and was encircled, in the
eyes of his disciples, with a halo of legend. Apollonius of Tyana, whom
the Pagans opposed to Christ, had raised the dead, healed the sick, cast
out devils, freed a young man from a lamia or vampire with whom he was
enamoured, prophesied, seen in one country events that were occurring in
another, and filled the world with the fame of his miracles and of his
sanctity.(689) A similar power, notwithstanding his own disclaimer, was
popularly attributed to the Platonist Apuleius.(690) Lucian has left us a
detailed account of the impostures by which the philosopher Alexander
endeavoured to acquire the fame of a miracle-worker.(691) When a magician
plotted against Plotinus, his spells recoiled miraculously against
himself; and when an Egyptian priest endeavoured by incantations to evoke
the guardian dæmon of the philosopher, instead of a dæmon the temple of
Isis was irradiated by the presence of a god.(692) Porphyry was said to
have expelled an evil dæmon from a bath.(693) It was reported among his
disciples that when Iamblichus prayed he was raised (like the saints of
another creed) ten cubits from the ground, and that his body and his dress
assumed a golden hue.(694) It was well known that he had at Gadara drawn
forth from the waters of two fountains their guardian spirits, and
exhibited them in bodily form to his disciples.(695) A woman named
Sospitra had been visited by two spirits under the form of aged Chaldeans,
and had been endowed with a transcendent beauty and with a superhuman
knowledge. Raised above all human frailties, save only love and death, she
was able to see at once the deeds which were done in every land, and the
people, dazzled by her beauty and her wisdom, ascribed to her a share of
the omnipresence of the Deity.(696)

Christianity floated into the Roman Empire on the wave of credulity that
brought with it this long train of Oriental superstitions and legends. In
its moral aspect it was broadly distinguished from the systems around it,
but its miracles were accepted by both friend and foe as the ordinary
accompaniments of religious teaching. The Jews, in the eyes of the Pagans,
had long been proverbial for their credulity,(697) and the Christians
inherited a double measure of their reputation. Nor is it possible to deny
that in the matter of the miraculous the reputation was deserved. Among
the Pagans the theory of Euhemerus, who believed the gods to be but
deified men, had been the stronghold of the Sceptics, while the Platonic
notion of dæmons was adopted by the more believing philosophers. The
Christian teachers combined both theories, maintaining that deceased kings
had originally supplied the names of the deities, but that malevolent
dæmons had taken their places; and without a single exception the Fathers
maintained the reality of the Pagan miracles as fully as their own.(698)
The oracles, as we have seen, had been ridiculed and rejected by numbers
of the philosophers, but the Christians unanimously admitted their
reality. They appealed to a long series of oracles as predictions of their
faith; and there is, I believe, no example of the denial of their
supernatural character in the Christian Church till 1696, when a Dutch
Anabaptist minister named Van Dale, in a remarkable book,(699) which was
abridged and translated by Fontenelle, asserted, in opposition to the
unanimous voice of ecclesiastical authority, that they were simple
impostures—a theory which is now almost universally accepted. To suppose
that men who held these opinions were capable, in the second or third
centuries, of ascertaining with any degree of just confidence whether
miracles had taken place in Judæa in the first century, is grossly absurd;
nor would the conviction of their reality have made any great impression
on their minds at a time when miracles were supposed to be so abundantly
diffused.

In truth, the question of the reality of the Jewish miracles must be
carefully distinguished from that of the conversion of the Roman Empire.
With the light that is furnished to us by modern investigations and habits
of thought, we weigh the testimony of the Jewish writers; but most of the
more judicious of modern apologists, considering the extreme credulity of
the Jewish people, decline to make the question simply one of evidence,
and occupy themselves chiefly in endeavouring to show that miracles are
possible, that those recorded in the Biblical narratives are related in
such a manner, and are so interwoven with the texture of a simple and
artless narrative, as to carry with them an internal proof of their
reality; that they differ in kind from later miracles, and especially that
the character and destinies of Christianity are such as to render its
miraculous origin antecedently probable. But in the ages when the Roman
Empire was chiefly converted, all sound and discriminating historical
investigation of the evidence of the early miracles was impossible, nor
was any large use made of those miracles as proofs of the religion. The
rhetorician Arnobius is probably the only one of the early apologists who
gives, among the evidences of the faith, any prominent place to the
miracles of Christ.(700) When evidential reasoning was employed, it was
usually an appeal not to miracles, but to prophecy. But here again the
opinions of the patristic age must be pronounced absolutely worthless. To
prove that events had taken place in Judæa, accurately corresponding with
the prophecies, or that the prophecies were themselves genuine, were both
tasks far transcending the critical powers of the Roman converts. The wild
extravagance of fantastic allegory, commonly connected with Origen, but
which appears at a much earlier date in the writings of Justin Martyr and
Irenæus, had thrown the interpretation of prophecy into hopeless
confusion, while the deliberate and apparently perfectly unscrupulous
forgery of a whole literature, destined to further the propagation either
of Christianity as a whole, or of some particular class of tenets that had
arisen within its border,(701) made criticism at once pre-eminently
difficult and necessary. A long series of oracles were cited, predicting
in detail the sufferings of Christ. The prophecies forged by the
Christians, and attributed by them to the heathen Sibyls, were accepted as
genuine by the entire Church, and were continually appealed to as among
the most powerful evidences of the faith. Justin Martyr declared that it
was by the instigation of dæmons that it had been made a capital offence
to read them.(702) Clement of Alexandria preserved the tradition that St.
Paul had urged the brethren to study them.(703) Celsus designated the
Christians Sibyllists, on account of the pertinacity with which they
insisted upon them.(704) Constantine the Great adduced them in a solemn
speech before the Council of Nice.(705) St. Augustine notices that the
Greek word for a fish, which, containing the initial letters of the name
and titles of Christ, had been adopted by the Early Church as its sacred
symbol, contains also the initial letters of some prophetic lines ascribed
to the Sibyl of Erythra.(706) The Pagans, it is true, accused their
opponents of having forged or interpolated these prophecies;(707) but
there was not a single Christian writer of the patristic period who
disputed their authority, and there were very few even of the most
illustrious who did not appeal to them. Unanimously admitted by the Church
of the Fathers, they were unanimously admitted during the middle ages, and
an allusion to them passed into the most beautiful lyric of the Missal. It
was only at the period of the Reformation that the great but unhappy
Castellio pointed out many passages in them which could not possibly be
genuine. He was followed, in the first years of the seventeenth century,
by a Jesuit named Possevin, who observed that the Sibyls were known to
have lived at a later period than Moses, and that many passages in the
Sibylline books purported to have been written before Moses. Those
passages, therefore, he said, were interpolated; and he added, with a
characteristic sagacity, that they had doubtless been inserted by Satan,
for the purpose of throwing suspicion upon the books.(708) It was in 1649
that a French Protestant minister, named Blondel, ventured for the first
time in the Christian Church to denounce these writings as deliberate and
clumsy forgeries, and after much angry controversy his sentiment has
acquired an almost undisputed ascendancy in criticism.

But although the opinion of the Roman converts was extremely worthless,
when dealing with past history or with literary criticism, there was one
branch of miracles concerning which their position was somewhat different.
Contemporary miracles, often of the most extraordinary character, but
usually of the nature of visions, exorcisms, or healing the sick, were
from the time of Justin Martyr uniformly represented by the Fathers as
existing among them,(709) and they continue steadily along the path of
history, till in the pages of Evagrius and Theodoret, in the Lives of
Hilarion and Paul, by St. Jerome, of Antony, by St. Athanasius, and of
Gregory Thaumaturgus, by his namesake of Nyssa, and in the Dialogues of
St. Gregory the Great, they attain as grotesque an extravagance as the
wildest mediæval legends. Few things are more striking than the assertions
hazarded on this matter by some of the ablest of the Fathers. Thus, St.
Irenæus assures us that all Christians possessed the power of working
miracles; that they prophesied, cast out devils, healed the sick, and
sometimes even raised the dead; that some who had been thus resuscitated
lived for many years among them, and that it would be impossible to reckon
the wonderful acts that were daily performed.(710) St. Epiphanius tells us
that some rivers and fountains were annually transformed into wine, in
attestation of the miracle of Cana; and he adds that he had himself drunk
of one of these fountains, and his brethren of another.(711) St. Augustine
notices that miracles were less frequent and less widely known than
formerly, but that many still occurred, and some of them he had himself
witnessed. Whenever a miracle was reported, he ordered that a special
examination into its circumstances should be made, and that the
depositions of the witnesses should be read publicly to the people. He
tells us, besides many other miracles, that Gamaliel in a dream revealed
to a priest named Lucianus the place where the bones of St. Stephen were
buried; that those bones, being thus discovered, were brought to Hippo,
the diocese of which St. Augustine was bishop; that they raised five dead
persons to life; and that, although only a portion of the miraculous cures
they effected had been registered, the certificates drawn up in two years
in the diocese, and by the orders of the saint, were nearly seventy. In
the adjoining diocese of Calama they were incomparably more numerous.(712)
In the height of the great conflict between St. Ambrose and the Arian
Empress Justina, the saint declared that it had been revealed to him by an
irresistible presentiment—or, as St. Augustine, who was present on the
occasion, says, in a dream—that relics were buried in a spot which he
indicated. The earth being removed, a tomb was found filled with blood,
and containing two gigantic skeletons, with their heads severed from their
bodies, which were pronounced to be those of St. Gervasius and St.
Protasius, two martyrs of remarkable physical dimensions, who were said to
have suffered about 300 years before. To prove that they were genuine
relics, the bones were brought in contact with a blind man, who was
restored to sight, and with demoniacs, who were cured; the dæmons,
however, in the first place, acknowledging that the relics were genuine;
that St. Ambrose was the deadly enemy of the powers of hell; that the
Trinitarian doctrine was true; and that those who rejected it would
infallibly be damned. The next day St. Ambrose delivered an invective
against all who questioned the miracle. St. Augustine recorded it in his
works, and spread the worship of the saints through Africa. The transport
of enthusiasm with which the miracles were greeted at Milan enabled St.
Ambrose to overcome every obstacle; but the Arians treated them with a
derisive incredulity, and declared that the pretended demoniacs had been
bribed by the saint.(713)

Statements of this kind, which are selected from very many that are
equally positive, though not equally precise, suggest veins of thought of
obvious interest and importance. We are now, however, only concerned with
the fact, that, with the exception of one or two isolated miracles, such
as the last I have noticed, and of one class of miracles which I shall
proceed to describe, these prodigies, whether true or false, were wrought
for the exclusive edification of confirmed believers. The exceptional
miracles were those of exorcism, which occupied a very singular position
in the early Church. The belief that certain diseases were inflicted by
Divine agency was familiar to the ancients, but among the early Greeks the
notion of diabolical possession appears to have been unknown. A dæmon, in
the philosophy of Plato, though inferior to a deity, was not an evil
spirit, and it is extremely doubtful whether the existence of evil dæmons
was known either to the Greeks or Romans till about the time of the advent
of Christ.(714) The belief was introduced with the Oriental superstitions
which then poured into Rome, and it brought in its train the notions of
possession and exorcism. The Jews, who in their own country appear to have
regarded it as a most ordinary occurrence to meet men walking about
visibly possessed by devils, and who professed to have learnt from Solomon
the means of expelling them, soon became the principal exorcists,
accomplishing their feats partly by adjuration, and partly by means of a
certain miraculous root named Baaras. Josephus assures us that he had
himself, in the reign of Vespasian, seen a Jew named Eleazar drawing by
these means a dæmon through the nostrils of a possessed person, who fell
to the ground on the accomplishment of the miracle; while, upon the
command of the magician, the devil, to prove that it had really left his
victim, threw down a cup of water which had been placed at a
distance.(715) The growth of Neoplatonism and kindred philosophies greatly
strengthened the belief, and some of the later philosophers, as well as
many religious charlatans, practised exorcism. But, of all classes, the
Christians became in this respect the most famous. From the time of Justin
Martyr, for about two centuries, there is, I believe, not a single
Christian writer who does not solemnly and explicitly assert the reality
and frequent employment of this power;(716) and although, after the
Council of Laodicea, the instances became less numerous, they by no means
ceased. The Christians fully recognised the supernatural power possessed
by the Jewish and Gentile exorcists, but they claimed to be in many
respects their superiors. By the simple sign of the cross, or by repeating
the name of their Master, they professed to be able to cast out devils
which had resisted all the enchantments of Pagan exorcists, to silence the
oracles, to compel the dæmons to confess the truth of the Christian faith.
Sometimes their power extended still further. Dæmons, we are told, were
accustomed to enter into animals, and these also were expelled by the
Christian adjuration. St. Jerome, in his “Life of St. Hilarion,” has given
us a graphic account of the courage with which that saint confronted, and
the success with which he relieved, a possessed camel.(717) In the reign
of Julian, the very bones of the martyr Babylas were sufficient to silence
the oracle of Daphne; and when, amid the triumphant chants of the
Christians, the relics, by the command of Julian, were removed, the
lightning descended from heaven and consumed the temple.(718) St. Gregory
Thaumaturgus having expelled the dæmons from an idol temple, the priest,
finding his means of subsistence destroyed, came to the saint, imploring
him to permit the oracles to be renewed. St. Gregory, who was then on his
journey, wrote a note containing the words “Satan, return,” which was
immediately obeyed, and the priest, awe-struck by the miracle, was
converted to Christianity.(719) Tertullian, writing to the Pagans in a
time of persecution, in language of the most deliberate earnestness,
challenges his opponents to bring forth any person who is possessed by a
dæmon or any of those virgins or prophets who are supposed to be inspired
by a divinity. He asserts that, in reply to the interrogation of any
Christian, the dæmons will be compelled to confess their diabolical
character; he invites the Pagans, if it be otherwise, to put the Christian
immediately to death; and he proposes this as at once the simplest and
most decisive demonstration of the faith.(720) Justin Martyr,(721)
Origen,(722) Lactantius,(723) Athanasius,(724) and Minucius Felix,(725)
all in language equally solemn and explicit, call upon the Pagans to form
their opinions from the confessions wrung from their own gods. We hear
from them, that when a Christian began to pray, to make the sign of the
cross, or to utter the name of his Master in the presence of a possessed
or inspired person, the latter, by screams and frightful contortions,
exhibited the torture that was inflicted, and by this torture the evil
spirit was compelled to avow its nature. Several of the Christian writers
declare that this was generally known to the Pagans. In one respect, it
was observed, the miracle of exorcism was especially available for
evidential purposes; for, as dæmons would not expel dæmons, it was the
only miracle which was necessarily divine.

It would be curious to examine the manner in which the challenge was
received by the Pagan writers; but unhappily, the writings which were
directed against the faith having been destroyed by the Christian
emperors, our means of information on this point are very scanty. Some
information, however, we possess, and it would appear to show that, among
the educated classes at least, these phenomena did not extort any great
admiration. The eloquent silence about diabolical possession observed by
the early philosophers, when discussing such questions as the nature of
the soul and of the spiritual world, decisively show that in their time
possession had not assumed any great prominence or acquired any general
credence. Plutarch, who admitted the reality of evil dæmons, and who was
the most strenuous defender of the oracles, treats the whole class of
superstitions to which exorcism belongs with much contempt.(726) Marcus
Aurelius, in recounting the benefits he had received from different
persons with whom he had been connected, acknowledges his debt of
gratitude to the philosopher Diognetus for having taught him to give no
credence to magicians, jugglers, and expellers of dæmons.(727) Lucian
declares that every cunning juggler could make his fortune by going over
to the Christians and preying upon their simplicity.(728) Celsus described
the Christians as jugglers performing their tricks among the young and the
credulous.(729) The most decisive evidence, however, we possess, is a law
of Ulpian, directed, it is thought, against the Christians, which condemns
those “who use incantations or imprecations, or (to employ the common word
of impostors) exorcisms.”(730) Modern criticism has noted a few facts
which may throw some light upon this obscure subject. It has been observed
that the symptoms of possession were for the most part identical with
those of lunacy or epilepsy; that it is quite possible that the excitement
of an imposing religious ceremony might produce or suspend the disorder;
that leading questions might in these cases be followed by the desired
answers; and that some passages from the Fathers show that the exorcisms
were not always successful, or the cures always permanent. It has been
observed, too, that at first the power of exorcism was open to all
Christians without restraint; that this licence, in an age when religious
jugglers were very common, and in a Church whose members were very
credulous, gave great facilities to impostors; that when the Laodicean
Council, in the fourth century, forbade any one to exorcise, except those
who were duly authorised by the bishop, these miracles speedily declined;
and that, in the very beginning of the fifth century, a physician named
Posidonius denied the existence of possession.(731)

To sum up this whole subject, we may conclude that what is called the
evidential system had no prominent place in effecting the conversion of
the Roman Empire. Historical criticisms were far too imperfect to make
appeals to the miracles of former days of any value, and the notion of the
wide diffusion of miraculous or magical powers, as well as the generally
private character of the alleged miracles of the Patristic age, made
contemporary wonders very unimpressive. The prophecies attributed to the
Sibyls, and the practice of exorcism, had, however, a certain weight; for
the first were connected with a religious authority, long and deeply
revered at Rome, and the second had been forced by several circumstances
into great prominence. But the effect even of these may be safely regarded
as altogether subsidiary, and the main causes of the conversion must be
looked for in another and a wider sphere.

These causes were the general tendencies of the age. They are to be found
in that vast movement of mingled scepticism and credulity, in that
amalgamation or dissolution of many creeds, in that profound
transformation of habits, of feelings, and of ideals, which I have
attempted to paint in the last chapter. Under circumstances more
favourable to religious proselytism than the world had ever before known,
with the path cleared by a long course of destructive criticism, the
religions and philosophies of mankind were struggling for the mastery in
that great metropolis where all were amply represented, and in which alone
the destinies of the world could be decided. Among the educated a frigid
Stoicism, teaching a majestic but unattainable grandeur, and scorning the
support of the affections, the hope of another world, and the consolations
of worship, had for a time been in the ascendant, and it only terminated
its noble and most fruitful career when it had become manifestly
inadequate to the religious wants of the age. Among other classes,
religion after religion ran its conquering course. The Jews, although a
number of causes had made them the most hated of all the Roman subjects,
and although their religion, from its intensely national character, seemed
peculiarly unsuited for proselytism, had yet, by the force of their
monotheism, their charity, and their exorcisms, spread the creed of Moses
far and wide. The Empress Poppæa is said to have been a proselyte. The
passion of Roman women for Jewish rites was one of the complaints of
Juvenal. The Sabbath and the Jewish fasts became familiar facts in all the
great cities, and the antiquity of the Jewish law the subject of eager
discussion. Other Oriental religions were even more successful. The
worship of Mithra, and, above all, of the Egyptian divinities, attracted
their thousands, and during more than three centuries the Roman writings
are crowded with allusions to their progress. The mysteries of the Bona
Dea,(732) the solemn worship of Isis, the expiatory rites that cleansed
the guilty soul, excited a very delirium of enthusiasm. Juvenal describes
the Roman women, at the dawn of the winter day, breaking the ice of the
Tiber to plunge three times into its sacred stream, dragging themselves on
bleeding knees in penance around the field of Tarquin, offering to
undertake pilgrimages to Egypt to seek the holy water for the shrine of
Isis, fondly dreaming that they had heard the voice of the goddess.(733)
Apuleius has drawn a graphic picture of the solemn majesty of her
processions, and the spell they cast upon the most licentious and the most
sceptical.(734) Commodus, Caracalla, and Heliogabalus were passionately
devoted to them.(735) The temples of Isis and Serapis, and the statues of
Mithra, are among the last prominent works of Roman art. In all other
forms the same credulity was manifested. The oracles that had been silent
were heard again; the astrologers swarmed in every city; the philosophers
were surrounded with an atmosphere of legend; the Pythagorean school had
raised credulity into a system. On all sides, and to a degree unparalleled
in history, we find men who were no longer satisfied with their old local
religion, thirsting for belief, passionately and restlessly seeking for a
new faith.

In the midst of this movement, Christianity gained its ascendancy, and we
can be at no loss to discover the cause of its triumph. No other religion,
under such circumstances, had ever combined so many distinct elements of
power and attraction. Unlike the Jewish religion, it was bound by no local
ties, and was equally adapted for every nation and for every class. Unlike
Stoicism, it appealed in the strongest manner to the affections, and
offered all the charm of a sympathetic worship. Unlike the Egyptian
religions, it united with its distinctive teaching a pure and noble system
of ethics, and proved itself capable of realising it in action. It
proclaimed, amid a vast movement of social and national amalgamation, the
universal brotherhood of mankind. Amid the softening influence of
philosophy and civilisation, it taught the supreme sanctity of love. To
the slave, who had never before exercised so large an influence over Roman
religious life, it was the religion of the suffering and the oppressed. To
the philosopher it was at once the echo of the highest ethics of the later
Stoics, and the expansion of the best teaching of the school of Plato. To
a world thirsting for prodigy, it offered a history replete with wonders
more strange that those of Apollonius; while the Jew and the Chaldean
could scarcely rival its exorcists, and the legends of continual miracles
circulated among its followers. To a world deeply conscious of political
dissolution, and prying eagerly and anxiously into the future, it
proclaimed with a thrilling power the immediate destruction of the
globe—the glory of all its friends, and the damnation of all its foes. To
a world that had grown very weary gazing on the cold and passionless
grandeur which Cato realised, and which Lucan sung, it presented an ideal
of compassion and of love—a Teacher who could weep by the sepulchre of His
friend, who was touched with the feeling of our infirmities. To a world,
in fine, distracted by hostile creeds and colliding philosophies, it
taught its doctrines, not as a human speculation, but as a Divine
revelation, authenticated much less by reason than by faith. “With the
heart man believeth unto righteousness;” “He that doeth the will of my
Father will know the doctrine, whether it be of God;” “Unless you believe
you cannot understand;” “A heart naturally Christian;” “The heart makes
the theologian,” are the phrases which best express the first action of
Christianity upon the world. Like all great religions, it was more
concerned with modes of feeling than with modes of thought. The chief
cause of its success was the congruity of its teaching with the spiritual
nature of mankind. It was because it was true to the moral sentiments of
the age, because it represented faithfully the supreme type of excellence
to which men were then tending, because it corresponded with their
religious wants, aims, and emotions, because the whole spiritual being
could then expand and expatiate under its influence, that it planted its
roots so deeply in the hearts of men.

To all these elements of attraction, others of a different order must be
added. Christianity was not merely a moral influence, or a system of
opinions, or an historical record, or a collection of wonder-working men;
it was also an institution definitely, elaborately, and skilfully
organised, possessing a weight and a stability which isolated or
undisciplined teachers could never rival, and evoking, to a degree before
unexampled in the world, an enthusiastic devotion to its corporate
welfare, analogous to that of the patriot to his country. The many forms
of Pagan worship were pliant in their nature. Each offered certain
advantages or spiritual gratifications; but there was no reason why all
should not exist together, and participation in one by no means implied
disrespect to the others. But Christianity was emphatically exclusive; its
adherent was bound to detest and abjure the faiths around him as the
workmanship of dæmons, and to consider himself placed in the world to
destroy them. Hence there sprang a stern, aggressive, and at the same time
disciplined enthusiasm, wholly unlike any other that had been witnessed
upon earth. The duties of public worship; the sacraments, which were
represented as the oaths of the Christian warrior; the fasts and penances
and commemorative days, which strengthened the Church feeling; the
intervention of religion in the most solemn epochs of life, conspired to
sustain it. Above all, the doctrine of salvation by belief, which then for
the first time flashed upon the world; the persuasion, realised with all
the vividness of novelty, that Christianity opened out to its votaries
eternal happiness, while all beyond its pale were doomed to an eternity of
torture, supplied a motive of action as powerful as it is perhaps possible
to conceive. It struck alike the coarsest chords of hope and fear, and the
finest chords of compassion and love. The polytheist, admitting that
Christianity might possibly be true, was led by a mere calculation of
prudence to embrace it, and the fervent Christian would shrink from no
suffering to draw those whom he loved within its pale. Nor were other
inducements wanting. To the confessor was granted in the Church a great
and venerable authority, such as the bishop could scarcely claim.(736) To
the martyr, besides the fruition of heaven, belonged the highest glory on
earth. By winning that bloodstained crown, the meanest Christian slave
might gain a reputation as glorious as that of a Decius or a Regulus. His
body was laid to rest with a sumptuous splendour;(737) his relics,
embalmed or shrined, were venerated with an almost idolatrous homage. The
anniversary of his birth into another life was commemorated in the Church,
and before the great assembly of the saints his heroic sufferings were
recounted.(738) How, indeed, should he not be envied? He had passed away
into eternal bliss. He had left upon earth an abiding name. By the
“baptism of blood” the sins of a life had been in a moment effaced.

Those who are accustomed to recognise heroic enthusiasm as a normal
product of certain natural conditions, will have no difficulty in
understanding that, under such circumstances as I have described, a
transcendent courage should have been evoked. Men seemed indeed to be in
love with death. Believing, with St. Ignatius, that they were “the wheat
of God,” they panted for the day when they should be “ground by the teeth
of wild beasts into the pure bread of Christ!” Beneath this one burning
enthusiasm all the ties of earthly love were snapt in twain. Origen, when
a boy, being restrained by force from going forth to deliver himself up to
the persecutors, wrote to his imprisoned father, imploring him not to let
any thought of his family intervene to quench his resolution or to deter
him from sealing his faith with his blood. St. Perpetua, an only daughter,
a young mother of twenty-two, had embraced the Christian creed, confessed
it before her judges, and declared herself ready to endure for it the
martyr’s death. Again and again her father came to her in a paroxysm of
agony, entreating her not to deprive him of the joy and the consolation of
his closing years. He appealed to her by the memory of all the tenderness
he had lavished upon her—by her infant child—by his own gray hairs, that
were soon to be brought down in sorrow to the grave. Forgetting in his
deep anguish all the dignity of a parent, he fell upon his knees before
his child, covered her hands with kisses, and, with tears streaming from
his eyes, implored her to have mercy upon him. But she was unshaken though
not untouched; she saw her father, frenzied with grief, dragged from
before the tribunal; she saw him tearing his white beard, and lying
prostrate and broken-hearted on the prison floor; she went forth to die
for a faith she loved more dearly—for a faith that told her that her
father would be lost for ever.(739) The desire for martyrdom became at
times a form of absolute madness, a kind of epidemic of suicide, and the
leading minds of the Church found it necessary to exert all their
authority to prevent their followers from thrusting themselves into the
hands of the persecutors.(740) Tertullian mentions how, in a little
Asiatic town, the entire population once flocked to the proconsul,
declaring themselves to be Christians, and imploring him to execute the
decree of the emperor and grant them the privilege of martyrdom. The
bewildered functionary asked them whether, if they were so weary of life,
there were no precipices or ropes by which they could end their days; and
he put to death a small number of the suppliants, and dismissed the
others.(741) Two illustrious Pagan moralists and one profane Pagan
satirist have noticed this passion with a most unpleasing scorn. “There
are some,” said Epictetus, “whom madness, there are others, like the
Galilæans, whom custom, makes indifferent to death.”(742) “What mind,”
said Marcus Aurelius, “is prepared, if need be, to go forth from the body,
whether it be to be extinguished, or to be dispersed, or to
endure?—prepared by deliberate reflection, and not by pure obstinacy, as
is the custom of the Christians.”(743) “These wretches,” said Lucian,
speaking of the Christians, “persuade themselves that they are going to be
altogether immortal, and to live for ever; wherefore they despise death,
and many of their own accord give themselves up to be slain.”(744)

“I send against you men who are as greedy of death as you are of
pleasures,” were the words which, in after days, the Mohammedan chief
addressed to the degenerate Christians of Syria, and which were at once
the presage and the explanation of his triumph. Such words might with
equal propriety have been employed by the early Christian leaders to their
Pagan adversaries. The zeal of the Christians and of the Pagans differed
alike in degree and in kind. When Constantine made Christianity the
religion of the State, it is probable that its adherents were but a
minority in Rome. Even in the days of Theodosius the senate was still
wedded to Paganism;(745) yet the measures of Constantine were both natural
and necessary. The majority were without inflexible belief, without moral
enthusiasm, without definite organisation, without any of those principles
that inspire the heroism either of resistance or aggression. The minority
formed a serried phalanx, animated by every motive that could purify,
discipline, and sustain their zeal. When once the Christians had acquired
a considerable position, the question of their destiny was a simple one.
They must either be crushed or they must reign. The failure of the
persecution of Diocletian conducted them inevitably to the throne.

It may indeed be confidently asserted that the conversion of the Roman
Empire is so far from being of the nature of a miracle or suspension of
the ordinary principles of human nature, that there is scarcely any other
great movement on record in which the causes and effects so manifestly
correspond. The apparent anomalies of history are not inconsiderable, but
they must be sought for in other quarters. That within the narrow limits
and scanty population of the Greek States should have arisen men who, in
almost every conceivable form of genius, in philosophy, in epic, dramatic
and lyric poetry, in written and spoken eloquence, in statesmanship, in
sculpture, in painting, and probably also in music, should have attained
almost or altogether the highest limits of human perfection—that the creed
of Mohammed should have preserved its pure monotheism and its freedom from
all idolatrous tendencies, when adopted by vast populations in that
intellectual condition in which, under all other creeds, a gross and
material worship has proved inevitable, both these are facts which we can
only very imperfectly explain. Considerations of climate, and still more
of political, social, and intellectual customs and institutions, may
palliate the first difficulty, and the attitude Mohammed assumed to art
may supply us with a partial explanation of the second; but I suppose
that, after all has been said, most persons will feel that they are in
presence of phenomena very exceptional and astonishing. The first rise of
Christianity in Judæa is a subject wholly apart from this book. We are
examining only the subsequent movement in the Roman Empire. Of this
movement it may be boldly asserted that the assumption of a moral or
intellectual miracle is utterly gratuitous. Never before was a religious
transformation so manifestly inevitable. No other religion ever combined
so many forms of attraction as Christianity, both from its intrinsic
excellence, and from its manifest adaptation to the special wants of the
time. One great cause of its success was that it produced more heroic
actions and formed more upright men than any other creed; but that it
should do so was precisely what might have been expected.

To these reasonings, however, those who maintain that the triumph of
Christianity in Rome is naturally inexplicable, reply by pointing to the
persecutions which Christianity had to encounter. As this subject is one
on which many misconceptions exist, and as it is of extreme importance on
account of its connection with later persecutions, it will be necessary
briefly to discuss it.

It is manifest that the reasons that may induce a ruler to suppress by
force some forms of religious worship or opinion, are very various. He may
do so on moral grounds, because they directly or indirectly produce
immorality; or on religious grounds, because he believes them to be
offensive to the Deity; or on political grounds, because they are
injurious either to the State or to the Government; or on corrupt grounds,
because he desires to gratify some vindictive or avaricious passion. From
the simple fact, therefore, of a religious persecution we cannot at once
infer the principles of the persecutor, but must examine in detail by
which of the above motives, or by what combination of them, he has been
actuated.

Now, the persecution which has taken place at the instigation of the
Christian priests differs in some respects broadly from all others. It has
been far more sustained, systematic, and unflinching. It has been directed
not merely against acts of worship, but also against speculative opinions.
It has been supported not merely as a right, but also as a duty. It has
been advocated in a whole literature of theology, by the classes that are
especially devout, and by the most opposing sects, and it has invariably
declined in conjunction with a large portion of theological dogmas.

I have elsewhere examined in great detail the history of persecutions by
Christians, and have endeavoured to show that, while exceptional causes
have undoubtedly occasionally occurred, they were, in the overwhelming
majority of cases, simply the natural, legitimate, and inevitable
consequence of a certain portion of the received theology. That portion is
the doctrine that correct theological opinions are essential to salvation,
and that theological error necessarily involves guilt. To these two
opinions may be distinctly traced almost all the sufferings that Christian
persecutors have caused, almost all the obstructions they have thrown in
the path of human progress; and those sufferings have been so grievous
that it may be reasonably questioned whether superstition has not often
proved a greater curse than vice, and that obstruction was so
pertinacious, that the contraction of theological influence has been at
once the best measure, and the essential condition of intellectual
advance. The notion that he might himself be possibly mistaken in his
opinions, which alone could cause a man who was thoroughly imbued with
these principles to shrink from persecuting, was excluded by the
theological virtue of faith, which, whatever else it might involve,
implied at least an absolute unbroken certainty, and led the devotee to
regard all doubt, and therefore all action based upon doubt, as sin.

To this general cause of Christian persecution I have shown that two
subsidiary influences may be joined. A large portion of theological ethics
was derived from writings in which religious massacres, on the whole the
most ruthless and sanguinary upon record, were said to have been directly
enjoined by the Deity, in which the duty of suppressing idolatry by force
was given a greater prominence than any article of the moral code, and in
which the spirit of intolerance has found its most eloquent and most
passionate expressions.(746) Besides this, the destiny theologians
represented as awaiting the misbeliever was so ghastly and so appalling as
to render it almost childish to lay any stress upon the earthly suffering
that might be inflicted in the extirpation of error.

That these are the true causes of the great bulk of Christian persecution,
I believe to be one of the most certain as well as one of the most
important facts in history. For the detailed proof I can only refer to
what I have elsewhere written; but I may here notice that that proof
combines every conceivable kind of evidence that in such a question can be
demanded. It can be shown that these principles would naturally lead men
to persecute. It can be shown that from the time of Constantine to the
time when the rationalistic spirit wrested the bloodstained sword from the
priestly hand, persecution was uniformly defended upon them—defended in
long, learned, and elaborate treatises, by the best and greatest men the
Church had produced, by sects that differed on almost all other points, by
multitudes who proved in every conceivable manner the purity of their
zeal. It can be shown, too, that toleration began with the distinction
between fundamental and non-fundamental doctrines, expanded in exact
proportion to the growing latitudinarianism, and triumphed only when
indifference to dogma had become a prevailing sentiment among legislators.
It was only when the battle had been won—when the anti-dogmatic party,
acting in opposition to the Church, had rendered persecution
impossible—that the great body of theologians revised their arguments, and
discovered that to punish men for their opinions was wholly at variance
with their faith. With the merits of this pleasing though somewhat tardy
conversion I am not now concerned; but few persons, I think, can follow
the history of Christian persecution without a feeling of extreme
astonishment that some modern writers, not content with maintaining that
the doctrine of exclusive salvation _ought_ not to have produced
persecution, have ventured, in defiance of the unanimous testimony of the
theologians of so many centuries, to dispute the plain historical fact
that it _did_ produce it. They argue that the Pagans, who did not believe
in exclusive salvation, persecuted, and that therefore that doctrine
cannot be the cause of persecution. The answer is that no sane man ever
maintained that all the persecutions on record were from the same source.
We can prove by the clearest evidence that Christian persecutions sprang
chiefly from the causes I have alleged. The causes of Pagan persecutions,
though different, are equally manifest, and I shall proceed shortly to
indicate them.

They were partly political and partly religious. The Governments in most
of the ancient States, in the earlier stages of their existence, undertook
the complete education of the people; professed to control and regulate
all the details of their social life, even to the dresses they wore, or
the dishes that were served upon their tables; and, in a word, to mould
their whole lives and characters into a uniform type. Hence, all
organisations and corporations not connected with the State, and
especially all that emanated from foreign countries, were looked upon with
distrust or antipathy. But this antipathy was greatly strengthened by a
religious consideration. No belief was more deeply rooted in the ancient
mind than that good or bad fortune sprang from the intervention of
spiritual beings, and that to neglect the sacred rites was to bring down
calamity upon the city. In the diminutive Greek States, where the function
of the Government was immensely enlarged, a strong intolerance existed,
which extended for some time not merely to practices, but to writings and
discourses. The well-known persecutions of Anaxagoras, Theodorus,
Diagoras, Stilpo, and Socrates; the laws of Plato, which were as opposed
to religious as to domestic freedom; and the existence in Athens of an
inquisitorial tribunal,(747) sufficiently attested it. But long before the
final ruin of Greece, speculative liberty had been fully attained. The
Epicurean and the Sceptical schools developed unmolested, and even in the
days of Socrates, Aristophanes was able to ridicule the gods upon the
stage.

In the earlier days of Rome religion was looked upon as a function of the
State; its chief object was to make the gods auspicious to the national
policy,(748) and its principal ceremonies were performed at the direct
command of the Senate. The national theory on religious matters was that
the best religion is always that of a man’s own country. At the same time,
the widest tolerance was granted to the religions of conquered nations.
The temples of every god were respected by the Roman army. Before
besieging a city, the Romans were accustomed to supplicate the presiding
deities of that city. With the single exception of the Druids, whose human
sacrifices it was thought a matter of humanity to suppress,(749) and whose
fierce rebellions it was thought necessary to crush, the teachers of all
national religions continued unmolested by the conqueror.

This policy, however, applied specially to religious rites practised in
the countries in which they were indigenous. The liberty to be granted to
the vast confluence of strangers attracted to Italy during the Empire was
another question. In the old Republican days, when the censors regulated
with the most despotic authority the minutest affairs of life, and when
the national religion was interwoven with every detail of political and
even domestic transactions, but little liberty could be expected. When
Carneades endeavoured to inculcate his universal scepticism upon the
Romans, by arguing alternately for and against the same proposition, Cato
immediately urged the Senate to expel him from the city, lest the people
should be corrupted by his teaching.(750) For a similar reason all
rhetoricians had been banished from the Republic.(751) The most
remarkable, however, and at the same time the extreme expression of Roman
intolerance that has descended to us, is the advice which Mæcenas is
represented as having given to Octavius Cæsar, before his accession to the
throne. “Always,” he said, “and everywhere, worship the gods according to
the rites of your country, and compel others to the same worship. Pursue
with your hatred and with punishments those who introduce foreign
religions, not only for the sake of the gods—the despisers of whom can
assuredly never do anything great—but also because they who introduce new
divinities entice many to use foreign laws. Hence arise conspiracies,
societies, and assemblies, things very unsuited to an homogeneous empire.
Tolerate no despiser of the gods, and no religious juggler. Divination is
necessary, and therefore let the aruspices and augurs by all means be
sustained, and let those who will, consult them; but the magicians must be
utterly prohibited, who, though they sometimes tell the truth, more
frequently, by false promises, urge men on to conspiracies.”(752)

This striking passage exhibits very clearly the extent to which in some
minds the intolerant spirit was carried in antiquity, and also the
blending motives that produced it. We should be, however, widely mistaken
if we regarded it as a picture of the actual religious policy of the
Empire. In order to realise this, it will be necessary to notice
separately liberty of speculation and liberty of worship.

When Asinius Pollio founded the first public library in Rome, he placed it
in the Temple of Liberty. The lesson which was thus taught to the literary
classes was never forgotten. It is probable that in no other period of the
history of the world was speculative freedom so perfect as in the Roman
Empire. The fearless scrutiny of all notions of popular belief, displayed
in the writings of Cicero, Seneca, Lucretius, or Lucian, did not excite an
effort of repression. Philosophers were, indeed, persecuted by Domitian
and Vespasian for their ardent opposition to the despotism of the
throne,(753) but on their own subjects they were wholly untrammelled. The
Greek writers consoled themselves for the extinction of the independence
of their country by the reflection that in the sphere of intellect the
meddling policy of the Greek States was replaced by an absolute and a
majestic freedom.(754) The fierceness of the opposition of sects faded
beneath its influence. Of all the speculative conflicts of antiquity, that
which most nearly approached the virulence of later theological
controversies was probably that between the Stoics and the Epicureans; but
it is well worthy of notice that some of the most emphatic testimonies to
the moral goodness of Epicurus have come from the writings of his
opponents.

But the policy of the Roman rulers towards religious rites was very
different from, and would at first sight appear to be in direct opposition
to, their policy towards opinions. An old law, which Cicero mentions,
expressly forbade the introduction of new religions,(755) and in the
Republican days and the earliest days of the Empire there are many
instances of its being enforced. Thus, in A.U.C. 326, a severe drought
having led men to seek help from new gods, the Senate charged the ædiles
to allow none but Roman deities to be worshipped.(756) Lutatius, soon
after the first Punic war, was forbidden by the Senate to consult foreign
gods, “because,” said the historian, “it was deemed right the Republic
should be administered according to the national auspices, and not
according to those of other lands.”(757) During the second Punic war, a
severe edict of the Senate enjoined the suppression of certain recent
innovations.(758) About A.U.C. 615 the prætor Hispalus exiled those who
had introduced the worship of the Sabasian Jupiter.(759) The rites of
Bacchus, being accompanied by gross and scandalous obscenity, were
suppressed, the consul, in a remarkable speech, calling upon the people to
revive the religious policy of their ancestors.(760) The worship of Isis
and Serapis only gained its footing after a long struggle, and no small
amount of persecution. The gross immorality it sometimes favoured, its
wild and abject superstition, so thoroughly alien to the whole character
of Roman life and tradition, and also the organisation of its priesthood,
rendered it peculiarly obnoxious to the Government. When the first edict
of suppression was issued, the people hesitated to destroy a temple which
seemed so venerable in their eyes, and the consul Æmilius Paulus dispelled
their fears by seizing an axe and striking the first blow himself.(761)
During the latter days of the Republic, edicts had commanded the
destruction of the Egyptian temples. Octavius, however, in his younger
days, favoured the new worship, but, soon after, it was again
suppressed.(762) Under Tiberius it had once more crept in; but the priests
of Isis having enabled a patrician named Mundus to disguise himself as the
god Anubis, and win the favours of a devout worshipper, the temple, by
order of the emperor, was destroyed, the images were thrown into the
Tiber, the priests were crucified, and the seducer was banished.(763)
Under the same emperor four thousand persons were exiled to Sardinia, as
affected with Jewish and Egyptian superstitions. They were commissioned to
repress robbers; but it was at the same time added, with a characteristic
scorn, that if they died through the unhealthiness of the climate, it
would be but a “small loss.”(764)

These measures represent together a considerable amount of religious
repression, but they were produced exclusively by notions of policy or
discipline. They grew out of that intense national spirit which sacrificed
every other interest to the State, and resisted every form of innovation,
whether secular or religious, that could impair the unity of the national
type, and dissolve the discipline which the predominance of the military
spirit and the stern government of the Republic had formed. They were
also, in some cases, the result of moral scandals. When, however, it
became evident that the internal condition of the Republic was unsuited
for the Empire, the rulers frankly acquiesced in the change, and from the
time of Tiberius, with the single exception of the Christians, perfect
liberty of worship seems to have been granted to the professors of all
religions in Rome.(765) The old law upon the subject was not revoked, but
it was not generally enforced. Sometimes the new creeds were expressly
authorised. Sometimes they were tacitly permitted. With a single
exception, all the religions of the world raised their heads unmolested in
the “Holy City.”(766)

The liberty, however, of professing and practising a foreign worship did
not dispense the Roman from the obligation of performing also the
sacrifices or other religious rites of his own land. It was here that
whatever religious fanaticism mingled with Pagan persecutions was
displayed. Eusebius tells us that religion was divided by the Romans into
three parts—the mythology, or legends that had descended from the poets;
the interpretations or theories by which the philosophers endeavoured to
rationalise, filter, or explain away these legends; and the ritual or
official religious observances. In the first two spheres perfect liberty
was accorded, but the ritual was placed under the control of the
Government, and was made a matter of compulsion.(767) In order to realise
the strength of the feeling that supported it, we must remember that the
multitude firmly believed that the prosperity and adversity of the Empire
depended chiefly upon the zeal or indifference that was shown in
conciliating the national divinities, and also that the philosophers, as I
have noticed in the last chapter, for the most part not only practised,
but warmly defended, the official observances. The love of truth in many
forms was exhibited among the Pagan philosophers to a degree which has
never been surpassed; but there was one form in which it was absolutely
unknown. The belief that it is wrong for a man in religious matters to act
a lie, to sanction by his presence and by his example what he regards as
baseless superstitions, had no place in the ethics of antiquity. The
religious flexibility which polytheism had originally generated, the
strong political feeling that pervaded all classes, and also the manifest
impossibility of making philosophy the creed of the ignorant, had rendered
nearly universal among philosophers a state of feeling which is often
exhibited, but rarely openly professed, among ourselves.(768) The
religious opinions of men had but little influence on their religious
practices, and the sceptic considered it not merely lawful, but a duty, to
attend the observances of his country. No one did more to scatter the
ancient superstitions than Cicero, who was himself an augur, and who
strongly asserted the duty of complying with the national rites.(769)
Seneca, having recounted in the most derisive terms the absurdities of the
popular worship, concludes his enumeration by declaring that “the sage
will observe all these things, not as pleasing to the Divinities, but as
commanded by the law,” and that he should remember “that his worship is
due to custom, not to belief.”(770) Epictetus, whose austere creed rises
to the purest monotheism, teaches as a fundamental religious maxim that
every man in his devotions should “conform to the customs of his
country.”(771) The Jews and Christians, who alone refused to do so, were
the representatives of a moral principle that was unknown to the Pagan
world.

It should be remembered, too, that the Oriental custom of deifying
emperors having been introduced into Rome, to burn incense before their
statues had become a kind of test of loyalty. This adoration does not, it
is true, appear to have implied any particular article of belief, and it
was probably regarded by most men as we regard the application of the term
“Sacred Majesty” to a sovereign, and the custom of kneeling in his
presence; but it was esteemed inconsistent with Christianity, and the
conscientious refusal of the Christians to comply with it aroused a
feeling resembling that which was long produced in Christendom by the
refusal of Quakers to comply with the usages of courts.

The obligation to perform the sacred rites of an idolatrous worship, if
rigidly enforced, would have amounted, in the case of the Jews and the
Christians, to a complete proscription. It does not, however, appear that
the Jews were ever persecuted on this ground. They formed a large and
influential colony in Rome. They retained undiminished, in the midst of
the Pagan population, their exclusive habits, refusing not merely all
religious communion, but most social intercourse with the idolaters,
occupying a separate quarter of the city, and sedulously practising their
distinctive rites. Tiberius, as we have seen, appears to have involved
them in his proscription of Egyptian superstitions; but they were usually
perfectly unmolested, or were molested only when their riotous conduct had
attracted the attention of the rulers. The Government was so far from
compelling them to perform acts contrary to their religion, that Augustus
expressly changed the day of the distribution of corn, in order that they
might not be reduced to the alternative of forfeiting their share, or of
breaking the Sabbath.(772)

It appears, then, that the old Republican intolerance had in the Empire
been so modified as almost to have disappeared. The liberty of speculation
and discussion was entirely unchecked. The liberty of practising foreign
religious rites, though ostensibly limited by the law against unauthorised
religions, was after Tiberius equally secure. The liberty of abstaining
from the official national rites, though more precarious, was fully
conceded to the Jews, whose jealousy of idolatry was in no degree inferior
to that of the Christians. It remains, then, to examine what were the
causes of the very exceptional fanaticism and animosity that were directed
against the latter.

The first cause of the persecution of the Christians was the religious
notion to which I have already referred. The belief that our world is
governed by isolated acts of Divine intervention, and that, in
consequence, every great calamity, whether physical, or military, or
political, may be regarded as a punishment or a warning, was the basis of
the whole religious system of antiquity.(773) In the days of the Republic
every famine, pestilence, or drought was followed by a searching
investigation of the sacred rites, to ascertain what irregularity or
neglect had caused the Divine anger, and two instances are recorded in
which vestal virgins were put to death because their unchastity was
believed to have provoked a national calamity.(774) It might appear at
first sight that the fanaticism which this belief would naturally produce
would have been directed against the Jews as strongly as against the
Christians; but a moment’s reflection is sufficient to explain the
difference. The Jewish religion was essentially conservative and
unexpansive. Although, in the passion for Oriental religions, many of the
Romans had begun to practise its ceremonies, there was no spirit of
proselytism in the sect; and it is probable that almost all who followed
this religion, to the exclusion of others, were of Hebrew nationality. The
Christians, on the other hand, were ardent missionaries; they were, for
the most part, Romans who had thrown off the allegiance of their old gods,
and their activity was so great that from a very early period the temples
were in some districts almost deserted.(775) Besides this, the Jews simply
abstained from and despised the religions around them. The Christians
denounced them as the worship of dæmons, and lost no opportunity of
insulting them. It is not, therefore, surprising that the populace should
have been firmly convinced that every great catastrophe that occurred was
due to the presence of the enemies of the gods. “If the Tiber ascends to
the walls,” says Tertullian, “or if the Nile does not overflow the fields,
if the heaven refuses its rain, if the earth quakes, if famine and
pestilence desolate the land, immediately the cry is raised, ‘The
Christians to the lions!’ ”(776) “There is no rain—the Christians are the
cause,” had become a popular proverb in Rome.(777) Earthquakes, which, on
account of their peculiarly appalling, and, to ignorant men, mysterious
nature, have played a very large part in the history of superstition, were
frequent and terrible in the Asiatic provinces, and in three or four
instances the persecution of the Christians may be distinctly traced to
the fanaticism they produced.

There is no part of ecclesiastical history more curious than the effects
of this belief in alternately assisting or impeding the progress of
different Churches. In the first three centuries of Christian history, it
was the cause of fearful sufferings to the faith; but even then the
Christians usually accepted the theory of their adversaries, though they
differed concerning its application. Tertullian and Cyprian strongly
maintained, sometimes that the calamities were due to the anger of the
Almighty against idolatry, sometimes that they were intended to avenge the
persecution of the truth. A collection was early made of men who, having
been hostile to the Christian faith, had died by some horrible death, and
their deaths were pronounced to be Divine punishments.(778) The victory
which established the power of the first Christian emperor, and the sudden
death of Arius, were afterwards accepted as decisive proofs of the truth
of Christianity, and of the falsehood of Arianism.(779) But soon the
manifest signs of the dissolution of the Empire revived the zeal of the
Pagans, who began to reproach themselves for their ingratitude to their
old gods, and who recognised in the calamities of their country the
vengeance of an insulted Heaven. When the altar of Victory was removed
contemptuously from the Senate, when the sacred college of the vestals was
suppressed, when, above all, the armies of Alaric encircled the Imperial
city, angry murmurs arose which disturbed the Christians in their triumph.
The standing-point of the theologians was then somewhat altered. St.
Ambrose dissected with the most unsparing rationalism the theory that
ascribed the national decline to the suppression of the vestals, traced it
to all its consequences, and exposed all its absurdities. Orosius wrote
his history to prove that great misfortunes had befallen the Empire before
its conversion. Salvian wrote his treatise on Providence to prove that the
barbarian invasions were a Divine judgment on the immorality of the
Christians. St. Augustine concentrated all his genius on a great work,
written under the impression of the invasion of Alaric, and intended to
prove that “the city of God” was not on earth, and that the downfall of
the Empire need therefore cause no disquietude to the Christians. St.
Gregory the Great continually represented the calamities of Italy as
warnings foreboding the destruction of the world. When Rome sank finally
before the barbarian hosts, it would seem as though the doctrine that
temporal success was the proof of Divine favour must be finally abandoned.
But the Christian clergy disengaged their cause from that of the ruined
Empire, proclaimed its downfall to be a fulfilment of prophecy and a
Divine judgment, confronted the barbarian conquerors in all the majesty of
their sacred office, and overawed them in the very moment of their
victory. In the conversion of the uncivilised tribes, the doctrine of
special intervention occupied a commanding place. The Burgundians, when
defeated by the Huns, resolved, as a last resource, to place themselves
under the protection of the Roman God whom they vaguely believed to be the
most powerful, and the whole nation in consequence embraced
Christianity.(780) In a critical moment of a great battle, Clovis invoked
the assistance of the God of his wife. The battle was won, and he, with
many thousands of Franks, was converted to the faith.(781) In England, the
conversion of Northumbria was partly, and the conversion of Mercia was
mainly, due to the belief that the Divine interposition had secured the
victory of a Christian king.(782) A Bulgarian prince was driven into the
Church by the terror of a pestilence, and he speedily effected the
conversion of his subjects.(783) The destruction of so many shrines, and
the defeat of so many Christian armies, by the followers of Mohammed; the
disastrous and ignominious overthrow of the Crusaders, who went forth
protected by all the blessings of the Church, were unable to impair the
belief. All through the middle ages, and for some centuries after the
middle ages had passed, every startling catastrophe was regarded as a
punishment, or a warning, or a sign of the approaching termination of the
world. Churches and monasteries were built. Religious societies were
founded. Penances were performed. Jews were massacred, and a long
catalogue might be given of the theories by which men attempted to connect
every vicissitude of fortune, and every convulsion of nature, with the
wranglings of theologians. Thus, to give but a few examples: St. Ambrose
confidently asserted that the death of Maximus was a consequence of the
crime he had committed in compelling the Christians to rebuild a Jewish
synagogue they had destroyed.(784) One of the laws in the Justinian code,
directed against the Jews, Samaritans, and Pagans, expressly attributes to
them the sterility of the soil, which in an earlier age the Pagans had so
often attributed to the Christians.(785) A volcanic eruption that broke
out at the commencement of the iconoclastic persecution was adduced as a
clear proof that the Divine anger was aroused, according to one party, by
the hostility of the emperor to the sacred images; according to the other
party, by his sinful hesitation in extirpating idolatry.(786) Bodin, in a
later age, considered that the early death of the sovereign who commanded
the massacre of St. Bartholomew was due to what he deemed the master crime
of that sovereign’s reign. He had spared the life of a famous
sorcerer.(787) In the struggles that followed the Reformation, physical
calamities were continually ascribed in one age to the toleration, in
another to the endowment, of either heresy or Popery.(788) Sometimes,
however, they were traced to the theatre, and sometimes to the writings of
freethinkers. But gradually, and almost insensibly, these notions faded
away. The old language is often heard, but it is no longer realised and
operative, and the doctrine which played so large a part in the history of
the world has ceased to exercise any appreciable influence upon the
actions of mankind.

In addition to this religious motive, which acted chiefly upon the vulgar,
there was a political motive which rendered Christianity obnoxious to the
educated. The Church constituted a vast, highly organised, and in many
respects secret society, and as such was not only distinctly illegal, but
was also in the very highest degree calculated to excite the apprehensions
of the Government. There was no principle in the Imperial policy more
stubbornly upheld than the suppression of all corporations that might be
made the nuclei of revolt. The extent to which this policy was carried is
strikingly evinced by a letter from Trajan to Pliny, in which the emperor
forbade the formation even of a guild of firemen, on the ground that they
would constitute an association and hold meetings.(789) In such a state of
feeling, the existence of a vast association, governed by countless
functionaries, shrouding its meetings and some of its doctrines in
impenetrable obscurity, evoking a degree of attachment and devotion
greater than could be elicited by the State, ramifying through the whole
extent of the empire, and restlessly extending its influence, would
naturally arouse the strongest apprehension. That it did so is clearly
recognised by the Christian apologists, who, however, justly retorted upon
the objectors the impossibility of showing a single instance in which, in
an age of continual conspiracies, the numerous and persecuted Christians
had proved disloyal. Whatever we may think of their doctrine of passive
obedience, it is impossible not to admire the constancy with which they
clung to it, when all their interests were the other way. But yet the
Pagans were not altogether wrong in regarding the new association as fatal
to the greatness of the Empire. It consisted of men who regarded the Roman
Empire as a manifestation of Antichrist, and who looked forward with
passionate longing to its destruction. It substituted a new enthusiasm for
that patriotism which was the very life-blood of the national existence.
Many of the Christians deemed it wrong to fight for their country. All of
them aspired to a type of character, and were actuated by hopes and
motives, wholly inconsistent with that proud martial ardour by which the
triumphs of Rome had been won, and by which alone her impending ruin could
be averted.

The aims and principles of this association were very imperfectly
understood. The greatest and best of the Pagans spoke of it as a hateful
superstition, and the phrase they most frequently reiterated, when
speaking of its members, was “enemies” or “haters of the human race.” Such
a charge, directed persistently against men whose main principle was the
supreme excellence of love, and whose charity unquestionably rose far
above that of any other class, was probably due in the first place to the
unsocial habits of the converts, who deemed it necessary to abstain from
all the forms of public amusement, to refuse to illuminate their houses,
or hang garlands from their portals in honour of the national triumphs,
and who somewhat ostentatiously exhibited themselves as separate and alien
from their countrymen. It may also have arisen from a knowledge of the
popular Christian doctrine about the future destiny of Pagans. When the
Roman learnt what fate the Christian assigned to the heroes and sages of
his nation, and to the immense mass of his living fellow-countrymen, when
he was told that the destruction of the once glorious Empire to which he
belonged was one of the most fervent aspirations of the Church, his
feelings were very likely to clothe themselves in such language as I have
cited.

But, in addition to the general charges, specific accusations(790) of the
grossest kind were directed against Christian morals. At a time when the
moral standard was very low, they were charged with deeds so atrocious as
to scandalise the most corrupt. They were represented as habitually, in
their secret assemblies, celebrating the most licentious orgies, feeding
on human flesh, and then, the lights having been extinguished, indulging
in promiscuous, and especially in incestuous, intercourse. The persistence
with which these accusations were made is shown by the great prominence
they occupy, both in the writings of the apologists and in the narrations
of the persecutions. That these charges were absolutely false will now be
questioned by no one. The Fathers were long able to challenge their
adversaries to produce a single instance in which any other crime than his
faith was proved against a martyr, and they urged with a just and noble
pride that whatever doubt there might be of the truth of the Christian
doctrines, or of the Divine origin of the Christian miracles, there was at
least no doubt that Christianity had transformed the characters of
multitudes, vivified the cold heart by a new enthusiasm, redeemed,
regenerated, and emancipated the most depraved of mankind. Noble lives,
crowned by heroic deaths, were the best arguments of the infant
Church.(791) Their enemies themselves not unfrequently acknowledged it.
The love shown by the early Christians to their suffering brethren has
never been more emphatically attested than by Lucian,(792) or the
beautiful simplicity of their worship than by Pliny,(793) or their ardent
charity than by Julian.(794) There was, it is true, another side to the
picture; but even when the moral standard of Christians was greatly
lowered, it was lowered only to that of the community about them.

These calumnies were greatly encouraged by the ecclesiastical rule, which
withheld from the unbaptised all knowledge of some of the more mysterious
doctrines of the Church, and veiled, at least, one of its ceremonies in
great obscurity. Vague rumours about the nature of that sacramental feast,
to which none but the baptised Christian was suffered to penetrate, and
which no ecclesiastic was permitted to explain either to the catechumens
or to the world, were probably the origin of the charge of cannibalism;
while the Agapæ or love feasts, the ceremony of the kiss of love, and the
peculiar and, to the Pagans, perhaps unintelligible, language in which the
Christians proclaimed themselves one body and fellow-members in Christ,
may have suggested the other charges. The eager credulity with which
equally baseless accusations against the Jews were for centuries believed,
illustrates the readiness with which they were accepted, and the extremely
imperfect system of police which rendered the verification of secret
crimes very difficult, had no doubt greatly enlarged the sphere of
calumny. But, in addition to these considerations, the orthodox were in
some respects exceedingly unfortunate. In the eyes of the Pagans they were
regarded as a sect of Jews; and the Jews, on account of their continual
riots, their inextinguishable hatred of the Gentile world,(795) and the
atrocities that frequently accompanied their rebellions, had early excited
the anger and the contempt of the Pagans. On the other hand, the Jew, who
deemed the abandonment of the law the most heinous of crimes, and whose
patriotism only shone with a fiercer flame amid the calamities of his
nation, regarded the Christian with an implacable hostility. Scorned or
hated by those around him, his temple levelled with the dust, and the last
vestige of his independence destroyed, he clung with a desperate tenacity
to the hopes and privileges of his ancient creed. In his eyes the
Christians were at once apostates and traitors. He could not forget that
in the last dark hour of his country’s agony, when the armies of the
Gentile encompassed Jerusalem, and when the hosts of the faithful flocked
to its defence, the Christian Jews had abandoned the fortunes of their
race, and refused to bear any part in the heroism and the sufferings of
the closing scene. They had proclaimed that the promised Messiah, who was
to restore the faded glories of Israel, had already come; that the
privileges which were so long the monopoly of a single people had passed
to the Gentile world; that the race which was once supremely blest was for
all future time to be accursed among mankind. It is not, therefore,
surprising that there should have arisen between the two creeds an
animosity which Paganism could never rival. While the Christians viewed
with too much exultation the calamities that fell upon the prostrate
people,(796) whose cup of bitterness they were destined through long
centuries to fill to the brim, the Jews laboured with unwearied hatred to
foment by calumnies the passions of the Pagan multitude.(797) On the other
hand, the Catholic Christians showed themselves extremely willing to draw
down the sword of the persecutor upon the heretical sects. When the Pagans
accused the Christians of indulging in orgies of gross licentiousness, the
first apologist, while repudiating the charge, was careful to add, of the
heretics, “Whether or not these people commit those shameful and fabulous
acts, the putting out the lights, indulging in promiscuous intercourse,
and eating human flesh, I know not.”(798) In a few years the language of
doubt and insinuation was exchanged for that of direct assertion; and, if
we may believe St. Irenæus and St. Clement of Alexandria, the followers of
Carpocrates, the Marcionites, and some other Gnostic sects, habitually
indulged, in their secret meetings, in acts of impurity and licentiousness
as hideous and as monstrous as can be conceived, and their conduct was one
of the causes of the persecution of the orthodox.(799) Even the most
extravagant charges of the Pagan populace were reiterated by the Fathers
in their accusations of the Gnostics. St. Epiphanius, in the fourth
century, assures us that some of their sects were accustomed to kill, to
dress with spices, and to eat the children born of their promiscuous
intercourse.(800) The heretics, in their turn, gladly accused the
Catholics;(801) while the Roman judge, in whose eyes Judaism, orthodox
Christianity, and heresy were but slightly differing modifications of one
despicable superstition, doubtless found in this interchange of
accusations a corroboration of his prejudices.

Another cause of the peculiar animosity felt against the Christians was
the constant interference with domestic life, arising from the great
number of female conversions. The Christian teacher was early noted for
his unrivalled skill in playing on the chords of a woman’s heart.(802) The
graphic title of “Earpicker of ladies,”(803) which was given to a
seductive pontiff of a somewhat later period, might have been applied to
many in the days of the persecution; and to the Roman, who regarded the
supreme authority of the head of the family, in all religious matters, as
the very foundation of domestic morality, no character could appear more
infamous or more revolting. “A wife,” said Plutarch, expressing the
deepest conviction of the Pagan world, “should have no friends but those
of her husband; and, as the gods are the first of friends, she should know
no gods but those whom her husband adores. Let her shut the door, then,
against idle religions and foreign superstitions. No god can take pleasure
in sacrifices offered by a wife without the knowledge of her
husband.”(804) But these principles, upon which the whole social system of
Paganism had rested, were now disregarded. Wives in multitudes deserted
their homes to frequent the nocturnal meetings(805) of a sect which was
looked upon with the deepest suspicion, and was placed under the ban of
the law. Again and again, the husband, as he laid his head on the pillow
by his wife, had the bitterness of thinking that all her sympathies were
withdrawn from him; that her affections belonged to an alien priesthood
and to a foreign creed; that, though she might discharge her duties with a
gentle and uncomplaining fidelity, he had for ever lost the power of
touching her heart—he was to her only as an outcast, as a brand prepared
for the burning. Even to a Christian mind there is a deep pathos in the
picture which St. Augustine has drawn of the broken-hearted husband
imploring the assistance of the gods, and receiving from the oracle the
bitter answer: “You may more easily write in enduring characters on the
wave, or fly with feathers through the air, than purge the mind of a woman
when once tainted by the superstition.”(806)

I have already noticed the prominence which the practice of exorcism had
acquired in the early Church, the contempt with which it was regarded by
the more philosophic Pagans, and the law which had been directed against
its professors. It is not, however, probable that this practice, though it
lowered the Christians in the eyes of the educated as much as it elevated
them in the eyes of the populace, had any appreciable influence in
provoking persecution. In the crowd of superstitions that were invading
the Roman Empire, exorcism had a prominent place; all such practices were
popular with the masses; the only form of magic which under the Empire was
seriously persecuted was political astrology or divination with a view to
discovering the successors to the throne, and of this the Christians were
never accused.(807) There was, however, another form of what was deemed
superstition connected with the Church, which was regarded by Pagan
philosophers with a much deeper feeling of aversion. To agitate the minds
of men with religious terrorism, to fill the unknown world with hideous
images of suffering, to govern the reason by alarming the imagination, was
in the eyes of the Pagan world one of the most heinous of crimes.(808)
These fears were to the ancients the very definition of superstition, and
their destruction was a main object both of the Epicurean and of the
Stoic. To men holding such sentiments, it is easy to perceive how
obnoxious must have appeared religious teachers who maintained that an
eternity of torture was reserved for the entire human race then existing
in the world, beyond the range of their own community, and who made the
assertion of this doctrine one of their main instruments of success.(809)
Enquiry, among the early theologians, was much less valued than
belief,(810) and reason was less appealed to than fear. In philosophy the
most comprehensive, but in theology the most intolerant, system is
naturally the strongest. To weak women, to the young, the ignorant, and
the timid, to all, in a word, who were doubtful of their own judgment, the
doctrine of exclusive salvation must have come with an appalling power;
and, as no other religion professed it, it supplied the Church with an
invaluable vantage-ground, and doubtless drove multitudes into its pale.
To this doctrine we may also, in a great degree, ascribe the agony of
terror that was so often displayed by the apostate, whose flesh shrank
from the present torture, but who was convinced that the weakness he could
not overcome would be expiated by an eternity of torment.(811) To the
indignation excited by such teaching was probably due a law of Marcus
Aurelius, which decreed that “if any one shall do anything whereby the
weak minds of any may be terrified by superstitious fear, the offender
shall be exiled into an island.”(812)

There can, indeed, be little doubt that a chief cause of the hostility
felt against the Christian Church was the intolerant aspect it at that
time displayed. The Romans were prepared to tolerate almost any form of
religion that would tolerate others. The Jews, though quite as obstinate
as the Christians in refusing to sacrifice to the emperor, were rarely
molested, except in the periods immediately following their insurrections,
because Judaism, however exclusive and unsocial, was still an unaggressive
national faith. But the Christian teachers taught that all religions,
except their own and that of the Jews, were constructed by devils, and
that all who dissented from their Church must be lost. It was impossible
that men strung to the very highest pitch of religious excitement, and
imagining they saw in every ceremony and oracle the direct working of a
present dæmon, could restrain their zeal, or respect in any degree the
feelings of others. Proselytising with an untiring energy, pouring a
fierce stream of invective and ridicule upon the gods on whose favour the
multitude believed all national prosperity to depend, not unfrequently
insulting the worshippers, and defacing the idols,(813) they soon stung
the Pagan devotees to madness, and convinced them that every calamity that
fell upon the empire was the righteous vengeance of the gods. Nor was the
sceptical politician more likely to regard with favour a religion whose
development was plainly incompatible with the whole religious policy of
the Empire. The new Church, as it was then organised, must have appeared
to him essentially, fundamentally, necessarily intolerant. To permit it to
triumph was to permit the extinction of religious liberty in an empire
which comprised all the leading nations of the world, and tolerated all
their creeds. It was indeed true that in the days of their distress the
apologists proclaimed, in high and eloquent language, the iniquity of
persecution, and the priceless value of a free worship; but it needed no
great sagacity to perceive that the language of the dominant Church would
be very different. The Pagan philosopher could not foresee the ghastly
histories of the Inquisition, of the Albigenses, or of St. Bartholomew;
but he could scarcely doubt that the Christians, when in the ascendant,
would never tolerate rites which they believed to be consecrated to
devils, or restrain, in the season of their power, a religious animosity
which they scarcely bridled when they were weak. It needed no prophetic
inspiration to anticipate the time, that so speedily arrived, when, amid
the wailings of the worshippers, the idols and the temples were shattered,
and when all who practised the religious ceremonies of their forefathers
were subject to the penalty of death.

There has probably never existed upon earth a community whose members were
bound to one another by a deeper or a purer affection than the Christians,
in the days of the persecution. There has probably never existed a
community which exhibited in its dealings with crime a gentler or more
judicious kindness, which combined more happily an unflinching opposition
to sin with a boundless charity to the sinner, and which was in
consequence more successful in reclaiming and transforming the most
vicious of mankind. There has, however, also never existed a community
which displayed more clearly the intolerance that would necessarily follow
its triumph. Very early tradition has related three anecdotes of the
apostle John which illustrate faithfully this triple aspect of the Church.
It is said that when the assemblies of the Christians thronged around him
to hear some exhortation from his lips, the only words he would utter
were, “My little children, love one another;” for in this, he said, is
comprised the entire law. It is said that a young man he had once confided
to the charge of a bishop, having fallen into the ways of vice, and become
the captain of a band of robbers, the apostle, on hearing of it, bitterly
reproached the negligence of the pastor, and, though in extreme old age,
betook himself to the mountains till he had been captured by the robbers,
when, falling with tears on the neck of the chief, he restored him to the
path of virtue. It is said that the same apostle, once seeing the heretic
Cerinthus in an establishment of baths into which he had entered,
immediately rushed forth, fearing lest the roof should fall because a
heretic was beneath it.(814) All that fierce hatred which during the Arian
and Donatist controversies convulsed the Empire, and which in later times
has deluged the world with blood, may be traced in the Church long before
the conversion of Constantine. Already, in the second century, it was the
rule that the orthodox Christian should hold no conversation, should
interchange none of the most ordinary courtesies of life, with the
excommunicated or the heretic.(815) Common sufferings were impotent to
assuage the animosity, and the purest and fondest relations of life were
polluted by the new intolerance. The Decian persecution had scarcely
closed, when St. Cyprian wrote his treatise to maintain that it is no more
possible to be saved beyond the limits of the Church, than it was during
the deluge beyond the limits of the ark; that martyrdom itself has no
power to efface the guilt of schism; and that the heretic, who for his
master’s cause expired in tortures upon the earth, passed at once, by that
master’s decree, into an eternity of torment in hell!(816) Even in the
arena the Catholic martyrs withdrew from the Montanists, lest they should
be mingled with the heretics in death.(817) At a later period St.
Augustine relates that, when he was a Manichean, his mother for a time
refused even to eat at the same table with her erring child.(818) When St.
Ambrose not only defended the act of a Christian bishop, who had burnt
down a synagogue of the Jews, but denounced as a deadly crime the decree
of the Government which ordered it to be rebuilt;(819) when the same
saint, in advocating the plunder of the vestal virgins, maintained the
doctrine that it is criminal for a Christian State to grant any endowment
to the ministers of any religion but his own,(820) which it has needed all
the efforts of modern liberalism to efface from legislation, he was but
following in the traces of those earlier Christians, who would not even
wear a laurel crown,(821) or join in the most innocent civic festival,
lest they should appear in some indirect way to be acquiescing in the
Pagan worship. While the apologists were maintaining against the Pagan
persecutors the duty of tolerance, the Sibylline books, which were the
popular literature of the Christians, were filled with passionate
anticipations of the violent destruction of the Pagan temples.(822) And no
sooner had Christianity mounted the throne than the policy they
foreshadowed became ascendant. The indifference or worldly sagacity of
some of the rulers, and the imposing number of the Pagans, delayed, no
doubt, the final consummation; but, from the time of Constantine,
restrictive laws were put in force, the influence of the ecclesiastics was
ceaselessly exerted in their favour, and no sagacious man could fail to
anticipate the speedy and absolute proscription of the Pagan worship. It
is related of the philosopher Antoninus, the son of the Pagan prophetess
Sospitra, that, standing one day with his disciples before that noble
temple of Serapis, at Alexandria, which was one of the wonders of ancient
art, and which was destined soon after to perish by the rude hands of the
Christian monks, the prophetic spirit of his mother fell upon him. Like
another prophet before another shrine, he appalled his hearers by the
prediction of the approaching ruin. The time would come, he said, when the
glorious edifice before them would be overthrown, the carved images would
be defaced, the temples of the gods would be turned into the sepulchres of
the dead, and a great darkness would fall upon mankind!(823)

And, besides the liberty of worship, the liberty of thought and of
expression, which was the supreme attainment of Roman civilisation, was in
peril. The new religion, unlike that which was disappearing, claimed to
dictate the opinions as well as the actions of men, and its teachers
stigmatised as an atrocious crime the free expression of every opinion on
religious matters diverging from their own. Of all the forms of liberty,
it was this which lasted the longest, and was the most dearly prized. Even
after Constantine, the Pagans Libanius, Themistius, Symmachus, and Sallust
enforced their views with a freedom that contrasts remarkably with the
restraints imposed upon their worship, and the beautiful friendships of
St. Basil and Libanius, of Synesius and Hypatia, are among the most
touching episodes of their time. But though the traditions of Pagan
freedom, and the true catholicism of Justin Martyr and Origen, lingered
long, it was inevitable that error, being deemed criminal, should be made
penal. The dogmatism of Athanasius and Augustine, the increasing power of
the clergy, and the fanaticism of the monks, hastened the end. The
suppression of all religions but one by Theodosius, the murder of Hypatia
at Alexandria by the monks of Cyril, and the closing by Justinian of the
schools of Athens, are the three events which mark the decisive overthrow
of intellectual freedom. A thousand years had rolled away before that
freedom was in part restored.

The considerations I have briefly enumerated should not in the smallest
degree detract from the admiration due to the surpassing courage, to the
pure, touching, and sacred virtues of the Christian martyrs; but they in
some degree palliate the conduct of the persecutors, among whom must be
included one emperor, who was probably, on the whole, the best and most
humane sovereign who has ever sat upon a throne, and at least two others,
who were considerably above the average of virtue. When, combined with the
indifference to human suffering, the thirst for blood, which the
spectacles of the amphitheatre had engendered, they assuredly make the
persecutions abundantly explicable. They show that if it can be proved
that Christian persecutions sprang from the doctrine of exclusive
salvation, the fact that the Roman Pagans, who did not hold that doctrine,
also persecuted, need not cause the slightest perplexity. That the
persecutions of Christianity by the Roman emperors, severe as they
undoubtedly were, were not of such a continuous nature as wholly to
counteract the vast moral, social, and intellectual agencies that were
favourable to its spread, a few dates will show.

We have seen that when the Egyptian rites were introduced into Rome, they
were met by prompt and energetic measures of repression; that these
measures were again and again repeated, but that at last, when they proved
ineffectual, the governors desisted from their opposition, and the new
worship assumed a recognised place. The history of Christianity, in its
relation to the Government, is the reverse of this. Its first introduction
into Rome appears to have been altogether unopposed. Tertullian asserts
that Tiberius, on the ground of a report from Pontius Pilate, desired to
enrol Christ among the Roman gods, but that the Senate rejected the
proposal; but this assertion, which is altogether unsupported by
trustworthy evidence, and is, intrinsically, extremely improbable, is now
generally recognised as false.(824) An isolated passage of Suetonius
states that in the time of Claudius “the Jews, being continually rioting,
at the instigation of a certain Chrestus,”(825) were expelled from the
city; but no Christian writer speaks of his co-religionists being
disturbed in this reign, while all, with a perfect unanimity, and with
great emphasis, describe Nero as the first persecutor. His persecution
began at the close of A.D. 64.(826) It was directed against Christians,
not ostensibly on the ground of their religion, but because they were
falsely accused of having set fire to Rome, and it is very doubtful
whether it extended beyond the city.(827) It had also this peculiarity,
that, being directed against the Christians not as Christians, but as
incendiaries, it was impossible to escape from it by apostasy. Within the
walls of Rome it raged with great fury. The Christians, who had been for
many years(828) proselytising without restraint in the great confluence of
nations, and amid the disintegration of old beliefs, had become a
formidable body. They were, we learn from Tacitus, profoundly unpopular;
but the hideous tortures to which Nero subjected them, and the conviction
that, whatever other crimes they might have committed, they were not
guilty of setting fire to the city, awoke general pity. Some of them, clad
in skins of wild beasts, were torn by dogs. Others, arrayed in shirts of
pitch, were burnt alive in Nero’s garden.(829) Others were affixed to
crosses. Great multitudes perished. The deep impression the persecution
made on the Christian mind is shown in the whole literature of the Sibyls,
which arose soon after, in which Nero is usually the central figure, and
by the belief, that lingered for centuries, that the tyrant was yet alive,
and would return once more as the immediate precursor of Antichrist, to
inflict the last great persecution upon the Church.(830)

Nero died A.D. 68. From that time, for at least twenty-seven years, the
Church enjoyed absolute repose. There is no credible evidence whatever of
the smallest interference with its freedom till the last year of the reign
of Domitian; and a striking illustration of the fearlessness with which it
exhibited itself to the world has been lately furnished in the discovery,
near Rome, of a large and handsome porch leading to a Christian catacomb,
built above ground between the reigns of Nero and Domitian, in the
immediate neighbourhood of one of the principal highways.(831) The long
reign of Domitian, though it may have been surpassed in ferocity, was
never surpassed in the Roman annals in the skilfulness and the persistence
of its tyranny. The Stoics and literary classes, who upheld the traditions
of political freedom, and who had already suffered much at the hands of
Vespasian, were persecuted with relentless animosity. Metius Modestus,
Arulenus Rusticus, Senecio, Helvidius, Dion Chrysostom, the younger
Priscus, Junius Mauricus, Artemidorus, Euphrates, Epictetus, Arria,
Fannia, and Gratilla were either killed or banished.(832) No measures,
however, appear to have been taken against the Christians till A.D. 95,
when a short and apparently not very severe persecution, concerning which
our information is both scanty and conflicting, was directed against them.
Of the special cause that produced it we are left in much doubt. Eusebius
mentions, on the not very trustworthy authority of Hegesippus, that the
emperor, having heard of the existence of the grandchildren of Judas, the
brother of Christ, ordered them to be brought before him, as being of the
family of David, and therefore possible pretenders to the throne; but on
finding that they were simple peasants, and that the promised kingdom of
which they spoke was a spiritual one, he dismissed them in peace, and
arrested the persecution he had begun.(833) A Pagan historian states that,
the finances of the Empire being exhausted by lavish expenditure in public
games, Domitian, in order to replenish his exchequer, resorted to a severe
and special taxation of the Jews; that some of these, in order to evade
the impost, concealed their worship, while others, who are supposed to
have been Christians, are described as following the Jewish rites without
being professed Jews.(834) Perhaps, however, the simplest explanation is
the truest, and the persecution may be ascribed to the antipathy which a
despot like Domitian must necessarily have felt to an institution which,
though it did not, like Stoicism, resist his policy, at least exercised a
vast influence altogether removed from his control. St. John, who was then
a very old man, is said to have been at this time exiled to Patmos.
Flavius Clemens, a consul, and a relative of the emperor, was put to
death. His wife, or, according to another account, his niece Domitilla,
was banished, according to one account, to the island of Pontia, according
to another, to the island of Pandataria, and many others were compelled to
accompany her into exile.(835) Numbers, we are told, “accused of
conversion to impiety or Jewish rites,” were condemned. Some were killed,
and others deprived of their offices.(836) Of the cessation of the
persecution there are two different versions. Tertullian(837) and
Eusebius(838) say that the tyrant speedily revoked his edict, and restored
those who had been banished; but according to Lactantius these measures
were not taken till after the death of Domitian,(839) and this latter
statement is corroborated by the assertion of Dion Cassius, that Nerva,
upon his accession, “absolved those who were accused of impiety, and
recalled the exiles.”(840)

When we consider the very short time during which this persecution lasted,
and the very slight notice that was taken of it, we may fairly, I think,
conclude that it was not of a nature to check in any appreciable degree a
strong religious movement like that of Christianity. The assassination of
Domitian introduces us to the golden age of the Roman Empire. In the eyes
of the Pagan historian, the period from the accession of Nerva, in A.D.
96, to the death of Marcus Aurelius, in A.D. 180, is memorable as a period
of uniform good government, of rapidly advancing humanity, of great
legislative reforms, and of a peace which was very rarely seriously
broken. To the Christian historian it is still more remarkable, as one of
the most critical periods in the history of his faith. The Church entered
into it considerable indeed, as a sect, but not large enough to be
reckoned an important power in the Empire. It emerged from it so increased
in its numbers, and so extended in its ramifications, that it might fairly
defy the most formidable assaults. It remains, therefore, to be seen
whether the opposition against which, during these eighty-four years, it
had so successfully struggled was of such a kind and intensity that the
triumph must be regarded as a miracle.

Nearly at the close of this period, during the persecution of Marcus
Aurelius, St. Melito, Bishop of Sardis, wrote a letter of expostulation to
the emperor, in which he explicitly asserts that in Asia the persecution
of the pious was an event which “had never before occurred,” and was the
result of “new and strange decrees;” that the ancestors of the emperor
were accustomed to honour the Christian faith “like other religions;” and
that “Nero and Domitian alone” had been hostile to it.(841) Rather more
than twenty years later, Tertullian asserted, in language equally distinct
and emphatic, that the two persecutors of the Christians were Nero and
Domitian, and that it would be impossible to name a single good sovereign
who had molested them. Marcus Aurelius himself, Tertullian refuses to
number among the persecutors, and, even relying upon a letter which was
falsely imputed to him, enrols him among the protectors of the
Church.(842) About a century later, Lactantius, reviewing the history of
the persecutions, declared that the good sovereigns who followed Domitian
abstained from persecuting, and passes at once from the persecution of
Domitian to that of Decius. Having noticed the measures of the former
emperor, he proceeds: “The acts of the tyrant being revoked, the Church
was not only restored to its former state, but shone forth with a greater
splendour and luxuriance; and a period following in which many good
sovereigns wielded the Imperial sceptre, it suffered no assaults from its
enemies, but stretched out its hands to the east and to the west; ... but
at last the long peace was broken. After many years, that hateful monster
Decius arose, who troubled the Church.”(843)

We have here three separate passages, from which we may conclusively infer
that the normal and habitual condition of the Christians during the
eighty-four years we are considering, and, if we accept the last two
passages, during a much longer period, was a condition of peace, but that
peace was not absolutely unbroken. The Christian Church, which was at
first regarded simply as a branch of Judaism, had begun to be recognised
as a separate body, and the Roman law professedly tolerated only those
religions which were expressly authorised. It is indeed true that with the
extension of the Empire, and especially of the city, the theory, or at
least the practice, of religious legislation had been profoundly modified.
First of all, certain religions, of which the Jewish was one, were
officially recognised, and then many others, without being expressly
authorised, were tolerated. In this manner, all attempts to resist the
torrent of Oriental superstitions proving vain, the legislator had
desisted from his efforts, and every form of wild superstition was
practised with publicity and impunity. Still the laws forbidding them were
unrevoked, although they were suffered to remain for the most part
obsolete, or were at least only put in action on the occasion of some
special scandal, or of some real or apprehended political danger. The
municipal and provincial independence under the Empire was, however, so
large, that very much depended on the character of the local governor; and
it continually happened that in one province the Christians were
unmolested or favoured, while in the adjoining province they were severely
persecuted.

As we have already seen, the Christians had for many reasons become
profoundly obnoxious to the people. They shared the unpopularity of the
Jews, with whom they were confounded, while the general credence given to
the calumnies about the crimes said to have been perpetrated at their
secret meetings, their abstinence from public amusements, and the belief
that their hostility to the gods was the cause of every physical calamity,
were special causes of antipathy. The history of the period of the
Antonines continually manifests the desire of the populace to persecute,
restrained by the humanity of the rulers. In the short reign of Nerva
there appears to have been no persecution, and our knowledge of the
official proceedings with reference to the religion is comprised in two
sentences of a Pagan historian, who tells us that the emperor “absolved
those who had been convicted of impiety,” and “permitted no one to be
convicted of impiety or Jewish rites.” Under Trajan, however, some serious
though purely local disturbances took place. The emperor himself, though
one of the most sagacious, and in most respects humane of Roman
sovereigns, was nervously jealous of any societies or associations among
his subjects, and had propounded a special edict against them; but the
persecution of the Christians appears to have been not so much political
as popular. If we may believe Eusebius, local persecutions, apparently of
the nature of riots, but sometimes countenanced by provincial governors,
broke out in several quarters of the Empire. In Bithynia, Pliny the
Younger was the governor, and he wrote a very famous letter to Trajan, in
which he professed himself absolutely ignorant of the proceedings to be
taken against the Christians, who had already so multiplied that the
temples were deserted, and who were arraigned in great numbers before his
tribunal. He had, he says, released those who consented to burn incense
before the image of the emperor, and to curse Christ, but had caused those
to be executed who persisted in their refusal, and who were not Roman
citizens, “not doubting that a pertinacious obstinacy deserved
punishment.” He had questioned the prisoners as to the nature of their
faith, and had not hesitated to seek revelations by torturing two
maid-servants, but had “discovered nothing but a base and immoderate
superstition.” He had asked the nature of their secret services, and had
been told that they assembled on a certain day before dawn to sing a hymn
to Christ as to a god; that they made a vow to abstain from every crime,
and that they then, before parting, partook together of a harmless feast,
which, however, they had given up since the decree against associations.
To this letter Trajan answered that Christians, if brought before the
tribunals and convicted, should be punished, but that they should not be
sought for; that, if they consented to sacrifice, no inquisition should be
made into their past lives, and that no anonymous accusations should be
received against them.(844) In this reign there are two authentic
instances of martyrdom.(845) Simeon, Bishop of Jerusalem, a man, it is
said, one hundred and twenty years old, having been accused by the
heretics, was tortured during several days, and at last crucified.
Ignatius, the Bishop of Antioch, was arrested, brought to Rome, and, by
the order of Trajan himself, thrown to wild beasts. Of the cause of this
last act of severity we are left in ignorance, but it has been noticed
that about this time Antioch had been the scene of one of those violent
earthquakes which so frequently produced an outburst of religious
excitement,(846) and the character of Ignatius, who was passionately
desirous of martyrdom, may have very probably led him to some act of
exceptional zeal. The letters of the martyr prove that at Rome the faith
was openly and fearlessly professed; the Government during the nineteen
years of this reign never appears to have taken any initiative against the
Christians, and, in spite of occasional local tumults, there was nothing
resembling a general persecution.

During the two following reigns, the Government was more decidedly
favourable to the Christians. Hadrian, having heard that the populace at
the public games frequently called for their execution, issued an edict in
which he commanded that none should be punished simply in obedience to the
outcries against them, or without a formal trial and a conviction of some
offence against the law, and he ordered that all false accusers should be
punished.(847) His disposition towards the Christians was so pacific as to
give rise to a legend that he intended to enrol Christ among the
gods;(848) but it is probable that, although curious on religious matters,
he regarded Christianity with the indifference of a Roman freethinker; and
a letter is ascribed to him in which he confounded it with the worship of
Serapis.(849) As far as the Government were concerned, the Christians
appear to have been entirely unmolested; but many of them suffered
dreadful tortures at the hands of the Jewish insurgents, who in this
reign, with a desperate but ill-fated heroism, made one last effort to
regain their freedom.(850) The mutual hostility exhibited at this time by
the Jews and Christians contributed to separate them in the eyes of the
Pagans, and it is said that when Hadrian forbade the Jews ever again to
enter Jerusalem, he recognised the distinction by granting a full
permission to the Christians.(851)

Antoninus, who succeeded Hadrian, made new efforts to restrain the
passions of the people against the Christians. He issued an edict
commanding that they should not be molested, and when, as a consequence of
some earthquakes in Asia Minor, the popular anger was fiercely roused, he
commanded that their accusers should be punished.(852) If we except these
riots, the twenty-three years of his reign appear to have been years of
absolute peace, which seems also to have continued during several years of
the reign of Marcus Aurelius; but at last persecuting edicts, of the exact
nature of which we have no knowledge, were issued. Of the reasons which
induced one of the best men who have ever reigned to persecute the
Christians, we know little or nothing. That it was not any ferocity of
disposition or any impatience of resistance may be confidently asserted of
one whose only fault was a somewhat excessive gentleness—who, on the death
of his wife, asked the Senate, as a single favour, to console him by
sparing the lives of those who had rebelled against him. That it was not,
as has been strangely urged, a religious fanaticism resembling that which
led St. Lewis to persecute, is equally plain. St. Lewis persecuted because
he believed that to reject his religious opinions was a heinous crime, and
that heresy was the path to hell. Marcus Aurelius had no such belief, and
he, the first Roman emperor who made the Stoical philosophy his religion
and his comfort, was also the first emperor who endowed the professors of
the philosophies that were most hostile to his own. The fact that the
Christian Church, existing as a State within a State, with government,
ideals, enthusiasms, and hopes wholly different from those of the nation,
was incompatible with the existing system of the Empire, had become more
evident as the Church increased. The accusations of cannibalism and
incestuous impurity had acquired a greater consistency, and the latter are
said to have been justly applicable to the Carpocratian heretics, who had
recently arisen. The Stoicism of Marcus Aurelius may have revolted from
the practices of exorcism or the appeals to the terrors of another world,
and the philosophers who surrounded him probably stimulated his hostility,
for his master and friend Fronto had written a book against
Christianity,(853) while Justin Martyr is said to have perished by the
machinations of the Cynic Crescens.(854) It must be added, too, that,
while it is impossible to acquit the emperor of having issued severe
edicts against the Christians,(855) the atrocious details of the
persecutions in his reign were due to the ferocity of the populace and the
weakness of the governors in distant provinces; and it is inconceivable
that, if he had been a very bitter enemy of the Christians, Tertullian,
writing little more than twenty years later, should have been so ignorant
of the fact as to represent him as one of the most conspicuous of their
protectors.

But, whatever may be thought on these points, there can, unhappily, be no
question that in this reign Rome was stained by the blood of Justin
Martyr, the first philosopher, and one of the purest and gentlest natures
in the Church, and that persecution was widely extended. In two far
distant quarters, at Smyrna and at Lyons, it far exceeded in atrocity any
that Christianity had endured since Nero, and in each case a heroism of
the most transcendent order was displayed by the martyrs. The persecution
at Smyrna, in which St. Polycarp and many others most nobly died, took
place on the occasion of the public games, and we may trace the influence
of the Jews in stimulating it.(856) The persecution at Lyons, which was
one of the most atrocious in the whole compass of ecclesiastical history,
and which has supplied the martyrology with some of its grandest and most
pathetic figures, derived its worst features from a combination of the
fury of the populace and of the subserviency of the governor.(857) Certain
servants of the Christians, terrified by the prospect of torture, accused
their masters of all the crimes which popular report attributed to them,
of incest, of infanticide, of cannibalism, of hideous impurity. A fearful
outburst of ferocity ensued. Tortures almost too horrible to recount were
for hours and even days applied to the bodies of old men and of weak
women, who displayed amid their agonies a nobler courage than has ever
shone upon a battle-field, and whose memories are immortal among mankind.
Blandina and Pothinus wrote in blood the first page of the glorious
history of the Church of France.(858) But although, during the closing
years of Marcus Aurelius, severe persecutions took place in three or four
provinces, there was no general and organised effort to suppress
Christianity throughout the Empire.(859)

We may next consider, as a single period, the space of time that elapsed
from the death of Marcus Aurelius, in A.D. 180, to the accession of
Decius, A.D. 249. During all this time Christianity was a great and
powerful body, exercising an important influence, and during a great part
of it Christians filled high civil and military positions. The hostility
manifested towards them began now to assume a more political complexion
than it had previously done, except perhaps in the later years of Marcus
Aurelius. The existence of a vast and rapidly increasing corporation, very
alien to the system of the Empire, confronted every ruler. Emperors like
Commodus or Heliogabalus were usually too immersed in selfish pleasures to
have any distinct policy; but sagacious sovereigns, sincerely desiring the
well-being of the Empire, either, like Marcus Aurelius and Diocletian,
endeavoured to repress the rising creed, or, like Alexander Severus, and
at last Constantine, actively encouraged it. The measures Marcus Aurelius
had taken against Christianity were arrested under Commodus, whose
favourite mistress, Marcia, supplies one of the very few recorded
instances of female influence, which has been the cause of so much
persecution, being exerted in behalf of toleration;(860) yet a Christian
philosopher named Apollonius, and at the same time, by a curious
retribution, his accuser, were in this reign executed at Rome.(861) During
the sixty-nine years we are considering, the general peace of the Church
was only twice broken. The first occasion was in the reign of Septimus
Severus, who was for some time very favourable to the Christians, but who,
in A.D. 202 or 203, issued an edict, forbidding any Pagan to join the
Christian or Jewish faith;(862) and this edict was followed by a
sanguinary persecution in Africa and Syria, in which the father of Origen,
and also St. Felicitas and St. Perpetua, perished. This persecution does
not appear to have extended to the West, and was apparently rather the
work of provincial governors, who interpreted the Imperial edict as a sign
of hostility to the Christians, than the direct act of the emperor,(863)
whose decree applied only to Christians actively proselytising. It is
worthy of notice that Origen observed that previous to this time the
number of Christian martyrs had been very small.(864) The second
persecution was occasioned by the murder of Alexander Severus by
Maximinus. The usurper pursued with great bitterness the leading courtiers
of the deceased emperor, among whom were some Christian bishops,(865) and
about the same time severe earthquakes in Pontus and Cappadocia produced
the customary popular ebullitions. But with these exceptions the
Christians were undisturbed. Caracalla, Macrinus, and Heliogabalus took no
measures against them, while Alexander Severus, who reigned for thirteen
years, warmly and steadily supported them. A Pagan historian assures us
that this emperor intended to build temples in honour of Christ, but was
dissuaded by the priests, who urged that all the other temples would be
deserted. He venerated in his private oratory the statues of Apollonius of
Tyana, Abraham, Orpheus, and Christ. He decreed that the provincial
governors should not be appointed till the people had the opportunity of
declaring any crime they had committed, borrowing this rule avowedly from
the procedure of the Jews and Christians in electing their clergy; he
ordered the precept “Do not unto others what you would not that they
should do unto you” to be engraven on the palace and other public
buildings, and he decided a dispute concerning a piece of ground which the
Christians had occupied, and which the owners of certain eating-houses
claimed, in favour of the former, on the ground that the worship of a god
should be most considered.(866) Philip the Arab, who reigned during the
last five years of the period we are considering, was so favourable to the
Christians that he was believed, though on no trustworthy evidence, to
have been baptised.

We have now reviewed the history of the persecutions to the year A.D. 249,
or about two hundred years after the planting of Christianity in Rome. We
have seen that, although during that period much suffering was
occasionally endured, and much heroism displayed, by the Christians, there
was, with the very doubtful exception of the Neronian persecution, no
single attempt made to suppress Christianity throughout the Empire. Local
persecutions of great severity had taken place at Smyrna and Lyons, under
Marcus Aurelius; in Africa and some Asiatic provinces, under Severus;
popular tumults, arising in the excitement of the public games, or
produced by some earthquake or inundation, or by some calumnious
accusation, were not unfrequent; but there was at no time that continuous,
organised, and universal persecution by which, in later periods,
ecclesiastical tribunals have again and again suppressed opinions
repugnant to their own; and there was no part of the Empire in which whole
generations did not pass away absolutely undisturbed. No martyr had fallen
in Gaul or in great part of Asia Minor till Marcus Aurelius. In Italy,
after the death of Nero, with the exception of some slight troubles under
Domitian and Maximinus, probably due to causes altogether distinct from
religion, there were, during the whole period we are considering, only a
few isolated instances of martyrdom. The bishops, as the leaders of the
Church, were the special objects of hostility, and several in different
parts of the world had fallen; but it is extremely questionable whether
any Roman bishop perished after the apostolic age, till Fabianus was
martyred under Decius.(867) If Christianity was not formally authorised,
it was, like many other religions in a similar position, generally
acquiesced in, and, during a great part of the time we have reviewed, its
professors appear to have found no obstacles to their preferment in the
Court or in the army. The emperors were for the most part indifferent or
favourable to them. The priests in the Pagan society had but little
influence, and do not appear to have taken any prominent part in the
persecution till near the time of Diocletian. With the single exception of
the Jews, no class held that doctrine of the criminality of error which
has been the parent of most modern persecutions; and although the belief
that great calamities were the result of neglecting or insulting the gods
furnished the Pagans with a religious motive for persecution, this motive
only acted on the occasion of some rare and exceptional catastrophe.(868)
In Christian times, the first objects of the persecutor are to control
education, to prevent the publication of any heterodox works, to institute
such a minute police inspection as to render impossible the celebration of
the worship he desires to suppress. But nothing of this kind was
attempted, or indeed was possible, in the period we are considering. With
the exception of the body-guard of the emperor, almost the whole army,
which was of extremely moderate dimensions, was massed along the vast
frontier of the Empire. The police force was of the scantiest kind,
sufficient only to keep common order in the streets. The Government had
done something to encourage, but absolutely nothing to control, education,
and parents or societies were at perfect liberty to educate the young as
they pleased. The expansion of literature, by reason of the facilities
which slavery gave to transcription, was very great, and it was for the
most part entirely uncontrolled.(869) Augustus, it is true, had caused
some volumes of forged prophecies to be burnt,(870) and, under the tyranny
of Tiberius and Domitian, political writers and historians who eulogised
tyrannicide, or vehemently opposed the Empire, were persecuted; but the
extreme indignation these acts elicited attests their rarity, and, on
matters unconnected with politics, the liberty of literature was
absolute.(871) In a word, the Church proselytised in a society in which
toleration was the rule, and at a time when municipal, provincial, and
personal independence had reached the highest point, when the ruling
classes were for the most part absolutely indifferent to religious
opinions, and when an unprecedented concourse of influences facilitated
its progress.

When we reflect that these were the circumstances of the Church till the
middle of the third century, we may readily perceive the absurdity of
maintaining that Christianity was propagated in the face of such a fierce
and continuous persecution that no opinions could have survived it without
a miracle, or of arguing from the history of the early Church that
persecution never has any real efficacy in suppressing truth. When, in
addition to the circumstances under which it operated, we consider the
unexampled means both of attraction and of intimidation that were
possessed by the Church, we can have no difficulty in understanding that
it should have acquired a magnitude that would enable it to defy the far
more serious assaults it was still destined to endure. That it had
acquired this extension we have abundant evidence. The language I have
quoted from Lactantius is but a feeble echo of the emphatic statements of
writers before the Decian persecution.(872) “There is no race of men,
whether Greek or barbarian,” said Justin Martyr, “among whom prayers and
thanks are not offered up in the name of the crucified.”(873) “We are but
of yesterday,” cried Tertullian, “and we fill all your cities, islands,
forts, councils, even the camps themselves, the tribes, the decuries, the
palaces, the senate, and the forum.”(874) Eusebius has preserved a letter
of Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, containing a catalogue of the officers of
his Church at the time of the Decian persecution. It consisted of one
bishop, forty-six presbyters, seven deacons, seven subdeacons, forty-two
acolytes, fifty-two exorcists, readers, and janitors. The Church also
supported more than fifteen hundred widows, and poor or suffering
persons.(875)

The Decian persecution, which broke out in A.D. 249, and was probably
begun in hopes of restoring the Empire to its ancient discipline, and
eliminating from it all extraneous and unpatriotic influences,(876) is the
first example of a deliberate attempt, supported by the whole machinery of
provincial government, and extending over the entire surface of the
Empire, to extirpate Christianity from the world. It would be difficult to
find language too strong to paint its horrors. The ferocious instincts of
the populace, that were long repressed, burst out anew, and they were not
only permitted, but encouraged by the rulers. Far worse than the deaths
which menaced those who shrank from the idolatrous sacrifices, were the
hideous and prolonged tortures by which the magistrates often sought to
subdue the constancy of the martyr, the nameless outrages that were
sometimes inflicted on the Christian virgin.(877) The Church, enervated by
a long peace, and deeply infected with the vices of the age, tottered
beneath the blow. It had long since arrived at the period when men were
Christians not by conviction, but through family relationship; when the
more opulent Christians vied in luxury with the Pagans among whom they
mixed, and when even the bishops were, in many instances, worldly
aspirants after civil offices. It is not, therefore, surprising that the
defection was very large. The Pagans marked with triumphant ridicule, and
the Fathers with a burning indignation, the thousands who thronged to the
altars at the very commencement of persecution, the sudden collapse of the
most illustrious churches, the eagerness with which the offer of
provincial governors to furnish certificates of apostasy, without exacting
a compliance with the conditions which those certificates attested, was
accepted by multitudes.(878) The question whether those who abandoned the
faith should afterwards be readmitted to communion, became the chief
question that divided the Novatians, and one of the questions that divided
the Montanists from the Catholics, while the pretensions of the confessors
to furnish indulgences, remitting the penances imposed by the bishops, led
to a conflict which contributed very largely to establish the undisputed
ascendancy of the episcopacy. But the Decian persecution, though it
exhibits the Church in a somewhat less noble attitude than the
persecutions which preceded and which followed it, was adorned by many
examples of extreme courage and devotion, displayed in not a few cases by
those who were physically among the frailest of mankind. It was of a kind
eminently fitted to crush the Church. Had it taken place at an earlier
period, had it been continued for a long succession of years,
Christianity, without a miracle, must have perished. But the Decian
persecution fell upon a Church which had existed for two centuries, and it
lasted less than two years.(879) Its intensity varied much in different
provinces. In Alexandria and the neighbouring towns, where a popular
tumult had anticipated the menaces of the Government, it was extremely
horrible.(880) In Carthage, at first, the proconsul being absent, no
capital sentence was passed, but on the arrival of that functionary the
penalty of death, accompanied by dreadful tortures, was substituted for
that of exile or imprisonment.(881) The rage of the people was especially
directed against the bishop St. Cyprian, who prudently retired till the
storm had passed.(882) In general, it was observed that the object of the
rulers was much less to slay than to vanquish the Christians. Horrible
tortures were continually employed to extort an apostasy, and, when those
tortures proved vain, great numbers were ultimately released.

The Decian persecution is remarkable in Christian archæology as being, it
is believed, the first occasion in which the Christian catacombs were
violated. Those vast subterranean corridors, lined with tombs and
expanding very frequently into small chapels adorned with paintings, often
of no mean beauty, had for a long period been an inviolable asylum in
seasons of persecution. The extreme sanctity which the Romans were
accustomed to attach to the place of burial repelled the profane, and as
early, it is said, as the very beginning of the third century, the
catacombs were recognised as legal possessions of the Church.(883) The
Roman legislators, however unfavourable to the formation of guilds or
associations, made an exception in favour of burial societies, or
associations of men subscribing a certain sum to ensure to each member a
decent burial in ground which belonged to the corporation. The Church is
believed to have availed itself of this privilege, and to have attained,
in this capacity, a legal existence. The tombs, which were originally the
properties of distinct families, became in this manner an ecclesiastical
domain, and the catacombs were, from perhaps the first, made something
more than places of burial.(884) The chapels with which they abound, and
which are of the smallest dimensions and utterly unfit for general
worship, were probably mortuary chapels, and may have also been employed
in the services commemorating the martyrs, while the ordinary worship was
probably at first conducted in the private houses of the Christians. The
decision of Alexander Severus, which I have already noticed, is the
earliest notice we possess of the existence of buildings specially devoted
to the Christian services; but we cannot tell how long before this time
they may have existed in Rome.(885) In serious persecution, however, they
would doubtless have to be abandoned; and, as a last resort, the catacombs
proved a refuge from the persecutors.

The reign of Decius only lasted about two years, and before its close the
persecution had almost ceased.(886) On the accession of his son Gallus, in
the last month of A.D. 251, there was for a short time perfect peace; but
Gallus resumed the persecution in the spring of the following year, and
although apparently not very severe, or very general, it seems to have
continued to his death, which took place a year after.(887) Two Roman
bishops, Cornelius, who had succeeded the martyred Fabianus, and his
successor Lucius, were at this time put to death.(888) Valerian, who
ascended the throne A.D. 254, at first not only tolerated, but warmly
patronised the Christians, and attracted so many to his Court that his
house, in the language of a contemporary, appeared “the Church of the
Lord.”(889) But after rather more than four years his disposition changed.
At the persuasion, it is said, of an Egyptian magician, named Macrianus,
he signed in A.D. 258 an edict of persecution condemning Christian
ecclesiastics and senators to death, and other Christians to exile, or to
the forfeiture of their property, and prohibiting them from entering the
catacombs.(890) A sanguinary and general persecution ensued. Among the
victims were Sixtus, the Bishop of Rome, who perished in the
catacombs,(891) and Cyprian, who was exiled, and afterwards beheaded, and
was the first Bishop of Carthage who suffered martyrdom.(892) At last,
Valerian, having been captured by the Persians, Gallienus, in A.D. 260,
ascended the throne, and immediately proclaimed a perfect toleration of
the Christians.(893)

The period from the accession of Decius, in A.D. 249, to the accession of
Gallienus, in A.D. 260, which I have now very briefly noticed, was by far
the most disastrous the Church had yet endured. With the exception of
about five years in the reigns of Gallus and Valerian, the persecution was
continuous, though it varied much in its intensity and its range. During
the first portion, if measured, not by the number of deaths, but by the
atrocity of the tortures inflicted, it was probably as severe as any upon
record. It was subsequently directed chiefly against the leading clergy,
and, as we have seen, four Roman bishops perished. In addition to the
political reasons that inspired it, the popular fanaticism caused by great
calamities, which were ascribed to anger of the gods at the neglect of
their worship, had in this as in former periods a great influence.
Political disasters, which foreshadowed clearly the approaching downfall
of the Empire, were followed by fearful and general famines and plagues.
St. Cyprian, in a treatise addressed to one of the persecutors who was
most confident in ascribing these things to the Christians, presents us
with an extremely curious picture both of the general despondency that had
fallen upon the Empire, and of the manner in which these calamities were
regarded by the Christians. Like most of his co-religionists, the saint
was convinced that the closing scene of the earth was at hand. The
decrepitude of the world, he said, had arrived, the forces of nature were
almost exhausted, the sun had no longer its old lustre, or the soil its
old fertility, the spring time had grown less lovely, and the autumn less
bounteous, the energy of man had decayed, and all things were moving
rapidly to the end. Famines and plagues were the precursors of the day of
judgment. They were sent to warn and punish a rebellious world, which,
still bowing down before idols, persecuted the believers in the truth. “So
true is this, that the Christians are never persecuted without the sky
manifesting at once the Divine displeasure.” The conception of a converted
Empire never appears to have flashed across the mind of the saint;(894)
the only triumph he predicted for the Church was that of another world;
and to the threats of the persecutors he rejoined by fearful menaces. “A
burning, scorching fire will for ever torment those who are condemned;
there will be no respite or end to their torments. We shall through
eternity contemplate in their agonies those who for a short time
contemplated us in tortures, and for the brief pleasure which the
barbarity of our persecutors took in feasting their eyes upon an inhuman
spectacle, they will be themselves exposed as an eternal spectacle of
agony.” As a last warning, calamity after calamity broke upon the world,
and, with the solemnity of one on whom the shadow of death had already
fallen, St. Cyprian adjured the persecutors to repent and to be
saved.(895)

The accession of Gallienus introduced the Church to a new period of
perfect peace, which, with a single inconsiderable exception, continued
for no less than forty years. The exception was furnished by Aurelian, who
during nearly the whole of his reign had been exceedingly favourable to
the Christians, and had even been appealed to by the orthodox bishops, who
desired him to expel from Antioch a prelate they had excommunicated for
heresy,(896) but who, at the close of his reign, intended to persecute. He
was assassinated, however, according to one account, when he was just
about to sign the decrees; according to another, before they had been sent
through the provinces; and if any persecution actually took place, it was
altogether inconsiderable.(897) Christianity, during all this time, was
not only perfectly free, it was greatly honoured. Christians were
appointed governors of the provinces, and were expressly exonerated from
the duty of sacrificing. The bishops were treated by the civil authorities
with profound respect. The palaces of the emperor were filled with
Christian servants, who were authorised freely to profess their religion,
and were greatly valued for their fidelity. The popular prejudice seems to
have been lulled to rest; and it has been noticed that the rapid progress
of the faith excited no tumult or hostility. Spacious churches were
erected in every quarter, and they could scarcely contain the multitude of
worshippers.(898) In Rome itself, before the outburst of the Diocletian
persecution, there were no less than forty churches.(899) The Christians
may still have been outnumbered by the Pagans; but when we consider their
organisation, their zeal, and their rapid progress, a speedy triumph
appeared inevitable.

But before that triumph was achieved a last and a terrific ordeal was to
be undergone. Diocletian, whose name has been somewhat unjustly associated
with a persecution, the responsibility of which belongs far more to his
colleague Galerius, having left the Christians in perfect peace for nearly
eighteen years, suffered himself to be persuaded to make one more effort
to eradicate the foreign creed. This emperor, who had risen by his merits
from the humblest position, exhibited in all the other actions of his
reign a moderate, placable, and conspicuously humane nature, and, although
he greatly magnified the Imperial authority, the simplicity of his private
life, his voluntary abdication, and, above all, his singularly noble
conduct during many years of retirement, displayed a rare magnanimity of
character. As a politician, he deserves, I think, to rank very high.
Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius had been too fascinated by the traditions of
the Republic, and by the austere teaching and retrospective spirit of the
Stoics, to realise the necessity of adapting institutions to the wants of
a luxurious and highly civilised people, and they therefore had little
permanent influence upon the destinies of the Empire. But Diocletian
invariably exhibited in his legislation a far-seeing and comprehensive
mind, well aware of the condition of the society he ruled, and provident
of distant events. Perceiving that Roman corruption was incurable, he
attempted to regenerate the Empire by creating new centres of political
life in the great and comparatively unperverted capitals of the provinces;
and Nicomedia, which was his habitual residence, Carthage, Milan, and
Ravenna, all received abundant tokens of his favour. He swept away or
disregarded the obsolete and inefficient institutions of Republican
liberty that still remained, and indeed gave his government a somewhat
Oriental character; but, at the same time, by the bold, and, it must be
admitted, very perilous measure of dividing the Empire into four sections,
he abridged the power of each ruler, ensured the better supervision and
increased authority of the provinces, and devised the first effectual
check to those military revolts which had for some time been threatening
the Empire with anarchy. With the same energetic statesmanship, we find
him reorganising the whole system of taxation, and attempting, less
wisely, to regulate commercial transactions. To such an emperor, the
problem presented by the rapid progress and the profoundly anti-national
character of Christianity must have been a matter of serious
consideration, and the weaknesses of his character were most unfavourable
to the Church; for Diocletian, with many noble qualities of heart and
head, was yet superstitious, tortuous, nervous, and vacillating, and was
too readily swayed by the rude and ferocious soldier, who was impetuously
inciting him against the Christians.

The extreme passion which Galerius displayed on this subject is ascribed,
in the first instance, to the influence of his mother, who was ardently
devoted to the Pagan worship. He is himself painted in dark colours by the
Christian writers as a man of boundless and unbridled sensuality, of an
imperiousness that rose to fury at opposition, and of a cruelty which had
long passed the stage of callousness, and become a fiendish delight, in
the infliction and contemplation of suffering.(900) His strong attachment
to Paganism made him at length the avowed representative of his party,
which several causes had contributed to strengthen. The philosophy of the
Empire had by this time fully passed into its Neoplatonic and Pythagorean
phases, and was closely connected with religious observances. Hierocles
and Porphyry, who were among its most eminent exponents, had both written
books against Christianity, and the Oriental religions fostered much
fanaticism among the people. Political interests united with superstition,
for the Christians were now a very formidable body in the State. Their
interests were supposed to be represented by the Cæsar Constantius
Chlorus, and the religion was either adopted, or at least warmly favoured,
by the wife and daughter of Diocletian (the latter of whom was married to
Galerius(901)), and openly professed by some of the leading officials at
the Court. A magnificent church crowned the hill facing the palace of the
emperor at Nicomedia. The bishops were, in most cities, among the most
active and influential citizens, and their influence was not always
exercised for good. A few cases, in which an ill-considered zeal led
Christians to insult the Pagan worship, one or two instances of Christians
refusing to serve in the army, because they believed military life
repugnant to their creed, a scandalous relaxation of morals, that had
arisen during the long peace, and the fierce and notorious discord
displayed by the leaders of the Church, contributed in different ways to
accelerate the persecution.(902)

For a considerable time Diocletian resisted all the urgency of Galerius
against the Christians, and the only measure taken was the dismissal by
the latter sovereign of a number of Christian officers from the army. In
A.D. 303, however, Diocletian yielded to the entreaties of his colleague,
and a fearful persecution, which many circumstances conspired to
stimulate, began. The priests, in one of the public ceremonies, had
declared that the presence of Christians prevented the entrails from
showing the accustomed signs. The oracle of Apollo, at Miletus, being
consulted by Diocletian, exhorted him to persecute the Christians. A
fanatical Christian, who avowed his deed, and expiated it by a fearful
death, tore down the first edict of persecution, and replaced it by a
bitter taunt against the emperor. Twice, after the outburst of the
persecution, the palace at Nicomedia, where Diocletian and Galerius were
residing, was set on fire, and the act was ascribed, not without
probability, to a Christian hand, as were also some slight disturbances
that afterwards arose in Syria.(903) Edict after edict followed in rapid
succession. The first ordered the destruction of all Christian churches
and of all Bibles, menaced with death the Christians if they assembled in
secret for Divine worship, and deprived them of all civil rights. A second
edict ordered all ecclesiastics to be thrown into prison, while a third
edict ordered that these prisoners, and a fourth edict that all
Christians, should be compelled by torture to sacrifice. At first
Diocletian refused to permit their lives to be taken, but after the fire
at Nicomedia this restriction was removed. Many were burnt alive, and the
tortures by which the persecutors sought to shake their resolution were so
dreadful that even such a death seemed an act of mercy. The only province
of the Empire where the Christians were at peace was Gaul, which had
received its baptism of blood under Marcus Aurelius, but was now governed
by Constantius Chlorus, who protected them from personal molestation,
though he was compelled, in obedience to the emperor, to destroy their
churches. In Spain, which was also under the government, but not under the
direct inspection, of Constantius, the persecution was moderate, but in
all other parts of the Empire it raged with fierceness till the abdication
of Diocletian in 305. This event almost immediately restored peace to the
Western provinces,(904) but greatly aggravated the misfortunes of the
Eastern Christians, who passed under the absolute rule of Galerius.
Horrible, varied, and prolonged tortures were employed to quell their
fortitude, and their final resistance was crowned by the most dreadful of
all deaths, roasting over a slow fire. It was not till A.D. 311, eight
years after the commencement of the general persecution, ten years after
the first measure against the Christians, that the Eastern persecution
ceased. Galerius, the arch-enemy of the Christians, was struck down by a
fearful disease. His body, it is said, became a mass of loathsome and
fœtid sores—a living corpse, devoured by countless worms, and exhaling the
odour of the charnel-house. He who had shed so much innocent blood, shrank
himself from a Roman death. In his extreme anguish he appealed in turn to
physician after physician, and to temple after temple. At last he relented
towards the Christians. He issued a proclamation restoring them to
liberty, permitting them to rebuild their churches, and asking their
prayers for his recovery.(905) The era of persecution now closed. One
brief spasm, indeed, due to the Cæsar Maximian, shot through the long
afflicted Church of Asia Minor;(906) but it was rapidly allayed. The
accession of Constantine, the proclamation of Milan, A.D. 313, the defeat
of Licinius, and the conversion of the conqueror, speedily followed, and
Christianity became the religion of the Empire.

Such, so far as we can trace it, is the outline of the last and most
terrible persecution inflicted on the early Church. Unfortunately we can
place little reliance on any information we possess about the number of
its victims, the provocations that produced it, or the objects of its
authors. The ecclesiastical account of these matters is absolutely
unchecked by any Pagan statement, and it is derived almost exclusively
from the history of Eusebius, and from the treatise “On the Deaths of the
Persecutors,” which is ascribed to Lactantius. Eusebius was a writer of
great learning, and of critical abilities not below the very low level of
his time, and he had personal knowledge of some of the events in Palestine
which he has recorded; but he had no pretensions whatever to impartiality.
He has frankly told us that his principle in writing history was to
conceal the facts that were injurious to the reputation of the
Church;(907) and although his practice was sometimes better than his
principle, the portrait he has drawn of the saintly virtues of his patron
Constantine, which we are able to correct from other sources, abundantly
proves with how little scruple the courtly bishop could stray into the
paths of fiction. The treatise of Lactantius, which has been well termed
“a party pamphlet,” is much more untrustworthy. It is a hymn of exultation
over the disastrous ends of the persecutors, and especially of Galerius,
written in a strain of the fiercest and most passionate invective, and
bearing on every page unequivocal signs of inaccuracy and exaggeration.
The whole history of the early persecution was soon enveloped in a thick
cloud of falsehood. A notion, derived from prophecy, that ten great
persecutions must precede the day of judgment, at an early period
stimulated the imagination of the Christians, who believed that day to be
imminent; and it was natural that as time rolled on men should magnify the
sufferings that had been endured, and that in credulous and uncritical
ages a single real incident should be often multiplied, diversified, and
exaggerated in many distinct narratives. Monstrous fictions, such as the
crucifixion of ten thousand Christians upon Mount Ararat under Trajan, the
letter of Tiberianus to Trajan, complaining that he was weary of
ceaselessly killing Christians in Palestine, and the Theban legion of six
thousand men, said to have been massacred by Maximilian, were boldly
propagated and readily believed.(908) The virtue supposed to attach to the
bones of martyrs, and the custom, and, after a decree of the second
Council of Nice, in the eighth century, the obligation, of placing saintly
remains under every altar, led to an immense multiplication of spurious
relics, and a corresponding demand for legends. Almost every hamlet soon
required a patron martyr and a local legend, which the nearest monastery
was usually ready to supply. The monks occupied their time in composing
and disseminating innumerable acts of martyrs, which purported to be
strictly historical, but which were, in fact, deliberate, though it was
thought edifying, forgeries; and pictures of hideous tortures, enlivened
by fantastic miracles, soon became the favourite popular literature. To
discriminate accurately the genuine acts of martyrs from the immense mass
that were fabricated by the monks, has been attempted by Ruinart, but is
perhaps impossible. Modern criticism has, however, done much to reduce the
ancient persecutions to their true dimensions. The famous essay of
Dodwell, which appeared towards the close of the seventeenth century,
though written, I think, a little in the spirit of a special pleader, and
not free from its own exaggerations, has had a great and abiding influence
upon ecclesiastical history, and the still more famous chapter which
Gibbon devoted to the subject rendered the conclusions of Dodwell familiar
to the world.

Notwithstanding the great knowledge and critical acumen displayed in this
chapter, few persons, I imagine, can rise from its perusal without a
feeling both of repulsion and dissatisfaction. The complete absence of all
sympathy with the heroic courage manifested by the martyrs, and the frigid
and, in truth, most unphilosophical severity with which the historian has
weighed the words and actions of men engaged in the agonies of a deadly
struggle, must repel every generous nature, while the persistence with
which he estimates persecutions by the number of deaths rather than by the
amount of suffering, diverts the mind from the really distinctive
atrocities of the Pagan persecutions. He has observed, that while the
anger of the persecutors was at all times especially directed against the
bishops, we know from Eusebius that only nine bishops were put to death in
the entire Diocletian persecution, and that the particular enumeration,
which the historian made on the spot, of all the martyrs who perished
during this persecution in Palestine, which was under the government of
Galerius, and was therefore exposed to the full fury of the storm, shows
the entire number to have been ninety-two. Starting from this fact,
Gibbon, by a well-known process of calculation, has estimated the probable
number of martyrs in the whole Empire, during the Diocletian persecution,
at about two thousand, which happens to be the number of persons burnt by
the Spanish Inquisition during the presidency of Torquemada alone,(909)
and about one twenty-fifth of the number who are said to have suffered for
their religion in the Netherlands in the reign of Charles V.(910) But
although, if measured by the number of martyrs, the persecutions inflicted
by Pagans were less terrible than those inflicted by Christians, there is
one aspect in which the former appear by far the more atrocious, and a
truthful historian should suffer no false delicacy to prevent him from
unflinchingly stating it. The conduct of the provincial governors, even
when they were compelled by the Imperial edicts to persecute, was often
conspicuously merciful. The Christian records contain several examples of
rulers who refused to search out the Christians, who discountenanced or
even punished their accusers, who suggested ingenious evasions of the law,
who tried by earnest and patient kindness to overcome what they regarded
as insane obstinacy, and who, when their efforts had proved vain,
mitigated by their own authority the sentence they were compelled to
pronounce. It was only on very rare occasions that any, except conspicuous
leaders of the Church, and sometimes persons of a servile condition, were
in danger; the time that was conceded them before their trials gave them
great facilities for escaping, and, even when condemned, Christian women
had usually full permission to visit them in their prisons, and to console
them by their charity. But, on the other hand, Christian writings, which
it is impossible to dispute, continually record barbarities inflicted upon
converts, so ghastly and so hideous that the worst horrors of the
Inquisition pale before them. It is, indeed, true that burning heretics by
a slow fire was one of the accomplishments of the Inquisitors, and that
they were among the most consummate masters of torture of their age. It is
true that in one Catholic country they introduced the atrocious custom of
making the spectacle of men burnt alive for their religious opinions an
element in the public festivities.(911) It is true, too, that the immense
majority of the acts of the martyrs are the transparent forgeries of lying
monks; but it is also true that among the authentic records of Pagan
persecutions there are histories which display, perhaps more vividly than
any other, both the depth of cruelty to which human nature may sink, and
the heroism of resistance it may attain. There was a time when it was the
just boast of the Romans, that no refinements of cruelty, no prolongations
of torture, were admitted in their stern but simple penal code. But all
this was changed. Those hateful games, which made the spectacle of human
suffering and death the delight of all classes, had spread their
brutalising influence wherever the Roman name was known, had rendered
millions absolutely indifferent to the sight of human suffering, had
produced in many, in the very centre of an advanced civilisation, a relish
and a passion for torture, a rapture and an exultation in watching the
spasms of extreme agony, such as an African or an American savage alone
can equal. The most horrible recorded instances of torture were usually
inflicted, either by the populace, or in their presence, in the
arena.(912) We read of Christians bound in chairs of red-hot iron, while
the stench of their half-consumed flesh rose in a suffocating cloud to
heaven; of others who were torn to the very bone by shells, or hooks of
iron; of holy virgins given over to the lust of the gladiator, or to the
mercies of the pander; of two hundred and twenty-seven converts sent on
one occasion to the mines, each with the sinews of one leg severed by a
red-hot iron, and with an eye scooped from its socket; of fires so slow
that the victims writhed for hours in their agonies; of bodies torn limb
from limb, or sprinkled with burning lead; of mingled salt and vinegar
poured over the flesh that was bleeding from the rack; of tortures
prolonged and varied through entire days. For the love of their Divine
Master, for the cause they believed to be true, men, and even weak girls,
endured these things without flinching, when one word would have freed
them from their sufferings. No opinion we may form of the proceedings of
priests in a later age should impair the reverence with which we bend
before the martyr’s tomb.






FOOTNOTES


    1 The opinions of Hume on moral questions are grossly misrepresented
      by many writers, who persist in describing them as substantially
      identical with those of Bentham. How far Hume was from denying the
      existence of a moral sense, the following passages will show:—“The
      final sentence, it is probable, which pronounces characters and
      actions amiable or odious, praiseworthy or blameable ... depends on
      some internal sense or feeling which nature has made universal in
      the whole species.”—_Enquiry Concerning Morals_, § 1. “The
      hypothesis we embrace ... defines virtue to be whatever mental
      action or quality gives to the spectator the pleasing sentiment of
      approbation.”—Ibid. Append. I. “The crime or immorality is no
      particular fact or relation which can be the object of the
      understanding, but arises entirely from the sentiment of
      disapprobation, which, by the structure of human nature, we
      unavoidably feel on the apprehension of barbarity or
      treachery.”—Ibid. “Reason instructs us in the several tendencies of
      actions, and humanity makes a distinction in favour of those which
      are useful and beneficial.”—Ibid. “As virtue is an end, and is
      desirable on its own account without fee or reward, merely for the
      immediate satisfaction it conveys, it is requisite that there should
      be some sentiment which it touches, some internal taste or feeling,
      or whatever you please to call it, which distinguishes moral good
      and evil, and which embraces the one and rejects the other.”—Ibid.
      The two writers to whom Hume was most indebted were Hutcheson and
      Butler. In some interesting letters to the former (Burton’s _Life of
      Hume_, vol. i.), he discusses the points on which he differed from
      them.

    2 “The chief thing therefore which lawgivers and other wise men that
      have laboured for the establishment of society have endeavoured, has
      been to make the people they were to govern believe that it was more
      beneficial for everybody to conquer than to indulge his appetites,
      and much better to mind the public than what seemed his private
      interest ... observing that none were either so savage as not to be
      charmed with praise, or so despicable as patiently to bear contempt,
      they justly concluded that flattery must be the most powerful
      argument that could be used to human creatures. Making use of this
      bewitching engine, they extolled the excellency of our nature above
      other animals ... by the help of which we were capable of performing
      the most noble achievements. Having, by this artful flattery,
      insinuated themselves into the hearts of men, they began to instruct
      them in the notions of honour and shame, &c.”—_Enquiry into the
      Origin of Moral Virtue._

    3 “I conceive that when a man deliberates whether he shall do a thing
      or not do it, he does nothing else but consider whether it be better
      for himself to do it or not to do it.”—Hobbes _On Liberty and
      Necessity._ “Good and evil are names that signify our appetites and
      aversions.”—Ibid. _Leviathan_, part i. ch. xvi. “Obligation is the
      necessity of doing or omitting any action in order to be
      happy.”—Gay’s dissertation prefixed to King’s _Origin of Evil_, p.
      36. “The only reason or motive by which individuals can possibly be
      induced to the practice of virtue, must be the feeling immediate or
      the prospect of future private happiness.”—Brown _On the
      Characteristics_, p. 159. “En tout temps, en tout lieu, tant en
      matière de morale qu’en matière d’esprit, c’est l’intérêt personnel
      qui dicte le jugement des particuliers, et l’intérêt général qui
      dicte celui des nations.... Tout homme ne prend dans ses jugements
      conseil que de son intérêt.”—Helvétius _De l’Esprit_, discours ii.
      “Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign
      masters, pain and pleasure. It is for them alone to point out what
      we ought to do, as well as to determine what we shall do.... The
      principle of utility recognises this subjection, and assumes it for
      the foundation of that system, the object of which is to rear the
      fabric of felicity by the hands of reason and of law. Systems which
      attempt to question it, deal in sounds instead of sense, in caprice
      instead of reason, in darkness instead of light.”—Bentham’s
      _Principles of Morals and Legislation_, ch. i. “By the principle of
      utility is meant that principle which approves or disapproves of
      every action whatsoever, according to the tendency which it appears
      to have to augment or diminish the happiness of the party whose
      interest is in question.”—Ibid. “Je regarde l’amour éclairé de
      nous-mêmes comme le principe de tout sacrifice moral.”—D’Alembert
      quoted by D. Stewart, _Active and Moral Powers_, vol. i. p. 220.

    4 “Pleasure is in itself a good; nay, even setting aside immunity from
      pain, the only good; pain is in itself an evil, and, indeed, without
      exception, the only evil, or else the words good and evil have no
      meaning.”—Bentham’s _Principles of Morals and Legislation_, ch. x.

    5 “Good and evil are nothing but pleasure and pain, or that which
      occasions or procures pleasure or pain to us. Moral good and evil
      then is only the conformity or disagreement of our voluntary actions
      to some law whereby good or evil is drawn on us by the will and
      power of the law maker, which good and evil, pleasure or pain,
      attending our observance or breach of the law by the decree of the
      law maker, is that we call reward or punishment.”—Locke’s _Essay_,
      book ii. ch. xxviii. “Take away pleasures and pains, not only
      happiness, but justice, and duty, and obligation, and virtue, all of
      which have been so elaborately held up to view as independent of
      them, are so many empty sounds.”—Bentham’s _Springs of Action_, ch.
      i. § 15.

    6 “Il lui est aussi impossible d’aimer le bien pour le bien, que
      d’aimer le mal pour le mal.”—Helvétius _De l’Esprit_, disc. ii. ch.
      v.

    7 “Even the goodness which we apprehend in God Almighty, is his
      goodness to us.”—Hobbes _On Human Nature_, ch. vii. § 3. So
      Waterland, “To love God is in effect the same thing as to love
      happiness, eternal happiness; and the love of happiness is still the
      love of ourselves.”—_Third Sermon on Self-love._

    8 “Reverence is the conception we have concerning another, that he
      hath the power to do unto us both good and hurt, but not the will to
      do us hurt.”—Hobbes _On Human Nature_, ch. viii. § 7.

    9 “The pleasures of piety are the pleasures that accompany the belief
      of a man’s being in the acquisition, or in possession of the
      goodwill or favour of the Supreme Being; and as a fruit of it, of
      his being in the way of enjoying pleasures to be received by God’s
      special appointment either in this life or in a life to
      come.”—Bentham’s _Principles of Morals and Legislation_, ch. v. “The
      pains of piety are the pains that accompany the belief of a man’s
      being obnoxious to the displeasure of the Supreme Being, and in
      consequence to certain pains to be inflicted by His especial
      appointment, either in this life or in a life to come. These may be
      also called the pains of religion.”—Ibid.

   10 “There can be no greater argument to a man of his own power, than to
      find himself able not only to accomplish his own desires, but also
      to assist other men in theirs; and this is that conception wherein
      consisteth charity.”—Hobbes _On Hum. Nat._ ch. ix. § 17. “No man
      giveth but with intention of good to himself, because gift is
      voluntary; and of all voluntary acts, the object to every man is his
      own good.”—Hobbes’ _Leviathan_, part i. ch. xv. “Dream not that men
      will move their little finger to serve you, unless their advantage
      in so doing be obvious to them. Men never did so, and never will
      while human nature is made of its present materials.”—Bentham’s
      _Deontology_, vol. ii. p. 133.

   11 “Pity is imagination or fiction of future calamity to ourselves,
      proceeding from the sense of another man’s calamity. But when it
      lighteth on such as we think have not deserved the same, the
      compassion is greater, because there then appeareth more probability
      that the same may happen to us; for the evil that happeneth to an
      innocent man may happen to every man.”—Hobbes _On Hum. Nat._ ch. ix.
      § 10. “La pitié est souvent un sentiment de nos propres maux dans
      les maux d’autrui. C’est une habile prévoyance des malheurs où nous
      pouvons tomber. Nous donnons des secours aux autres pour les engager
      à nous en donner en de semblables occasions, et ces services que
      nous leur rendons sont, à proprement parler, des biens que nous nous
      faisons à nous-mêmes par avance.”—La Rochefoucauld, _Maximes_, 264.
      Butler has remarked that if Hobbes’ account were true, the most
      fearful would be the most compassionate nature; but this is perhaps
      not quite just, for Hobbes’ notion of pity implies the union of two
      not absolutely identical, though nearly allied, influences, timidity
      and imagination. The theory of Adam Smith, though closely connected
      with, differs totally in consequences from that of Hobbes on this
      point. He says, “When I condole with you for the loss of your son,
      in order to enter into your grief, I do not consider what I, a
      person of such a character and profession, should suffer if I had a
      son, and if that son should die—I consider what I should suffer if I
      was really you. I not only change circumstances with you, but I
      change persons and characters. My grief, therefore, is entirely upon
      your account.... A man may sympathise with a woman in child-bed,
      though it is impossible he should conceive himself suffering her
      pains in his own proper person and character.”—_Moral Sentiments_,
      part vii. ch. i. §3.

   12 “Ce que les hommes ont nommé amitié n’est qu’une société, qu’un
      ménagement réciproque d’intérêts et qu’un échange de bons offices.
      Ce n’est enfin qu’un commerce où l’amour-propre se propose toujours
      quelque chose à gagner.”—La Rochefoucauld, _Max._ 83. See this idea
      developed at large in Helvétius.

   13 “La science de la morale n’est autre chose que la science même de la
      législation.”—Helvétius _De l’Esprit_, ii. 17.

   14 This doctrine is expounded at length in all the moral works of
      Hobbes and his school. The following passage is a fair specimen of
      their meaning:—“Moral philosophy is nothing else but the science of
      what is good and evil in the conversation and society of mankind.
      Good and evil are names that signify our appetites and aversions,
      which in different tempers, customs, and doctrines of men are
      different ... from whence arise disputes, controversies, and at last
      war. And therefore, so long as man is in this condition of mere
      nature (which is a condition of war), his private appetite is the
      measure of good and evil. And consequently all men agree in this,
      that peace is good, and therefore also that the ways or means of
      peace, (which, as I have showed before) are justice, gratitude,
      modesty, equity, mercy, and the rest of the laws of nature are good
      ... and their contrary vices evil.”—Hobbes’ _Leviathan_, part i. ch.
      xvi. See, too, a striking passage in Bentham’s _Deontology_, vol.
      ii. p. 132.

   15 As an ingenious writer in the _Saturday Review_ (Aug. 10, 1867)
      expresses it: “Chastity is merely a social law created to encourage
      the alliances that most promote the permanent welfare of the race,
      and to maintain woman in a social position which it is thought
      advisable she should hold.” See, too, on this view, Hume’s _Inquiry
      concerning Morals_, § 4, and also _note_ x.: “To what other purpose
      do all the ideas of chastity and modesty serve? Nisi utile est quod
      facimus, frustra est gloria.”

   16 “All pleasure is necessarily self-regarding, for it is impossible to
      have any feelings out of our own mind. But there are modes of
      delight that bring also satisfaction to others, from the round that
      they take in their course. Such are the pleasures of benevolence.
      Others imply no participation by any second party, as, for example,
      eating, drinking, bodily warmth, property, and power; while a third
      class are fed by the pains and privations of fellow-beings, as the
      delights of sport and tyranny. The condemnatory phrase, selfishness,
      applies with especial emphasis to the last-mentioned class, and, in
      a qualified degree, to the second group; while such terms as
      unselfishness, disinterestedness, self-devotion, are applied to the
      vicarious position wherein we seek our own satisfaction in that of
      others.”—Bain _On the Emotions and Will_, p. 113.

   17 “Vice may be defined to be a miscalculation of chances, a mistake in
      estimating the value of pleasures and pains. It is false moral
      arithmetic.”—Bentham’s _Deontology_, vol. i. p. 131.

   18 “La récompense, la punition, la gloire et l’infamie soumises à ses
      volontés sont quatre espèces de divinités avec lesquelles le
      législateur peut toujours opérer le bien public et créer des hommes
      illustres en tous les genres. Toute l’étude des moralistes consiste
      à déterminer l’usage qu’on doit faire de ces récompenses et de ces
      punitions et les secours qu’on peut tirer pour lier l’intérêt
      personnel à l’intérêt général.”—Helvétius _De l’Esprit_, ii. 22. “La
      justice de nos jugements et de nos actions n’est jamais que la
      rencontre heureuse de notre intérêt avec l’intérêt public.”—Ibid.
      ii. 7. “To prove that the immoral action is a miscalculation of
      self-interest, to show how erroneous an estimate the vicious man
      makes of pains and pleasures, is the purpose of the intelligent
      moralist. Unless he can do this he does nothing; for, as has been
      stated above, for a man not to pursue what he deems likely to
      produce to him the greatest sum of enjoyment, is, in the very nature
      of things, impossible.”—Bentham’s _Deontology_.

   19 “If the effect of virtue were to prevent or destroy more pleasure
      than it produced, or to produce more pain than it prevented, its
      more appropriate name would be wickedness and folly; wickedness as
      it affected others, folly as respected him who practised
      it.”—Bentham’s _Deontology_, vol. i. p. 142. “Weigh pains, weigh
      pleasures, and as the balance stands will stand the question of
      right and wrong.”—Ibid. vol. i. p. 137. “Moralis philosophiæ caput
      est, Faustine fili, ut scias quibus ad beatam vitam perveniri
      rationibus possit.”—Apuleius, _Ad Doct. Platonis_, ii. “Atque ipsa
      utilitas, justi prope mater et æqui.”—Horace, _Sat._ I. iii. 98.

   20 “We can be obliged to nothing but what we ourselves are to gain or
      lose something by; for nothing else can be ‘violent motive’ to us.
      As we should not be obliged to obey the laws or the magistrate
      unless rewards or punishments, pleasure or pain, somehow or other,
      depended upon our obedience; so neither should we, without the same
      reason, be obliged to do what is right, to practise virtue, or to
      obey the commands of God.”—Paley’s _Moral Philosophy_, book ii. ch.
      ii.

   21 See Gassendi _Philosophiæ Epicuri Syntagma_. These four canons are a
      skilful condensation of the argument of Torquatus in Cicero, _De
      Fin._ i. 2. See, too, a very striking letter by Epicurus himself,
      given in his life by Diogenes Laërtius.

   22 “Sanus igitur non est, qui nulla spe majore proposita, iis bonis
      quibus cæteri utuntur in vita, labores et cruciatus et miserias
      anteponat.... Non aliter his bonis præsentibus abstinendum est quam
      si sint aliqua majora, propter quæ tanti sit et voluptates omittere
      et mala omnia sustinere.”—Lactantius, _Div. Inst._ vi. 9. Macaulay,
      in some youthful essays against the Utilitarian theory (which he
      characteristically described as “Not much more laughable than
      phrenology, and immeasurably more humane than cock-fighting”),
      maintains the theological form of selfishness in very strong terms.
      “What proposition is there respecting human nature which is
      absolutely and universally true? We know of only one, and that is
      not only true but identical, that men always act from
      self-interest.”—Review of Mill’s _Essay on Government_. “Of this we
      may be sure, that the words ‘greatest happiness’ will never in any
      man’s mouth mean more than the greatest happiness of others, which
      is consistent with what he thinks his own.... This direction (Do as
      you would be done by) would be utterly unmeaning, as it actually is
      in Mr. Bentham’s philosophy, unless it were accompanied by a
      sanction. In the Christian scheme accordingly it is accompanied by a
      sanction of immense force. To a man whose greatest happiness in this
      world is inconsistent with the greatest happiness of the greatest
      number, is held out the prospect of an infinite happiness hereafter,
      from which he excludes himself by wronging his fellow-creatures
      here.”—_Answer to the Westminster Review’s Defence of Mill._

   23 “All virtue and piety are thus resolvable into a principle of
      self-love. It is what Scripture itself resolves them into by
      founding them upon faith in God’s promises, and hope in things
      unseen. In this way it may be rightly said that there is no such
      thing as disinterested virtue. It is with reference to ourselves and
      for our own sakes that we love even God Himself.”—Waterland, _Third
      Sermon on Self-love_. “To risk the happiness of the whole duration
      of our being in any case whatever, were it possible, would be
      foolish.”—Robert Hall’s _Sermon on Modern Infidelity_. “In the moral
      system the means are virtuous practice; the end, happiness.”—
      Warburton’s _Divine Legation_, book ii. Appendix.

   24 “There is always understood to be a difference between an act of
      prudence and an act of duty. Thus, if I distrusted a man who owed me
      a sum of money, I should reckon it an act of prudence to get another
      person bound with him; but I should hardly call it an act of
      duty.... Now in what, you will ask, does the difference consist,
      inasmuch as, according to our account of the matter, both in the one
      case and the other, in acts of duty as well as acts of prudence, we
      consider solely what we ourselves shall gain or lose by the act? The
      difference, and the only difference, is this: that in the one case
      we consider what we shall gain or lose in the present world; in the
      other case, we consider also what we shall gain or lose in the world
      to come.”—Paley’s _Moral Philosophy_, ii. 3.

   25 “Hence we may see the weakness and mistake of those falsely
      religious ... who are scandalised at our being determined to the
      pursuit of virtue through any degree of regard to its happy
      consequences in this life.... For it is evident that the religious
      motive is precisely of the same kind, only stronger, as the
      happiness expected is greater and more lasting.”—Brown’s _Essays on
      the Characteristics_, p. 220.

   26 “If a Christian, who has the view of happiness and misery in another
      life, be asked why a man must keep his word, he will give this as a
      reason, because God, who has the power of eternal life and death,
      requires it of us. But if an Hobbist be asked why, he will answer,
      because the public requires it, and the Leviathan will punish you if
      you do not. And if one of the old heathen philosophers had been
      asked, he would have answered, because it was dishonest, below the
      dignity of man, and opposite to virtue, the highest perfection of
      human nature, to do otherwise.”—Locke’s _Essay_, i. 3.

   27 Thus Paley remarks that—“The Christian religion hath not ascertained
      the precise quantity of virtue necessary to salvation,” and he then
      proceeds to urge the probability of graduated scales of rewards and
      punishments. (_Moral Philosophy_, book i. ch. vii.)

   28 This view was developed by Locke (_Essay on the Human
      Understanding_, book ii. ch. xxi.) Pascal, in a well-known passage,
      applied the same argument to Christianity, urging that the rewards
      and punishments it promises are so great, that it is the part of a
      wise man to embrace the creed, even though he believes it
      improbable, if there be but a possibility in its favour.

   29 Cudworth, in his _Immutable Morals_, has collected the names of a
      number of the schoolmen who held this view. See, too, an interesting
      note in Miss Cobbe’s very learned _Essay on Intuitive Morals_, pp.
      18, 19.

   30 E.g. Soame Jenyns, Dr. Johnson, Crusius, Pascal, Paley, and Austin.
      Warburton is generally quoted in the list, but not I think quite
      fairly. See his theory, which is rather complicated (_Divine
      Legation_, i. 4). Waterland appears to have held this view, and also
      Condillac. See a very remarkable chapter on morals, in his _Traité
      des Animaux_, part ii. ch. vii. Closely connected with this doctrine
      is the notion that the morality of God is generically different from
      the morality of men, which having been held with more or less
      distinctness by many theologians (Archbishop King being perhaps the
      most prominent), has found in our own day an able defender in Dr.
      Mansel. Much information on the history of this doctrine will be
      found in Dr. Mansel’s _Second Letter_ to Professor Goldwin Smith
      (Oxford, 1862).

   31 Leibnitz noticed the frequency with which Supralapsarian Calvinists
      adopt this doctrine. (_Théodicée_, part ii. § 176.) Archbishop
      Whately, who from his connection with the Irish Clergy had admirable
      opportunities of studying the tendencies of Calvinism, makes a
      similar remark as the result of his own experience. (_Whately’s
      Life_, vol. ii. p. 339.)

   32 “God designs the happiness of all His sentient creatures.... Knowing
      the tendencies of our actions, and knowing His benevolent purpose,
      we know His tacit commands.”—Austin’s _Lectures on Jurisprudence_,
      vol. i. p. 31. “The commands which He has revealed we must gather
      from the terms wherein they are promulgated. The commands which He
      has not revealed we must construe by the principle of
      utility.”—Ibid. p. 96. So Paley’s _Moral Philosophy_, book ii. ch.
      iv. v.

   33 Paley’s _Moral Philosophy_, book i. ch. vii. The question of the
      disinterestedness of the love we should bear to God was agitated in
      the Catholic Church, Bossuet taking the selfish, and Fénelon the
      unselfish side. The opinions of Fénelon and Molinos on the subject
      were authoritatively condemned. In England, the less dogmatic
      character of the national faith, and also the fact that the great
      anti-Christian writer, Hobbes, was the advocate of extreme
      selfishness in morals, had, I think, a favourable influence upon the
      ethics of the church. Hobbes gave the first great impulse to moral
      philosophy in England, and his opponents were naturally impelled to
      an unselfish theory. Bishop Cumberland led the way, resolving virtue
      (like Hutcheson) into benevolence. The majority of divines, however,
      till the present century, have, I think, been on the selfish side.

_   34 Moral Philosophy_, ii. 3.

_   35 Essay on the Human Understanding_, ii. 28.

_   36 Principles of Morals and Legislation_, ch. iii. Mr. Mill observes
      that, “Bentham’s idea of the world is that of a collection of
      persons pursuing each his separate interest or pleasure, and the
      prevention of whom from jostling one another more than is
      unavoidable, may be attempted by hopes and fears derived from three
      sources—the law, religion, and public opinion. To these three
      powers, considered as binding human conduct, he gave the name of
      sanctions; the political sanction operating by the rewards and
      penalties of the law; the religious sanction by those expected from
      the ruler of the universe; and the popular, which he
      characteristically calls also the moral sanction, operating through
      the pains and pleasures arising from the favour or disfavour of our
      fellow-creatures.”—_Dissertations_, vol. i. pp. 362-363.

   37 Hume on this, as on most other points, was emphatically opposed to
      the school of Hobbes, and even declared that no one could honestly
      and in good faith deny the reality of an unselfish element in man.
      Following in the steps of Butler, he explained it in the following
      passage:—“Hunger and thirst have eating and drinking for their end,
      and from the gratification of these primary appetites arises a
      pleasure which may become the object of another species of desire or
      inclination that is secondary and interested. In the same manner
      there are mental passions by which we are impelled immediately to
      seek particular objects, such as fame or power or vengeance, without
      any regard to interest, and when these objects are attained a
      pleasing enjoyment ensues.... Now where is the difficulty of
      conceiving that this may likewise be the case with benevolence and
      friendship, and that from the original frame of our temper we may
      feel a desire of another’s happiness or good, which by means of that
      affection becomes our own good, and is afterwards pursued, from the
      combined motives of benevolence and self-enjoyment?”—Hume’s _Enquiry
      concerning Morals_, Appendix II. Compare Butler, “If there be any
      appetite or any inward principle besides self-love, why may there
      not be an affection towards the good of our fellow-creatures, and
      delight from that affection’s being gratified and uneasiness from
      things going contrary to it?”—_Sermon on Compassion._

   38 “By sympathetic sensibility is to be understood the propensity that
      a man has to derive pleasure from the happiness, and pain from the
      unhappiness, of other sensitive beings.”—Bentham’s _Principles of
      Morals and Legislation_, ch. vi. “The sense of sympathy is
      universal. Perhaps there never existed a human being who had reached
      full age without the experience of pleasure at another’s pleasure,
      of uneasiness at another’s pain.... Community of interests,
      similarity of opinion, are sources from whence it
      springs.”—_Deontology_, vol. i. pp. 169-170.

   39 “The idea of the pain of another is naturally painful. The idea of
      the pleasure of another is naturally pleasurable.... In this, the
      unselfish part of our nature, lies a foundation, even independently
      of inculcation from without, for the generation of moral
      feelings”—Mill’s _Dissertations_, vol. i. p. 137. See, too, Bain’s
      _Emotions and the Will_, pp. 289, 313; and especially Austin’s
      _Lectures on Jurisprudence_. The first volume of this brilliant work
      contains, I think without exception, the best modern statement of
      the utilitarian theory in its most plausible form—a statement
      equally remarkable for its ability, its candour, and its uniform
      courtesy to opponents.

   40 See a collection of passages from Aristotle, bearing on the subject,
      in Mackintosh’s _Dissertation_.

   41 Cic. _De Finibus_, i. 5. This view is adopted in Tucker’s _Light of
      Nature_ (ed. 1842), vol. i. p. 167. See, too, Mill’s _Analysis of
      the Human Mind_, vol. ii. p. 174.

_   42 Essay_, book ii. ch. xxxiii.

   43 Hutcheson _On the Passions_, § 1. The “secondary desires” of
      Hutcheson are closely related to the “reflex affections” of
      Shaftesbury. “Not only the outward beings which offer themselves to
      the sense are the objects of the affection; but the very actions
      themselves, and the affections of pity, kindness, gratitude, and
      their contraries, being brought into the mind by reflection, become
      objects. So that by means of this reflected sense, there arises
      another kind of affection towards those very affections
      themselves.”—Shaftesbury’s _Enquiry concerning Virtue_, book i. part
      ii. § 3.

   44 See the preface to Hartley _On Man_. Gay’s essay is prefixed to
      Law’s translation of Archbishop King _On the Origin of Evil_.

   45 “The case is this. We first perceive or imagine some real good; i.e.
      fitness to promote our happiness in those things which we love or
      approve of.... Hence those things and pleasures are so tied together
      and associated in our minds, that one cannot present itself, but the
      other will also occur. And the association remains even after that
      which at first gave them the connection is quite forgotten, or
      perhaps does not exist, but the contrary.”—Gay’s _Essay_, p. lii.
      “All affections whatsoever are finally resolvable into reason,
      pointing out private happiness, and are conversant only about things
      apprehended to be means tending to this end; and whenever this end
      is not perceived, they are to be accounted for from the association
      of ideas, and may properly enough be called habits.”—Ibid. p. xxxi.

   46 Principally by Mr. James Mill, whose chapter on association, in his
      _Analysis of the Human Mind_, may probably rank with Paley’s
      beautiful chapter on happiness, at the head of all modern writings
      on the utilitarian side,—either of them, I think, being far more
      valuable than anything Bentham ever wrote on morals. This last
      writer—whose contempt for his predecessors was only equalled by his
      ignorance of their works, and who has added surprisingly little to
      moral science (considering the reputation he attained), except a
      barbarous nomenclature and an interminable series of classifications
      evincing no real subtlety of thought—makes, as far as I am aware, no
      use of the doctrine of association. Paley states it with his usual
      admirable clearness. “Having experienced in some instances a
      particular conduct to be beneficial to ourselves, or observed that
      it would be so, a sentiment of approbation rises up in our minds,
      which sentiment afterwards accompanies the idea or mention of the
      same conduct, although the private advantage which first existed no
      longer exist.”—Paley, _Moral Philos_. i. 5. Paley, however, made
      less use of this doctrine than might have been expected from so
      enthusiastic an admirer of Tucker. In our own day it has been much
      used by Mr. J. S. Mill.

   47 This illustration, which was first employed by Hutcheson, is very
      happily developed by Gay (p. lii.). It was then used by Hartley, and
      finally Tucker reproduced the whole theory with the usual
      illustration without any acknowledgment of the works of his
      predecessors, employing however, the term “translation” instead of
      “association” of ideas. See his curious chapter on the subject,
      _Light of Nature_, book i. ch. xviii.

   48 “It is the nature of translation to throw desire from the end upon
      the means, which thenceforward become an end capable of exciting an
      appetite without prospect of the consequences whereto they lead. Our
      habits and most of the desires that occupy human life are of this
      translated kind.”—Tucker’s _Light of Nature_, vol. ii. (ed. 1842),
      p. 281.

   49 Mill’s _Analysis of the Human Mind_. The desire for posthumous fame
      is usually cited by intuitive moralists as a proof of a naturally
      disinterested element in man.

   50 Mill’s _Analysis_.

   51 Hartley _On Man_, vol. i. pp. 474-475.

   52 “Benevolence ... has also a high degree of honour and esteem annexed
      to it, procures us many advantages and returns of kindness, both
      from the person obliged and others, and is most closely connected
      with the hopes of reward in a future state, and of self-approbation
      or the moral sense; and the same things hold with respect to
      generosity in a much higher degree. It is easy therefore to see how
      such associations may be formed as to engage us to forego great
      pleasure, or endure great pain for the sake of others, how these
      associations may be attended with so great a degree of pleasure as
      to overrule the positive pain endured or the negative one from the
      foregoing of a pleasure, and yet how there may be no direct explicit
      expectation of reward either from God or man, by natural consequence
      or express appointment, not even of the concomitant pleasure that
      engages the agent to undertake the benevolent and generous action;
      and this I take to be a proof from the doctrine of association that
      there is and must be such a thing as pure disinterested benevolence;
      also a just account of the origin and nature of it.”—Hartley _On
      Man_, vol. i. pp. 473-474. See too Mill’s _Analysis_, vol. ii. p.
      252.

   53 Mill’s _Analysis_, vol. ii. pp. 244-247.

   54 “With self-interest,” said Hartley, “man must begin; he may end in
      self-annihilation;” or as Coleridge happily puts it, “Legality
      precedes morality in every individual, even as the Jewish
      dispensation preceded the Christian in the world at large.”—_Notes
      Theological and Political_, p. 340. It might be retorted with much
      truth, that we begin by practising morality as a duty—we end by
      practising it as a pleasure, without any reference to duty.
      Coleridge, who expressed for the Benthamite theories a very cordial
      detestation, sometimes glided into them himself. “The happiness of
      man,” he says, “is the end of virtue, and truth is the knowledge of
      the means.” (_The Friend_, ed. 1850, vol. ii. p. 192.) “What can be
      the object of human virtue but the happiness of sentient, still more
      of moral beings?” (_Notes Theol. and Polit._ p. 351.) Leibnitz says,
      “Quand on aura appris à faire des actions louables par ambition, on
      les fera après par inclination.” (_Sur l’ Art de connaître les
      Hommes._)

   55 E.g. Mackintosh and James Mill. Coleridge in his younger days was an
      enthusiastic admirer of Hartley; but chiefly, I believe, on account
      of his theory of vibrations. He named his son after him, and
      described him in one of his poems as:—

      “He of mortal kind
      Wisest, the first who marked the ideal tribes
      Up the fine fibres through the sentient brain.”

      _Religious Musings._

   56 This position is elaborated in a passage too long for quotation by
      Mr. Austin. (_Lectures on Jurisprudence_, vol. i. p. 44.)

   57 Hobbes defines conscience as “the opinion of evidence” (_On Human
      Nature_, ch. vi. §8). Locke as “our own opinion or judgment of the
      moral rectitude or pravity of our own actions” (_Essay_, book i. ch.
      iii. § 8). In Bentham there is very little on the subject; but in
      one place he informs us that “conscience is a thing of fictitious
      existence, supposed to occupy a seat in the mind” (_Deontology_,
      vol. i. p. 137); and in another he ranks “love of duty” (which he
      describes as an “impossible motive, in so far as duty is synonymous
      to obligation”) as a variety of the “love of power” (_Springs of
      Action_, ii.) Mr. Bain says, “conscience is an imitation within
      ourselves of the government without us.” (_Emotions and Will_, p.
      313.)

   58 “However much they [utilitarians] may believe (as they do) that
      actions and dispositions are only virtuous because they promote
      another end than virtue, yet this being granted ... they not only
      place virtue at the very head of the things which are good as means
      to the ultimate end, but they also recognise as a psychological fact
      the possibility of its being to the individual a good in itself....
      Virtue, according to the utilitarian doctrine, is not naturally and
      originally part of the end, but it is capable of becoming so....
      What was once desired as an instrument for the attainment of
      happiness has come to be desired ... as part of happiness.... Human
      nature is so constituted as to desire nothing which is not either a
      part of happiness or a means of happiness.”—J. S. Mill’s
      _Utilitarianism_, pp. 54, 55, 56, 58.

   59 “A man is tempted to commit adultery with the wife of his friend.
      The composition of the motive is obvious. He does not obey the
      motive. Why? He obeys other motives which are stronger. Though
      pleasures are associated with the immoral act, pains are associated
      with it also—the pains of the injured husband, the pains of the
      wife, the moral indignation of mankind, the future reproaches of his
      own mind. Some men obey the first rather than the second motive. The
      reason is obvious. In these the association of the act with the
      pleasure is from habit unduly strong, the association of the act
      with pains is from want of habit unduly weak. This is the case of a
      bad education.... Among the different classes of motives, there are
      men who are more easily and strongly operated on by some, others by
      others. We have also seen that this is entirely owing to habits of
      association. This facility of being acted upon by motives of a
      particular description, is that which we call disposition.”—Mill’s
      _Analysis_, vol. ii. pp. 212, 213, &c. Adam Smith says, I think with
      much wisdom, that “the great secret of education is to direct vanity
      to proper objects.”—_Moral Sentiments_, part vi. § 3.

   60 “Goodness in ourselves is the prospect of satisfaction annexed to
      the welfare of others, so that we please them for the pleasure we
      receive ourselves in so doing, or to avoid the uneasiness we should
      feel in omitting it. But God is completely happy in Himself, nor can
      His happiness receive increase or diminution from anything befalling
      His creatures; wherefore His goodness is pure, disinterested bounty,
      without any return of joy or satisfaction to Himself. Therefore it
      is no wonder we have imperfect notions of a quality whereof we have
      no experience in our own nature.”—Tucker’s _Light of Nature_, vol.
      i. p. 355. “It is the privilege of God alone to act upon pure,
      disinterested bounty, without the least addition thereby to His own
      enjoyment.”—Ibid. vol. ii. p. 279. On the other hand, Hutcheson
      asks, “If there be such disposition in the Deity, where is the
      impossibility of some small degree of this public love in His
      creatures, and why must they be supposed incapable of acting but
      from self-love?”—_Enquiry concerning Moral Good_, § 2.

   61 “We gradually, through the influence of association, come to desire
      the means without thinking of the end; the action itself becomes an
      object of desire, and is performed without reference to any motive
      beyond itself. Thus far, it may still be objected that the action
      having, through association, become pleasurable, we are as much as
      before moved to act by the anticipation of pleasure, namely, the
      pleasure of the action itself. But granting this, the matter does
      not end here. As we proceed in the formation of habits, and become
      accustomed to will a particular act ... because it is pleasurable,
      we at last continue to will it without any reference to its being
      pleasurable.... In this manner it is that habits of hurtful excess
      continue to be practised, although they have ceased to be
      pleasurable, and in this manner also it is that the habit of willing
      to persevere in the course which he has chosen, does not desert the
      moral hero, even when the reward ... is anything but an equivalent
      for the suffering he undergoes, or the wishes he may have to
      renounce.”—Mill’s _Logic_ (4th edition), vol. ii. pp. 416, 417.

   62 “In regard to interest in the most extended, which is the original
      and only strictly proper sense of the word disinterested, no human
      act has ever been or ever can be disinterested.... In the only sense
      in which disinterestedness can with truth be predicated of human
      actions, it is employed ... to denote, not the absence of all
      interest ... but only the absence of all interest of the
      self-regarding class. Not but that it is very frequently predicated
      of human action in cases in which divers interests, to no one of
      which the appellation of self-regarding can with propriety be
      denied, have been exercising their influence, and in particular fear
      of God, or hope from God, and fear of ill-repute, or hope of good
      repute. If what is above be correct, the most disinterested of men
      is not less under the dominion of interest than the most interested.
      The only cause of his being styled disinterested, is its not having
      been observed that the sort of motive (suppose it sympathy for an
      individual or class) has as truly a corresponding interest belonging
      to it as any other species of motive has. Of this contradiction
      between the truth of the case and the language employed in speaking
      of it, the cause is that in the one case men have not been in the
      habit of making—as in point of consistency they ought to have
      made—of the word interest that use which in the other case they have
      been in the habit of making of it.”—Bentham’s _Springs of Action_,
      ii. § 2.

   63 Among others Bishop Butler, who draws some very subtle distinctions
      on the subject in his first sermon “on the love of our neighbour.”
      Dugald Stewart remarks that “although we apply the epithet selfish
      to avarice and to low and private sensuality, we never apply it to
      the desire of knowledge or to the pursuits of virtue, which are
      certainly sources of more exquisite pleasure than riches or
      sensuality can bestow.”—_Active and Moral Powers_, vol. i. p. 19.

   64 Sir W. Hamilton.

   65 Cic. _De Fin._ lib. ii.

   66 “As there is not any sort of pleasure that is not itself a good, nor
      any sort of pain the exemption from which is not a good, and as
      nothing but the expectation of the eventual enjoyment of pleasure in
      some shape, or of exemption from pain in some shape, can operate in
      the character of a motive, a necessary consequence is that if by
      motive be meant _sort_ of motive, there is not any such thing as a
      bad motive.”—Bentham’s _Springs of Action_, ii. § 4. The first
      clauses of the following passage I have already quoted: “Pleasure is
      itself a good, nay, setting aside immunity from pain, the only good.
      Pain is in itself an evil, and indeed, without exception, the only
      evil, or else the words good and evil have no meaning. And this is
      alike true of every sort of pain, and of every sort of pleasure. It
      follows therefore immediately and incontestably that there is no
      such thing as any sort of motive that is in itself a bad
      one.”—_Principles of Morals and Legislation_, ch. ix. “The search
      after motive is one of the prominent causes of men’s bewilderment in
      the investigation of questions of morals.... But this is a pursuit
      in which every moment employed is a moment wasted. All motives are
      abstractedly good. No man has ever had, can, or could have a motive
      different from the pursuit of pleasure or of shunning
      pain.”—_Deontology_, vol. i. p. 126. Mr. Mill’s doctrine appears
      somewhat different from this, but the difference is I think only
      apparent. He says: “The motive has nothing to do with the morality
      of the action, though much with the worth of the agent,” and he
      afterwards explains this last statement by saying that the “motive
      makes a great difference in our moral estimation of the agent,
      especially if it indicates a good or a bad habitual disposition, a
      bent of character from which useful or from which hurtful actions
      are likely to arise.”—_Utilitarianism_, 2nd ed. pp. 26-27.

   67 This truth has been admirably illustrated by Mr. Herbert Spencer
      (_Social Statics_, pp. 1-8).

   68 “On évalue la grandeur de la vertu en comparant les biens obtenus
      aux maux au prix desquels on les achète: l’excédant en bien mesure
      la valeur de la vertu, comme l’excédant en mal mesure le degré de
      haine que doit inspirer le vice.”—Ch. Comte, _Traité de
      Législation_, liv. ii. ch. xii.

   69 M. Dumont, the translator of Bentham, has elaborated in a rather
      famous passage the utilitarian notions about vengeance. “Toute
      espèce de satisfaction entraînant une peine pour le délinquant
      produit naturellement un plaisir de vengeance pour la partie lésée.
      Ce plaisir est un gain. Il rappelle la parabole de Samson. C’est le
      doux qui sort du terrible. C’est le miel recueilli dans la gueule du
      lion. Produit sans frais, résultat net d’une opération nécessaire à
      d’autres titres, c’est une jouissance à cultiver comme toute autre;
      car le plaisir de la vengeance considérée abstraitement n’est comme
      tout autre plaisir qu’un bien en lui-même.”—_Principes du Code
      pénal_, 2me partie, ch. xvi. According to a very acute living writer
      of this school, “The criminal law stands to the passion of revenge
      in much the same relation as marriage to the sexual appetite” (J. F.
      Stephen, _On the Criminal Law of England_, p. 99). Mr. Mill observes
      that, “In the golden rule of Jesus of Nazareth, we read the complete
      spirit of the ethics of utility” (_Utilitarianism_, p. 24). It is
      but fair to give a specimen of the opposite order of extravagance.
      “So well convinced was Father Claver of the eternal happiness of
      almost all whom he assisted,” says this saintly missionary’s
      biographer, “that speaking once of some persons who had delivered a
      criminal into the hands of justice, he said, God _forgive_ them; but
      they have secured the salvation of this man at _the probable risk of
      their own_.”—Newman’s _Anglican Difficulties_, p. 205.

_   70 De Ordine_, ii. 4. The experiment has more than once been tried at
      Venice, Pisa, &c., and always with the results St. Augustine
      predicted.

   71 The reader will here observe the very transparent sophistry of an
      assertion which is repeated ad nauseam by utilitarians. They tell us
      that a regard to the remote consequences of our actions would lead
      us to the conclusion that we should never perform an act which would
      not be conducive to human happiness if it were universally
      performed, or, as Mr. Austin expresses it, that “the question is if
      acts of this class were generally done or generally forborne or
      omitted, what would be the probable effect on the general happiness
      or good?” (_Lectures on Jurisprudence_, vol. i. p. 32.) The question
      is nothing of the kind. If I am convinced that utility alone
      constitutes virtue, and if I am meditating any particular act, the
      sole question of morality must be whether that act is on the whole
      useful, produces a net result of happiness. To determine this
      question I must consider both the immediate and the remote
      consequences of the act; but the latter are not ascertained by
      asking what would be the result if every one did as I do, but by
      asking how far, as a matter of fact, my act is likely to produce
      imitators, or affect the conduct and future acts of others. It may
      no doubt be convenient and useful to form classifications based on
      the general tendency of different courses to promote or diminish
      happiness, but such classifications cannot alter the morality of
      particular acts. It is quite clear that no act which produces on the
      whole more pleasure than pain can on utilitarian principles be
      vicious. It is, I think, equally clear that no one could act
      consistently on such a principle without being led to consequences
      which in the common judgment of mankind are grossly and scandalously
      immoral.

   72 There are some very good remarks on the possibility of living a life
      of imagination wholly distinct from the life of action in Mr. Bain’s
      _Emotions and Will_, p. 246.

   73 Bentham especially recurs to this subject frequently. See Sir J.
      Bowring’s edition of his works (Edinburgh, 1843), vol. i. pp. 142,
      143, 562; vol. x. pp. 549-550.

   74 “Granted that any practice causes more pain to animals than it gives
      pleasure to man; is that practice moral or immoral? And if exactly
      in proportion as human beings raise their heads out of the slough of
      selfishness they do not with one voice answer ‘immoral,’ let the
      morality of the principle of utility be for ever condemned.”—Mill’s
      _Dissert_. vol. ii. p. 485. “We deprive them [animals] of life, and
      this is justifiable—their pains do not equal our enjoyments. There
      is a balance of good.”—Bentham’s _Deontology_, vol. i. p. 14. Mr.
      Mill accordingly defines the principle of utility, without any
      special reference to man. “The creed which accepts as the foundation
      of morals, utility or the great happiness principle, holds that
      actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness,
      wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of
      happiness.”—_Utilitarianism_, pp. 9-10.

   75 The exception of course being domestic animals, which may be injured
      by ill treatment, but even this exception is a very partial one. No
      selfish reason could prevent any amount of cruelty to animals that
      were about to be killed, and even in the case of previous ill-usage
      the calculations of selfishness will depend greatly upon the price
      of the animal. I have been told that on some parts of the continent
      diligence horses are systematically under-fed, and worked to a
      speedy death, their cheapness rendering such a course the most
      economical.

   76 Bentham, as we have seen, is of opinion that the gastronomic
      pleasure would produce the requisite excess of enjoyment. Hartley,
      who has some amiable and beautiful remarks on the duty of kindness
      to animals, without absolutely condemning, speaks with much aversion
      of the custom of eating “our brothers and sisters,” the animals.
      (_On Man_, vol. ii. pp. 222-223.) Paley, observing that it is quite
      possible for men to live without flesh-diet, concludes that the only
      sufficient justification for eating meat is an express divine
      revelation in the Book of Genesis. (_Moral Philos._ book ii. ch.
      11.) Some reasoners evade the main issue by contending that they
      kill animals because they would otherwise overrun the earth; but
      this, as Windham said, “is an indifferent reason for killing fish.”

   77 In commenting upon the French licentiousness of the eighteenth
      century, Hume says, in a passage which has excited a great deal of
      animadversion:—“Our neighbours, it seems, have resolved to sacrifice
      some of the domestic to the social pleasures; and to prefer ease,
      freedom, and an open commerce, to strict fidelity and constancy.
      These ends are both good, and are somewhat difficult to reconcile;
      nor must we be surprised if the customs of nations incline too much
      sometimes to the one side, and sometimes to the other.”—_Dialogue._

   78 There are few things more pitiable than the blunders into which
      writers have fallen when trying to base the plain virtue of chastity
      on utilitarian calculations. Thus since the writings of Malthus it
      has been generally recognised that one of the very first conditions
      of all material prosperity is to check early marriages, to restrain
      the tendency of population to multiply more rapidly than the means
      of subsistence. Knowing this, what can be more deplorable than to
      find moralists making such arguments as these the very foundation of
      morals?—“The first and great mischief, and by consequence the guilt,
      of promiscuous concubinage consists in its tendency to diminish
      marriages.” (Paley’s _Moral Philosophy_, book iii. part iii. ch.
      ii.) “That is always the most happy condition of a nation, and that
      nation is most accurately obeying the laws of our constitution, in
      which the number of the human race is most rapidly increasing. Now
      it is certain that under the law of chastity, that is, when
      individuals are exclusively united to each other, the increase of
      population will be more rapid than under any other circumstances.”
      (Wayland’s _Elements of Moral Science_, p. 298, 11th ed., Boston,
      1839.) I am sorry to bring such subjects before the reader, but it
      is impossible to write a history of morals without doing so.

   79 See Luther’s _Table Talk_.

   80 Tillemont, _Mém. pour servir à l’Hist. ecclésiastique_, tome x. p.
      57.

   81 Τό τε ἀληθεύειν καὶ τὸ εὐεργετεῖν. (Ælian, _Var. Hist._ xii. 59.)
      Longinus in like manner divides virtue into εὐεργεσία καὶ ἀλήθεια.
      (_De Sublim._ § 1.) The opposite view in England is continually
      expressed in the saying, “You should never pull down an opinion
      until you have something to put in its place,” which can only mean,
      if you are convinced that some religious or other hypothesis is
      false, you are morally bound to repress or conceal your conviction
      until you have discovered positive affirmations or explanations as
      unqualified and consolatory as those you have destroyed.

   82 See this powerfully stated by Shaftesbury. (_Inquiry concerning
      Virtue_, book i. part iii.) The same objection applies to Dr.
      Mansel’s modification of the theological doctrine—viz. that the
      origin of morals is not the will but the nature of God.

   83 “The one great and binding ground of the belief of God and a
      hereafter is the law of conscience.”—Coleridge, _Notes Theological
      and Political_, p. 367. That our moral faculty is our one reason for
      maintaining the supreme benevolence of the Deity was a favourite
      position of Kant.

   84 “Nescio quomodo inhæret in mentibus quasi sæculorum quoddam augurium
      futurorum; idque in maximis ingeniis altissimisque animis et
      exsistit maxime et apparet facillime.”—Cic. _Tusc. Disp._ i. 14.

   85 “It is a calumny to say that men are roused to heroic actions by
      ease, hope of pleasure, recompense—sugar-plums of any kind in this
      world or the next. In the meanest mortal there lies something
      nobler. The poor swearing soldier hired to be shot has his ‘honour
      of a soldier,’ different from drill, regulations, and the shilling a
      day. It is not to taste sweet things, but to do noble and true
      things, and vindicate himself under God’s heaven as a God-made man,
      that the poorest son of Adam dimly longs. Show him the way of doing
      that, the dullest day-drudge kindles into a hero. They wrong man
      greatly who say he is to be seduced by ease. Difficulty, abnegation,
      martyrdom, death, are the allurements that act on the heart of man.
      Kindle the inner genial life of him, you have a flame that burns up
      all lower considerations.”—Carlyle’s _Hero-worship_, p. 237 (ed.
      1858).

   86 “Clamat Epicurus, is quem vos nimis voluptatibus esse deditum
      dicitis, non posse jucunde vivi nisi sapienter, honeste, justeque
      vivatur, nec sapienter, honeste, juste nisi jucunde.”—Cicero, _De
      Fin._ i. 18.

   87 “The virtues to be complete must have fixed their residence in the
      heart and become appetites impelling to actions without further
      thought than the gratification of them; so that after their
      expedience ceases they still continue to operate by the desire they
      raise.... I knew a mercer who having gotten a competency of fortune,
      thought to retire and enjoy himself in quiet; but finding he could
      not be easy without business was forced to return to the shop and
      assist his former partners gratis, in the nature of a journeyman.
      Why then should it be thought strange that a man long inured to the
      practice of moral duties should persevere in them out of liking,
      when they can yield him no further advantage?”—Tucker’s _Light of
      Nature_, vol. i. p. 269. Mr. J. S. Mill in his _Utilitarianism_
      dwells much on the heroism which he thinks this view of morals may
      produce.

   88 See Lactantius, _Inst. Div._ vi. 9. Montesquieu, in his _Décadence
      de l’Empire romain_, has shown in detail the manner in which the
      crimes of Roman politicians contributed to the greatness of their
      nation. Modern history furnishes only too many illustrations of the
      same truth.

   89 “That quick sensibility which is the groundwork of all advances
      towards perfection increases the pungency of pains and
      vexations.”—Tucker’s _Light of Nature_, ii. 16, § 4.

   90 This position is forcibly illustrated by Mr. Maurice in his fourth
      lecture _On Conscience_ (1868). It is manifest that a tradesman
      resisting a dishonest or illegal trade custom, an Irish peasant in a
      disturbed district revolting against the agrarian conspiracy of his
      class, or a soldier in many countries conscientiously refusing in
      obedience to the law to fight a duel, would incur the full force of
      social penalties, because he failed to do that which was illegal or
      criminal.

   91 See Brown _On the Characteristics_, pp. 206-209.

   92 “A toothache produces more violent convulsions of pain than a
      phthisis or a dropsy. A gloomy disposition ... may be found in very
      worthy characters, though it is sufficient alone to embitter
      life.... A selfish villain may possess a spring and alacrity of
      temper, which is indeed a good quality, but which is rewarded much
      beyond its merit, and when attended with good fortune will
      compensate for the uneasiness and remorse arising from all the other
      vices.”—Hume’s Essays: _The Sceptic_.

   93 At the same time, the following passage contains, I think, a great
      deal of wisdom and of a kind peculiarly needed in England at the
      present day:—“The nature of the subject furnishes the strongest
      presumption that no better system will ever, for the future, be
      invented, in order to account for the origin of the benevolent from
      the selfish affections, and reduce all the various emotions of the
      human mind to a perfect simplicity. The case is not the same in this
      species of philosophy as in physics. Many an hypothesis in nature,
      contrary to first appearances, has been found, on more accurate
      scrutiny, solid and satisfactory.... But the presumption always lies
      on the other side in all enquiries concerning the origin of our
      passions, and of the internal operations of the human mind. The
      simplest and most obvious cause which can there be assigned for any
      phenomenon, is probably the true one.... The affections are not
      susceptible of any impression from the refinements of reason or
      imagination; and it is always found that a vigorous exertion of the
      latter faculties, necessarily, from the narrow capacity of the human
      mind, destroys all activity in the former.”—Hume’s _Enquiry
      Concerning Morals_, Append. II.

   94 “The pleasing consciousness and self-approbation that rise up in the
      mind of a virtuous man, exclusively of any direct, explicit,
      consideration of advantage likely to accrue to himself from his
      possession of those good qualities” (Hartley _On Man_, vol. i. p.
      493), form a theme upon which moralists of both schools are fond of
      dilating, in a strain that reminds one irresistibly of the
      self-complacency of a famous nursery hero, while reflecting upon his
      own merits over a Christmas-pie. Thus Adam Smith says, “The man who,
      not from frivolous fancy, but from proper motives, has performed a
      generous action, when he looks forward to those whom he has served,
      feels himself to be the natural object of their love and gratitude,
      and by sympathy with them, of the esteem and approbation of all
      mankind. And when he looks backward to the motive from which he
      acted, and surveys it in the light in which the indifferent
      spectator will survey it, he still continues to enter into it, and
      applauds himself by sympathy with the approbation of this supposed
      impartial judge. In both these points of view, his conduct appears
      to him every way agreeable.... Misery and wretchedness can never
      enter the breast in which dwells complete
      self-satisfaction.”—_Theory of Moral Sentiments_, part ii. ch. ii. §
      2; part iii. ch. iii. I suspect that many moralists confuse the
      self-gratulation which they suppose a virtuous man to feel, with the
      delight a religious man experiences from the sense of the protection
      and favour of the Deity. But these two feelings are clearly
      distinct, and it will, I believe, be found that the latter is most
      strongly experienced by the very men who most sincerely disclaim all
      sense of merit. “Were the perfect man to exist,” said that good and
      great writer, Archer Butler, “he himself would be the last to know
      it; for the highest stage of advancement is the lowest descent in
      humility.” At all events, the reader will observe, that on
      utilitarian principles nothing could be more pernicious or criminal
      than that modest, humble, and diffident spirit, which diminishes the
      pleasure of self-gratulation, one of the highest utilitarian motives
      to virtue.

   95 Hartley has tried in one place to evade this conclusion by an appeal
      to the doctrine of final causes. He says that the fact that
      conscience is not an original principle of our nature, but is formed
      mechanically in the manner I have described, does not invalidate the
      fact that it is intended for our guide, “for all the things which
      have evident final causes, are plainly brought about by mechanical
      means;” and he appeals to the milk in the breast, which is intended
      for the sustenance of the young, but which is nevertheless
      mechanically produced. (_On Man_, vol. ii. pp. 338-339.) But it is
      plain that this mode of reasoning would justify us in attributing an
      authoritative character to any habit—e.g. to that of avarice—which
      these writers assure us is in the manner of its formation an exact
      parallel to conscience. The later followers of Hartley certainly
      cannot be accused of any excessive predilection for the doctrine of
      final causes, yet we sometimes find them asking what great
      difference it can make whether (when conscience is admitted by both
      parties to be real) it is regarded as an original principle of our
      nature, or as a product of association? Simply this. If by the
      constitution of our nature we are subject to a law of duty which is
      different from and higher than our interest, a man who violates this
      law through interested motives, is deserving of reprobation. If on
      the other hand there is no natural law of duty, and if the pursuit
      of our interest is the one original principle of our being, no one
      can be censured who pursues it, and the first criterion of a wise
      man will be his determination to eradicate every habit
      (conscientious or otherwise) which impedes him in doing so.

_   96 On Human Nature_, chap. ix. § 10.

_   97 Enquiry concerning Good and Evil._

   98 This theory is noticed by Hutcheson, and a writer in the _Spectator_
      (No. 436) suggests that it may explain the attraction of
      prize-fights. The case of the pleasure derived from fictitious
      sorrow is a distinct question, and has been admirably treated in
      Lord Kames’ _Essays on Morality_. Bishop Butler notices (_Second
      Sermon on Compassion_), that it is possible for the very intensity
      of a feeling of compassion to divert men from charity by making them
      “industriously turn away from the miserable;” and it is well known
      that Goethe, on account of this very susceptibility, made it one of
      the rules of his life to avoid everything that could suggest painful
      ideas. Hobbes makes the following very characteristic comments on
      some famous lines of Lucretius: “From what passion proceedeth it
      that men take pleasure to behold from the shore the danger of those
      that are at sea in a tempest or in fight, or from a safe castle to
      behold two armies charge one another in the field? It is certainly
      in the whole sum joy, else men would never flock to such a
      spectacle. Nevertheless, there is both joy and grief, for as there
      is novelty and remembrance of our own security present, which is
      delight, so there is also pity, which is grief. But the delight is
      so far predominant that men usually are content in such a case to be
      spectators of the misery of their friends.” (_On Human Nature_, ch.
      ix. § 19.) Good Christians, according to some theologians, are
      expected to enjoy this pleasure in great perfection in heaven. “We
      may believe in the next world also the goodness as well as the
      happiness of the blest will be confirmed and advanced by reflections
      naturally arising from the view of the misery which some shall
      undergo, which seems to be a good reason for the creation of those
      beings who shall be finally miserable, and for the continuation of
      them in their miserable existence ... though in one respect the view
      of the misery which the damned undergo might seem to detract from
      the happiness of the blessed through pity and commiseration, yet
      under another, a nearer and much more affecting consideration, viz.
      that all this is the misery they themselves were often exposed to
      and in danger of incurring, why may not the sense of their own
      escape so far overcome the sense of another’s ruin as quite to
      extinguish the pain that usually attends the idea of it, and even
      render it productive of some real happiness? To this purpose,
      Lucretius’ _Suave mari_,” etc. (_Law’s notes to his Translation of
      King’s Origin of Evil_, pp. 477, 479.)

   99 See e.g. _Reid’s Essays on the Active Powers_, essay iii. ch. v.

  100 The error I have traced in this paragraph will be found running
      through a great part of what Mr. Buckle has written upon morals—I
      think the weakest portion of his great work. See, for example, an
      elaborate confusion on the subject, _History of Civilisation_, vol.
      ii. p. 429. Mr. Buckle maintains that all the philosophers of what
      is commonly called “the Scotch school” (a school founded by the
      Irishman Hutcheson, and to which Hume does not belong), were
      incapable of inductive reasoning, because they maintained the
      existence of a moral sense or faculty, or of first principles,
      incapable of resolution; and he enters into a learned enquiry into
      the causes which made it impossible for Scotch writers to pursue or
      appreciate the inductive method. It is curious to contrast this view
      with the language of one, who, whatever may be the value of his
      original speculations, is, I conceive, among the very ablest
      philosophical critics of the present century. “Les philosophes
      écossais adoptèrent les procédés que Bacon avait recommandé
      d’appliquer à l’étude du monde physique, et les transportèrent dans
      l’étude du monde moral. Ils firent voir que l’induction baconienne,
      c’est-à-dire, l’induction précédée d’une observation scrupuleuse des
      phénomènes, est en philosophie comme en physique la seule méthode
      légitime. C’est un de leurs titres les plus honorables d’avoir
      insisté sur cette démonstration, et d’avoir en même temps joint
      l’exemple au précepte.... Il est vrai que le zèle des philosophes
      écossais en faveur de la méthode d’observation leur a presque fait
      dépasser le but. Ils ont incliné à renfermer la psychologie dans la
      description minutieuse et continuelle de phénomènes de l’âme sans
      réfléchir assez que cette description doit faire place à l’induction
      et au raisonnement déductif, et qu’une philosophie qui se bornerait
      à l’observation serait aussi stérile que celle qui s’amuserait à
      construire des hypothèses sans avoir préalablement observé.”—Cousin,
      Hist. de la Philos. Morale au xviiime Siècle, Tome 4, p. 14-16.
      Dugald Stewart had said much the same thing, but he was a Scotchman,
      and therefore, according to Mr. Buckle (_Hist. of Civ._ ii. pp.
      485-86), incapable of understanding what induction was. I may add
      that one of the principal objections M. Cousin makes against Locke
      is, that he investigated the origin of our ideas before analysing
      minutely their nature, and the propriety of this method is one of
      the points on which Mr. Mill (_Examination of Sir W. Hamilton_) is
      at issue with M. Cousin.

  101 M. Ch. Comte, in his very learned _Traité de Législation_, liv. iii.
      ch. iv., has made an extremely curious collection of instances in
      which different nations have made their own distinctive
      peculiarities of colour and form the ideal of beauty.

  102 “How particularly fine the hard theta is in our English
      terminations, as in that grand word death, for which the Germans
      gutturise a sound that _puts you in mind of nothing but a loathsome
      toad_.”—Coleridge’s _Table Talk_, p. 181.

  103 Mackintosh, _Dissert._ p. 238.

  104 Lord Kames’ _Essays on Morality_ (1st edition), pp. 55-56.

  105 See Butler’s _Three Sermons on Human Nature_, and the preface.

  106 Speaking of the animated statue which he regarded as a
      representative of man, Condillac says, “Le goût peut ordinairement
      contribuer plus que l’odorat à son bonheur et à son malheur.... Il y
      contribue même encore plus que les sons harmonieux, parce que le
      besoin de nourriture lui rend les saveurs plus nécessaires, et par
      conséquent les lui fait goûter avec plus de vivacité. La faim pourra
      la rendre malheureuse, mais dès qu’elle aura remarqué les sensations
      propres à l’apaiser, elle y déterminera davantage son attention, les
      désirera avec plus de violence et en jouira avec plus de
      délire.”—_Traité des Sensations_, 1re partie ch. x.

  107 This is one of the favourite thoughts of Pascal, who, however, in
      his usual fashion dwells upon it in a somewhat morbid and
      exaggerated strain. “C’est une bien grande misère que de pouvoir
      prendre plaisir à des choses si basses et si méprisables ... l’homme
      est encore plus à plaindre de ce qu’il peut se divertir à ces choses
      si frivoles et si basses, que de ce qu’il s’afflige de ses misères
      effectives.... D’ou vient que cet homme, qui a perdu depuis peu son
      fils unique, et qui, accablé de procès et de querelles, était ce
      matin si troublé, n’y pense plus maintenant? Ne vous en étonnez pas;
      il est tout occupé à voir par où passera un cerf que ses chiens
      poursuivent.... C’est une joie de malade et de
      frénétique.”—_Pensées_ (Misère de l’homme).

  108 “Quæ singula improvidam mortalitatem involvunt, solum ut inter ista
      certum sit, nihil esse certi, nec miserius quidquam homine, aut
      superbius. Cæteris quippe animantium sola victus cura est, in quo
      sponte naturæ benignitas sufficit: uno quidem vel præferenda cunctis
      bonis, quod de gloria, de pecunia, ambitione, superque de morte, non
      cogitant.”—Plin. _Hist. Nat._ ii. 5.

  109 Paley, in his very ingenious, and in some respects admirable,
      chapter on happiness tries to prove the inferiority of animal
      pleasures, by showing the short time their enjoyment actually lasts,
      the extent to which they are dulled by repetition, and the cases in
      which they incapacitate men for other pleasures. But this
      calculation omits the influence of some animal enjoyments upon
      health and temperament. The fact, however, that health, which is a
      condition of body, is the chief source of happiness, Paley fully
      admits. “Health,” he says, “is the one thing needful ... when we are
      in perfect health and spirits, we feel in ourselves a happiness
      independent of any particular outward gratification.... This is an
      enjoyment which the Deity has annexed to life, and probably
      constitutes in a great measure the happiness of infants and brutes
      ... of oysters, periwinkles, and the like; for which I have
      sometimes been at a loss to find out amusement.” On the test of
      happiness he very fairly says, “All that can be said is that there
      remains a presumption in favour of those conditions of life in which
      men generally appear most cheerful and contented; for though the
      apparent happiness of mankind be not always a true measure of their
      real happiness, it is the best measure we have.”—_Moral Philosophy_,
      i. 6.

  110 A writer who devoted a great part of his life to studying the deaths
      of men in different countries, classes, and churches, and to
      collecting from other physicians information on the subject, says:
      “À mesure qu’on s’éloigne des grands foyers de civilisation, qu’on
      se rapproche des plaines et des montagnes, le caractère de la mort
      prend de plus en plus l’aspect calme du ciel par un beau crépuscule
      du soir.... En général la mort s’accomplit d’une manière d’autant
      plus simple et naturelle qu’on est plus libre des innombrables liens
      de la civilisation.”—Lauvergne, _De l’agonie de la Mort_, tome i.
      pp. 131-132.

  111 “I will omit much usual declamation upon the dignity and capacity of
      our nature, the superiority of the soul to the body, of the rational
      to the animal part of our constitution, upon the worthiness,
      refinement, and delicacy of some satisfactions, or the meanness,
      grossness, and sensuality of others; because I hold that pleasures
      differ in nothing but in continuance and intensity.”—Paley’s _Moral
      Philosophy_, book i. ch. vi. Bentham in like manner said, “Quantity
      of pleasure being equal, pushpin is as good as poetry,” and he
      maintained that the value of a pleasure depends on—its (1)
      intensity, (2) duration, (3) certainty, (4) propinquity, (5) purity,
      (6) fecundity, (7) extent (_Springs of Action_). The recognition of
      the “purity” of a pleasure might seem to imply the distinction for
      which I have contended in the text, but this is not so. The purity
      of a pleasure or pain, according to Bentham, is “the chance it has
      of not being followed by sensations of the opposite kind: that is
      pain if it be a pleasure, pleasure if it be a pain.”—_Morals and
      Legislation_, i. § 8. Mr. Buckle (_Hist. of Civilisation_, vol. ii.
      pp. 399-400) writes in a somewhat similar strain, but less
      unequivocally, for he admits that mental pleasures are “more
      ennobling” than physical ones. The older utilitarians, as far as I
      have observed, did not even advert to the question. This being the
      case, it must have been a matter of surprise as well as of
      gratification to most intuitive moralists to find Mr. Mill fully
      recognising the existence of different kinds of pleasure, and
      admitting that the superiority of the higher kinds does not spring
      from their being greater in amount.—_Utilitarianism_, pp. 11-12. If
      it be meant by this that we have the power of recognising some
      pleasures as superior to others in kind, irrespective of all
      consideration of their intensity, their cost, and their
      consequences, I submit that the admission is completely incompatible
      with the utilitarian theory, and that Mr. Mill has only succeeded in
      introducing Stoical elements into his system by loosening its very
      foundation. The impossibility of establishing an aristocracy of
      enjoyments in which, apart from all considerations of consequences,
      some which give less pleasure and are less widely diffused are
      regarded as intrinsically superior to others which give more
      pleasure and are more general, without admitting into our estimate a
      moral element, which on utilitarian principles is wholly
      illegitimate, has been powerfully shown since the first edition of
      this book by Professor Grote, in his _Examination of the Utilitarian
      Philosophy_, chap. iii.

  112 Büchner, _Force et Matière_, pp. 163-164. There is a very curious
      collection of the speculations of the ancient philosophers on this
      subject in Plutarch’s treatise, _De Placitis Philos._

  113 Aulus Gellius, _Noctes_, x. 23. The law is given by Dion. Halicarn.
      Valerius Maximus says, “Vini usus olim Romanis feminis ignotus fuit,
      ne scilicet in aliquod dedecus prolaberentur: quia proximus a Libero
      patre intemperantiæ gradus ad inconcessam Venerem esse consuevit”
      (Val. Max. ii. 1, § 5). This is also noticed by Pliny (_Hist. Nat._
      xiv. 14), who ascribes the law to Romulus, and who mentions two
      cases in which women were said to have been put to death for this
      offence, and a third in which the offender was deprived of her
      dowry. Cato said that the ancient Romans were accustomed to kiss
      their wives for the purpose of discovering whether they had been
      drinking wine. The Bona Dea, it is said, was originally a woman
      named Fatua, who was famous for her modesty and fidelity to her
      husband, but who, unfortunately, having once found a cask of wine in
      the house, got drunk, and was in consequence scourged to death by
      her husband. He afterwards repented of his act, and paid divine
      honours to her memory, and as a memorial of her death, a cask of
      wine was always placed upon the altar during the rites. (Lactantius,
      _Div. Inst._ i. 22.) The Milesians, also, and the inhabitants of
      Marseilles are said to have had laws forbidding women to drink wine
      (Ælian, _Hist. Var._ ii. 38). Tertullian describes the prohibition
      of wine among the Roman women as in his time obsolete, and a taste
      for it was one of the great trials of St. Monica (_Aug. Conf._ x.
      8).

  114 “La loi fondamentale de la morale agit sur toutes les nations bien
      connues. Il y a mille différences dans les interprétations de cette
      loi en mille circonstances; mais le fond subsiste toujours le même,
      et ce fond est l’idée du juste et de l’injuste.”—Voltaire, _Le
      Philosophe ignorant_.

  115 The feeling in its favour being often intensified by filial
      affection. “What is the most beautiful thing on the earth?” said
      Osiris to Horus. “To avenge a parent’s wrongs,” was the
      reply.—Plutarch _De Iside et Osiride_.

  116 Hence the Justinian code and also St. Augustine (_De Civ. Dei_, xix.
      15) derived servus from “servare,” to preserve, because the victor
      preserved his prisoners alive.

  117 “Les habitants du Congo tuent les malades qu’ils imaginent ne
      pouvoir en revenir; _c’est, disentils, pour leur épargner les
      douleurs de l’agonie_. Dans l’île Formose, lorsqu’un homme est
      dangereusement malade, on lui passe un nœud coulant au col et on
      l’étrangle, _pour l’arracher à la douleur_.”—Helvétius, _De
      l’Esprit_, ii. 13. A similar explanation may be often found for
      customs which are quoted to prove that the nations where they
      existed had no sense of chastity. “C’est pareillement sous la
      sauvegarde des lois que les Siamoises, la gorge et les cuisses à
      moitié découvertes, portées dans les rues sur les palanquins, s’y
      présentent dans des attitudes très-lascives. Cette loi fut établie
      par une de leurs reines nommée Tirada, qui, _pour dégoûter les
      hommes d’un amour plus déshonnête_, crut devoir employer toute la
      puissance de la beauté.”—_De l’Esprit_, ii. 14.

  118 “The contest between the morality which appeals to an external
      standard, and that which grounds itself on internal conviction, is
      the contest of progressive morality against stationary, of reason
      and argument against the deification of mere opinion and habit.”
      (Mill’s _Dissertations_, vol. ii. p. 472); a passage with a true
      Bentham ring. See, too, vol. i. p. 158. There is, however, a schism
      on this point in the utilitarian camp. The views which Mr. Buckle
      has expressed in his most eloquent chapter on the comparative
      influence of intellectual and moral agencies in civilisation diverge
      widely from those of Mr. Mill.

  119 “Est enim sensualitas quædam vis animæ inferior.... Ratio vero vis
      animæ est superior.”—Peter Lombard, _Sent._ ii. 24.

  120 Helvétius, _De l’Esprit_, discours iv. See too, Dr. Draper’s
      extremely remarkable _History of Intellectual Development in Europe_
      (New York, 1864), pp. 48, 53.

  121 Plutarch, _De Cohibenda Ira._

  122 Lactantius, _Div. Inst._ i. 22. The mysteries of the Bona Dea
      became, however, after a time, the occasion of great disorders. See
      Juvenal, Sat. vi. M. Magnin has examined the nature of these rites
      (_Origines du Théâtre_, pp. 257-259).

  123 The history of the vestals, which forms one of the most curious
      pages in the moral history of Rome, has been fully treated by the
      Abbé Nadal, in an extremely interesting and well-written memoir,
      read before the Académie des Belles-lettres, and republished in
      1725. It was believed that the prayer of a vestal could arrest a
      fugitive slave in his flight, provided he had not got past the city
      walls. Pliny mentions this belief as general in his time. The
      records of the order contained many miracles wrought at different
      times to save the vestals or to vindicate their questioned purity,
      and also one miracle which is very remarkable as furnishing a
      precise parallel to that of the Jew who was struck dead for touching
      the ark to prevent its falling.

  124 As for example the Sibyls and Cassandra. The same prophetic power
      was attributed in India to virgins.—Clem. Alexandrin. _Strom._ iii.
      7.

  125 This custom continued to the worst period of the empire, though it
      was shamefully and characteristically evaded. After the fall of
      Sejanus the senate had no compunction in putting his innocent
      daughter to death, but their religious feelings were shocked at the
      idea of a virgin falling beneath the axe. So by way of improving
      matters “filia constuprata est prius a carnifice, quasi impium esset
      virginem in carcere perire.”—Dion Cassius, lviii. 11. See too,
      Tacitus, _Annal._ v. 9. If a vestal met a prisoner going to
      execution the prisoner was spared, provided the vestal declared that
      the encounter was accidental. On the reverence the ancients paid to
      virgins, see Justus Lipsius, _De Vesta et Vestalibus_.

  126 See his picture of the first night of marriage:—

      “Tacitè subit ille supremus
      Virginitatis amor, primæque modestia culpæ
      Confundit vultus. Tunc ora rigantur honestis
      Imbribus.”

      _Thebaidos_, lib. ii. 232-34.

  127 Bees (which Virgil said had in them something of the divine nature)
      were supposed by the ancients to be the special emblems or models of
      chastity. It was a common belief that the bee mother begot her young
      without losing her virginity. Thus in a fragment ascribed to
      Petronius we read,

      “Sic sine concubitu textis apis excita ceris
      Fervet, et audaci milite castra replet.”

      Petron. _De Varia Animalium Generatione._

      So too Virgil:—

      “Quod neque concubitu indulgent nec corpora segnes
      In Venerem solvunt aut fœtus nixibus edunt.”—_Georg._ iv. 198-99.

      Plutarch says that an unchaste person cannot approach bees, for they
      immediately attack him and cover him with stings. Fire was also
      regarded as a type of virginity. Thus Ovid, speaking of the vestals,
      says:—

      “Nataque de fiamma corpora nulla vides:
      Jure igitur virgo est, quæ semina nulla remittit
      Nec capit, et comites virginitatis amat.”

      “The Egyptians believed that there are no males among vultures, and
      they accordingly made that bird an emblem of nature.”—Ammianus
      Marcellinus, xvii. 4.

  128 “La divinité étant considérée comme renfermant en elle toutes les
      qualités, toutes les forces intellectuelles et morales de l’homme,
      chacune de ces forces ou de ces qualités, conçue séparément,
      s’offrait comme un Être divin.... De-là aussi les contradictions les
      plus choquantes dans les notions que les anciens avaient des
      attributs divins.”—Maury, _Hist. des Religions de la Grèce antique_,
      tome i. pp. 578-579.

  129 “The Church holds that it were better for sun and moon to drop from
      heaven, for the earth to fail, and for all the many millions who are
      upon it to die of starvation in extremest agony, so far as temporal
      affliction goes, than that one soul, I will not say should be lost,
      but should commit one single venial sin, should tell one wilful
      untruth, though it harmed no one, or steal one poor farthing without
      excuse.”—Newman’s _Anglican Difficulties_, p. 190.

  130 There is a remarkable dissertation on this subject, called “The
      Limitations of Morality,” in a very ingenious and suggestive little
      work of the Benthamite school, called _Essays by a Barrister_
      (reprinted from the _Saturday Review_).

  131 The following passage, though rather vague and rhetorical, is not
      unimpressive: “Oui, dit Jacobi, je mentirais comme Desdemona
      mourante, je tromperais comme Oreste quand il veut mourir à la place
      de Pylade, j’assassinerais comme Timoléon, je serais parjure comme
      Épaminondas et Jean de Witt, je me déterminerais au suicide comme
      Caton, je serais sacrilége comme David; car j’ai la certitude en
      moi-même qu’en pardonnant à ces fautes suivant la lettre l’homme
      exerce le droit souverain que la majesté de son être lui confère; il
      appose le sceau de sa divine nature sur la grâce qu’il
      accorde.”—Barchou de Penhoen, _Hist. de la Philos. allemande_, tome
      i. p. 295.

  132 This equivocation seems to me to lie at the root of the famous
      dispute whether man is by nature a social being, or whether, as
      Hobbes averred, the state of nature is a state of war. Few persons
      who have observed the recent light thrown on the subject will
      question that the primitive condition of man was that of savage
      life, and fewer still will question that savage life is a state of
      war. On the other hand, it is, I think, equally certain that man
      necessarily becomes a social being in exact proportion to the
      development of the capacities of his nature.

  133 One of the best living authorities on this question writes: “The
      asserted existence of savages so low as to have no moral standard is
      too groundless to be discussed. Every human tribe has its general
      views as to what conduct is right and what wrong, and each
      generation hands the standard on to the next. Even in the details of
      their moral standards, wide as their differences are, there is yet
      wider agreement throughout the human race.”—Tylor on Primitive
      Society, _Contemporary Review_, April 1873, p. 702.

  134 The distinction between innate faculties evolved by experience and
      innate ideas independent of experience, and the analogy between the
      expansion of the former and that of the bud into the flower has been
      very happily treated by Reid. (_On the Active Powers_, essay iii.
      chap. viii. p. 4.) Professor Sedgwick, criticising Locke’s notion of
      the soul being originally like a sheet of white paper, beautifully
      says: “Naked man comes from his mother’s womb, endowed with limbs
      and senses indeed well fitted to the material world, yet powerless
      from want of use; and as for knowledge, his soul is one unvaried
      blank; yet has this blank been already touched by a celestial hand,
      and when plunged in the colours which surround it, it takes not its
      tinge from accident but design, and comes forth covered with a
      glorious pattern.” (_On the Studies of the University_, p. 54.)
      Leibnitz says: “L’esprit n’est point une table rase. Il est tout
      plein de caractères que la sensation ne peut que découvrir et mettre
      en lumière au lieu de les y imprimer. Je me suis servi de la
      comparaison d’une pierre de marbre qui a des veines plutôt que d’une
      pierre de marbre tout unie.... S’il y avait dans la pierre des
      veines qui marquassent la figure d’Hercule préférablement à d’autres
      figures, ... Hercule y serait comme inné en quelque façon, quoiqu’il
      fallût du travail pour découvrir ces veines.”—_Critique de l’Essai
      sur l’Entendement._

  135 The argument against the intuitive moralists derived from savage
      life was employed at some length by Locke. Paley then adopted it,
      taking a history of base ingratitude related by Valerius Maximus,
      and asking whether a savage would view it with disapprobation.
      (_Moral Phil._ book i. ch. 5.) Dugald Stewart (_Active and Moral
      Powers_, vol. i. pp. 230-231) and other writers have very fully
      answered this, but the same objection has been revived in another
      form by Mr. Austin, who supposes (_Lectures on Jurisprudence_, vol.
      i. pp. 82-83) a savage who first meets a hunter carrying a dead
      deer, kills the hunter and steals the deer, and is afterwards
      himself assailed by another hunter whom he kills. Mr. Austin asks
      whether the savage would perceive a moral difference between these
      two acts of homicide? Certainly not. In this early stage of
      development, the savage recognises a duty of justice and humanity to
      the members of his tribe, but to no one beyond this circle. He is in
      a “state of war” with the foreign hunter. He has a right to kill the
      hunter and the hunter an equal right to kill him.

  136 Everyone who is acquainted with metaphysics knows that there has
      been an almost endless controversy about Locke’s meaning on this
      point. The fact seems to be that Locke, like most great originators
      of thought, and indeed more than most, often failed to perceive the
      ultimate consequences of his principles, and partly through some
      confusion of thought, and partly through unhappiness of expression,
      has left passages involving the conclusions of both schools. As a
      matter of history the sensual school of Condillac grew professedly
      out of his philosophy. In defence of the legitimacy of the process
      by which these writers evolved their conclusions from the premisses
      of Locke, the reader may consult the very able lectures of M. Cousin
      on Locke. The other side has been treated, among others, by Dugald
      Stewart in his _Dissertation_, by Professor Webb in his
      _Intellectualism of Locke_, and by Mr. Rogers in an essay reprinted
      from the _Edinburgh Review_.

  137 I make this qualification, because I believe that the denial of a
      moral nature in man capable of perceiving the distinction between
      duty and interest and the rightful supremacy of the former, is both
      philosophically and actually subversive of natural theology.

  138 See the forcible passage in the life of Epicurus by Diogenes
      Laërtius. So Mackintosh: “It is remarkable that, while, of the three
      professors who sat in the Porch from Zeno to Posidonius, every one
      either softened or exaggerated the doctrines of his predecessor, and
      while the beautiful and reverend philosophy of Plato had in his own
      Academy degenerated into a scepticism which did not spare morality
      itself, the system of Epicurus remained without change; his
      disciples continued for ages to show personal honour to his memory
      in a manner which may seem unaccountable among those who were taught
      to measure propriety by a calculation of palpable and outward
      usefulness.”—_Dissertation on Ethical Philosophy_, p. 85, ed. 1836.
      See, too, Tennemann (_Manuel de la Philosophie_, ed. Cousin, tome i.
      p. 211).

  139 Thus e.g. the magnificent chapters of Helvétius on the moral effects
      of despotism, form one of the best modern contributions to political
      ethics. We have a curious illustration of the emphasis with which
      this school dwells on the moral importance of institutions in a
      memoir of M. De Tracy, _On the best Plan of National Education_,
      which appeared first towards the close of the French Revolution, and
      was reprinted during the Restoration. The author, who was one of the
      most distinguished of the disciples of Condillac, argued that the
      most efficient of all ways of educating a people is, the
      establishment of a good system of police, for the constant
      association of the ideas of crime and punishment in the minds of the
      masses is the one effectual method of creating moral habits, which
      will continue to act when the fear of punishment is removed.

  140 An important intellectual revolution is at present taking place in
      England. The ascendency in literary and philosophical questions
      which belonged to the writers of books is manifestly passing in a
      very great degree to weekly and even daily papers, which have long
      been supreme in politics, and have begun within the last ten years
      systematically to treat ethical and philosophical questions. From
      their immense circulation, their incontestable ability and the power
      they possess of continually reiterating their distinctive doctrines,
      from the impatience, too, of long and elaborate writings, which
      newspapers generate in the public, it has come to pass that these
      periodicals exercise probably a greater influence than any other
      productions of the day, in forming the ways of thinking of ordinary
      educated Englishmen. The many consequences, good and evil, of this
      change it will be the duty of future literary historians to trace,
      but there is one which is, I think, much felt in the sphere of
      ethics. An important effect of these journals has been to evoke a
      large amount of literary talent in the lawyer class. Men whose
      professional duties would render it impossible for them to write
      long books, are quite capable of treating philosophical subjects in
      the form of short essays, and have in fact become conspicuous in
      these periodicals. There has seldom, I think, before, been a time
      when lawyers occupied such an important literary position as at
      present, or when legal ways of thinking had so great an influence
      over English philosophy; and this fact has been eminently favourable
      to the progress of utilitarianism.

  141 There are some good remarks on this point in the very striking
      chapter on the present condition of Christianity in Wilberforce’s
      _Practical View_.

  142 See Reid’s _Essays on the Active Powers_, iii. i.

  143 I say usually proportioned, because it is, I believe, possible for
      men to realise intensely suffering, and to derive pleasure from that
      very fact. This is especially the case with vindictive cruelty, but
      it is not, I think, altogether confined to that sphere. This
      question we shall have occasion to examine when discussing the
      gladiatorial shows. Most cruelty, however, springs from callousness,
      which is simply dulness of imagination.

  144 The principal exception being where slavery, coexisting with
      advanced civilisation, retards or prevents the growth of industrial
      habits.

  145 See Mr. Laing’s _Travels in Sweden_. A similar cause is said to have
      had a similar effect in Bavaria.

  146 This has been, I think, especially the case with the Austrians.

  147 See some remarkable instances of this in Cabanis, _Rapports du
      Physique et du Moral de l’Homme_.

  148 Diog. Laërt. _Pythag._

  149 Plutarch, _De Profectibus in Virt._

  150 Diog. Laërt. _Stilpo._

  151 Clem. Alexand. _Strom._ vii.

  152 Cicero, _De Nat. Deorum_, i. 1.

  153 Lactant. _Inst. Div._ i. 5.

  154 “Pythagoras ita definivit quid esset Deus: Animus qui per universas
      mundi partes, omnemque naturam commeans atque diffusus, ex quo omnia
      quæ nascuntur animalia vitam capiunt.”—Ibid. Lactantius in this
      chapter has collected several other philosophic definitions of the
      Divinity. See too Plutarch, _De Placit. Philos._ Tertullian explains
      the stoical theory by an ingenious illustration: “Stoici enim volunt
      Deum sic per materiem decucurrisse quomodo mel per favos.”—Tert. _De
      Anima_.

  155 As Cicero says: “Epicurus re tollit, oratione relinquit, deos.”—_De
      Nat. Deor._ i. 44.

  156 Sometimes, however, they restricted its operation to the great
      events of life. As an interlocutor in Cicero says: “Magna dii
      curant, parva negligunt.”—Cic. _De Natur. Deor._ ii. 66. Justin
      Martyr notices (_Trypho_, i.) that some philosophers maintained that
      God cared for the universal or species, but not for the individual.
      Seneca maintains that the Divinity has determined all things by an
      inexorable law of destiny, which He has decreed, but which He
      Himself obeys. (_De Provident._ v.)

  157 See on this theory Cicero, _De Natur. Deor._ i. 42; Lactantius,
      _Inst. Div._ i. 11.

  158 Diog. Laërt. _Vit. Zeno._ St. Aug. _De Civ. Dei_, iv. 11. Maximus of
      Tyre, _Dissert._ x. (in some editions xxix.) § 8. Seneca, _De
      Beneficiis_, iv. 7-8. Cic. _De Natur. Deor._ i. 15. Cicero has
      devoted the first two books of this work to the stoical theology. A
      full review of the allegorical and mythical interpretations of
      paganism is given by Eusebius, _Evang. Præpar._ lib. iii.

  159 St. Aug. _De Civ._ vii. 5.

  160 Plin. _Hist. Nat_. ii. 1.

  161 “Nec vero Deus ipse qui intelligitur a nobis, alio modo intelligi
      potest nisi mens soluta quædam et libera, segregata ab omni
      concretione mortali, omnia sentiens et movens, ipsaque prædita motu
      sempiterno.”—_Tusc. Quæst_. i. 27.

  162 Senec. _Quæst. Nat._ ii. 45.

  163 “Estne Dei sedes, nisi terra et pontus et aër.
      Et cœlum et virtus? Superos quid quærimus ultra?
      Jupiter est quodcumque vides, quodcumque moveris.”

      _Pharsal._ ix. 578-80.

  164 “Quæve anus tam excors inveniri potest, quæ illa, quæ quondam
      credebantur apud inferos portenta, extimescat?”—Cic. _De Nat. Deor._
      ii. 2.

      “Esse aliques Manes et subterranea regna ...
      Nec pueri credunt nisi qui nondum ære lavantur.”

      Juv. _Sat._ ii. 149, 152.

      See on this subject a good review by the Abbé Freppel, _Les Pères
      Apostoliques_, leçon viii.

  165 Cicero, _De Leg._ i. 14; Macrobius, _In. Som. Scip._ i. 10.

  166 See his works _De Divinatione_ and _De Nat. Deorum_, which form a
      curious contrast to the religious conservatism of the _De Legibus_,
      which was written chiefly from a political point of view.

  167 Eusebius, _Præp. Evang._ lib. iv.

  168 The oracles first gave their answers in verse, but their bad poetry
      was ridiculed, and they gradually sank to prose, and at last ceased.
      Plutarch defended the inspiration of the bad poetry on the ground
      that the inspiring spirit availed itself of the natural faculties of
      the priestess for the expression of its infallible truths—a theory
      which is still much in vogue among Biblical critics, and is, I
      believe, called dynamical inspiration. See Fontenelle, _Hist. des
      Oracles_ (1st ed.), pp. 292-293.

  169 See the famous description of Cato refusing to consult the oracle of
      Jupiter Ammon in Lucan, _Phars._ ix.; and also Arrian, ii. 7. Seneca
      beautifully says, “Vis deos propitiare? bonus esto. Satis illos
      coluit quisquis imitatus est.”—_Ep._ xcv.

  170 Cicero, _De Divin_. ii. 24.

  171 Aulus Gellius, _Noct. Att._ xv. 22.

  172 See a long string of witticisms collected by Legendre, _Traité de
      l’Opinion, ou Mémoires pour servir à l’Histoire de l’Esprit humain_
      (Venise, 1735), tome i. pp. 386-387.

  173 See Cicero, _De Natura Deorum_; Seneca, _De Brev. Vit._ c. xvi.;
      Plin. _Hist. Nat._ ii. 5; Plutarch, _De Superstitione_.

  174 “Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
      Cum faber, incertus scamnum faceretne Priapum,
      Maluit esse Deum.”

      _Sat._ I. viii. 1-3.

  175 There is a very curious discussion on this subject, reported to have
      taken place between Apollonius of Tyana and an Egyptian priest. The
      former defended the Greek fashion of worshipping the Divinity under
      the form of the human image, sculptured by Phidias and Praxiteles,
      this being the noblest form we can conceive, and therefore the least
      inadequate to the Divine perfections. The latter defended the
      Egyptian custom of worshipping animals, because, as he said, it is
      blasphemous to attempt to conceive an image of the Deity, and the
      Egyptians therefore concentrate the imagination of the worshipper on
      objects that are plainly merely allegorical or symbolical, and do
      not pretend to offer any such image (_Philos. Apoll. of Tyana_, vi.
      19). Pliny shortly says, “Effigiem Dei formamque quærere
      imbecillitatis humanæ reor” (_Hist. Nat._ ii. 5). See too Max.
      Tyrius, Diss. xxxviii. There was a legend that Numa forbade all
      idols, and that for 200 years they were unknown in Rome (Plutarch,
      _Life of Numa_). Dion Chrysostom said that the Gods need no statues
      or sacrifices, but that by these means we attest our devotion to
      them (_Orat._ xxxi.). On the vanity of rich idols, see Plutarch, _De
      Superstitione_; Seneca, _Ep._ xxxi.

  176 1 Lact. _Inst. Div._ vi. 25.

  177 Dion. Halic. ii.; Polyb. vi. 56.

  178 St. Aug. _De Civ. Dei_, iv. 31.

  179 Epictetus, _Enchir._ xxxix.

  180 Cicero, speaking of the worship of deified men, says, “indicat
      omnium quidem animos immortales esse, sed fortium bonorumque
      divinos.”—_De Leg._ ii. 11. The Roman worship of the dead, which was
      the centre of the domestic religion, has been recently investigated
      with much ability by M. Coulanges (_La Cité antique_).

  181 On the minute supervision exercised by the censors on all the
      details of domestic life, see Aul. Gell. _Noct._ ii. 24; iv. 12, 20.

  182 Livy, xxxix. 6.

  183 Vell. Paterculus, i. 11-13; Eutropius, iv. 6. Sallust ascribed the
      decadence of Rome to the destruction of its rival, Carthage.

  184 Plutarch, _De Adulatore et Amico_.

  185 There is much curious information about the growth of Roman luxury
      in Pliny (_Hist. Nat._ lib. xxxiv.). The movement of decomposition
      has been lately fully traced by Mommsen (_Hist. of Rome_); Döllinger
      (_Jew and Gentile_); Denis (_ Hist. des Idées morales dans
      l’Antiquité_); Pressensé (_Hist. des trois premiers Siècles_); in
      the histories of Champagny, and in the beautiful closing chapters of
      the _Apôtres_ of Renan.

  186 Sueton. _Aug._ xvi.

  187 Ibid. _Calig._ v.

  188 Persius, _Sat._ ii.; Horace, _Ep._ i. 16, vv. 57-60.

  189 See, on the identification of the Greek and Egyptian myths,
      Plutarch’s _De Iside et Osiride_. The Greek and Roman gods were
      habitually regarded as identical, and Cæsar and Tacitus, in like
      manner, identified the deities of Gaul and Germany with those of
      their own country. See Döllinger, _Jew and Gentile_, vol. ii. pp.
      160-165.

  190 “Ego deûm genus esse semper dixi et dicam cœlitum; Sed eos non
      curare opinor quid agat hominum genus.”

      Cicero adds: “magno plausu loquitur assentiente populo.”—_De Divin._
      ii. 50.

  191 Plutarch, _De Superstitione_.

  192 St. Aug. _De Civ. Dei_, vi. 6; Tertul. _Apol._ 15; Arnobius, _Adv.
      Gentes_, iv.

  193 “Pars alia et hanc pellit, astroque suo eventus assignat, nascendi
      legibus; semelque in omnes futuros unquam Deo decretum; in reliquum
      vero otium datum. Sedere cœpit sententia hæc pariterque et eruditum
      vulgus et rude in eam cursu vadit. Ecce fulgurum monitus, oraculorum
      præscita, aruspicum prædicta, atque etiam parva dictu, in auguriis
      sternumenta et offensiones pedum.”—_Hist. Nat._ ii. 5. Pliny himself
      expresses great doubt about astrology giving many examples of men
      with different destinies, who had been born at the same time, and
      therefore under the same stars (vii. 50). Tacitus expresses complete
      doubt about the existence of Providence. (_Ann._ vi. 22.) Tiberius
      is said to have been very indifferent to the gods and to the worship
      of the temples, being wholly addicted to astrology and convinced
      that all things were pre-ordained. (_Suet. Tib._ lxix.)

  194 Ammianus Marcellinus, xxviii.

_  195 De Profectibus in Virt._ It was originally the custom at Roman
      feasts to sing to a pipe the actions and the virtues of the greatest
      men. (Cic. _Tusc. Quæst._ iv.)

  196 E.g. Epictetus, _Ench._ lii. Seneca is full of similar exhortations.

  197 According to Cicero, the first Latin work on philosophy was by the
      Epicurean Amafanius. (_Tusc. Quæst._ iv.)

  198 See on the great perfection of the character of Epicurus his life by
      Diogenes Laërtius, and on the purity of the philosophy he taught and
      the degree in which it was distorted and misrepresented by his Roman
      followers. Seneca _De Vita Beata_, c. xii. xiii. and _Ep._ xxi.
      Gassendi, in a very interesting little work entitled _Philosophiæ
      Epicuri Syntagma_, has abundantly proved the possibility of uniting
      Epicurean principles with a high code of morals. But probably the
      most beautiful picture of the Epicurean system is the first book of
      the _De Finibus_, in which Cicero endeavours to paint it as it would
      have been painted by its adherents. When we remember that the writer
      of this book was one of the most formidable and unflinching
      opponents of Epicureanism in all the ancient world, it must be owned
      that it would be impossible to find a grander example of that noble
      love of truth, that sublime and scrupulous justice to opponents,
      which was the pre-eminent glory of ancient philosophers, and which,
      after the destruction of philosophy, was for many centuries almost
      unknown in the world. It is impossible to doubt that Epicureanism
      was logically compatible with a very high degree of virtue. It is, I
      think, equally impossible to doubt that its practical tendency was
      towards vice.

  199 Mr. Grote gives the following very clear summary of Plato’s ethical
      theory, which he believes to be original:—“Justice is in the mind a
      condition analogous to good health and strength in the body.
      Injustice is a condition analogous to sickness, corruption,
      impotence in the body.... To possess a healthy body is desirable for
      its consequences as a means towards other constituents of happiness,
      but it is still more desirable in itself as an essential element of
      happiness _per se_, i.e., the negation of sickness, which would of
      itself make us miserable.... In like manner, the just mind blesses
      the possessor twice: first and chiefly by bringing to him happiness
      in itself; next, also, as it leads to ulterior happy results. The
      unjust mind is a curse to its possessor in itself and apart from
      results, though it also leads to ulterior results which render it
      still more a curse to him.”—Grote’s _Plato_, vol. iii. p. 131.
      According to Plutarch, Aristo of Chio defined virtue as “the health
      of the soul.” (_De Virtute Morali._)

  200 “Beata est ergo vita conveniens naturæ suæ; quæ non aliter
      contingere potest quam si primum sana mens est et in perpetuâ
      possessione sanitatis suæ.”—Seneca, _De Vita Beata_, c. iii.

  201 The famous paradox that “the sage could be happy even in the bull of
      Phalaris,” comes from the writings not of Zeno but of
      Epicurus—though the Stoics adopted and greatly admired it. (Cic.
      _Tusc._ ii. See Gassendi, _Philos. Epicuri Syntagma_, pars iii. c.
      1.)

  202 “Sed nescio quomodo dum lego assentior; cum posui librum et mecum
      ipse de immortalitate animorum cœpi cogitare, assensio omnis illa
      elabitur.”—Cic. _Tusc._ i.

  203 Sallust, _Catilina_, cap. li.

  204 See that most impressive passage (_Hist. Nat._ vii. 56). That the
      sleep of annihilation is the happiest end of man is a favourite
      thought of Lucretius. Thus:

      “Nil igitur mors est, ad nos neque pertinet hilum,
      Quandoquidem natura animi mortalis habetur.”—iii. 842.

      This mode of thought has been recently expressed in Mr. Swinburne’s
      very beautiful poem on _The Garden of Proserpine_.

  205 Diog. Laërtius. The opinion of Chrysippus seems to have prevailed,
      and Plutarch (_De Placit. Philos._) speaks of it as that of the
      school. Cicero sarcastically says, “Stoici autem usuram nobis
      largiuntur, tanquam cornicibus: diu mansuros aiunt animos; semper,
      negant.”—_Tusc. Disp._ i. 31.

  206 It has been very frequently asserted that Antigonus of Socho having
      taught that virtue should be practised for its own sake, his
      disciple, Zadok, the founder of the Sadducees, inferred the
      non-existence of a future world; but the evidence for this whole
      story is exceedingly unsatisfactory. The reader may find its history
      in a very remarkable article by Mr. Twisleton on _Sadducees_, in
      Smith’s _Biblical Dictionary_.

  207 On the Stoical opinions about a future life see Martin, _La Vie
      future_ (Paris, 1858); Courdaveaux _De l’immortalité de l’âme dans
      le Stoïcisme_ (Paris, 1857); and Alger’s _Critical Hist. of the
      Doctrine of a Future Life_ (New York, 1866).

  208 His arguments are met by Cicero in the _Tusculans_.

  209 See a collection of passages from his discourses collected by M.
      Courdaveaux, in the introduction to his French translation of that
      book.

  210 Stobæus, _Eclog. Physic._ lib. i. cap. 52.

  211 In his consolations to Marcia, he seems to incline to a belief in
      the immortality, or at least the future existence, of the soul. In
      many other passages, however, he speaks of it as annihilated at
      death.

  212 “Les Stoïciens ne faisaient aucunement dépendre la morale de la
      perspective des peines ou de la rémunération dans une vie future....
      La croyance à l’immortalité de l’âme n’appartenait donc, selon leur
      manière de voir, qu’à la physique, c’est-à-dire à la
      psychologie.”—Degerando, _Hist. de la Philos._ tome iii. p. 56.

  213 “Panætius igitur, qui sine controversia de officiis accuratissime
      disputavit, quemque nos, correctione quadam adhibita, potissimum
      secuti sumus.”—_De Offic._ iii. 2.

  214 Marcus Aurelius thanks Providence, as for one of the great blessings
      of his life, that he had been made acquainted with the writings of
      Epictetus. The story is well known how the old philosopher warned
      his master, who was beating him, that he would soon break his leg,
      and when the leg was broken, calmly remarked, “I told you you would
      do so.” Celsus quoted this in opposition to the Christians, asking,
      “Did your leader under suffering ever say anything so noble?” Origen
      finely replied, “He did what was still nobler—He kept silence.” A
      Christian anchorite (some say St. Nilus, who lived in the beginning
      of the fifth century) was so struck with the _Enchiridion_ of
      Epictetus, that he adapted it to Christian use. The conversations of
      Epictetus, as reported by Arrian, are said to have been the
      favourite reading of Toussaint l’Ouverture.

  215 Tacitus had used this expression before Milton: “Quando etiam
      sapientibus cupido gloriæ novissima exuitur.”—_Hist._ iv. 6.

  216 Two remarkable instances have come down to us of eminent writers
      begging historians to adorn and even exaggerate their acts. See the
      very curious letters of Cicero to the historian Lucceius (_Ep. ad
      Divers._ v. 12); and of the younger Pliny to Tacitus (_Ep._ vii.
      33). Cicero has himself confessed that he was too fond of glory.

  217 “Unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem;
      Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem.”—Ennius.

  218 See the beautiful description of Cato’s tranquillity under insults.
      Seneca, _De Ira_, ii. 33; _De Const. Sap._ 1, 2.

_  219 De Officiis_, iii. 9.

_  220 Tusc._ ii. 26.

  221 Seneca, _De Vit. Beat._ c. xx.

  222 Seneca, _Ep._ cxiii.

  223 Seneca, _Ep._ lxxxi.

  224 Persius, _Sat._ i. 45-47.

  225 Epictetus, _Ench._ xxiii.

  226 Seneca, _De Ira_, iii. 41.

  227 Seneca, _Cons. ad Helv._ xiii.

  228 Marc. Aur. vii. 67.

  229 Marc. Aur. iv. 20.

  230 Pliny, _Ep._ i. 22.

  231 “Non dux, sed comes voluptas.”—_De Vit. Beat._ c. viii.

  232 “Voluptas non est merces nec causa virtutis sed accessio; nec quia
      delectat placet sed quia placet delectat.”—Ibid., c. ix.

  233 Peregrinus apud Aul. Gellius, xii. 11. Peregrinus was a Cynic, but
      his doctrine on this point was identical with that of the Stoics.

  234 Marc. Aurel. ix. 42.

  235 Marc. Aurel. v. 6.

  236 Seneca, however, in one of his letters (_Ep._ lxxv.), subtilises a
      good deal on this point. He draws a distinction between affections
      and maladies. The first, he says, are irrational, and therefore
      reprehensible movements of the soul, which, if repeated and
      unrepressed, tend to form an irrational and evil habit, and to the
      last he in this letter restricts the term disease. He illustrates
      this distinction by observing that colds and any other slight
      ailments, if unchecked and neglected, may produce an organic
      disease. The wise man, he says, is wholly free from moral disease,
      but no man can completely emancipate himself from affections, though
      he should make this his constant object.

_  237 De Clem._ ii. 6, 7.

  238 “Peccantes vero quid habet cur oderit, cum error illos in hujusmodi
      delicta compellat?”—Sen. _De Ira_, i. 14. This is a favourite
      thought of Marcus Aurelius, to which he reverts again and again.
      See, too, Arrian, i. 18.

  239 “Ergo ne homini quidem nocebimus quia peccavit sed ne peccet, nec
      unquam ad præteritum sed ad futurum pœna referetur.”—Ibid. ii. 31.
      In the philosophy of Plato, on the other hand, punishment was
      chiefly expiatory and purificatory. (Lerminier, _Introd. à
      l’Histoire du Droit_, p. 123.)

  240 Seneca, _De Constant. Sap._ v. Compare and contrast this famous
      sentence of Anaxagoras with that of one of the early Christian
      hermits. Someone told the hermit that his father was dead. “Cease
      your blasphemy,” he answered, “my father is immortal.”—Socrates,
      _Eccl. Hist._ iv 23.

  241 Epictetus, _Ench._ 16, 18.

  242 The dispute about whether anything but virtue is a good, was, in
      reality, a somewhat childish quarrel about words; for the Stoics,
      who indignantly denounced the Peripatetics for maintaining the
      affirmative, admitted that health, friends, &c., should be sought
      not as “goods” but as “preferables.” See a long discussion on this
      matter in Cicero (_De Finib._ lib. iii. iv.). The Stoical doctrine
      of the equality of all vices was formally repudiated by Marcus
      Aurelius, who maintained (ii. 10), with Theophrastus, that faults of
      desire were worse than faults of anger. The other Stoics, while
      dogmatically asserting the equality of all virtues as well as the
      equality of all vices, in their particular judgments graduated their
      praise or blame much in the same way as the rest of the world.

  243 See Seneca (_Ep._ lxxxix.). Seneca himself, however, has devoted a
      work to natural history, but the general tendency of the school was
      certainly to concentrate all attention upon morals, and all, or
      nearly all the great naturalists were Epicureans. Cicero puts into
      the mouth of the Epicurean the sentence, “Omnium autem rerum natura
      cognita levamur superstitione, liberamur mortis metu, non
      conturbamur ignoratione rerum” (_De Fin._ i.); and Virgil expressed
      an eminently Epicurean sentiment in his famous lines:—

      “Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,
      Quique metus omnes et inexorabile fatum
      Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque
      Acherontis avari.”

      _Georg._ 490-492.

  244 Plutarch, _Cato Major_.

  245 Cicero, _Ad Attic._ vi. 2.

  246 This contrast is noticed and largely illustrated by M. Montée in his
      interesting little work _Le Stoïcisme à Rome_, and also by Legendre
      in his _Traité de l’Opinion, ou Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire de
      l’esprit humain_ (Venise, 1735).

  247 “Atque hoc quidem omnes mortales sic habent ... commoditatem
      prosperitatemque vitæ a diis se habere, virtutem autem nemo unquam
      acceptam deo retulit. Nimirum recte. Propter virtutem enim jure
      laudamur et in virtute recte gloriamur. Quod non contingeret si id
      donum a deo, non a nobis haberemus.”—Cicero, _De Nat. Deor._ iii.
      36.

_  248 Ep._ i. 18.

  249 Seneca _Ep._ lxvi.

  250 Lucretius, v. It was a Greek proverb, that Apollo begat Æsculapius
      to heal the body, and Plato to heal the soul. (Legendre, _Traité de
      l’Opinion_, tome i. p. 197.)

  251 “Orandum est ut sit mens sana in corpore sano:
      Fortem posce animum, mortis terrore carentem....
      Monstro, quod ipse tibi possis dare.”

      Juvenal, _Sat._ x. 356.

      Marcus Aurelius recommends prayer, but only that we may be freed
      from evil desires. (ix. 11.)

  252 Seneca, _Ep._ lxvi.

  253 Ibid. _Ep._ liii.

_  254 De Const. Sap._ viii.

_  255 Ench._ xlviii.

  256 Arrian, i. 12.

  257 Arrian, ii. 8. The same doctrine is strongly stated in Seneca, _Ep._
      xcii.

  258 Cicero, _De Nat. Deor._ ii. 66.

_  259 Ep._ lxxxiii. Somewhat similar sentiments are attributed to Thales
      and Bion (Diog. Laërt.).

_  260 Ep._ xli. There are some beautiful sentiments of this kind in
      Plutarch’s treatise, _De Sera Numinis Vindicta_. It was a saying of
      Pythagoras, that “we become better as we approach the gods.”

  261 Marc. Aur. iii. 5.

  262 Marcus Aurelius.

  263 Seneca, _Præf. Nat. Quæst._ iii.

  264 Marc. Aur. x. 25.

  265 Epict. _Ench._ xvii.

  266 Epict. _Ench._ xi.

  267 Seneca, _De Prov._ i.

  268 Ibid. iv.

  269 Marc. Aurel. ii. 2, 3.

  270 The language in which the Stoics sometimes spoke of the inexorable
      determination of all things by Providence would appear logically
      inconsistent with free will. In fact, however, the Stoics asserted
      the latter doctrine in unequivocal language, and in their practical
      ethics even exaggerated its power. Aulus Gellius (_Noct. Att._ vi.
      2) has preserved a passage in which Chrysippus exerted his subtlety
      in reconciling the two things. See, too, Arrian, i. 17.

  271 We have an extremely curious illustration of this mode of thought in
      a speech of Archytas of Tarentum on the evils of sensuality, which
      Cicero has preserved. He considers the greatest of these evils to be
      that the vice predisposes men to unpatriotic acts. “Nullam
      capitaliorem pestem quam corporis voluptatem, hominibus a natura
      datam.... Hinc patriæ proditiones, hinc rerumpublicarum eversiones,
      hinc cum hostibus clandestina colloquia nasci,” etc.—Cicero, _De
      Senect._ xii.

  272 Diog. Laërt. _Anax._

  273 “Cari sunt parentes, cari liberi, propinqui, familiares; sed omnes
      omnium caritates patria una complexa est; pro qua quis bonus dubitet
      mortem oppetere si ei sit profuturus?”—_De Offic._ i. 17.

  274 See Seneca, _Consol. ad Helviam_ and _De Otio Sapien._; and
      Plutarch, _De Exilio_. The first of these works is the basis of one
      of the most beautiful compositions in the English language,
      Bolingbroke’s _Reflections on Exile_.

_  275 De Officiis_.

_  276 Epist._ i. 10.

  277 “Tota enim philosophorum vita, ut ait idem, commentatio mortis
      est.”—Cicero, _Tusc._ i. 30, _ad fin_.

_  278 Essay on Death._

  279 Spinoza, _Ethics_, iv. 67.

  280 Camden. Montalembert notices a similar legend as existing in
      Brittany (_Les Moines d’Occident_, tome ii. p. 287). Procopius (_De
      Bello Goth._ iv. 20) says that it is impossible for men to live in
      the west of Britain, and that the district is believed to be
      inhabited by the souls of the dead.

  281 In his _De Sera Numinis Vindicta_ and his _Consolatio ad Uxorem_.

  282 In the _Phædo_, _passim_. See, too, Marc. Aurelius, ii. 12.

  283 See a very striking letter of Epicurus quoted by Diogenes Laërt. in
      his life of that philosopher. Except a few sentences, quoted by
      other writers, these letters were all that remained of the works of
      Epicurus, till the recent discovery of one of his treatises at
      Herculaneum.

_  284 Tusc. Quæst._ i.

_  285 Consol. ad Polyb._ xxvii.

  286 Maury, _Hist. des Religions de la Grèce antique_, tom. i. pp.
      582-588. M. Ravaisson, in his Memoir on Stoicism (_Acad. des
      Inscriptions et Belles-lettres_, tom. xxi.) has enlarged on the
      terrorism of paganism, but has, I think, exaggerated it. Religions
      which selected games as the natural form of devotion can never have
      had any very alarming character.

  287 Plutarch, _Ad Apollonium_.

  288 Ibid.

  289 Cic. _Tusc. Quæst._ i.

  290 Philost. Apoll. of Tyan. v. 4. Hence their passion for suicide,
      which Silius Italicus commemorates in lines which I think very
      beautiful:—

      “Prodiga gens animæ et properare facillima mortem;
      Namque ubi transcendit florentes viribus annos
      Impatiens ævi, spernit novisse senectam
      Et fati modus in dextra est.”—i. 225-228.

      Valerius Maximus (ii. vi. § 12) speaks of Celts who celebrated the
      birth of men with lamentation, and their deaths with joy.

  291 Aulus Gellius, _Noctes_, i. 3.

  292 Tacitus, _Annales_, xv. 62.

  293 Sueton. _Titus_, 10.

  294 Capitolinus, _Antoninus_.

  295 See the beautiful account of his last hours given by Ammianus
      Marcellinus and reproduced by Gibbon. There are some remarks well
      worth reading about the death of Julian, and the state of thought
      that rendered such a death possible, in Dr. Newman’s _Discourses on
      University Education_, lect. ix.

  296 “Lex non pœna mors” was a favourite saying among the ancients. On
      the other hand, Tertullian very distinctly enunciated the patristic
      view, “Qui autem primordia hominis novimus, audenter determinamus
      mortem non ex natura secutam hominem sed ex culpa.”—_De Anima_, 52.

  297 Plutarch, _Ad Uxorem_.

  298 St. Augustine, _Epist._ 166.

  299 “At hoc quidem commune est omnium philosophorum, non eorum modo qui
      deum nihil habere ipsum negotii dicunt, et nihil exhibere alteri;
      sed eorum etiam, qui deum semper agere aliquid et moliri volunt,
      numquam nec irasci deum nec nocere.”—Cic. _De Offic._ iii. 28.

  300 See the refutation of the philosophic notion in Lactantius, _De Ira
      Dei_.

  301 “Revelation,” as Lessing observes in his essay on this subject, “has
      made Death the ‘king of terrors,’ the awful offspring of sin and the
      dread way to its punishment; though to the imagination of the
      ancient heathen world, Greek or Etrurian, he was a youthful
      genius—the twin brother of Sleep, or a lusty boy with a torch held
      downwards.”—Coleridge’s _Biographia Litteraria_, cap. xxii., note by
      Sara Coleridge.

  302 “Vetat Pythagoras injussu imperatoris, id est Dei, de præsidio et
      statione vitæ decedere.”—Cic. _De Senec._ xx. If we believe the very
      untrustworthy evidence of Diog. Laërtius (_Pythagoras_) the
      philosopher himself committed suicide by starvation.

  303 See his _Laws_, lib. ix. In his _Phædon_, however, Plato went
      further, and condemned all suicide. Libanius says (_De Vita Sua_)
      that the arguments of the _Phædon_ prevented him from committing
      suicide after the death of Julian. On the other hand, Cicero
      mentions a certain Cleombrotus, who was so fascinated by the proof
      of the immortality of the soul in the _Phædon_ that he forthwith
      cast himself into the sea. Cato, as is well known, chose this work
      to study, the night he committed suicide.

  304 Arist. _Ethic._ v.

  305 See a list of these in Lactantius’ _Inst. Div._ iii. 18. Many of
      these instances rest on very doubtful evidence.

  306 Adam Smith’s _Moral Sentiments_, part vii. § 2.

  307 “Proxima deinde tenent mœsti loca qui sibi lethum
      Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi
      Projecere animas. Quam vellent æthere in alto
      Nunc et pauperiem et duros perferre labores.”
      —_Æneid_, vi. 434-437.

  308 Cicero has censured suicide in his _De Senectute_, in the _Somn.
      Scipionis_, and in the _Tusculans_. Concerning the death of Cato, he
      says, that the occasion was such as to constitute a divine call to
      leave life.—_Tusc._ i.

  309 Apuleius, _De Philos. Plat._ lib. i.

  310 Thus Ovid:—

      “Rebus in adversis facile est contemnere vitam,
      Fortiter ille facit qui miser esse potest.”

      See, too, Martial, xi. 56.

  311 Especially _Ep._ xxiv. Seneca desires that men should not commit
      suicide with panic or trepidation. He says that those condemned to
      death should await their execution, for “it is a folly to die
      through fear of death;” and he recommends men to support old age as
      long as their faculties remain unimpaired. On this last point,
      however, his language is somewhat contradictory. There is a good
      review of the opinions of the ancients in general, and of Seneca in
      particular, on this subject in Justus Lipsius’ _Manuductio ad
      Stoicam Philosophiam_, lib. iii. dissert. 22, 23, from which I have
      borrowed much.

  312 In his _Meditations_, ix. 3, he speaks of the duty of patiently
      awaiting death. But in iii. 1, x. 8, 22-32, he clearly recognises
      the right of suicide in some cases, especially to prevent moral
      degeneracy. It must be remembered that the _Meditations_ of Marcus
      Aurelius were private notes for his personal guidance, that all the
      Stoics admitted it to be wrong to commit suicide in cases where the
      act would be an injury to society, and that this consideration in
      itself would be sufficient to divert an emperor from the deed.
      Antoninus, the uncle, predecessor, and model of M. Aurelius, had
      considered it his duty several times to prevent Hadrian from
      committing suicide (Spartianus, _Hadrianus_). According to
      Capitolinus, Marcus Aurelius in his last illness purposely
      accelerated his death by abstinence. The duty of not hastily, or
      through cowardice, abandoning a path of duty, and the right of man
      to quit life when it appears intolerable, are combined very clearly
      by Epictetus, _Arrian_, i. 9; and the latter is asserted in the
      strongest manner, i. 24-25.

  313 Porphyry, _De Abst. Carnis_, ii. 47; Plotinus, 1st Enn. ix. Porphyry
      says (_Life of Plotinus_) that Plotinus dissuaded him from suicide.
      There is a good epitome of the arguments of this school against
      suicide in Macrobius, _In Som. Scip._ 1.

  314 Quoted by Seneca, _Ep._ xxvi. Cicero states the Epicurean doctrine
      to be, “Ut si tolerabiles sint dolores, feramus, sin minus æquo
      animo e vita, cum ea non placet, tanquam e theatro, exeamus” (_De
      Finib._ i. 15); and again, “De Diis immortalibus sine ullo metu vera
      sentit. Non dubitat, si ita melius sit, de vita migrare.”—Id. i. 19.

  315 This is noticed by St. Jerome.

  316 Corn. Nepos, _Atticus_. He killed himself when an old man, to
      shorten a hopeless disease.

  317 Petronius, who was called the arbitrator of tastes (“elegantiæ
      arbiter”), was one of the most famous voluptuaries of the reign of
      Nero. Unlike most of his contemporaries, however, he was endowed
      with the most exquisite and refined taste; his graceful manners
      fascinated all about him, and made him in matters of pleasure the
      ruler of the Court. Appointed Proconsul of Bithynia, and afterwards
      Consul, he displayed the energies and the abilities of a statesman.
      A Court intrigue threw him out of favour; and believing that his
      death was resolved on, he determined to anticipate it by suicide.
      Calling his friends about him, he opened his veins, shut them, and
      opened them again; prolonged his lingering death till he had
      arranged his affairs; discoursed in his last moments, not about the
      immortality of the soul or the dogmas of philosophers, but about the
      gay songs and epigrams of the hour; and partaking of a cheerful
      banquet, died as recklessly as he had lived. (Tacit. _Annal._ xvi.
      18-19.) It has been a matter of much dispute whether or not this
      Petronius was the author of the _Satyricon_, one of the most
      licentious and repulsive works in Latin literature.

  318 Seneca, _De Vita Beata_, xix.

  319 “Imperfectæ vero in homine naturæ præcipua solatia, ne Deum quidem
      posse omnia; namque nec sibi potest mortem consciscere si velit,
      quod homini dedit optimum in tantis vitæ pœnis.”—_Hist. Nat._ ii. 5.

_  320 Hist. Nat._ ii. 63. We need not be surprised at this writer thus
      speaking of sudden death, “Mortes repentinæ (hoc est summa vitæ
      felicitas),” vii. 54.

_  321 Tusc. Quæst._ lib. 1. Another remarkable example of an epidemic of
      suicide occurred among the young girls of Miletus. (_Aul. Gell._ xv.
      10.)

  322 Sir Cornewall Lewis, _On the Credibility of Early Roman History_,
      vol. ii. p. 430. See, too, on this class of suicides, Cromaziano,
      _Istorica Critica del Suicidio_ (Venezia, 1788), pp. 81-82. The real
      name of the author of this book (which is, I think, the best history
      of suicide) was Buonafede. He was a Celestine monk. The book was
      first published at Lucca in 1761. It was translated into French in
      1841.

  323 Senec. _De Provid._ ii.; _Ep._ xxiv.

  324 See some examples of this in Seneca, _Ep._ lxx.

  325 See a long catalogue of suicides arising from this cause, in
      Cromaziano, _Ist. del Suicidio_, pp. 112-114.

_  326 Consol. ad Marc._ c. xx.

_  327 De Ira_, iii. 15.

_  328 Ep._ lxx.

  329 See Donne’s _Biathanatos_ (London, 1700), pp. 56-57. Gibbon’s
      _Decline and Fall_, ch. xliv. Blackstone, in his chapter on suicide,
      quotes the sentence of the Roman lawyers on the subject: “Si quis
      impatientia doloris aut tædio vitæ aut morbo aut furore aut pudore
      mori maluit non animadvertatur in eum.” Ulpian expressly asserts
      that the wills of suicides were recognised by law, and numerous
      examples of the act, notoriously prepared and publicly and gradually
      accomplished, prove its legality in Rome. Suetonius, it is true,
      speaks of Claudius accusing a man for having tried to kill himself
      (Claud, xvi.), and Xiphilin says (lxix. 8) that Hadrian gave special
      permission to the philosopher Euphrates to commit suicide, “on
      account of old age and disease;” but in the first case it appears
      from the context that a reproach and not a legal action was meant,
      while Euphrates, I suppose, asked permission to show his loyalty to
      the emperor, and not as a matter of strict necessity. There were,
      however, some Greek laws condemning suicide, probably on civic
      grounds. Josephus mentions (_De Bell. Jud._ iii. 8) that in some
      nations “the right hand of the suicide was amputated, and that in
      Judea the suicide was only buried after sunset.” A very strange law,
      said to have been derived from Greece, is reported to have existed
      at Marseilles. Poison was kept by the senate of the city, and given
      to those who could prove that they had sufficient reason to justify
      their desire for death, and all other suicide was forbidden. The law
      was intended, it was said, to prevent hasty suicide, and to make
      deliberate suicide as rapid and painless as possible. (Valer.
      Maximus, ii. 6, § 7.) In the Reign of Terror in France, a law was
      made similar to that of Domitian. (Carlyle’s _Hist. of the French
      Revolution_, book v. c. ii.)

  330 Compare with this a curious “order of the day,” issued by Napoleon
      in 1802, with the view of checking the prevalence of suicide among
      his soldiers. (Lisle, _Du Suicide_, pp. 462-463.)

  331 See Suetonius, _Otho._ c. x.-xi., and the very fine description in
      Tacitus, _Hist._ lib. ii. c. 47-49. Martial compares the death of
      Otho to that of Cato:

      “Sit Cato, dum vivit, sane vel Cæsare major;
      Dum moritur, numquid major Othone fuit?”
      —_Ep._ vi. 32.

  332 Xiphilin, lxviii. 12.

  333 Tacit. _Hist._ ii. 49. Suet. _Otho_, 12. Suetonius says that, in
      addition to these, many soldiers who were not present killed
      themselves on hearing the news.

  334 Ibid. _Annal._ xiv. 9.

  335 Plin. _Hist. Nat._ vii. 54. The opposite faction attributed this
      suicide to the maddening effects of the perfumes burnt on the pile.

  336 Tacit. _Annal._ vi. 26.

  337 Plin. _Ep._ i. 12.

  338 This history is satirically and unfeelingly told by Lucian. See,
      too, Ammianus Marcellinus, xxix. 1.

  339 Sophocles.

  340 Arrian, i. 24.

  341 Seneca, _Ep._ lviii.

  342 Stobæus. One of the most deliberate suicides recorded was that of a
      Greek woman of ninety years old.—Val. Maxim. ii. 6, § 8.

  343 Plin. _Ep._ iii. 7. He starved himself to death.

_  344 Ep._ i. 22. Some of Pliny’s expressions are remarkable:—“Id ego
      arduum in primis et præcipua laude dignum puto. Nam impetu quodam et
      instinctu procurrere ad mortem, commune cum multis: deliberare vero
      et causas ejus expendere, utque suaserit ratio, vitæ mortisque
      consilium suscipere vel ponere, ingentis est animi.” In this case
      the doctors pronounced that recovery was possible, and the suicide
      was in consequence averted.

  345 Lib. vi. _Ep._ xxiv.

_  346 Ep._ lxxvii. On the former career of Marcellinus, see _Ep._ xxix.

  347 See the very beautiful lines of Statius:—

      “Urbe fuit media nulli concessa potentum
      Ara Deum, mitis posuit Clementia sedem:
      Et miseri fecere sacram, sine supplice numquam
      Illa novo; nulla damnavit vota repulsa.
      Auditi quicunque rogant, noctesque diesque
      Ire datum, et solis numen placare querelis.
      Parca superstitio; non thurea flamma, nec altus
      Accipitur sanguis, lachrymis altaria sudant ...
      Nulla autem effigies, nulli commissa metallo
      Forma Deæ, mentes habitare et pectora gaudet.
      Semper habet trepidos, semper locus horret egenis
      Cœtibus, ignotæ tantum felicibus aræ.”—_Thebaid_, xii. 481-496.

      This altar was very old, and was said to have been founded by the
      descendants of Hercules. Diodorus of Sicily, however, makes a
      Syracusan say that it was brought from Syracuse (lib. xiii. 22).
      Marcus Aurelius erected a temple to “Beneficentia” on the Capitol.
      (Xiphilin, lib. lxxi. 34.)

  348 Herodotus, vi. 21.

  349 See Arrian’s _Epictetus_, i. 9. The very existence of the word
      φιλανθρωπία shows that the idea was not altogether unknown.

  350 Diog. Laërt. _Pyrrho_. There was a tradition that Pythagoras had
      himself penetrated to India, and learnt philosophy from the
      gymnosophists. (Apuleius, _Florid._ lib. ii. c. 15.)

  351 This aspect of the career of Alexander was noticed in a remarkable
      passage of a treatise ascribed to Plutarch (_De Fort. Alex._).
      “Conceiving he was sent by God to be an umpire between all, and to
      unite all together, he reduced by arms those whom he could not
      conquer by persuasion, and formed of a hundred diverse nations one
      single universal body, mingling, as it were, in one cup of
      friendship the customs, marriages, and laws of all. He desired that
      all should regard the whole world as their common country, ... that
      every good man should be esteemed a Hellene, every evil man a
      barbarian.” See on this subject the third lecture of Mr. Merivale
      (whose translation of Plutarch I have borrowed) _On the Conversion
      of the Roman Empire_.

  352 They were both born about B.C. 250. See Sir C. Lewis, _Credibility
      of Early Roman History_, vol. i. p. 82.

  353 Aulus Gellius mentions the indignation of Marcus Cato against a
      consul named Albinus, who had written in Greek a Roman history, and
      prefaced it by an apology for his faults of style, on the ground
      that he was writing in a foreign language. (_Noct. Att._ xi. 8.)

  354 See a vivid picture of the Greek influence upon Rome, in Mommsen’s
      _Hist. of Rome_ (Eng. trans.), vol. iii. pp. 423-426.

  355 Plin. _Hist. Nat._ vii. 31.

  356 See Friedlænder, _Mœurs romaines du règne d’Auguste à la fin des
      Antonins_ (French trans., 1865), tome i. pp. 6-7.

  357 See the curious catalogue of Greek love terms in vogue (Lucretius,
      lib. iv. line 1160, &c.). Juvenal, more than a hundred years later,
      was extremely angry with the Roman ladies for making love in Greek
      (_Sat._ vi. lines 190-195). Friedlænder remarks that there is no
      special term in Latin for to ask in marriage (tome i. p. 354).

  358 Aul. Gell. _Noct._ xv. 4; Vell. Paterculus, ii. 65. The people were
      much scandalised at this elevation, and made epigrams about it.
      There is a curious catalogue of men who at different times rose in
      Rome from low positions to power and dignity, in Legendre, _Traité
      de l’Opinion_, tome ii. pp. 254-255.

  359 Dion Cassius, xlviii. 32. Plin. _Hist. Nat._ v. 5; vii. 44.

  360 The history of the influence of freedmen is minutely traced by
      Friedlænder, _Mœurs romaines du règne d’Auguste à la fin des
      Antonins_, tome i. pp. 58-93. Statius and Martial sang their
      praises.

  361 See Tacit. _Ann._ vi. 23-25.

  362 On the Roman journeys, see the almost exhaustive dissertation of
      Friedlænder, tome ii.

  363 Joseph. (_Antiq._ xvii. 11, § 1) says above 8,000 Jews resident in
      Rome took part in a petition to Cæsar. If these were all adult
      males, the total number of Jewish residents must have been extremely
      large.

  364 See the famous fragment of Seneca cited by St. Augustin (_De Civ.
      Dei_, vi. 11): “Usque eo sceleratissimæ gentis consuetudo convaluit,
      ut per omnes jam terras recepta sit: victi victoribus leges
      dederunt.” There are numerous scattered allusions to the Jews in
      Horace, Juvenal, and Martial.

  365 The Carthaginian influence was specially conspicuous in early
      Christian history. Tertullian and Cyprian (both Africans) are justly
      regarded as the founders of Latin theology. (See Milman’s _Latin
      Christianity_ (ed. 1867), vol. i. pp. 35-36.)

  366 Milo had emancipated some slaves to prevent them from being tortured
      as witnesses. (_Cic. Pro Milo._) This was made illegal. The other
      reasons for enfranchisement are given by Dion. Halicarn. _Antiq._
      lib. iv.

  367 This subject is fully treated by Wallon, _Hist. de l’Esclavage dans
      l’Antiquité_.

  368 Senec. _De Clemen._ i. 24.

  369 See, on the prominence and the insolence of the freedmen, Tacit.
      _Annal._ iii. 26-27.

  370 Montesquieu, _Décadence des Romains_, ch. xiii.

  371 See the very curious speech attributed to Camillus (Livy, v. 52).

  372 “Caritas generis humani.”—_De Finib._ So, too, he speaks (_De Leg._
      i. 23) of every good man as “civis totius mundi.”

  373 He speaks of Rome as “civitas ex nationum conventu constituta.”

_  374 De Legib._ i. 7.

_  375 De Offic._

  376 Ibid. iii. 6.

_  377 De Offic._ iii. 6.

_  378 De Legib._ i. 15.

  379 “Tunc genus humanum positis sibi consulat armis,
      Inque vicem gens omnis amet.”
      —_Pharsalia_, vi.

_  380 Ep._ xcv.

_  381 Ep._ xxxi.

_  382 De Vita Beata_, xx.

  383 Arrian, ii. 10.

  384 vi. 44.

  385 “Hæc duri immota Catonis
      Secta fuit, servare modum, finemque tenere,
      Naturamque sequi, patriæque impendere vitam,
      Nec sibi sed toti genitum se credere mundo.”

      Lucan, _Phars._ ii. 380-383.

  386 There is a passage on this subject in one of the letters of Pliny,
      which I think extremely remarkable, and to which I can recall no
      pagan parallel:—“Nuper me cujusdam amici languor admonuit, optimos
      esse nos dum infirmi sumus. Quem enim infirmum aut avaritia aut
      libido solicitat? Non amoribus servit, non appetit honores ... tunc
      deos, tunc hominem esse se meminit.”—Plin. _Ep._ vii. 26.

_  387 Ep._ viii. 16. He says: “Hominis est enim affici dolore, sentire,
      resistere tamen, et solatia admittere, non solatiis non egere.”

  388 This characteristic of Stoicism is well noticed in Grant’s
      _Aristotle_, vol. i. p. 254. The first volume of this work contains
      an extremely good review of the principles of the Stoics.

  389 Cie. _De Finib._ lib. iv.

  390 Arrian, _Epict._ ii. 14.

  391 Ibid. i. 9.

  392 Ibid. i. 14.

  393 Ibid. i. 16.

  394 Arrian, ii. 8.

  395 Plutarch, _De Profect. in Virt._ This precept was enforced by Bishop
      Sanderson in one of his sermons. (Southey’s _Commonplace Book_, vol.
      i. p. 92.)

  396 Diog. Laërt. _Pythagoras_.

  397 Thus Cicero makes Cato say: “Pythagoreorumque more, exercendæ
      memoriæ gratia, quid quoque die dixerim, audiverim, egerim,
      commemoro vesperi.”—_De Senect._ xi.

  398 Ibid.

_  399 Sermon_, i. 4.

  400 He even gave up, for a time, eating meat, in obedience to the
      Pythagorean principles. (_Ep._ cviii.) Seneca had two masters of
      this school, Sextius and Sotion. He was at this time not more than
      seventeen years old. (See Aubertin, _Étude critique sur les Rapports
      supposés entre Sénèque et St. Paul_, p. 156.)

  401 See his very beautiful description of the self-examination of
      Sextius and of himself. (_De Ira_, iii. 36.)

  402 Arrian, ii. 18. Compare the _Manual_ of Epictetus, xxxiv.

  403 “Quod de Romulo ægre creditum est, omnes pari consensu præsumserunt,
      Marcum cœlo receptum esse.”—Aur. Vict. _Epit._ xvi. “Deusque etiam
      nunc habetur.”—Capitolinus.

  404 The first book of his _Meditations_ was written on the borders of
      the Granua, in Hungary.

  405 i. 14.

  406 See his touching letter to Fronto, who was about to engage in a
      debate with Herod Atticus.

  407 i. 6-15. The eulogy he passed on his Stoic master Apollonius is
      worthy of notice. Apollonius furnished him with an example of the
      combination of extreme firmness and gentleness.

  408 E.g. “Beware of Cæsarising.” (vi. 30.) “Be neither a tragedian nor a
      courtesan.” (v. 28.) “Be just and temperate and a follower of the
      gods; but be so with simplicity, for the pride of modesty is the
      worst of all.” (xii. 27.)

  409 iii. 4.

  410 i. 17.

  411 v. 1.

  412 ix. 29.

  413 viii. 59.

  414 xi. 18.

  415 ix. 11.

  416 viii. 15.

  417 vii. 70.

  418 vii. 63.

  419 vii. 22.

  420 Mr. Maurice, in this respect, compares and contrasts him very
      happily with Plutarch. “Like Plutarch, the Greek and Roman
      characters were in Marcus Aurelius remarkably blended; but, unlike
      Plutarch, the foundation of his mind was Roman. He was a student
      that he might more effectually carry on the business of an
      emperor.”—_Philosophy of the First Six Centuries_, p. 32.

  421 vi. 47.

  422 Capitolinus, Aurelius Victor.

  423 M. Suckau, in his admirable _Étude sur Marc-Aurèle_, and M. Renan,
      in a very acute and learned _Examen de quelques faits relatifs à
      l’impératrice Faustine_ (read before the Institut, August 14, 1867),
      have shown the extreme uncertainty of the stories about the
      debaucheries of Faustina, which the biographers of Marcus Aurelius
      have collected. It will be observed that the emperor himself has
      left an emphatic testimony to her virtue, and to the happiness he
      derived from her (i. 17); that the earliest extant biographer of
      Marcus Aurelius was a generation later; and that the infamous
      character of Commodus naturally predisposed men to imagine that he
      was not the son of so perfect an emperor.

  424 “Quid me fletis, et non magis de pestilentia et communi morte
      cogitatis?” Capitolinus, _M. Aurelius_.

  425 Ibid.

  426 Many examples of this are given by Coulanges, _La Cité antique_, pp.
      177-178.

  427 All this is related by Suetonius, _August_.

  428 Tacit. _Annal._ iv. 36.

  429 See, e.g., the sentiments of the people about Julius Cæsar, Sueton.
      _J. C._ lxxxviii.

  430 Sueton. _Vesp._ xxiii.

  431 “Qualis artifex pereo” were his dying words.

  432 See Sueton. _Calig._ 1.

  433 Sueton. _Calig._ xxii. A statue of Jupiter is said to have burst out
      laughing just before the death of this emperor.

  434 Seneca, _De Ira_, i. 46; Sueton. _Calig._ xxii.

  435 Lampridius, _Heliogab._

  436 Senec. _De Clemen._ i. 18.

  437 Tacit. _Annal._ iii. 36.

  438 Senec. _De Benefic._ iii. 26.

  439 Tacit. _Annal._ i. 73. Tiberius refused to allow this case to be
      proceeded with. See, too, Philost. _Apollonius of Tyana_, i. 15.

  440 Suet. _Tiber._ lviii.

  441 “Mulier quædam, quod semel exuerat ante statuam Domitiani, damnata
      et interfecta est.”—Xiphilin, lxvii. 12.

  442 “Eos demum, qui nihil præterquam de libertate cogitent, dignos esse,
      qui Romani fiant.”—Livy, viii. 21.

  443 Valerius Maximus, iv. 3, § 14.

  444 See the picture of this scene in Tacitus, _Hist._ iii. 83.

  445 Dion. Halicarnass.

  446 “Divina Natura dedit agros; ars humana ædificavit urbes.”

  447 See a collection of passages from these writers in Wallon, _Hist. de
      l’Esclavage_, tome ii. pp. 378-379. Pliny, in the first century,
      noticed (_Hist. Nat._ xviii. 7) that the _latifundia_, or system of
      large properties, was ruining both Italy and the provinces, and that
      six landlords whom Nero killed were the possessors of half Roman
      Africa.

  448 Tacit. _Annal._ xii. 43. The same complaint had been made still
      earlier by Tiberius, in a letter to the Senate. (_Annal._ iii. 54.)

  449 Augustus, for a time, contemplated abolishing the distributions, but
      soon gave up the idea. (Suet. _Aug._ xlii.) He noticed that it had
      the effect of causing the fields to be neglected.

  450 M. Wallon has carefully traced this history. (_Hist. de l’Esclav._
      tome iii. pp. 294-297.)

  451 Livy, iv. 59-60. Florus, i. 12.

  452 Livy, xxiv. 49.

  453 Sallust, _Bell. Jugurth._ 84-86.

  454 Livy, xxxix. 6.

  455 “Primus Cæsarum fidem militis etiam præmio pigneratus.”—Suet.
      _Claud._ x.

  456 See Tacitus, _Annal._ xiii. 35; _Hist._ ii. 69.

  457 M. Sismondi thinks that the influence of Christianity in subduing
      the spirit of revolt, if not in the army, at least in the people,
      was very great. He says: “Il est remarquable qu’en cinq ans, sept
      prétendans au trône, tous bien supérieurs à Honorius en courage, en
      talens et en vertus, furent successivement envoyés captifs à Ravenne
      ou punis de mort, que le peuple applaudit toujours à ces jugemens et
      ne se sépara point de l’autorité légitime, tant la doctrine du droit
      divin des rois que les évêques avoient commencé à prêcher sous
      Théodose avoit fait de progrès, et tant le monde romain sembloit
      determiné à périr avec un monarque imbécile plutôt que tenté de se
      donner un sauveur.”—_Hist. de la Chute de l’Empire romain_, tome i.
      p. 221.

  458 See Gibbon, ch. v.; Merivale’s _Hist. of Rome_, ch. lxvii. It was
      thought that troops thus selected would be less likely to revolt.
      Constantine abolished the Prætorians.

  459 The gladiatorial shows are treated incidentally by most Roman
      historians, but the three works from which I have derived most
      assistance in this part of my subject are the _Saturnalia_ of Justus
      Lipsius, Magnin, _Origines du Théâtre_ (an extremely learned and
      interesting book, which was unhappily never completed), and
      Friedlænder’s _Roman Manners from Augustus to the Antonines_ (the
      second volume of the French translation). M. Wallon has also
      compressed into a few pages (_Hist. de l’Esclavage_, tome ii. pp.
      129-139) much information on the subject.

  460 Hence the old name of _bustuarii_ (from _bustum_, a funeral pile)
      given to gladiators (Nieupoort, _De Ritibus Romanorum_, p. 514).
      According to Pliny (_Hist. Nat._ xxx. 3), “regular human sacrifices
      were only abolished in Rome by a decree of the senate, B.C. 97,” and
      there are some instances of them at a still later period. Much
      information about them is collected by Sir C. Lewis, _Credibility of
      Roman History_, vol. ii. p. 430; Merivale, _Conversion of the Roman
      Empire_, pp. 230-233; Legendre, _Traité de l’Opinion_, vol. i. pp.
      229-231. Porphyry, in his _De Abstinentia Carnis_, devoted
      considerable research to this matter. Games were habitually
      celebrated by wealthy private individuals, during the early part of
      the empire, at the funerals of their relatives, but their mortuary
      character gradually ceased, and after Marcus Aurelius they had
      become mere public spectacles, and were rarely celebrated at Rome by
      private men. (See Wallon, _Hist. de l’Esclav._ tome ii. pp.
      135-136.) The games had then really passed into their purely secular
      stage, though they were still nominally dedicated to Mars and Diana,
      and though an altar of Jupiter Latiaris stood in the centre of the
      arena. (Nieupoort, p. 365.)

  461 Cicero, _Tusc._ lib. ii.

  462 Capitolinus, _Maximus et Balbinus_. Capitolinus says this is the
      most probable origin of the custom, though others regarded it as a
      sacrifice to appease Nemesis by an offering of blood.

  463 Much curious information on this subject may be found in
      Friedlænder, _Mœurs romaines_, liv. vi. ch. i. Very few Roman
      emperors ventured to disregard or to repress these outcries, and
      they led to the fall of several of the most powerful ministers of
      the empire. On the whole these games represent the strangest and
      most ghastly form political liberty has ever assumed. On the other
      hand, the people readily bartered all genuine freedom for abundant
      games.

  464 Valer. Maximus, ii. 4, § 7.

  465 On the gladiators at banquets, see J. Lipsius, _Saturnalia_, lib. i.
      c. vi., Magnin; _Origines du Théâtre_, pp. 380-385. This was
      originally an Etruscan custom, and it was also very common at Capua.
      As Silius Italicus says:—

      “Exhilarare viris convivia cæde Mos olim, et miscere epulis
      spectacula dira.”

      Verus, the colleague of Marcus Aurelius, was especially addicted to
      this kind of entertainment. (Capitolinus, _Verus_.) See, too,
      Athenæus iv. 40, 41.

  466 Senec. _De Brevit. Vit._ c. xiii.

  467 Sueton. _J. Cæsar_, xxvi. Pliny (_Ep._ vi. 34) commends a friend for
      having given a show in memory of his departed wife.

  468 Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ xxxiii. 16.

  469 Sueton. _Cæsar_, x.; Dion Cassius, xliii. 24.

  470 Sueton. _Aug._ xxix. The history of the amphitheatres is given very
      minutely by Friedlænder, who, like nearly all other antiquaries,
      believes this to have been the first of stone. Pliny mentions the
      existence, at an earlier period, of two connected wooden theatres,
      which swung round on hinges and formed an amphitheatre. (_Hist.
      Nat._ xxxvi. 24.)

  471 Dion Cassius, liv. 2. It appears, however, from an inscription, that
      10,000 gladiators fought in the reign and by the command of
      Augustus. Wallon_, Hist. de l’Esclavage_, tome ii. p. 133.

  472 Sueton. _Tiber._ xxxiv. Nero made another slight restriction (Tacit.
      _Annal._ xiii. 31), which appears to have been little observed.

  473 Martial notices (_Ep._ iii. 59) and ridicules a spectacle given by a
      shoemaker at Bologna, and by a fuller at Modena.

  474 Epictetus, _Enchir._ xxxiii. § 2.

  475 Arrian, iii. 15.

  476 See these points minutely proved in Friedlænder.

  477 Suet. _Aug._ xliv. This was noticed before by Cicero. The Christian
      poet Prudentius dwelt on this aspect of the games in some forcible
      lines:—

      “Virgo modesta jubet converso pollice rumpi
      Ne lateat pars ulla animæ vitalibus imis
      Altius impresso dum palpitat ense secutor.”

  478 Sueton. _Tiberius_, xl. Tacitus, who gives a graphic description of
      the disaster (_Annal._ iv. 62-63), says 50,000 persons were killed
      or wounded.

  479 Tacit. _Annal._ xiii. 49.

  480 Joseph. _Bell. Jud._ vi. 9.

  481 See the very curious picture which Livy has given (xli. 20) of the
      growth of the fascination.

  482 Joseph. _Antiq. Jud._ xix. 7.

  483 Lucian, _Demonax_.

  484 Philost. _Apoll._ iv. 22.

  485 Friedlænder, tome ii. pp. 95-96. There are, however, several extant
      Greek inscriptions relating to gladiators, and proving the existence
      of the shows in Greece. Pompeii, which was a Greek colony, had a
      vast amphitheatre, which we may still admire; and, under Nero, games
      were prohibited at Pompeii for ten years, in consequence of a riot
      that broke out during a gladiatorial show. (Tacit. _Annal._ xiv.
      17.) After the defeat of Perseus, Paulus Emilius celebrated a show
      in Macedonia. (Livy, xli. 20.)

  486 These are fully discussed by Magnin and Friedlænder. There is a very
      beautiful description of a ballet, representing the “Judgment of
      Paris,” in Apuleius, _Metamorph._ x.

  487 Pacuvius and Accius were the founders of Roman tragedy. The
      abridger, Velleius Paterculus, who is the only Roman historian who
      pays any attention to literary history, boasts that the latter might
      rank honourably with the best Greek tragedians. He adds, “ut in
      illis [the Greeks] limæ, in hoc pœne plus videatur fuisse
      sanguinis.”—_Hist. Rom._ ii. 9.

  488 Thus, e.g., Hobbes: “Alienæ calamitatis contemptus nominatur
      crudelitas, proceditque a propriæ securitatis opinione. Nam ut
      aliquis sibi placeat in malis alienis sine alio fine, videtur mihi
      impossibile.”—_Leviathan_, pars i. c. vi.

  489 Sueton. _Claudius_, xxxiv.

  490 “Et verso pollice vulgi
      Quemlibet occidunt populariter.”—Juvenal, _Sat._ iii. 36-37.

  491 Besides the many incidental notices scattered through the Roman
      historians, and through the writings of Seneca, Plutarch, Juvenal,
      and Pliny, we have a curious little book, _De Spectaculis_, by
      Martial—a book which is not more horrible from the atrocities it
      recounts than from the perfect absence of all feeling of repulsion
      or compassion it everywhere displays.

  492 These are but a few of the many examples given by Magnin, who has
      collected a vast array of authorities on the subject. (_Origines du
      Théâtre_, pp. 445-453.) M. Mongez has devoted an interesting memoir
      to “Les animaux promenés ou tués dans le cirque.” (_Mém. de l’Acad.
      des Inscrip. et Belles-lettres_, tome x.) See, too, Friedlænder.
      Pliny rarely gives an account of any wild animal without
      accompanying it by statistics about its appearances in the arena.
      The first instance of a wild beast hunt in the amphitheatre is said
      to be that recorded by Livy (xxxix. 22), which took place about 80
      B.C.

  493 Capitolinus, _Gordiani_.

  494 Vopiscus, _Aurelian_.

  495 Xiphilin, lxviii. 15.

  496 Tacit. _Annal._ xv. 44.

  497 Xiphilin, lxvii. 8; Statius, _Sylv._ i. 6.

  498 During the Republic, a rich man ordered in his will that some women
      he had purchased for the purpose should fight in the funeral games
      to his memory, but the people annulled the clause. (Athenæeus, iv.
      39.) Under Nero and Domitian, female gladiators seem to have been
      not uncommon. See Statius, _Sylv._ i. 6; Sueton. _Domitian_, iv.;
      Xiphilin, lxvii. 8. Juvenal describes the enthusiasm with which
      Roman ladies practised with the gladiatorial weapons (_Sat._ vi.
      248, &c.), and Martial (_De Spectac._ vi.) mentions the combats of
      women with wild beasts. One, he says, killed a lion. A combat of
      female gladiators, under Severus, created some tumult, and it was
      decreed that they should no longer be permitted. (Xiphilin, lxxv.
      16.) See Magnin, pp. 434-435.

  499 Martial, _De Spectac._ vii.

  500 Ibid. _Ep._ viii. 30.

  501 Tertullian, _Ad Nation._ i. 10. One of the most ghastly features of
      the games was the comic aspect they sometimes assumed. This was the
      case in the combats of dwarfs. There were also combats by
      blind-folded men. Petronius (_Satyricon_, c. xlv.) has given us a
      horrible description of the maimed and feeble men who were sometimes
      compelled to fight. People afflicted with epilepsy were accustomed
      to drink the blood of the wounded gladiators, which they believed to
      be a sovereign remedy. (Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ xxviii. 2; Tertul.
      _Apol._ ix.)

  502 “Nec unquam sine humano cruore cœnabat”—Lactan. _De Mort. Persec._
      Much the same thing is told of the Christian emperor Justinian II.,
      who lived at the end of the seventh century. (Sismondi, _Hist. de la
      Chute de l’Empire Romain_, tome ii. p. 85.)

  503 Winckelmann says the statue called “The Dying Gladiator” does not
      represent a gladiator. At a later period, however, statues of
      gladiators were not uncommon, and Pliny notices (_Hist. Nat._ xxxv.
      33) paintings of them. A fine specimen of mosaic portraits of
      gladiators is now in the Lateran Museum.

  504 Plutarch’s _Life of Cæsar_.

  505 Dion Cassius, li. 7.

  506 Faustina, the wife of Marcus Aurelius, was especially accused of
      this weakness. (Capitolinus, _Marcus Aurelius_.)

  507 Seneca, _De Provident._ iv.

  508 Arrian’s _Epictetus_, i. 29.

  509 Seneca, _De Provident._ iii.

  510 Aulus Gellius, xii. 5.

  511 Cicero, _Tusc._ lib. ii.

  512 Some Equites fought under Julius Cæsar, and a senator named Fulvius
      Setinus wished to fight, but Cæsar prevented him. (Suet. _Cæsar_,
      xxxix.; Dion Cassius, xliii. 23.) Nero, according to Suetonius,
      compelled men of the highest rank to fight. Laws prohibiting
      patricians from fighting were several times made and violated.
      (Friedlænder, pp. 39-41.) Commodus is said to have been himself
      passionately fond of fighting as a gladiator. Much, however, of what
      Lampridius relates on this point is perfectly incredible. On the
      other hand, the profession of the gladiator was constantly spoken of
      as infamous; but this oscillation between extreme admiration and
      contempt will surprise no one who has noticed the tone continually
      adopted about prize-fighters in England, and about the members of
      some other professions on the Continent. Juvenal dwells (_Sat._
      viii. 197-210) with great indignation on an instance of a patrician
      fighting.

  513 “Quis mediocris gladiator ingemuit, quis vultum mutavit
      unquam?”—Cic. _Tusc. Quæst._ lib. ii.

  514 E.g. Clem. Alex. _Strom._ iii. There is a well-known passage of this
      kind in Horace, _Ars Poet._ 412-415. The comparison of the good man
      to an athlete or gladiator, which St. Paul employed, occurs also in
      Seneca and Epictetus, from which some have inferred that they must
      have known the writings of the Apostle. M. Denis, however, has shown
      (_Idées morales dans l’Antiquité_, tome ii. p. 240) that the same
      comparison had been used, before the rise of Christianity, by Plato,
      Æschines, and Cicero.

_  515 Confess._ vi. 8.

  516 “[Servi] etsi per fortunam in omnia obnoxii, tamen quasi secundum
      hominum genus sunt.”—Florus, _Hist._ iii. 20.

  517 Macrinus, however, punished fugitive slaves by compelling them to
      fight as gladiators. (Capitolinus, _Macrinus_.)

  518 Tacit. _Annal._ xii. 56. According to Friedlænder, however, there
      were two classes of criminals. One class were condemned only to
      fight, and pardoned if they conquered; the others were condemned to
      fight till death, and this was considered an aggravation of capital
      punishment.

  519 “Ad conciliandum plebis favorem effusa largitio, quum spectaculis
      indulget, supplicia quondam hostium artem facit.”—Florus, iii. 12.

_  520 Tusc. Quæst._ ii. 17.

  521 See his magnificent letter on the subject. (_Ep._ vii.)

  522 In his two treatises _De Esu Carnium_.

  523 Pliny. _Ep._ iv. 22.

  524 Xiphilin, lxxi. 29. Capitolinus, _M. Aurelius_. The emperor also
      once carried off the gladiators to a war with his army, much to the
      indignation of the people. (Capit.) He has himself noticed the
      extreme weariness he felt at the public amusements he was obliged to
      attend. (vii. 3.)

  525 Sueton. _Titus_, viii.

  526 “Visum est spectaculum inde non enerve nec fluxum, nec quod animos
      virorum molliret et frangeret, sed quod ad pulchra vulnera
      contemptumque mortis accenderet.”—Pliny, _Paneg._ xxxiii.

  527 “Præterea tanto consensu rogabaris, ut negare non constans sed durum
      videretur.”—Plin. _Epist._ vi. 34.

  528 Symmach. _Epist._ ii. 46.

  529 Sueton. _Domitian_, iii. It is very curious that the same emperor,
      about the same time (the beginning of his reign), had such a horror
      of bloodshed that he resolved to prohibit the sacrifice of oxen.
      (Suet. _Dom._ ix.)

  530 “Pendant qu’il restait au logis, il n’était incommode à personne; il
      y passait la meilleure partie de son temps tranquillement dans sa
      chambre.... Il se divertissait aussi quelquefois à fumer une pipe de
      tabac; ou bien lorsqu’il voulait se relâcher l’esprit un peu plus
      longtemps, il cherchait des araignées qu’il faisait battre ensemble,
      ou des mouches qu’il jetait dans la toile d’araignée, et regardait
      ensuite cette bataille avec tant de plaisir qu’il éclatait
      quelquefois de rire.”—Colerus, _Vie de Spinoza_.

  531 This is noticed by George Duval in a curious passage of his
      _Souvenirs de la Terreur_, quoted by Lord Lytton in a note to his
      _Zanoni_.

_  532 Essay on Goodness._

  533 This contrast has been noticed by Archbishop Whately in a lecture on
      Egypt. See, too, Legendre, _Traité de l’Opinion_, tome ii. p. 374.

  534 Tacit. _Annal._ xiv. 45.

  535 Senec. _De Clemen._ i. 14.

  536 Val. Max. ii. 9. This writer speaks of “the eyes of a mistress
      delighting in human blood” with as much horror as if the
      gladiatorial games were unknown. Livy gives a rather different
      version of this story.

  537 Tacit. _Annal._ i. 76.

  538 Sueton. _Calig._ xi.

  539 Spartian. _Caracalla._ Tertullian mentions that his nurse was a
      Christian.

  540 Capitolinus, _Marcus Aurelius_. Capitolinus, who wrote under
      Diocletian, says that in his time the custom of spreading a net
      under the rope-dancer still continued. I do not know when it ceased
      at Rome, but St. Chrysostom mentions that in his time it had been
      abolished in the East.—Jortin’s _Remarks on Ecclesiastical History_,
      ii. 71 (ed. 1846).

  541 Tacit. _Ann._ iii. 55.

  542 Champagny, _Les Antonins_, tome ii. pp. 179-200.

  543 πολιτεύεσθαι.—Diog. Laërt. _Zeno_.

  544 Thus Tigellinus spoke of “Stoicorum arrogantia sectaque quæ turbidos
      et negotiorum appetentes faciat.”—Tacit. _Ann._ xiv. 57. The
      accusation does not appear to have been quite untrue, for Vespasian,
      who was a very moderate emperor, thought it necessary to banish
      nearly all the philosophers from Rome on account of their
      factiousness. Sometimes the Stoics showed their independence by a
      rather gratuitous insolence. Dion Cassius relates that, when Nero
      was thinking of writing a poem in 400 books, he asked the advice of
      the Stoic Cornutus, who said, that no one would read so long a work.
      “But,” answered Nero, “your favourite Chrysippus wrote still more
      numerous books.” “True,” rejoined Cornutus, “but then they were of
      use to humanity.” On the other hand, Seneca is justly accused of
      condescending too much to the vices of Nero in his efforts to
      mitigate their effects.

  545 The influence of Stoicism on Roman law has been often examined. See,
      especially, Degerando, _Hist. de la Philosophie_ (2nd ed.), tome
      iii. pp. 202-204; Laferrière, _De l’Influence du Stoïcisme sur les
      Jurisconsultes romains_; Denis, _Théories et Idées morales dans
      l’Antiquité_, tome ii. pp. 187-217; Troplong, _Influence du
      Christianisme sur le Droit civil des Romains_; Merivale, _Conversion
      of the Roman Empire_, lec. iv.; and the great work of Gravina, _De
      Ortu et Progressu Juris civilis_.

  546 Cic. _De Legib._ ii. 4, 23.

  547 There were two rival schools, that of Labeo and that of Capito. The
      first was remarkable for its strict adherence to the letter of the
      law—the second for the latitude of interpretation it admitted.

_  548 Dig._ lib. i. tit. 17-32.

  549 Ibid. i. tit. 1-3.

  550 Ibid. i. tit. 1-4.

_  551 Dig._ lib. i. tit. 4-5.

  552 Laferrière, p. 32. Wallon, _Hist. de l’Esclavage dans l’Antiquité_,
      tome iii. pp. 71-80. M. Wallon gives many curious instances of legal
      decisions on this point.

  553 To prove that this is the correct conception of law was the main
      object of Cicero’s treatise _De Legibus_. Ulpian defined
      jurisprudence as “divinarum atque humanarum rerum notitia, justi
      atque injusti scientia.”—_Dig._ lib. i. tit. 1-10. So Paul “Id quod
      semper æquum ad bonum est jus dicitur ut est jus naturale.”—_Dig._
      lib. i. tit. 1-11. And Gaius, “Quod vero naturalis ratio inter omnes
      homines constituit ... vocatur jus gentium.”—_Dig._ lib. i. tit.
      1-9. The Stoics had defined true wisdom as “rerum divinarum atque
      humanarum scientia.”—Cic. _De Offic._ i. 43.

  554 Cicero compares the phraseology of the Stoics with that of the
      Peripatetics, maintaining that the precision of the former is well
      adapted to legal discussions, and the redundancy of the latter to
      oratory. “Omnes fere Stoici prudentissimi in disserendo sint et id
      arte faciant, sintque architecti pene verborum; iidem traducti a
      disputando ad dicendum, inopes reperiantur: unum excipio Catonem....
      Peripateticorum institutis commodius fingeretur oratio ... nam ut
      Stoicorum astrictior est oratio, aliquantoque contractior quam aures
      populi requirunt: sic illorum liberior et latior quam patitur
      consuetudo judiciorum et fori.”—_De Claris Oratoribus._ A very
      judicious historian of philosophy observes: “En général à Rome le
      petit nombre d’hommes livrés à la méditation et à l’enthousiasme
      préférèrent Pythagore et Platon; les hommes du monde et ceux qui
      cultivaient les sciences naturelles s’attachèrent à Épicure; les
      orateurs et les hommes d’État à la nouvelle Académie; les
      juris-consultes au Portique.”—Degerando, _Hist. de la Philos._ tome
      iii. p. 196.

  555 See a very remarkable passage in Aulus Gellius, _Noct._ ii. 15.

  556 “Fere enim nulli alii sunt homines qui talem in filios suos habeant
      potestatem qualem nos habemus.”—Gaius.

  557 A full statement of these laws is given by Dion. Halicarn. ii. 4. It
      was provided that if a father sold his son and if the son was
      afterwards enfranchised by the purchaser, he became again the slave
      of his father, who might sell him a second, and, if manumission
      again ensued, a third time. It was only on the third sale that he
      passed for ever out of the parental control. A more merciful law,
      attributed to Numa, provided that when the son married (if that
      marriage was with the consent of the father), the father lost the
      power of selling him. In no other way, however, was his authority
      even then abridged.

  558 Velleius Paterculus, ii. 67. A great increase of parricide was
      noticed during the Empire (Senec. _De Clem._ i. 23). At first, it is
      said, there was no law against parricide, for the crime was believed
      to be too atrocious to be possible.

  559 Numerous instances of these executions are collected by Livy, Val.
      Maximus, &c.; their history is fully given by Cornelius van
      Bynkershoek, “De Jure occidendi, vendendi, et exponendi liberos apud
      veteres Romanos,” in his works (Cologne, 1761).

  560 This proceeding of Hadrian, which is related by the lawyer Marcian,
      is doubly remarkable, because the father had surprised his son in
      adultery with his stepmother. Now a Roman had originally not only
      absolute authority over the life of his son, but also the right of
      killing any one whom he found committing adultery with his wife. Yet
      Marcian praises the severity of Hadrian, “Nam patria potestas in
      pietate debet, non atrocitate, consistere.”—_Digest._ lib. xlviii.
      tit. 9, § 5.

  561 Valer. Max. vii. 7.

  562 See, on all this subject, Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_, ch. xliv.;
      Troplong, _Influence du Christianisme sur le Droit_, ch. ix.; Denis,
      _Hist. des Idées morales_, tome ii. pp. 107-120; Laferrière,
      _Influence du Stoïcisme sur les Jurisconsultes_, pp. 37-44.

  563 Ælian, _Hist. Var._ vi. 7.

  564 Livy, ii. 36; Cicero, _De Divin._ ii. 26.

  565 Cicero, _De Legibus_, ii. 8-12. Cato, however, maintained that
      slaves might on those days be employed on work which did not require
      oxen.—Wallon, _Hist. de l’Esclavage_, tome ii. p. 215.

  566 See the _Saturnalia_ of Macrobius.

  567 See his _Life_ by Plutarch, and his book on agriculture.

  568 The number of the Roman slaves has been a matter of much
      controversy. M. Dureau de la Malle (_Econ. politique des Romains_)
      has restricted it more than any other writer. Gibbon (_Decline and
      Fall_, chap. ii.) has collected many statistics on the subject, but
      the fullest examination is in M. Wallon’s admirable _Hist. de
      l’Esclavage_. On the contrast between the character of the slaves of
      the Republic and those of the Empire, see _Tac. Ann._ xiv. 44.

  569 Tacit. _Annal._ xiii. 32; xiv. 42-45. Wallon, _Hist. de l’Esclav._
      ii. 293. I have already noticed the indignant rising of the people
      caused by the proposal to execute the 400 slaves of the murdered
      Pedanius. Their interposition was, however (as Tacitus informs us),
      unavailing, and the slaves, guarded against rescue by a strong band
      of soldiers, were executed. It was proposed to banish the freedmen
      who were in the house, but Nero interposed and prevented it. Pliny
      notices (_Ep._ viii. 14) the banishment of the freedmen of a
      murdered man.

  570 See all this fully illustrated in Wallon. The plays of Plautus and
      the Roman writers on agriculture contain numerous allusions to the
      condition of slaves.

  571 Wallon, tome ii. pp. 209-210, 357. There were no laws till the time
      of the Christian emperors against separating the families of slaves,
      but it was a maxim of the jurisconsults that in forced sales they
      should not be separated. (Wallon, tome iii. pp. 55-56.)

  572 Ibid. tome ii. pp. 211-213.

  573 Plin. _Epist._ viii. 16. It was customary to allow the public or
      State slaves to dispose of half their goods by will. (Wallon, tome
      iii. p. 59.)

  574 Wallon, tome ii. p. 419. This appears from an allusion of Cicero,
      _Philip._ viii. 11.

  575 Senec. _De Clem._ i. 18.

  576 Ibid. _Ep._ xlvii.

  577 Pliny, _Ep._ viii. 16.

  578 Spartianus, _Hadrianus_.

  579 Compare Wallon, tome ii. p. 186; tome iii. pp. 65-66. Slaves were
      only to be called as witnesses in cases of incest, adultery, murder,
      and high treason, and where it was impossible to establish the crime
      without their evidence. Hadrian considered that the reality of the
      crime must have already acquired a strong probability, and the
      jurisconsult Paul laid down that at least two free witnesses should
      be heard before slaves were submitted to torture, and that the offer
      of an accused person to have his slaves tortured that they might
      attest his innocence should not be accepted.

  580 Numerous and very noble instances of slave fidelity are given by
      Seneca, _De Benefic._ iii. 19-27; Val. Max. vi. 8; and in Appian’s
      _History of the Civil Wars_. See, too, Tacit. _Hist._ i. 3.

  581 Aristotle had, it is true, declared slavery to be part of the law of
      nature—an opinion which, he said, was rejected by some of his
      contemporaries; but he advocated humanity to slaves quite as
      emphatically as the other philosophers (_Economics_, i. 5). Epicurus
      was conspicuous even among Greek philosophers for his kindness to
      slaves, and he associated some of his own with his philosophical
      labours. (Diog. Laërt. _Epicurus_.)

_  582 De Benef._ iii. 18-28; _De Vita Beata_, xxiv.; _De Clem._ i. 18,
      and especially _Ep._ xlvii. Epictetus, as might be expected from his
      history, frequently recurs to the duty. Plutarch writes very
      beautifully upon it in his treatise _De Cohibenda Ira_.

  583 Diog. Laërt. _Zeno_.

  584 Bodin thinks it was promulgated by Nero, and he has been followed by
      Troplong and Mr. Merivale. Champagny (_Les Antonins_, tome ii. p.
      115) thinks that no law after Tiberius was called _lex_.

  585 Sueton. _Claud._ xxv.; Dion Cass. lx. 29.

  586 See Dumas, _Secours publics chez les Anciens_ (Paris, 1813), pp.
      125-130.

  587 Senec. _De Clem._ i. 18.

  588 Senec. _De Benef._ iii. 22.

  589 Spartian. _Hadrianus._ Hadrian exiled a Roman lady for five years
      for treating her slaves with atrocious cruelty. (_Digest._ lib. i.
      tit. 6, § 2.)

  590 See these laws fully examined by Wallon, tome iii. pp. 51-92, and
      also Laferrière, _Sur l’Influence du Stoïcisme sur le Droit_. The
      jurisconsults gave a very wide scope to their definitions of
      cruelty. A master who degraded a literary slave, or a slave
      musician, to some coarse manual employment, such as a porter, was
      decided to have ill-treated him. (Wallon, tome iii. p. 62.)

  591 Thus, e.g., Livia called in the Stoic Areus to console her after the
      death of Drusus (Senec. _Ad Marc._). Many of the letters of Seneca
      and Plutarch are written to console the suffering. Cato, Thrasea,
      and many others appear to have fortified their last hours by
      conversation with philosophers. The whole of this aspect of Stoicism
      has been admirably treated by M. Martha (_Les Moralistes de l’Empire
      Romain_).

  592 We have a pleasing picture of the affection philosophers and their
      disciples sometimes bore to one another in the lines of Persius
      (_Sat._ v.) to his master Cornutus.

  593 Grant’s _Aristotle_, vol. i. pp. 277-278.

  594 Champagny, _Les Antonins_, tome i. p. 405.

  595 Arrian, iii. 22. Julian has also painted the character of the true
      Cynic, and contrasted it with that of the impostors who assumed the
      garb. See Neander’s _Life of Julian_ (London, 1850), p. 94.

  596 Seneca the rhetorician (father of the philosopher) collected many of
      the sayings of the rhetoricians of his time. At a later period,
      Philostratus wrote the lives of eminent rhetoricians, Quintilian
      discussed their rules of oratory, and Aulus Gellius painted the
      whole society in which they moved. On their injurious influence upon
      eloquence, see Petronius, _Satyricon_, i. 2. Much curious
      information about the rhetoricians is collected in Martha,
      _Moralistes de l’Empire Romain_, and in Nisard, _Etudes sur les
      Poëtes Latins de la Dècadence_, art. Juvenal.

  597 “Cependant ces orateurs n’étaient jamais plus admirés que lorsqu’ils
      avaient le bonheur de trouver un sujet où la louange fut un tour de
      force.... Lucien a fait l’éloge de la mouche; Fronton de la
      poussière, de la fumée, de la négligence; Dion Chrysostome de la
      chevelure, du perroquet, etc. Au cinquième siècle, Synésius, qui fut
      un grand évêque, fera le panégyrique de la calvitie, long ouvrage où
      toutes les sciences sont mises à contribution pour apprendre aux
      hommes ce qu’il y a non-seulement de bonheur mais aussi de mérite à
      être chauve.”—Martha, _Moralistes de l’Empire Romain_ (ed. 1865), p.
      275.

  598 There is a good review of the teaching of Maximus in Champagny, _Les
      Antonins_, tome ii. pp. 207-215.

_  599 Orat._ xv.; _De Servitute_.

  600 See the singularly charming essay on Dion Chrysostom, in M. Martha’s
      book.

  601 Mr. Buckle, in his admirable chapter on the “Proximate Causes of the
      French Revolution” (_Hist. of Civilisation_, vol. i.), has painted
      this fashionable enthusiasm for knowledge with great power, and
      illustrated it with ample learning.

  602 The saying of Mme. Dudeffand about Helvétius is well known: “C’est
      un homme qui a dit le secret de tout le monde.” How truly Helvétius
      represented this fashionable society appears very plainly from the
      vivid portrait of it in the _Nouvelle Hèloïse_, part ii. letter
      xvii., a masterpiece of its kind.

  603 Musonius tried to stop this custom of applauding the lecturer. (Aul.
      Gell. _Noct._ v. i.) The habits that were formed in the schools of
      the rhetoricians were sometimes carried into the churches, and we
      have notices of preachers (especially St. Chrysostom) being
      vociferously applauded.

  604 Thus Gellius himself consulted Favorinus about a perplexing case
      which he had, in his capacity of magistrate, to determine, and
      received from his master a long dissertation on the duties of a
      judge (xiv. 2).

  605 i. 10.

_  606 Noct. Att._ vi. 13. They called these questions _symposiacæ_, as
      being well fitted to stimulate minds already mellowed by wine.

  607 xviii. 2.

  608 We have a curious example of this in a letter of Marcus Aurelius
      preserved by Gallicanus in his _Life of Avidius Cassius_.

  609 “Senserunt hoc Stoici qui servis et mulieribus philosophandum esse
      dixerunt.”—Lact. _Nat. Div._ iii. 25. Zeno was often reproached for
      gathering the poorest and most sordid around him when he lectured.
      (Diog. Laërt. _Zeno_.)

  610 This decadence was noticed and rebuked by some of the leading
      philosophers. See the language of Epictetus in Arrian, ii. 19, iv.
      8, and of Herod Atticus in Aul. Gell. i. 2, ix. 2. St. Augustine
      speaks of the Cynics as having in his time sunk into universal
      contempt. See much evidence on this subject in Friedlænder, _Hist.
      des Mœurs Romaines_, tome iv. 378-385.

  611 This movement is well treated by Vacherot, _Hist. de l’École
      d’Alexandrie_.

_  612 De Superstitione._

_  613 Dissertations_, x. § 8 (ed. Davis, London, 1740). In some editions
      this is _Diss._ xxix.

_  614 Dissert._ xxxviii.

_  615 De Dæmone Socratis._

_  616 De Dæmone Socratis._ See, on the office of dæmons or genii, Arrian
      i. 14, and a curious chapter in Ammianus Marcell. xxi. 14. See, too,
      Plotinus, 3rd _Enn._ lib. iv.

_  617 De Dæmone Socratis._

  618 I should except Plotinus, however, who was faithful in this point to
      Plato, and was in consequence much praised by the Christian Fathers.

  619 “Omnium malorum maximum voluptas, qua tanquam clavo et fibula anima
      corpori nectitur; putatque vera quæ et corpus suadet, et ita
      spoliatur rerum divinarum aspectu.”—Iamblichus, _De Secta Pythagor._
      (Romæ, 1556), p. 38. Plotinus, 1st _Enn._ vi. 6.

_  620 De Sect. Pyth._ pp. 36, 37.

  621 Porphyry, _Life of Plotinus_.

  622 Iamblichus, _De Mysteriis._ 1.

  623 See, on this doctrine of ecstasy, Vacherot, _Hist. de l’École
      d’Alexandrie_, tome i. p. 576, &c.

  624 “Sic habeto, omnibus qui patriam conservaverint, adjuverint,
      auxerint, certum esse in cœlo ac definitum locum ubi beati ævo
      sempiterno fruantur.”—Cic. _Somn. Scip._

  625 Φῶς, which, according to Plutarch (who here confuses two distinct
      words), is poetically used for man (_De Latenter Vivendo_). A
      similar thought occurs in M. Aurelius, who speaks of the good man as
      light which only ceases to shine when it ceases to be.

_  626 Diss._ xxi. § 6.

  627 Iamblichus, _De Sect. Pythagoræ_, p. 35.

  628 Porphyry, _Life of Plotinus_, cap. vii.; Plotinus, 1st _Enn._ iv. 7.
      See on this subject Degerando, _Hist. de la Philos._ iii. p. 383.

  629 Thus it was said of Apollonius that in his teaching at Ephesus he
      did not speak after the manner of the followers of Socrates, but
      endeavoured to detach his disciples from all occupation other than
      philosophy.—_Philostr. Apoll. of Tyana_, iv. 2. Cicero notices the
      aversion the Pythagoreans of his time displayed to argument: “Quum
      ex iis quæreretur quare ita esset, respondere solitos, Ipse dixit;
      ipse autem erat Pythagoras.”—_De Nat. Deor._ i. 5.

  630 See Vacherot, tome ii. p. 66.

  631 See Degerando, _Hist. de la Philosophie_, tome iii. pp. 400, 401.

  632 Plotinus, 1st _Enn._ ix.

  633 See a strong passage, on the universality of this belief, in
      Plotinus, 1st _Enn._ i. 12, and Origen, _Cont. Cels._ vii. A very
      old tradition represented the Egyptians as the first people who held
      the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. Cicero (_Tusc. Quæst._)
      says that the Syrian Pherecydes, master of Pythagoras, first taught
      it. Maximus of Tyre attributes its origin to Pythagoras, and his
      slave Zamolxis was said to have introduced it into Greece. Others
      say that Thales first taught it. None of these assertions have any
      real historical value.

  634 We have a remarkable instance of the clearness with which some even
      of the most insignificant historians recognised the folly of
      confining history to the biographies of the Emperors, in the opening
      chapter of Capitolinus, _Life of Macrinus_.—Tacitus is full of
      beautiful episodes, describing the manners and religion of the
      people.

  635 The passages relating to the Jews in Roman literature are collected
      in Aubertin’s _Rapports supposés entre Sénèque et St. Paul_.
      Champagny, _Rome et Judée_, tome i. pp. 134-137.

  636 Cicero, _pro Flacco_, 28; Sueton. _Claudius_, 25.

  637 Juvenal, _Sat._ xiv.

_  638 Hist._ v.

  639 Lact. _Inst. Div._ vii. 3.

  640 See their history fully investigated in Aubertin. Augustine followed
      Jerome in mentioning the letters, but neither of these writers
      asserted their genuineness. Lactantius, nearly at the same time
      (_Inst. Div._ vi. 24), distinctly spoke of Seneca as a Pagan, as
      Tertullian (_Apol._ 50) had done before. The immense number of
      forged documents is one of the most disgraceful features of the
      Church history of the first few centuries.

  641 Fleury has written an elaborate work maintaining the connection
      between the apostle and the philosopher. Troplong (_Influence du
      Christianisme sur le Droit_) has adopted the same view. Aubertin, in
      the work I have already cited, has maintained the opposite view
      (which is that of all or nearly all English critics) with masterly
      skill and learning. The Abbé Dourif (_Rapports du Stoïcisme et du
      Christianisme_) has placed side by side the passages from each
      writer which are most alike.

  642 Quoted by St. Augustine.—_De Civ. Dei_, vi. 11.

  643 xi. 3.

  644 The history of the two schools has been elaborately traced by
      Ritter, Pressensé, and many other writers. I would especially refer
      to the fourth volume of Degerando’s most fascinating _Histoire de la
      Philosophie_.

  645 “Scurra Atticus,” Min. Felix, _Octav._ This term is said by Cicero
      to have been given to Socrates by Zeno. (Cic. _De Nat. Deor._ i.
      34.)

  646 Tertull. _De Anima_, 39.

  647 See especially his _Apol._ ii. 8, 12, 13. He speaks of the
      σπερματικὸς λόγος.

  648 See, on all this, Clem. Alex. _Strom._ v., and also i. 22.

  649 St. Clement repeats this twice (_Strom._ i. 24, v. 14). The writings
      of this Father are full of curious, and sometimes ingenious,
      attempts to trace different phrases of the great philosophers,
      orators, and poets to Moses. A vast amount of learning and ingenuity
      has been expended in the same cause by Eusebius. (_Præp. Evan._ xii.
      xiii.) The tradition of the derivation of Pagan philosophy from the
      Old Testament found in general little favour among the Latin
      writers. There is some curious information on this subject in
      Waterland’s “Charge to the Clergy of Middlesex, to prove that the
      wisdom of the ancients was borrowed from revelation; delivered in
      1731.” It is in the 8th volume of Waterland’s works (ed. 1731).

  650 St. Clement (_Strom._ i.) mentions that some think him to have been
      Ezekiel, an opinion which St. Clement himself does not hold. See, on
      the patristic notions about Pythagoras, Legendre, _Traité de
      l’Opinion_, tome i. p. 164.

  651 This was the opinion of Julius Firmicus Maternus, a Latin writer of
      the age of Constantine, “Nam quia Saræ pronepos fuerat ... Serapis
      dictus est Græco sermone, hoc est Σαρᾶς ἄπο.”—Julius Firmicus
      Maternus, _De Errore Profanarum Religionum_, cap. xiv.

  652 Justin Martyr, _Apol._ i. 54; Trypho, 69-70. There is a very curious
      collection of Pagan legends that were parallel to Jewish incidents,
      in La Mothe le Vayer, let. xciii.

  653 Suet. _Vesp._ 7; Tacit. _Hist._ iv. 81. There is a slight difference
      between the two historians about the second miracle. Suetonius says
      it was the leg, Tacitus that it was the hand, that was diseased. The
      god Serapis was said to have revealed to the patients that they
      would be cured by the emperor. Tacitus says that Vespasian did not
      believe in his own power; that it was only after much persuasion he
      was induced to try the experiment; that the blind man was well known
      in Alexandria, where the event occurred, and that eyewitnesses who
      had no motive to lie still attested the miracle.

  654 The following is a good specimen of the language which may still be
      uttered, apparently without exciting any protest, from the pulpit in
      one of the great centres of English learning: “But we have prayed,
      and not been heard, at least in this present visitation. Have we
      deserved to be heard? In former visitations it was observed commonly
      how the cholera lessened from the day of the public humiliation.
      When we dreaded famine from long-continued drought, on the morning
      of our prayers the heaven over our head was of brass; the clear
      burning sky showed no token of change. Men looked with awe at its
      unmitigated clearness. In the evening was the cloud like a man’s
      hand; the relief was come.” (And then the author adds, in a note):
      “This describes what I myself saw on the Sunday morning in Oxford,
      on returning from the early communion at St. Mary’s at eight. There
      was no visible change till the evening.”—Pusey’s _Miracles of
      Prayer_, preached at Oxford, 1866.

  655 E.g.: “A master of philosophy, travelling with others on the way,
      when a fearful thunderstorm arose, checked the fear of his fellows,
      and discoursed to them of the natural reasons of that uproar in the
      clouds, and those sudden flashes wherewith they seemed (out of the
      ignorance of causes) to be too much affrighted: in the midst of his
      philosophical discourse he was struck dead with the dreadful
      eruption which he slighted. What could this be but the finger of
      that God who will have his works rather entertained with wonder and
      trembling than with curious scanning?”—Bishop Hall, _The Invisible
      World_, § vi.

  656 Sir C. Lewis _On the Credibility of Roman Hist._ vol. i. p. 50.

  657 Cic. _De Divin._ lib. i. c. 1.

  658 “The days on which the miracle [of the king’s touch] was to be
      wrought were fixed at sittings of the Privy Council, and were
      solemnly notified by the clergy to all the parish churches of the
      realm. When the appointed time came, several divines in full
      canonicals stood round the canopy of state. The surgeon of the royal
      household introduced the sick. A passage of Mark xvi. was read. When
      the words ‘They shall lay their hands on the sick and they shall
      recover,’ had been pronounced, there was a pause and one of the sick
      was brought to the king. His Majesty stroked the ulcers.... Then
      came the Epistle, &c. The Service may still be found in the Prayer
      Books of the reign of Anne. Indeed, it was not until some time after
      the accession of George I. that the University of Oxford ceased to
      reprint the office of healing, together with the Liturgy.
      Theologians of eminent learning, ability, and virtue gave the
      sanction of their authority to this mummery, and, what is stranger
      still, medical men of high note believed, or affected to believe,
      it.... Charles II., in the course of his reign, touched near 100,000
      persons.... In 1682 he performed the rite 8,500 times. In 1684 the
      throng was such that six or seven of the sick were trampled to
      death. James, in one of his progresses, touched 800 persons in the
      choir of the cathedral of Chester.”—Macaulay’s _History of England_,
      c. xiv.

  659 One of the surgeons of Charles II. named John Brown, whose official
      duty it was to superintend the ceremony, and who assures us that he
      has witnessed many thousands touched, has written an extremely
      curious account of it, called _Charisma Basilicon_ (London, 1684).
      This miraculous power existed exclusively in the English and French
      royal families, being derived, in the first, from Edward the
      Confessor, in the second, from St. Lewis. A surgeon attested the
      reality of the disease before the miracle was performed. The king
      hung a riband with a gold coin round the neck of the person touched;
      but Brown thinks the gold, though possessing great virtue, was not
      essential to the cure. He had known cases where the cured person had
      sold, or ceased to wear, the medal, and his disease returned. The
      gift was unimpaired by the Reformation, and an obdurate Catholic was
      converted on finding that Elizabeth, after the Pope’s
      excommunication, could cure his scrofula. Francis I. cured many
      persons when prisoner in Spain. Charles I., when a prisoner, cured a
      man by his simple benediction, the Puritans not permitting him to
      touch him. His blood had the same efficacy; and Charles II., when an
      exile in the Netherlands, still retained it. There were, however,
      some “Atheists, Sadducees, and ill-conditioned Pharisees” who even
      then disbelieved it; and Brown gives the letter of one who went, a
      complete sceptic, to satisfy his friends, and came away cured and
      converted. It was popularly, but Brown says erroneously, believed
      that the touch was peculiarly efficacious on Good Friday. An
      official register was kept, for every month in the reign of Charles
      II., of the persons touched, but two years and a half appear to be
      wanting. The smallest number touched in one year was 2,983 (in
      1669); the total, in the whole reign, 92,107. Brown gives numbers of
      specific cases with great detail. Shakspeare has noticed the power
      (_Macbeth_, Act iv. Scene 3). Dr. Johnson, when a boy, was touched
      by Queen Anne; but at that time few persons, except Jacobites,
      believed the miracle.

  660 Lucretius, lib. vi. The poet says there are certain seeds of fire in
      the earth, around the water, which the sun attracts to itself, but
      which the cold of the night represses, and forces back upon the
      water.

      The fountain of Jupiter Ammon, and many others that were deemed
      miraculous, are noticed by Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ ii. 106.

      “Fly not yet; the fount that played
      In times of old through Ammon’s shade,
      Though icy cold by day it ran,
      Yet still, like souls of mirth, began
      To burn when night was near.”—Moore’s _Melodies_.

  661 Tacit. _Annal._ i. 28. Long afterwards, the people of Turin were
      accustomed to greet every eclipse with loud cries, and St. Maximus
      of Turin energetically combated their superstition. (Ceillier,
      _Hist. des Auteurs sacrés_, tome xiv. p. 607.)

  662 Suet. _Aug._ xci.

  663 See the answer of the younger Pliny (_Ep._ i. 18), suggesting that
      dreams should often be interpreted by contraries. A great many
      instances of dreams that were believed to have been verified are
      given in Cic. (_De Divinatione_, lib. i.) and Valerius Maximus (lib.
      i. c. vii.). Marcus Aurelius (Capitolinus) was said to have appeared
      to many persons after his death in dreams, and predicted the future.

  664 The augurs had noted eleven kinds of lightning with different
      significations. (Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ ii. 53.) Pliny says all nations
      agree in clapping their hands when it lightens (xxviii. 5). Cicero
      very shrewdly remarked that the Roman considered lightning a good
      omen when it shone upon his left, while the Greeks and barbarians
      believed it to be auspicious when it was upon the right. (Cic. _De
      Divinat._ ii. 39.) When Constantine prohibited all other forms of
      magic, he especially authorised that which was intended to avert
      hail and lightning. (_Cod. Theod._ lib. ix. tit. xvi. 1. 3.)

  665 Suet. _Aug._ xc.

  666 Ibid. _Tiber._ lxix. The virtue of laurel leaves, and of the skin of
      a sea-calf, as preservatives against lightning, are noticed by Pliny
      (_Hist. Nat._ ii. 56), who also says (xv. 40) that the laurel leaf
      is believed to have a natural antipathy to fire, which it shows by
      its angry crackling when in contact with that element.

  667 Suet. _Calig._ ii.

  668 Suet. _Jul. Cæs._ lxxxviii.

  669 Plin. _Hist. Nat._ ii. 23.

  670 “Prodigia eo anno multa nuntiata sunt, quæ quo magis credebant
      simplices ac religiosi homines eo plura nuntiabantur” (xxiv. 10).
      Compare with this the remark of Cicero on the oracles: “Quando autem
      illa vis evanuit? An postquam homines minus creduli esse cœperunt?”
      (_De Div._ ii. 57.)

  671 This theory, which is developed at length by the Stoic, in the first
      book of the _De Divinatione_ of Cicero, grew out of the pantheistic
      notion that the human soul is a part of the Deity, and therefore by
      nature a participator in the Divine attribute of prescience. The
      soul, however, was crushed by the weight of the body; and there were
      two ways of evoking its prescience—the ascetic way, which attenuates
      the body, and the magical way, which stimulates the soul. Apollonius
      declared that his power of prophecy was not due to magic, but solely
      to his abstinence from animal food. (Philost. _Ap. of Tyana_, viii.
      5.) Among those who believed the oracles, there were two theories.
      The first was that they were inspired by dæmons or spirits of a
      degree lower than the gods. The second was, that they were due to
      the action of certain vapours which emanated from the caverns
      beneath the temples, and which, by throwing the priestess into a
      state of delirium, evoked her prophetic powers. The first theory was
      that of the Platonists, and it was adopted by the Christians, who,
      however, changed the signification of the word dæmon. The second
      theory, which appears to be due to Aristotle (Baltus, _Réponse à
      l’Histoire des Oracles_, p. 132), is noticed by Cic. _De Div._ i.
      19; Plin. _H. N._ ii. 95; and others. It is closely allied to the
      modern belief in clairvoyance. Plutarch, in his treatise on the
      decline of the oracles, attributes that decline sometimes to the
      death of the dæmons (who were believed to be mortal), and sometimes
      to the exhaustion of the vapours. The oracles themselves, according
      to Porphyry (Fontenelle, _Hist. des Oracles_, pp. 220-222, first
      ed.), attributed it to the second cause. Iamblichus (_De Myst._ §
      iii. c. xi.) combines both theories, and both are very clearly
      stated in the following curious passage: “Quamquam Platoni credam
      inter deos atque homines, natura et loco medias quasdam divorum
      potestates intersitas, easque divinationes cunctas et magorum
      miracula gubernare. Quin et illud mecum reputo, posse animum
      humanum, præsertim, puerilem et simplicem, seu carminum avocamento,
      sive odorum delenimento, soporari, et ad oblivionem præsentium
      externari: et paulis per remota corporis memoria, redigi ac redire
      ad naturam suam, quæ est immortalis scilicet et divina; atque ita
      veluti quodam sopore, futura rerum præsagire.”—Apuleius, _Apolog._

  672 Aul. Gell. _Noct._ ii. 28. Florus, however (_Hist._ i. 19), mentions
      a Roman general appeasing the goddess Earth on the occasion of an
      earthquake that occurred during a battle.

  673 Ælian, _Hist. Var._ iv. 17.

_  674 Hist. Nat._ ii. 81-86.

  675 Ibid. ii. 9.

  676 Ibid. ii. 23.

  677 I have referred in the last chapter to a striking passage of Am.
      Marcellinus on this combination. The reader may find some curious
      instances of the superstitions of Roman sceptics in Champagny, _Les
      Antonins_, tome iii. p. 46.

  678 viii. 19. This is also mentioned by Lucretius.

  679 viii. 1.

  680 viii. 50. This was one of the reasons why the early Christians
      sometimes adopted the stag as a symbol of Christ.

  681 xxix. 23.

  682 xxxii. 1.

  683 vii. 2.

  684 xxviii. 7. The blind man restored to sight by Vespasian was cured by
      anointing his eyes with spittle. (Suet. _Vesp._ 7; Tacit. _Hist._
      iv. 81.)

  685 Ibid. The custom of spitting in the hand before striking still
      exists among pugilists.

  686 ii. 101.

  687 Legendre, _Traité de l’Opinion_, tome ii. p. 17. The superstition
      is, however, said still to linger in many sea-coast towns.

  688 Lucian is believed to have died about two years before Marcus
      Aurelius.

  689 See his very curious Life by Philostratus. This Life was written at
      the request of Julia Domna, the wife of Septimus Severus, whether or
      not with the intention of opposing the Gospel narrative is a
      question still fiercely discussed. Among the most recent Church
      historians, Pressensé maintains the affirmative, and Neander the
      negative. Apollonius was born at nearly the same time as Christ, but
      outlived Domitian. The traces of his influence are widely spread
      through the literature of the empire. Eunapius calls him “Ἀπολλώνιος
      ὁ ἐκ Τυάνων, οὐκέτι φιλόσοφος ἀλλ᾽ ἦν τι θεῶν τε καὶ ἀνθρώπου
      μέσον.”—_Lives of the Sophists._ Xiphilin relates (lxvii. 18) the
      story, told also by Philostratus, how Apollonius, being at Ephesus,
      saw the assassination of Domitian at Rome. Alexander Severus placed
      (_Lampridius Severus_) the statue of Apollonius with those of
      Orpheus, Abraham, and Christ, for worship in his oratory. Aurelian
      was reported to have been diverted from his intention of destroying
      Tyana by the ghost of the philosopher, who appeared in his tent,
      rebuked him, and saved the city (Vopiscus, _Aurelian_); and, lastly,
      the Pagan philosopher Hierocles wrote a book opposing Apollonius to
      Christ, which was answered by Eusebius. The Fathers of the fourth
      century always spoke of him as a great magician. Some curious
      passages on the subject are collected by M. Chassang, in the
      introduction to his French translation of the work of Philostratus.

  690 See his defence against the charge of magic. Apuleius, who was at
      once a brilliant rhetorician, the writer of an extremely curious
      novel (_The Metamorphoses, or Golden Ass_), and of many other works,
      and an indefatigable student of the religious mysteries of his time,
      lived through the reigns of Hadrian and his two successors. After
      his death his fame was for about a century apparently eclipsed; and
      it has been noticed as very remarkable that Tertullian, who lived a
      generation after Apuleius, and who, like him, was a Carthaginian,
      has never even mentioned him. During the fourth century his
      reputation revived, and Lactantius, St. Jerome, and St. Augustine
      relate that many miracles were attributed to him, and that he was
      placed by the Pagans on a level with Christ, and regarded by some as
      even a greater magician. See the sketch of his life by M. Bétolaud
      prefixed to the Panckoucke edition of his works.

_  691 Life of Alexander._ There is an extremely curious picture of the
      religious jugglers, who were wandering about the Empire, in the
      eighth and ninth books of the _Metamorphoses_ of Apuleius. See, too,
      Juvenal, _Sat._ vi. 510-585.

  692 Porphyry’s _Life of Plotinus_.

  693 Eunapius, _Porph._

  694 Ibid. _Iamb._ Iamblichus himself only laughed at the report.

  695 Eunapius, _Iamb._

  696 See her life in Eunapius, _Œdescus_. Ælian and the rhetorician
      Aristides are also full of the wildest prodigies. There is an
      interesting dissertation on this subject in Friedlænder (_Trad.
      Franc._ tome iv. p. 177-186).

  697 “Credat Judæus Apella.”—Hor. _Sat._ v. 100.

  698 This appears from all the writings of the Fathers. There were,
      however, two forms of Pagan miracles about which there was some
      hesitation in the early Church—the beneficent miracle of healing and
      the miracle of prophecy. Concerning the first, the common opinion
      was that the dæmons only cured diseases they had themselves caused,
      or that, at least, if they ever (in order to enthral men more
      effectually) cured purely natural diseases, they did it by natural
      means, which their superior knowledge and power placed at their
      disposal. Concerning prophecy, it was the opinion of some of the
      Fathers that intuitive prescience was a Divine prerogative, and that
      the prescience of the dæmons was only acquired by observation. Their
      immense knowledge enabled them to forecast events to a degree far
      transcending human faculties, and they employed this power in the
      oracles.

_  699 De Origine ac Progressu Idolatriæ_ (Amsterdam).

  700 This characteristic of early Christian apology is forcibly exhibited
      by Pressensé, _Hist. des trois premiers Siècles_, 2me série, tome
      ii.

  701 The immense number of these forged writings is noticed by all candid
      historians, and there is, I believe, only one instance of any
      attempt being made to prevent this pious fraud. A priest was
      degraded for having forged some voyages of St. Paul and St. Thecla.
      (Tert. _De Baptismo_, 17.)

_  702 Apol._ i.

_  703 Strom._ vi. c. 5.

  704 Origen, _Cont. Cols._ v.

_  705 Oratio_ (apud Euseb.) xviii.

_  706 De Civ. Dei_, xviii. 23.

  707 Constantine, _Oratio_ xix. “His testimoniis quidam revicti solent eo
      confugere ut aiant non esse illa carmina Sibyllina, sed a nostris
      conficta atque composita.”—Lactant. _Div. Inst._ iv. 15.

  708 Antonius Possevinus, _Apparatus Sacer_ (1606), verb. “Sibylla.”

  709 This subject is fully treated by Middleton in his _Free Enquiry_,
      whom I have closely followed.

  710 Irenæus, _Contr. Hæres._ ii. 32.

  711 Epiphan. _Adv. Hæres._ ii. 30.

  712 St. Aug. _De Civ. Dei_, xxii. 8.

  713 This history is related by St. Ambrose in a letter to his sister
      Marcellina; by St. Paulinus of Nola, in his _Life of Ambrose_; and
      by St. Augustine, _De Civ. Dei_, xxii. 8; _Confess._ ix. 7.

  714 Plutarch thought they were known by Plato, but this opinion has been
      much questioned. See a very learned discussion on the subject in
      Farmer’s _Dissertation on Miracles_, pp. 129-140; and Fontenelle,
      _Hist. des Oracles_, pp. 26, 27. Porphyry speaks much of evil
      dæmons.

  715 Josephus, _Antiq._ viii. 2, § 5.

  716 This very curious subject is fully treated by Baltus (_Réponse à
      l’Histoire des Oracles_, Strasburg, 1707, published anonymously in
      reply to Van Dale and Fontenelle), who believed in the reality of
      the Pagan as well as the patristic miracles; by Bingham
      (_Antiquities of the Christian Church_, vol. i. pp. 316-324), who
      thinks the Pagan and Jewish exorcists were impostors, but not the
      Christians; and by Middleton (_Free Enquiry_, pp. 80-93), who
      disbelieves in all the exorcists after the apostolic times. It has
      also been the subject of a special controversy in England, carried
      on by Dodwell, Church, Farmer, and others. Archdeacon Church says:
      “If we cannot vindicate them [the Fathers of the first three
      centuries] on this article, their credit must be lost for ever; and
      we must be obliged to decline all further defence of them. It is
      impossible for any words more strongly to express a claim to this
      miracle than those used by all the best writers of the second and
      third centuries.”—_Vindication of the Miracles of the First Three
      Centuries_, p. 199. So, also, Baltus: “De tous les anciens auteurs
      ecclésiastiques, n’y en ayant pas un qui n’ait parlé de ce pouvoir
      admirable que les Chrétiens avoient de chasser les démons” (p. 296).
      Gregory of Tours describes exorcism as sufficiently common in his
      time, and mentions having himself seen a monk named Julian cure by
      his words a possessed person. (_Hist._ iv. 32.)

_  717 Vit. Hilar._ Origen notices that cattle were sometimes possessed by
      devils. See Middleton’s _Free Enquiry_, pp. 88, 89.

  718 The miracle of St. Babylas is the subject of a homily by St.
      Chrysostom, and is related at length by Theodoret, Sozomen, and
      Socrates. Libanius mentions that, by command of Julian, the bones of
      St. Babylas were removed from the temple. The Christians said the
      temple was destroyed by lightning; the Pagans declared it was burnt
      by the Christians, and Julian ordered measures of reprisal to be
      taken. Amm. Marcellinus, however, mentions a report that the fire
      was caused accidentally by one of the numerous candles employed in
      the ceremony. The people of Antioch defied the emperor by chanting,
      as they removed the relics, “Confounded be all they that trust in
      graven images.”

  719 See the _Life of Gregory Thaumaturgus_, by Gregory of Nyssa. St.
      Gregory the Great assures us (_Dial._ iii. 10) that Sabinus, Bishop
      of Placentia, wrote a letter to the river Po, which had overflowed
      its banks and flooded some church lands. When the letter was thrown
      into the stream the waters at once subsided.

  720 “Edatur hic aliquis sub tribunalibus vestris, quem dæmone agi
      constet. Jussus a quolibet Christiano loqui spiritus ille, tam se
      dæmonem confitebitur de vero, quam alibi deum de falso. Æque
      producatur aliquis ex iis qui de deo pati existimantur, qui aris
      inhalantes numen de nidore concipiunt ... nisi se dæmones confessi
      fuerint, Christiano mentiri non audentes, ibidem illius Christiani
      procacissimi sanguinem fundite. Quid isto opere manifestius? quid
      hæc probatione fidelius?”—Tert. _Apol._ xxiii.

_  721 Apol._ i.; _Trypho_.

_  722 Cont. Cels._ vii.

_  723 Inst. Div._ iv. 27.

_  724 Life of Antony._

_  725 Octavius._

_  726 De Superstitione._

  727 i. 6.

_  728 De Mort. Peregrin._

  729 Origen, _Adv. Cels._ vi. Compare the curious letter which Vopiscus
      (Saturninus) attributes to Hadrian, “Nemo illic [i.e. in Egypt]
      archisynagogus Judæorum, nemo Samarites, nemo Christianorum
      presbyter, non mathematicus, non aruspex, non aliptes.”

  730 “Si incantavit, si imprecatus est, si (ut vulgari verbo impostorum
      utor) exorcizavit.”—Bingham, _Antiquities of the Christian Church_
      (Oxf., 1855), vol. i. p. 318. This law is believed to have been
      directed specially against the Christians, because these were very
      prominent as exorcists, and because Lactantius (_Inst. Div._ v. 11)
      says that Ulpian had collected the laws against them.

  731 Philostorgius, _Hist. Eccl._ viii. 10.

  732 See Juvenal, _Sat._ vi. 314-335.

  733 See Juvenal, _Sat._ vi. 520-530.

_  734 Metamorphoses_, book x.

  735 See their _Lives_, by Lampridius and Spartianus.

  736 The conflict between St. Cyprian and the confessors, concerning the
      power of remitting penances claimed by the latter, though it ended
      in the defeat of the confessors, shows clearly the influence they
      had obtained.

  737 “Thura plane non emimus; si Arabiæ queruntur scient Sabæi pluris et
      carioris suas merces Christianis sepeliendis profligari quam diis
      fumigandis.”—_Apol._ 42. Sometimes the Pagans burnt the bodies of
      the martyrs, in order to prevent the Christians venerating their
      relics.

  738 Many interesting particulars about these commemrative festivals are
      collected in Cave’s _Primitive Christianity_, part i. c. vii. The
      anniversaries were called “Natalia,” or birth-days.

  739 See her acts in Ruinart.

  740 St. Clem. Alex. _Strom._ iv. 10. There are other passages of the
      same kind in other Fathers.

_  741 Ad Scapul._ v. Eusebius (_Martyrs of Palestine_, ch. iii.) has
      given a detailed account of six young men, who in the very height of
      the Galerian persecution, at a time when the most hideous tortures
      were applied to the Christians, voluntarily gave themselves up as
      believers. Sulp. Severus (_Hist._ ii. 32), speaking of the voluntary
      martyrs under Diocletian, says that Christians then “longed for
      death as they now long for bishoprics.” “Cogi qui potest, nescit
      mori,” was the noble maxim of the Christians.

  742 Arrian, iv. 7. It is not certain, however, that this passage alludes
      to the Christians. The followers of Judas of Galilee were called
      Galilæans, and they were famous for their indifference to death. See
      Joseph. _Antiq._ xviii. 1.

  743 xi. 3.

  744 Peregrinus.

  745 Zosimus.

  746 “Do I not hate them, O Lord, that hate thee?—yea, I hate them with a
      perfect hatred.”

  747 See Renan’s _Apôtres_, p. 314.

  748 M. Pressensé very truly says of the Romans, “Leur religion était
      essentiellement un art—l’art de découvrir les desseins des dieux et
      d’agir sur eux par des rites variés.”—_Hist. des Trois premiers
      Siècles_, tome i. p. 192. Montesquieu has written an interesting
      essay on the political nature of the Roman religion.

  749 Sueton. _Claud._ xxv.

  750 Plin. _Hist. Nat._ vii. 31.

  751 Tacit. _De Orat._ xxxv.; Aul. Gell. _Noct._ xv. 11. It would appear,
      from this last authority, that the rhetoricians were twice expelled.

  752 Dion Cassius, lii. 36. Most historians believe that this speech
      represents the opinions, not of the Augustan age, but of the age of
      the writer who relates it.

  753 On the hostility of Vespasian to philosophers, see Xiphilin, lxvi.
      13; on that of Domitian, the _Letters_ of Pliny and the _Agricola_
      of Tacitus.

  754 See a remarkable passage in Dion Chrysostom, _Or._ lxxx. _De
      Libertate_.

  755 Cic. _De Legib._ ii. 11; Tertull. _Apol._ v.

  756 Livy, iv. 30

  757 Val. Maximus, i. 3, § 1.

  758 Livy, xxv. 1.

  759 Val. Max. i. 3, § 2.

  760 See the account of these proceedings, and of the very remarkable
      speech of Postumius, in Livy, xxxix. 8-19. Postumius notices the old
      prohibition of foreign rites, and thus explains it:—“Judicabant enim
      prudentissimi viri omnis divini humanique juris, nihil æque
      dissolvendæ religionis esse, quam ubi non patrio sed externo ritu
      sacrificaretur.” The Senate, though suppressing these rites on
      account of the outrageous immoralities connected with them, decreed,
      that if any one thought it a matter of religious duty to perform
      religious ceremonies to Bacchus, he should be allowed to do so on
      applying for permission to the Senate, provided there were not more
      than five assistants, no common purse, and no presiding priest.

  761 Val. Max. i. 3.

  762 See Dion Cassius, xl. 47; xlii. 26; xlvii. 15; liv. 6.

  763 Joseph. _Antiq._ xviii. 3.

  764 Tacit. _Annal._ ii. 85.

  765 Tacitus relates (_Ann._ xi. 15) that under Claudius a senatus
      consultus ordered the pontiffs to take care that the old Roman (or,
      more properly, Etruscan) system of divination was observed, since
      the influx of foreign superstitions had led to its disuse; but it
      does not appear that this measure was intended to interfere with any
      other form of worship.

  766 “Sacrosanctam istam civitatem accedo.”—Apuleius, _Metam._ lib. x. It
      is said that there were at one time no less than 420 ædes sacræ in
      Rome. Nieupoort, _De Ritibus Romanorum_ (1716), p. 276.

  767 Euseb. _Præp. Evang._ iv. 1. Fontenelle says very truly, “Il y a
      lieu de croire que chez les payens la religion n’estoit qu’une
      pratique, dont la spéculation estoit indifférente. Faites comme les
      autres et croyez ce qu’il vous plaira.”—_Hist. des Oracles_, p. 95.
      It was a saying of Tiberius, that it is for the gods to care for the
      injuries done to them: “Deorum injurias diis curæ.”—Tacit. _Annal._
      i. 73.

  768 The most melancholy modern instance I remember is a letter of Hume
      to a young man who was thinking of taking orders, but who, in the
      course of his studies, became a complete sceptic. Hume strongly
      advised him not to allow this consideration to interfere with his
      career (Burton, _Life of Hume_, vol. ii. pp. 187, 188.) The
      utilitarian principles of the philosopher were doubtless at the root
      of his judgment.

_  769 De Divinat._ ii. 33; _De Nat. Deor._ ii. 3.

  770 “Quæ omnia sapiens servabit tanquam legibus jussa non tanquam diis
      grata.... Meminerimus cultum ejus magis ad morem quam ad rem
      pertinere.”—St. Aug. _De Civ. Dei_, vi. 10. St. Augustine denounces
      this view with great power. See, too, Lactantius. _Inst. Div._ ii.
      3.

_  771 Enchirid._ xxxi.

  772 This is noticed by Philo.

  773 The ship in which the atheist Diagoras sailed was once nearly
      wrecked by a tempest, and the sailors declared that it was a just
      retribution from the gods because they had received the philosopher
      into their vessel. Diagoras, pointing to the other ships that were
      tossed by the same storm, asked whether they imagined there was a
      Diagoras in each. (_Cic. De Nat. Deor._ iii. 37.)

  774 The vestal Oppia was put to death because the diviners attributed to
      her unchastity certain “prodigies in the heavens,” that had alarmed
      the people at the beginning of the war with Veii. (Livy, ii. 42.)
      The vestal Urbinia was buried alive on account of a plague that had
      fallen upon the Roman women, which was attributed to her
      incontinence, and which is said to have ceased suddenly upon her
      execution. (Dion. Halicar. ix.)

  775 Pliny, in his famous letter to Trajan about the Christians, notices
      that this had been the case in Bithynia.

  776 Tert. _Apol._ xl. See, too, Cyprian, _contra Demetrian._, and
      Arnobius, _Apol._ lib. i.

  777 St. Aug. _De Civ. Dei_, ii. 3.

  778 Instances of this kind are given by Tertullian _Ad Scapulam_, and
      the whole treatise _On the Deaths of the Persecutors_, attributed to
      Lactantius, is a development of the same theory. St. Cyprian’s
      treatise against Demetrianus throws much light on the mode of
      thought of the Christians of his time. In the later historians,
      anecdotes of adversaries of the Church dying horrible deaths became
      very numerous. They were said especially to have been eaten by
      worms. Many examples of this kind are collected by Jortin. (_Remarks
      on Eccles. Hist._ vol. i. p. 432.)

  779 “It is remarkable, in all the proclamations and documents which
      Eusebius assigns to Constantine, some even written by his own hand,
      how, almost exclusively, he dwells on this worldly superiority of
      the God adored by the Christians over those of the heathens, and the
      visible temporal advantages which attend on the worship of
      Christianity. His own victory, and the disasters of his enemies, are
      his conclusive evidences of Christianity.”—Milman, _Hist. of Early
      Christianity_ (ed. 1867), vol. ii. p. 327. “It was a standing
      argument of Athanasius, that the death of Arius was a sufficient
      refutation of his heresy.”—Ibid. p. 382.

  780 Socrates, _Eccl. Hist._, vii. 30.

  781 Greg. Tur. ii. 30, 31. Clovis wrote to St. Avitus, “Your faith is
      our victory.”

  782 Milman’s _Latin Christianity_ (ed. 1867), vol. ii. pp. 236-245.

  783 Ibid. vol. iii. p. 248.

_  784 Ep._ xl.

  785 “An diutius perferimus mutari temporum vices, irata cœli temperie?
      Quæ Paganorum exacerbata perfidia nescit naturæ libramenta servare.
      Unde enim ver solitam gratiam abjuravit? unde æstas, messe jejuna,
      laboriosum agricolam in spe destituit aristarum? unde hyemis
      intemperata ferocitas uberitatem terrarum penetrabili frigore
      sterilitatis læsione damnavit? nisi quod ad impietatis vindictam
      transit lege sua naturæ decretum.”—Novell. lii. Theodos. _De Judæis,
      Samaritanis, et Hæreticis_.

  786 Milman’s _Latin Christianity_ vol. ii. p. 354.

_  787 Démonomanie des Sorciers_, p. 152.

  788 See a curious instance in Bayle’s _Dictionary_, art. “Vergerius.”

  789 Pliny, Ep. x. 43. Trajan noticed that Nicomedia was peculiarly
      turbulent. On the edict against the hetæriæ, or associations, see
      _Ep._ x. 97.

  790 All the apologists are full of these charges. The chief passages
      have been collected in that very useful and learned work, Kortholt,
      _De Calumniis contra Christianos_. (Cologne, 1683.)

  791 Justin Martyr tells us it was the brave deaths of the Christians
      that converted him. (_Apol._ ii. 12.)

  792 Peregrinus.

_  793 Ep._ x. 97.

_  794 Ep._ ii.

  795 Juvenal describes the popular estimate of the Jews:—

      “Tradidit arcano quodcunque volumine Moses;
      Non monstrare vias, eadem nisi sacra colenti,
      Quæsitum ad fontem solos deducere verpos.”

      _Sat._ xix. 102-105.

      It is not true that the Mosaic law contains these precepts.

  796 See Merivale’s _Hist. of Rome_, vol. viii. p. 176.

  797 See Justin Martyr, _Trypho_, xvii.

  798 Justin Martyr, _Apol._ i. 26.

  799 Eusebius expressly notices that the licentiousness of the sect of
      Carpocrates occasioned calumnies against the whole of the Christian
      body. (iv. 7.) A number of passages from the Fathers describing the
      immorality of these heretics are referred to by Cave, _Primitive
      Christianity_, part ii. ch. v.

  800 Epiphanius, _Adv. Hær._ lib. i. Hær. 26. The charge of murdering
      children, and especially infants, occupies a very prominent place
      among the recriminations of religionists. The Pagans, as we have
      seen, brought it against the Christians, and the orthodox against
      some of the early heretics. The Christians accused Julian of
      murdering infants for magical purposes, and the bed of the Orontes
      was said to have been choked with their bodies. The accusation was
      then commonly directed against the Jews, against the witches, and
      against the mid-wives, who were supposed to be in confederation with
      the witches.

  801 See an example in Eusebius, iii. 32. After the triumph of
      Christianity the Arian heretics appear to have been accustomed to
      bring accusations of immorality against the Catholics. They procured
      the deposition of St. Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch, by suborning a
      prostitute to accuse him of being the father of her child. The woman
      afterwards, on her death-bed, confessed the imposture. (Theodor.
      _Hist._ i. 21-22.) They also accused St. Athanasius of murder and
      unchastity, both of which charges he most triumphantly repelled.
      (Ibid. i. 30.)

  802 The great exertions and success of the Christians in making female
      converts is indignantly noticed by Celsus (_Origen_) and by the
      Pagan interlocutor in Minucius Felix (_Octavius_), and a more minute
      examination of ecclesiastical history amply confirms their
      statements. I shall have in a future chapter to revert to this
      matter. Tertullian graphically describes the anger of a man he knew,
      at the conversion of his wife, and declares he would rather have had
      her “a prostitute than a Christian.” (_Ad Nationes_, i. 4.) He also
      mentions a governor of Cappadocia, named Herminianus, whose motive
      for persecuting the Christians was his anger at the conversion of
      his wife, and who, in consequence of his having persecuted, was
      devoured by worms. (_Ad Scapul._ 3.)

  803 “Matronarum Auriscalpius.” The title was given to Pope St. Damasus.
      See Jortin’s _Remarks on Ecclesiastical History_, vol. ii. p. 27.
      Ammianus Marcellinus notices (xxvii. 3) the great wealth the Roman
      bishops of his time had acquired through the gifts of women.
      Theodoret (_Hist. Eccl._ ii. 17) gives a curious account of the
      energetic proceedings of the Roman ladies upon the exile of Pope
      Liberius.

_  804 Conj. Præcept._ This passage has been thought to refer to the
      Christians; if so, it is the single example of its kind in the
      writings of Plutarch.

  805 Pliny, in his letter on the Christians, notices that their
      assemblies were before daybreak. Tertullian and Minucius Felix speak
      frequently of the “nocturnes convocationes,” or “nocturnes
      congregationes” of the Christians. The following passage, which the
      last of these writers puts into the mouth of a Pagan, describes
      forcibly the popular feeling about the Christians: “Qui de ultima
      fæce collectis imperitioribus et mulieribus credulis sexus sui
      facilitate labentibus, plebem profanæ conjurationis instituunt: quæ
      nocturnis congregationibus et jejuniis solennibus et inhumanis cibis
      non sacro quodam sed piaculo fœderantur, latebrosa et lucifugax
      natio, in publico muta, in angulis garrula; templa ut busta
      despiciunt, deos despuunt, rident sacra.”—_Octavius._ Tertullian, in
      exhorting the Christian women not to intermarry with Pagans, gives
      as one reason that they would not permit them to attend this
      “nightly convocation.” (_Ad Uxorem_, ii. 4.) This whole chapter is a
      graphic but deeply painful picture of the utter impossibility of a
      Christian woman having any real community of feeling with a “servant
      of the devil.”

_  806 De Civ. Dei_, xix. 23.

  807 The policy of the Romans with reference to magic has been minutely
      traced by Maury, _Hist. de la Magie_. Dr. Jeremie conjectures that
      the exorcisms of the Christians may have excited the antipathy of
      Marcus Aurelius, he, as I have already noticed, being a disbeliever
      on this subject. (Jeremie, _Hist. of Church in the Second and Third
      Cent._ p. 26.) But this is mere conjecture.

  808 See the picture of the sentiments of the Pagans on this matter, in
      Plutarch’s noble _Treatise on Superstition_.

  809 Thus Justin Martyr: “Since sensation remains in all men who have
      been in existence, and everlasting punishment is in store, do not
      hesitate to believe, and be convinced that what I say is true....
      This Gehenna is a place where all will be punished who live
      unrighteously, and who believe not that what God has taught through
      Christ will come to pass.”—_Apol._ 1. 18-19. Arnobius has stated
      very forcibly the favourite argument of many later theologians: “Cum
      ergo hæc sit conditio futurorum ut teneri et comprehendi nullius
      possint anticipationis attactu: nonne purior ratio est, ex duobus
      incertis et in ambigua expectatione pendentibus, id potius credere
      quod aliquas spes ferat, quam omnino quod nullas? In illo enim
      periculi nihil est, si quod dicitur imminere cassum fiat et vacuum.
      In hoc damnum est maximum.”—_Adv. Gentes_, lib. i

  810 The continual enforcement of the duty of belief, and the credulity
      of the Christians, were perpetually dwelt on by Celsus and Julian.
      According to the first, it was usual for them to say, “Do not
      examine, but believe only.” According to the latter, “the sum of
      their wisdom was comprised in this single precept, believe.” The
      apologists frequently notice this charge of credulity as brought
      against the Christians, and some famous sentences of Tertullian go
      far to justify it. See Middleton’s _Free Enquiry_, Introd. pp. xcii,
      xciii.

  811 See the graphic picture of the agony of terror manifested by the
      apostates as they tottered to the altar at Alexandria, in the Decian
      persecution, in Dionysius apud Eusebius, vi. 41. Miraculous
      judgments (often, perhaps, the natural consequence of this extreme
      fear) were said to have frequently fallen upon the apostates. St.
      Cyprian has preserved a number of these in his treatise _De Lapsis_.
      Persons, when excommunicated, were also said to have been sometimes
      visibly possessed by devils. See Church, _On Miraculous Powers in
      the First Three Centuries_, pp. 52-54.

  812 “Si quis aliquid fecerit, quo leves hominum animi superstitione
      numinis terrerentur, Divus Marcus hujusmodi homines in insulam
      relegari rescripsit,” _Dig._ xlviii. tit. 19, l. 30.

  813 A number of instances have been recorded, in which the punishment of
      the Christians was due to their having broken idols, overturned
      altars, or in other ways insulted the Pagans at their worship. The
      reader may find many examples of this collected in Cave’s _Primitive
      Christianity_, part i. c. v.; Kortholt, _De Calumniis contra
      Christianos_; Barbeyrac, _Morale des Pères_, c. xvii.; Tillemont,
      _Mém. ecclésiast._ tome vii. pp. 354-355; Ceillier, _Hist. des
      Auteurs sacrés_, tome iii. pp. 531-533. The Council of Illiberis
      found it necessary to make a canon refusing the title of “martyr” to
      those who were executed for these offences.

  814 The first of these anecdotes is told by St. Jerome, the second by
      St. Clement of Alexandria, the third by St. Irenæus.

  815 The severe discipline of the early Church on this point has been
      amply treated in Marshall’s _Penitential Discipline of the Primitive
      Church_ (first published in 1714, but reprinted in the library of
      Anglo-Catholic theology), and in Bingham’s _Antiquities of the
      Christian Church_, vol. vi. (Oxford, 1855). The later saints
      continually dwelt upon this duty of separation. Thus, “St. Théodore
      de Phermé disoit, que quand une personne dont nous étions amis
      estoit tombée dans la fornication, nous devions luy donner la main
      et faire notre possible pour le relever; mais que s’il estoit tombé
      dans quelque erreur contre la foi, et qu’il ne voulust pas s’en
      corriger après les premières remonstrances, il falloit l’abandonner
      promptement et rompre toute amitié avec luy, de peur qu’en nous
      amusant à le vouloir retirer de ce gouffre, il ne nous y entraînast
      nous-mêmes.”—Tillemont, _Mém. Ecclés._ tome xii. p. 367.

  816 “Habere jam non potest Deum patrem qui ecclesiam non habet matrem.
      Si potuit evadere quisquam qui extra arcam Noe fuit, et qui extra
      ecclesiam foris fuerit evadit ... hanc unitatem qui non tenet ...
      vitam non tenet et salutem ... esse martyr non potest qui in
      ecclesia non est.... Cum Deo manere non possunt qui esse in ecclesia
      Dei unanimes noluerunt. Ardeant licet flammis et ignibus traditi,
      vel objecti bestiis animas suas ponunt, non erit illa fidei corona,
      sed pœna perfidiæ, nec religiosæ virtutis exitus gloriosus sed
      desperationis interitus. Occidi talis potest, coronari non potest.
      Sic se Christianum esse profitetur quo modo et Christum diabolus
      sæpe mentitur.”—Cyprian, _De Unit. Eccles._

  817 Eusebius, v. 16.

_  818 Confess._ iii. 11. She was afterwards permitted by a special
      revelation to sit at the same table with her son!

_  819 Ep._ xl.

_  820 Ep._ xviii.

  821 Tertull. _De Corona_.

  822 Milman’s _Hist. of Christianity_, vol. ii. pp. 116-125. It is
      remarkable that the Serapeum of Alexandria was, in the Sibylline
      books, specially menaced with destruction.

  823 Eunapius, _Lives of the Sophists_. Eunapius gives an extremely
      pathetic account of the downfall of this temple. There is a
      Christian account in Theodoret (v. 22). Theophilus, Bishop of
      Alexandria, was the leader of the monks. The Pagans, under the
      guidance of a philosopher named Olympus, made a desperate effort to
      defend their temple. The whole story is very finely told by Dean
      Milman. (_Hist. of Christianity_, vol. iii. pp. 68-72.)

_  824 Apology_, v. The overwhelming difficulties attending this assertion
      are well stated by Gibbon, ch. xvi. Traces of this fable may be
      found in Justin Martyr. The freedom of the Christian worship at Rome
      appears not only from the unanimity with which Christian writers
      date their troubles from Nero, but also from the express statement
      in _Acts_ xxviii. 31.

  825 “Judæos, impulsore Chresto, assidue tumultuantes, Roma
      expulit.”—Sueton. _Claud._ xxv. This banishment of the Jews is
      mentioned in _Acts_ xviii. 2, but is not there connected in any way
      with Christianity. A passage in Dion Cassius (lx. 6) is supposed to
      refer to the same transaction. Lactantius notices that the Pagans
      were accustomed to call Christus, _Chrestus_: “Eum immutata litera
      Chrestum solent dicere.”—_Div. Inst._ iv. 7.

  826 This persecution is fully described by Tacitus (_Annal._ xv. 44),
      and briefly noticed by Suetonius (_Nero_, xvi.).

  827 This has been a matter of very great controversy. Looking at the
      question apart from direct testimony, it appears improbable that a
      persecution directed against the Christians on the charge of having
      burnt Rome, should have extended to Christians who did not live near
      Rome. On the other hand, it has been argued that Tacitus speaks of
      them as “haud perinde in crimine incendii, quam odio humani generis
      convicti;” and it has been maintained that “hatred of the human
      race” was treated as a crime, and punished in the provinces. But
      this is, I think, extremely far-fetched; and it is evident from the
      sequel that the Christians at Rome were burnt as incendiaries, and
      that it was the conviction that they were not guilty of that crime
      that extorted the pity which Tacitus notices. There is also no
      reference in Tacitus to any persecution beyond the walls. If we pass
      to the Christian evidence, a Spanish inscription referring to the
      Neronian persecution, which was once appealed to as decisive, is now
      unanimously admitted to be a forgery. In the fourth century,
      however, Sulp. Severus (lib. ii.) and Orosius (_Hist._ vii. 7)
      declared that general laws condemnatory of Christianity were
      promulgated by Nero; but the testimony of credulous historians who
      wrote so long after the event is not of much value. Rossi, however,
      imagines that a fragment of an inscription found at Pompeii
      indicates a general law against Christians. See his _Bulletino
      d’Archeologia Cristiana_ (Roma, Dec. 1865), which, however, should
      be compared with the very remarkable _Compte rendu_ of M. Aubé,
      _Acad. des Inscrip. et Belles-lettres_, Juin 1866. These two papers
      contain an almost complete discussion of the persecutions of Nero
      and Domitian. Gibbon thinks it quite certain the persecution was
      confined to the city; Mosheim (_Eccl. Hist._ i. p. 71) adopts the
      opposite view, and appeals to the passage in Tertullian (_Ap._ v.),
      in which he speaks of “leges istæ ... quas Trajanus ex parte
      frustratus est, vitando inquiri Christianos,” as implying the
      existence of special laws against the Christians. This passage,
      however, may merely refer to the general law against unauthorised
      religions, which Tertullian notices in this very chapter; and Pliny,
      in his famous letter, does not show any knowledge of the existence
      of special legislation about the Christians.

  828 Ecclesiastical historians maintain, but not on very strong evidence,
      that the Church of Rome was founded by St. Peter, A.D. 42 or 44. St.
      Paul came to Rome A.D. 61.

  829 On this horrible punishment see Juvenal, _Sat._ i. 155-157.

  830 Lactantius, in the fourth century, speaks of this opinion as still
      held by some “madmen” (_De Mort. Persec._ cap. ii.); but Sulp.
      Severus (_Hist._ lib. ii.) speaks of it as a common notion, and he
      says that St. Martin, when asked about the end of the world,
      answered, “Neronem et Antichristum prius esse venturos: Neronem in
      occidentali plaga regibus subactis decem, imperaturum, persecutionem
      autem ab eo hactenus exercendam ut idola gentium coli
      cogat.”—_Dial._ ii. Among the Pagans, the notion that Nero was yet
      alive lingered long, and twenty years after his death an adventurer
      pretending to be Nero was enthusiastically received by the Parthians
      (Sueton. _Nero_, lvii.).

  831 See the full description of it in Rossi’s _Bulletino d’Archeol.
      Crist._ Dec. 1865. Eusebius (iii. 17) and Tertullian (_Apol._ v.)
      have expressly noticed the very remarkable fact that Vespasian, who
      was a bitter enemy to the Jews, and who exiled all the leading
      Stoical philosophers except Musonius, never troubled the Christians.

  832 See a pathetic letter of Pliny, lib. iii. _Ep._ xi. and also lib. i.
      _Ep._ v. and the _Agricola_ of Tacitus.

  833 Euseb. iii. 20.

  834 “Præter cæteros Judaicus fiscus acerbissime actus est. Ad quem
      deferebantur, qui vel improfessi Judaicam intra urbem viverent
      vitam, vel dissimulata origine imposita genti tributa non
      pependissent.”—Sueton. _Domit._ xi. Suetonius adds that, when a
      young man, he saw an old man of ninety examined before a large
      assembly to ascertain whether he was circumcised.

  835 Euseb. iii. 18.

  836 See the accounts of these transactions in Xiphilin, the abbreviator
      of Dion Cassius (lxvii. 14); Euseb. iii. 17-18. Suetonius notices
      (_Domit._ xv.) that Flavius Clemens (whom he calls a man
      “contemptissimæ inertiæ”) was killed “ex tenuissima suspicione.” The
      language of Xiphilin, who says he was killed for “impiety and Jewish
      rites;” the express assertion of Eusebius, that it was for
      Christianity; and the declaration of Tertullian, that Christians
      were persecuted at the close of this reign, leave, I think, little
      doubt that this execution was connected with Christianity, though
      some writers have questioned it. At the same time, it is very
      probable, as Mr. Merivale thinks (_Hist. of Rome_, vol. vii. pp.
      381-384), that though the pretext of the execution might have been
      religious, the real motive was political jealousy. Domitian had
      already put to death the brother of Flavius Clemens on the charge of
      treason. His sons had been recognised as successors to the throne,
      and at the time of his execution another leading noble named Glabrio
      was accused of having fought in the arena. Some ecclesiastical
      historians have imagined that there may have been two Domitillas—the
      wife and niece of Flavius Clemens. The islands of Pontia and
      Pandataria were close to one another.

  837 “Tentaverat et Domitianus, portio Neronis de crudelitate; sed qua et
      homo facile cœptum repressit, restitutis etiam quos relegaverat.”
      (_Apol._ 5.) It will be observed that Tertullian makes no mention of
      any punishment more severe than exile.

  838 Euseb. iii. 20.

_  839 De Mort. Persec._ iii.

  840 Xiphilin, lxviii. 1. An annotator to Mosheim conjectures that the
      edict may have been issued just before the death of the emperor, but
      not acted on till after it.

  841 Euseb. iv. 26. The whole of this apology has been recently
      recovered, and translated into Latin by M. Renan in the _Spicilegium
      Solesmense_.

_  842 Apol._ 5.

  843 Lactant. _De Mort. Persec._ 3-4.

  844 Pliny, _Ep._ x. 97-98.

  845 Euseb. lib. iii.

  846 There is a description of this earthquake in Merivale’s _Hist. of
      the Romans_, vol. viii. pp. 155-156. Orosius (_Hist._ vii. 12)
      thought it was a judgment on account of the persecution of the
      Christians.

  847 Eusebius, iv. 8-9. See, too, Justin Martyr, _Apol._ i. 68-69.

  848 This is mentioned incidentally by Lampridius in his _Life of A.
      Severus_.

  849 See this very curious letter in Vopiscus, _Saturninus_.

  850 Justin Mart. _Ap._ i. 31. Eusebius quotes a passage from Hegesippus
      to the same effect. (iv. 8.)

  851 “Præcepitque ne cui Judæo introeundi Hierosolymam esset licentia,
      Christianis tantum civitate permissa.”—_Oros._ vii. 13.

  852 A letter which Eusebius gives at full (iv. 13), and ascribes to
      Antoninus Pius, has created a good deal of controversy. Justin Mart.
      (_Apol._ i. 71) and Tertullian (_Apol._ 5) ascribe it to Marcus
      Aurelius. It is now generally believed to be a forgery by a
      Christian hand, being more like a Christian apology than the letter
      of a Pagan emperor. St. Melito, however, writing to Marcus Aurelius,
      expressly states that Antoninus had written a letter forbidding the
      persecution of Christians. (Euseb. iv. 26.)

  853 It is alluded to by Minucius Felix.

  854 Eusebius, iv. 16.

  855 St. Melito expressly states that the edicts of Marcus Aurelius
      produced the Asiatic persecution.

  856 Eusebius, iv. 15.

  857 See the most touching and horrible description of this persecution
      in a letter written by the Christians of Lyons, in Eusebius, v. 1.

  858 Sulpicius Severus (who was himself a Gaul) says of their martyrdom
      (_H. E._, lib. ii.), “Tum primum intra Gallias Martyria visa, serius
      trans Alpes Dei religione suscepta.” Tradition ascribes Gallic
      Christianity to the apostles, but the evidence of inscriptions
      appears to confirm the account of Severus. It is at least certain
      that Christianity did not acquire a great extension till later. The
      earliest Christian inscriptions found are (one in each year) of A.D.
      334, 347, 377, 405, and 409. They do not become common till the
      middle of the fifth century. See a full discussion of this in the
      preface of M. Le Blant’s admirable and indeed exhaustive work,
      _Inscriptions Chrétiennes de la Gaule_.

  859 It was alleged among the Christians, that towards the close of his
      reign Marcus Aurelius issued an edict protecting the Christians, on
      account of a Christian legion having, in Germany, in a moment of
      great distress, procured a shower of rain by their prayers. (Tert.
      _Apol._ 5.) The shower is mentioned by Pagan as well as Christian
      writers, and is portrayed on the column of Antoninus. It was
      “ascribed to the incantations of an Egyptian magician, to the
      prayers of a legion of Christians, or to the favour of Jove towards
      the best of mortals, according to the various prejudices of
      different observers.”—Merivale’s _Hist. of Rome_, vol. viii. p. 338.

  860 Xiphilin, lxxii. 4. The most atrocious of the Pagan persecutions was
      attributed, as we shall see, to the mother of Galerius, and in
      Christian times the Spanish Inquisition was founded by Isabella the
      Catholic; the massacre of St. Bartholomew was chiefly due to
      Catherine of Medicis, and the most horrible English persecution to
      Mary Tudor.

  861 Euseb. v. 21. The accuser, we learn from St. Jerome, was a slave. On
      the law condemning slaves who accused their masters, compare
      Pressensé, _Hist. des Trois premiers Siècles_ (2me série), tome i.
      pp. 182-183, and Jeremie’s _Church History of Second and Third
      Centuries_, p. 29. Apollonius was of senatorial rank. It is said
      that some other martyrs died at the same time.

  862 “Judæos fieri sub gravi pœna vetuit. Idem etiam de Christianis
      sanxit.”—Spartian. _S. Severus_. The persecution is described by
      Eusebius, lib. vi. Tertullian says Severus was favourable to the
      Christians, a Christian named Proculus (whom he, in consequence,
      retained in the palace till his death) having cured him of an
      illness by the application of oil. (_Ad Scapul._ 4.)

  863 “Of the persecution under Severus there are few, if any, traces in
      the West. It is confined to Syria, perhaps to Cappadocia, to Egypt,
      and to Africa, and in the latter provinces appears as the act of
      hostile governors proceeding upon the existing laws, rather than the
      consequence of any recent edict of the emperor.”—Milman’s _Hist. of
      Christianity_, vol. ii. pp. 156-157.

_  864 Adv. Cels._ iii. See Gibbon, ch. xvi.

  865 Eusebius, vi. 28.

  866 Lampridius, _A. Severus_. The historian adds, “Judæis privilegia
      reservavit. Christianos esse passus est.”

  867 Compare Milman’s _History of Early Christianity_ (1867), vol. ii. p.
      188, and his _History of Latin Christianity_ (1867), vol. i. pp.
      26-59. There are only two cases of alleged martyrdom before this
      time that can excite any reasonable doubt. Irenæus distinctly
      asserts that Telesphorus was martyred; but his martyrdom is put in
      the beginning of the reign of Antoninus Pius (he had assumed the
      mitre near the end of the reign of Hadrian), and Antoninus is
      represented, by the general voice of the Church, as perfectly free
      from the stain of persecution. A tradition, which is in itself
      sufficiently probable, states that Pontianus, having been exiled by
      Maximinus, was killed in banishment.

  868 Tacitus has a very ingenious remark on this subject, which
      illustrates happily the half-scepticism of the Empire. After
      recounting a number of prodigies that were said to have taken place
      in the reign of Otho, he remarks that these were things habitually
      noticed in the ages of ignorance, but now only noticed in periods of
      terror. “Rudibus sæculis etiam in pace observata, quæ nunc tantum in
      metu audiuntur.”—_Hist._ i. 86.

  869 M. de Champagny has devoted an extremely beautiful chapter (_Les
      Antonins_, tome ii. pp. 179-200) to the liberty of the Roman Empire.
      See, too, the fifty-fourth chapter of Mr. Merivale’s _History_. It
      is the custom of some of the apologists for modern Cæsarism to
      defend it by pointing to the Roman Empire as the happiest period in
      human history. No apology can be more unfortunate. The first task of
      a modern despot is to centralise to the highest point, to bring
      every department of thought and action under a system of police
      regulation, and, above all, to impose his shackling tyranny upon the
      human mind. The very perfection of the Roman Empire was, that the
      municipal and personal liberty it admitted had never been surpassed,
      and the intellectual liberty had never been equalled.

  870 Sueton. _Aug._ xxxi. It appears from a passage in Livy (xxxix. 16)
      that books of oracles had been sometimes burnt in the Republic.

  871 Tacitus has given us a very remarkable account of the trial of
      Cremutius Cordus, under Tiberius, for having published a history in
      which he had praised Brutus and called Cassius the last of Romans.
      (_Annal._ iv. 34-35.) He expressly terms this “novo ac tunc primum
      audito crimine,” and he puts a speech in the mouth of the accused,
      describing the liberty previously accorded to writers. Cordus
      avoided execution by suicide. His daughter, Marcia, preserved some
      copies of his work, and published it in the reign and with the
      approbation of Caligula. (Senec. _Ad. Marc._ 1; Suet. _Calig._ 16.)
      There are, however, some traces of an earlier persecution of
      letters. Under the sanction of a law of the decemvirs against
      libellers, Augustus exiled the satiric writer Cassius Severus, and
      he also destroyed the works of an historian named Labienus, on
      account of their seditious sentiments. These writings were
      re-published with those of Cordus. Generally, however, Augustus was
      very magnanimous in his dealings with his assailants. He refused the
      request of Tiberius to punish them (Suet. _Aug._ 51), and only
      excluded from his palace Timagenes, who bitterly satirised both him
      and the empress, and proclaimed himself everywhere the enemy of the
      emperor. (Senec. _De Ira_, iii. 23.) A similar magnanimity was shown
      by most of the other emperors; among others, by Nero. (Suet. _Nero_,
      39.) Under Vespasian, however, a poet, named Maternus, was obliged
      to retouch a tragedy on Cato (Tacit. _De Or._ 2-3), and Domitian
      allowed no writings opposed to his policy. (Tacit. _Agric._) But no
      attempt appears to have been made in the Empire to control religious
      writings till the persecution of Diocletian, who ordered the
      Scriptures to be burnt. The example was speedily followed by the
      Christian emperors. The writings of Arius were burnt in A.D. 321,
      those of Porphyry in A.D. 388. Pope Gelasius, in A.D. 496, drew up a
      list of books which should not be read, and all liberty of
      publication speedily became extinct. See on this subject Peignot,
      _Essai historique sur la Liberté d’Écrire_; Villemain, _Études de
      Littèr. ancienne_; Sir C. Lewis on the _Credibility of Roman Hist._
      vol. i. p. 52; Nadal, _Mémoire sur la liberté qu’avoient les soldats
      romains de dire des vers satyriques contre ceux qui triomphoient_
      (Paris 1725).

  872 See a collection of passages on this point in Pressensé, _Hist. des
      Trois premiers Siècles_ (2me série), tome i. pp. 3-4.

_  873 Trypho._

_  874 Apol._ xxxvii.

  875 Euseb. vi. 43.

  876 Eusebius, it is true, ascribes this persecution (vi. 39) to the
      hatred Decius bore to his predecessor Philip, who was very friendly
      to the Christians. But although such a motive might account for a
      persecution like that of Maximin, which was directed chiefly against
      the bishops who had been about the Court of Severus, it is
      insufficient to account for a persecution so general and so severe
      as that of Decius. It is remarkable that this emperor is uniformly
      represented by the Pagan historians as an eminently wise and humane
      sovereign. See Dodwell, _De Paucitate Martyrum_, lii.

  877 St. Cyprian (_Ep._ vii.) and, at a later period, St. Jerome (_Vit.
      Pauli_), both notice that during this persecution the desire of the
      persecutors was to subdue the constancy of the Christians by
      torture, without gratifying their desire for martyrdom. The
      consignment of Christian virgins to houses of ill fame was one of
      the most common incidents in the later acts of martyrs which were
      invented in the middle ages. Unhappily, however, it must be
      acknowledged that there are some undoubted traces of it at an
      earlier date. Tertullian, in a famous passage, speaks of the cry “Ad
      Lenonem” as substituted for that of “Ad Leonem;” and St. Ambrose
      recounts some strange stories on this subject in his treatise _De
      Virginibus_.

  878 St. Cyprian has drawn a very highly coloured picture of this general
      corruption, and of the apostasy it produced, in his treatise _De
      Lapsis_, a most interesting picture of the society of his time. See,
      too, the _Life of St. Gregory Thaumaturgus_, by Greg. of Nyssa.

  879 “La persécution de Dèce ne dura qu’environ un an dans sa grande
      violence. Car S. Cyprien, dans les lettres écrites en 251, dès
      devant Pasque, et mesme dans quelques-unes écrites apparemment dès
      la fin de 250, témoigne que son église jouissoit déjà de quelque
      paix, mais d’une paix encore peu affermie, en sorte que le moindre
      accident eust pu renouveler le trouble et la persécution. Il semble
      mesme que l’on n’eust pas encore la liberté d’y tenir les
      assemblées, et néanmoins il paroist que tous les confesseurs
      prisonniers à Carthage y avoient esté mis en liberté dès ce
      temps-là.”—Tillemont, _Mém. d’Hist. ecclésiastique_, tome iii. p.
      324.

  880 Dionysius the bishop wrote a full account of it, which Eusebius has
      preserved (vi. 41-42). In Alexandria, Dionysius says, the
      persecution produced by popular fanaticism preceded the edict of
      Decius by an entire year. He has preserved a particular catalogue of
      all who were put to death in Alexandria during the entire Decian
      persecution. They were seventeen persons. Several of these were
      killed by the mob, and their deaths were in nearly all cases
      accompanied by circumstances of extreme atrocity. Besides these,
      others (we know not how many) had been put to torture. Many,
      Dionysius says, perished in other cities or villages of Egypt.

  881 See St. Cyprian, _Ep._ viii.

  882 There was much controversy at this time as to the propriety of
      bishops evading persecution by flight. The Montanists maintained
      that such a conduct was equivalent to apostasy. Tertullian had
      written a book, _De Fuga in Persecutione_, maintaining this view;
      and among the orthodox the conduct of St. Cyprian (who afterwards
      nobly attested his courage by his death) did not escape
      animadversion. The more moderate opinion prevailed, but the leading
      bishops found it necessary to support their conduct by declaring
      that they had received special revelations exhorting them to fly.
      St. Cyprian, who constantly appealed to his dreams to justify him in
      his controversies (see some curious instances collected in
      Middleton’s _Free Enquiry_, pp. 101-105), declared (_Ep._ ix.), and
      his biographer and friend Pontius re-asserted (_Vit. Cyprianis_),
      that his flight was “by the command of God.” Dionysius, the Bishop
      of Alexandria, asserts the same thing of his own flight, and attests
      it by an oath (see his own words in Euseb. vi. 40); and the same
      thing was afterwards related of St. Gregory Thaumaturgus. (See his
      _Life_ by Gregory of Nyssa.)

  883 “E veramente che almeno fino dal secolo terzo i fedeli abbiano
      posseduto cimiteri a nome commune, e che il loro possesso sia stato
      riconosciuto dagl’ imperatori, è cosa impossibile a negare.”—Rossi,
      _Roma Sotterranea_, tomo i. p. 103.

  884 This is all fully discussed by Rossi, _Roma Sotterranea_, tomo i.
      pp. 101-108. Rossi thinks the Church, in its capacity of burial
      society, was known by the name of “ecclesia fratrum.”

  885 See, on the history of early Christian Churches, Cave’s _Primitive
      Christianity_, part i. c. vi.

  886 Dodwell (_De Paucit. Martyr._ lvii.) has collected evidence of the
      subsidence of the persecution in the last year of the reign of
      Decius.

  887 This persecution is not noticed by St. Jerome, Orosius, Sulpicius
      Severus, or Lactantius. The very little we know about it is derived
      from the letters of St. Cyprian, and from a short notice by
      Dionysius of Alexandria, in Eusebius, vii. 1. Dionysius says, Gallus
      began the persecution when his reign was advancing prosperously, and
      his affairs succeeding, which probably means, after he had procured
      the departure of the Goths from the Illyrian province, early in A.D.
      252 (see Gibbon, chap. x.). The disastrous position into which
      affairs had been thrown by the defeat of Decius appears, at first,
      to have engrossed his attention.

  888 Lucius was at first exiled and then permitted to return, on which
      occasion St. Cyprian wrote him a letter of congratulation (_Ep._
      lvii.). He was, however, afterwards re-arrested and slain, but it is
      not, I think, clear whether it was under Gallus or Valerian. St.
      Cyprian speaks (_Ep._ lxvi.) of both Cornelius and Lucius as
      martyred. The emperors were probably at this time beginning to
      realise the power the Bishops of Rome possessed. We know hardly
      anything of the Decian persecution at Rome except the execution of
      the bishop; and St. Cyprian says (_Ep._ li.) that Decius would have
      preferred a pretender to the throne to a Bishop of Rome.

  889 Dionysius, Archbishop of Alexandria; see Euseb. vii. 10.

  890 Eusebius, vii. 10-12; Cyprian, _Ep._ lxxxi. Lactantius says of
      Valerian, “Multum quamvis brevi tempore justi sanguinis fudit.”—_De
      Mort. Persec._ c. v.

  891 Cyprian. _Ep._ lxxxi.

  892 See his _Life_ by the deacon Pontius, which is reproduced by Gibbon.

  893 Eusebius, vii. 13.

  894 Tertullian had before, in a curious passage, spoken of the
      impossibility of Christian Cæsars. “Sed et Cæsares credidissent
      super Christo si aut Cæsares non essent seculo necessarii, aut si et
      Christiani potuissent esse Cæsares.”—_Apol._ xxi.

_  895 Contra Demetrianum._

  896 Eusebius, vii. 30. Aurelian decided that the cathedral at Antioch
      should be given up to whoever was appointed by the bishops of Italy.

  897 Compare the accounts in Eusebius, vii. 30, and Lactantius, _De
      Mort._ c. vi.

  898 See the forcible and very candid description of Eusebius, viii. 1.

  899 This is noticed by Optatus.

  900 See the vivid pictures in Lact. _De Mort. Persec._

  901 Lactant. _De Mort. Persec._ 15.

  902 Eusebius, viii.

  903 These incidents are noticed by Eusebius in his _History_, and in his
      _Life of Constantine_, and by Lactantius, _De Mort. Persec._

  904 “Italy, Sicily, Gaul, and whatever parts extend towards the
      West,—Spain, Mauritania, and Africa.”—Euseb. _Mart. Palest._ ch.
      xiii. But in Gaul, as I have said, the persecution had not extended
      beyond the destruction of churches; in these provinces the
      persecution, Eusebius says, lasted not quite two years.

  905 The history of this persecution is given by Eusebius, _Hist._ lib.
      viii., in his work on the _Martyrs of Palestine_, and in Lactantius,
      _De Mort. Persec._ The persecution in Palestine was not quite
      continuous: in A.D. 308 it had almost ceased; it then revived
      fiercely, but at the close of A.D. 309, and in the beginning of A.D.
      310, there was again a short lull, apparently due to political
      causes. See Mosheim, _Eccles. Hist._ (edited by Soames), vol. i. pp.
      286-287.

  906 Eusebius.

  907 See two passages, which Gibbon justly calls remarkable. (_H. E._
      viii. 2; _Martyrs of Palest._ ch. xii.)

  908 There is one instance of a wholesale massacre which appears to rest
      on good authority. Eusebius asserts that, during the Diocletian
      persecution, a village in Phrygia, the name of which he does not
      mention, being inhabited entirely by Christians who refused to
      sacrifice, was attacked and burnt with all that were in it by the
      Pagan soldiery. Lactantius (_Inst. Div._ v. 11) confines the
      conflagration to a church in which the entire population was burnt;
      and an early Latin translation of Eusebius states that the people
      were first summoned to withdraw, but refused to do so. Gibbon (ch.
      xvi.) thinks that this tragedy took place when the decree of
      Diocletian ordered the destruction of the churches.

  909 Mariana (_De Rebus Hispaniæ_, xxiv. 17). Llorente thought this
      number perished in the single year 1482; but the expressions of
      Mariana, though he speaks of “this beginning,” do not necessarily
      imply this restriction. Besides these martyrs, 17,000 persons in
      Spain recanted, and endured punishments less than death, while great
      numbers fled. There does not appear to have been, in this case,
      either the provocation or the political danger which stimulated the
      Diocletian persecution.

  910 This is according to the calculation of Sarpi. Grotius estimates the
      victims at 100,000.—Gibbon, ch. xvi.

  911 See some curious information on this in Ticknor’s _Hist. of Spanish
      Literature_ (3rd American edition), vol. iii. pp. 236-237.

  912 This was the case in the persecutions at Lyons and Smyrna, under
      Marcus Aurelius. In the Diocletian persecution at Alexandria the
      populace were allowed to torture the Christians as they pleased.
      (_Eusebius_, viii. 10.)





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF EUROPEAN MORALS FROM AUGUSTUS TO CHARLEMAGNE (VOL. 1 OF 2)***



CREDITS


March 25, 2012

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Delphine Lettau, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>.



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 39273‐0.txt or 39273‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/9/2/7/39273/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

