
NOTES

ON

THE APOCALYPSE;

WITH

An Appendix

CONTAINING DISSERTATIONS ON SOME OF THE APOCALYPTIC SYMBOLS,

TOGETHER WITH

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE INTERPRETATIONS OF SEVERAL AMONG THE MOST LEARNED
AND APPROVED EXPOSITORS OF BRITAIN AND AMERICA.

BY DAVID STEELE, Sr.,

Pastor of the Reformed Presbyterian Congregation, Philadelphia.


PHILADELPHIA: YOUNG & FERGUSON, No. 14 SOUTH SEVENTH ST. 1870.



TO THE

REV. JOHN CUNNINGHAM, LL.D.,

_Missionary from the Reformed Presbyterian Church to the Jews in London,
England._


REV. AND VERY DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER:--

Although we are "separated upon the wall, one far from the other," we
are not altogether precluded from mutual salutation. Placed by our
Master on two hemispheres, between which the electric current bears
frequent tidings, our respective positions are advantageous for noting
the events of providence. These constitute the signs of the times, and
are the counterpart of prophecy. Prophecy and providence reflect light
upon each other, and both are helpful to the interpretation of each; but
He alone who is the "Wonderful Counsellor," can cause us to understand
either.

In submitting the following work to the public, I venture to do so under
your auspices, if not under the sanction of your name. And I embrace the
present occasion, Rev. Sir, to bear willing testimony to your
acknowledged scholarship,--your profound erudition, especially in
Natural Science and Philology. I do also cheerfully and joyfully
recognise you as a public witness; and at the present time of general
defection, as an official and _consistent_ witness in the British Isles
for the integrity of our Covenanted Reformation,--that reformation which
in its fuller development is destined to secure the rights of God and
man in reorganized society. Such, I believe to be one of the cheering
lessons which may be learned by Christ's witnesses from searching the
Apocalypse.

That you, Dear Sir, may be long preserved, sustained and comforted by
the providence and grace of the Most High, amid all your self-sacrifice,
privation and reproach which you endure for the truth's Bake, is the
prayer of

Your brother in covenant bonds,

DAVID STEELE.

PHILADELPHIA, _February 1st, 1870_.




PREFACE


The Apocalypse is one of the most sublime and wonderful dramatic
exhibitions presented for human contemplation. Internal evidence concurs
with authentic history, in demonstrating to the devout and intelligent
reader, its divine origin. God, angels and men, are the principal
actors. Men's natural curiosity may find entertainment in this book; and
from no higher principle, many have doubtless been prompted to attempt a
discovery of its mysterious contents. What is true, however, of
supernatural revelation in general, is equally true of this book:--"The
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned."

To the right understanding of the Apocalypse, so far as the prophetical
parts of it are contemplated, the following prerequisites would seem to
be indispensable:--

1. A competent knowledge of what may be termed the fundamental doctrines
of the gospel: such as the unity of the Divine Nature; the distinction
of persons in the Godhead; the atonement and intercession of Christ; the
total depravity and renovation of human nature; the resurrection and
final retribution, etc.

2. Acquaintance with symbolical language, as the only language common to
all men since the confusion of tongues.

3. Familiarity with the typical dispensation, from which most of the
symbols are taken. 4. Freedom from all political bias.

No expositor of the Apocalypse appears to have possessed all these
qualifications, however few and simple. The most learned and judicious
interpreters of this book have been divines of Britain and of the United
States.

After so many laborers employed in this harvest, the reader may
ask,--What remains to be gleaned? To this inquiry, it may be sufficient
to remind the devout Christian, that as the Apocalypse is the end of the
Bible, so "the harvest is the end of the world;" and during the
intermediate time "the Lord of the harvest is sending forth laborers."
Prophecy has engaged the attention and occupied the thoughts of the
writer, more or less, for the last thirty years. He has consulted the
views of most of the distinguished and approved interpreters of the book
of Revelation; among whom the following are named, viz.: _Mede, Sir
Isaac_ and _Bishop Newton, Durham, Fleming, Gill, Whitaker, Kett,
Galloway, Faber, Scott, Mason, McLeod_; and many others: from all whose
labors, he has derived much instruction; and from all of whom he has
been obliged in important points to dissent.

The immediate occasion of this undertaking, was the urgent request of
the people of his charge, that the substance of a course of lectures
delivered in ordinary Sabbath ministrations, might be put into a more
permanent form, for their future edification.

In the early centuries of the Christian era, so wild, enthusiastic and
corrupt were the sentiments of some Millenarians, that this book ceased
in great measure to be read or studied; and even its divine authority
came to be questioned by many learned and pious men. As the "Dark Ages"
of Popery resulted from neglect of the sacred Scriptures in general, so
even among the first reformers the Apocalypse was viewed with suspicion
as to its claim to inspiration. It is probable that many of the
unlearned will hear with wonder, and doubt the assertion, that even the
great reformer Luther rejected the Apocalypse, as being no part of the
sacred canon! The same judgment he formed of the epistle by James! With
characteristic boldness, he wrote as follows:--"The epistle of James
hath nothing evangelical in it. I do not consider it the writing of an
apostle at all.... It ascribes justification to works, in direct
contradiction to Paul and all the other sacred writers.... With respect
to the Revelation of John, I state what I feel. For more than one
reason, I cannot deem this book either apostolic or prophetical, ... and
it is sufficient reason for me not to esteem it highly, that Christ is
neither taught nor known in it."[1] Such was the estimation in which
that distinguished reformer held _two_ inspired books of the New
Testament at the dawn of the Reformation. How great the increase of
scriptural light since his day!

The grand design of this book, as declared by its divine Author, is, "to
show unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass," ... "to
testify these things in the churches:"--to make known beforehand, to
those styled his "witnesses," the certainty of a great apostacy,--the
rise, reign and overthrow of the Antichrist, that "when it came to pass,
they might believe," and exemplify before the world "the patience and
the faith of the saints." During that protracted period, the witnesses
could neither know their duty nor sustain their allotted trials without
these necessary instructions.

From the position of the witnessing church--"in the wilderness" during
the whole time of Antichrist's reign, which is also the position of the
apostle John when viewing in vision the "woman upon the beast;" (ch.
xvii. 3,) _that_ appears to be the _only advantageous position_ from
which to view the actors in this wonderful scene. And since few have
voluntarily "gone forth to Christ without the camp, bearing his
reproach," or submitted to wear the mourning garments of "sackcloth," it
is not at all surprising that the Apocalypse--emphatically a
_Revelation_--should continue to be, to many, a "sealed book." But on
the other hand, "blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the
words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein."

As this work is intended for the instruction and edification of the
unlearned, rather than for the entertainment of the learned, words of
foreign extract are used as seldom as possible. Practical remarks and
reflections are rarely introduced; the principal aim being simply to
ascertain and present to the reader the mind of the Holy Spirit. How far
this object has been accomplished, is of course left to the judgment of
the honest inquirer. The reader, however, in forming his judgment of the
value of these Notes, may be reminded of that inspired rule in searching
the Scriptures,--"Comparing spiritual things with spiritual." To assist
him in the application of this divine rule, many chapters and verses are
quoted from other parts of the Bible, but especially within the
Apocalypse itself; that by concentrating the various rays upon
particular texts or symbols, their intrinsic light may be rendered more
luminous. Thus the interpretation given, if correct, may be confirmed
and illustrated.




NOTES ON THE APOCALYPSE.


The heavens and the earth did not make themselves. The material universe
furnishes to the intelligent creature a visible demonstration of the
"eternal power and godhead of its Author." Besides, a _sense of Deity_
is essential to humanity; and a supernatural revelation is not necessary
to convince rational beings that there is a God. Man is a dependent
being in common with all other creatures, and all creatures depend upon
a first cause. That cause is God. Dependent as a creature, man may know
something of the natural perfections of his Maker; and possessing a
conscience, which implies accountability to a superior, he may know,--he
_must_ know, something of the moral attributes of God.

In view of these positions, we may account for the fact, too often
overlooked by the reader of the Bible, that the Holy Spirit directed the
first of all historians to begin his narrative _so abruptly_. Assuming
that the reader is already assured of _God's being,_ Moses proceeds at
once to account for the origination of the material universe. In simple
narrative he writes,--"In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth." Thus God's being, and the eternity of his being are assumed as
known by the first inspired penman; a fact or principle not to be
disputed. True, the being of God has been questioned, but only by
"fools"--"brutish people;" who, by their atheistical suggestions have
proclaimed to their fellows their "brutish folly." (Ps. xiv. 6, xciv. 8,
9.)

As the Bible takes for granted that mankind have had a previous
revelation in their own physical and moral constitution,--in the visible
heavens and earth; the same is true of the last book of the Bible, the
Apocalypse. It assumes that the reader has some competent knowledge of
the preceding books of the sacred Scriptures. The reader is supposed to
be acquainted with the patriarchal and Mosaic dispensations of the
Covenant of Grace. Moreover, the moral law, as inculcated in the Old
Testament; the Levitical priesthood and ministry, as being "shadows of
good things to come;" the "doctrine according to godliness," taught in
the gospels and epistles of the New Testament,--are all taken for
granted and supposed to be received with a divine faith by all who would
profit by this last book of the sacred canon.

It is further assumed in the Apocalypse, that the humble inquirer into
the mind of the Holy Spirit has a knowledge of ancient history, of the
character and destiny of Egypt, Babylon, etc. And finally, it is
requisite that the successful inquirer into the mind of God be
acquainted with the language of symbols; and, above all, that he be
resolved, with the inspired writer John, to take a position with the
mystic woman _in the wilderness_.

With these few preliminaries, we proceed:




