CHAPTER III.


1. And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write; These things saith
he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars; I know thy
works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.

2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready
to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

3. Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold fast,
and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a
thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee.

4. Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their
garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.

5. He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I
will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess
his name before my Father, and before his angels.

6. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.

Vs. 1-6.--As hitherto in these epistles we do not discover a "presiding
minister" above an elder, so neither do we in this one find any hint of
a "bishop and pastors." All Christ's bishops are elders, and "all are
brethren." (Acts xx. 17, 28.) Prelacy,--that is, preferring one pastor
before another in office, is expressly prohibited by the church's only
Lawgiver. (Matt. xx. 25, 26.) The attempts to annul this law of Christ
has caused more sin and suffering to his disciples than any one external
agency of the devil. The whole history of the church furnishes the
evidence of this.

The church in Sardis is addressed by him who "hath the seven spirits of
God and the seven stars," who has authority by office to give the
quickening influences of the Spirit to the dead, and his reviving
influences to the dormant; for revival presupposes life. Their "works
were not perfect before God," however they might appear to men. The
majority were in a languishing condition, had "given themselves over to
a detestable neutrality" in the Lord's cause. And as the whole body is
justly characterized by the major part; this church is described as
"dead." "Be watchful,--remember,--repent." These duties point out the
prevailing sins, namely, slothfulness, forgetfulness and security. Where
these predominate, "things that remain are ready to die." And there is
no other remedy but that of applying to the "Seven Spirits of God,"
which Christ is ready to shed abundantly on all who make believing
application.

Christ threatens to "come as a thief" upon those who do not "watch." In
similitudes, we are not to indulge a licentious fancy in our attempts to
interpret them. The objects of the thief's visit and that of Christ are
not the point of resemblance; for "the thief cometh not but for to
steal, and to kill, and to destroy." The point, and the only point of
resemblance, is the suddenness of the visit. Ignorance or neglect of
this rule of interpretation has been a fruitful source of error,
especially in expounding Revelation.

In this epistle, the order hitherto observed by the Saviour is reversed.
What was praiseworthy in other churches was first noticed. Here the
commendation follows the reproof. "Thou hast a few names," etc. A
virtuous minority are "undefiled in the way." They have nobly withstood
the prevailing contamination, and therefore Christ will admit them to
fellowship and honor. The victor shall be "clothed in white
raiment,"--grace shall be perfected in glory; and their names, which
were inscribed in the book of life,--the register of the church of the
first-born, shall be confessed by Christ "before his Father and before
his angels," as having "followed the Lamb," when others went back like
Orpah. (Ruth i. 15.) Let those who, having "put their hand to the
plough," are tempted to "look back," consider "what the Spirit saith" to
the church in Sardis.


7. And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: These things
saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David,
he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth;

8. I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no
man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word,
and has not denied my name.

9. Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they
are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to come and
worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

10. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep
thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world,
to try them that dwell upon the earth.

11. Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no man
take thy crown.

12. Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God,
and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my
God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which
cometh down out of heaven from my God; and I will write upon him my new
name.

13. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.

Vs. 7-13.--This church, like the one in Smyrna, is "without rebuke," in
the midst of similar trials.--Christ's message is prefaced, as usual, by
some description of himself, implying his supreme deity and authority.
"He that is holy, he that is true," is more than a creature. As "there
is none _good_ but one, that is God;" so, "there is none _holy_ as the
Lord," (Jehovah,) (1 Sam. ii. 2.) Here is another, among many plain
proofs, of our Saviour's proper divinity. His divine authority is held
forth in his "having the key of David," etc. A key is the symbol of
authority, (Matt. xvi. 19,) and the reference is to that prophecy, (Isa.
xxii. 20-24,) in which the mediatorial dominion of Christ is set forth,
by calling Eliakim to the place of authority in the room of Shebna. "The
key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder." It is in virtue
of this extensive grant of power from the Father, that the Lord Christ
has a right, _as Mediator_, to send his ambassadors into all nations, to
call sinners (rebels) back to their rightful allegiance; and also to
execute deserved punishment upon all who do harm to his servants. (Ps.
cv, 15.) In the exercise of his rightful authority, he has set before
this church an "open door" of liberty, of opportunity, of activity; that
she may put forth her "little strength" in keeping Christ's word and
confessing his name amidst opposition, reproach and violence; for it is
obvious, that when impostors fail to reach their objects by deceit, they
will resort to forcible measures. Because this church was unable to
purge herself by corrective discipline,--having but "a little strength,"
therefore Christ declares his purpose to strip these lying Jews of their
cloak of hypocrisy, and exhibit them in their true character a
"synagogue (church) of Satan." (James ii. 2.) Seeing that in apostolic
times there were apostles, ministers, churches of the devil, is it to be
supposed that we violate the law of charity, if in our own degenerate
age, when heresies abound, when ecclesiastical order is trampled upon,
we venture to apply the language of the Holy Spirit to unholy and
profane amalgamations? No, it is part of the special business of
Christ's witnesses to unmask specious hypocrites and warn of danger from
false teachers, (2 Cor. xi. 13-15; Gal. i. 6, 7,) that "their folly may
be made manifest to all men." (2 Tim. iii. 8, 9; 2 Peter ii. 1, 3.)--The
cruel enemy, who in the day of prosperity boasts of his success, in the
day of adversity becomes the most arrant coward and cringing
suppliant,--whether it be Saul or Shimei. (1 Sam. xv. 30; 2 Sam. xix.
18.) Haughty persecutors have been changed to humble suitors for an
interest in the prayers of their victims,--"to worship before their
feet." "The word of Christ's patience" may signify any truth or doctrine
of the Bible which is of supernatural revelation. The same idea is
suggested by the phrase, "the present truth,"--any divine truth which
may come to be opposed or denied, especially as it may bear upon the
personal glory of our Redeemer. Love to Christ is often tested by an
enlightened and firm adherence to the "truth as it is in Jesus," when
"false apostles will sell it for a mess of pottage." (Prov. xxiii. 23; 2
Cor. xiii. 8.) The first promise here is of a temporal kind, of
protection in time of general danger. The "temptation" thus predicted
may refer to some of those "ten persecutions" waged by the Roman
emperors against the Christians, as that of Trajan in particular; but
doubtless, like many other predictions, it was to have more than one
fulfilment. The expression, "all the world" does indeed sometimes mean
the Roman empire, (Luke ii. 1;) but perhaps it would be rash to affirm,
that it is to be always thus limited. Like "the kingdom of heaven,--the
kingdom of God,"--phrases which have unquestionably a two-fold
signification, so it will be safer to consider this expression as of a
similar kind. All other churches would be exposed to trial, from which
this one would be exempted. The trial might consist of persecution, or
the spreading of heretical principles and wicked practices, followed by
apostacies. At such a time of trial, a firm adherence to the "doctrines
which are after godliness," would be imperative duty, and the only way
to secure the victor's crown. The gracious reward of fidelity here
promised is a permanent and honorable place in the heavenly temple,--the
temple of Christ's Father, whose name the citizen of the New Jerusalem
should bear for ever, and should be known and recognised as
"fellow-citizen with the saints." These names may be safely interpreted
as importing, "son, daughter of the Lord Almighty, citizen of Zion,
Christian." As "the disciples were first called Christians at Antioch,"
so their gracious Master will "confess their names before his Father and
the holy angels." (Acts xi. 26; Rev. iii. 5.)


14. And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write: These
things saith the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of
the creation of God;

15. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou
wert cold or hot.

16. So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will
spue thee out of my mouth.

17. Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked.

18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest
be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the
shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with
eye-salve, that thou mayest see.

19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and
repent.

20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: If any man hear my voice, and
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with
me.

21. To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.

22. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.

Vs. 14-22.--It appears that in Paul's time a Christian church had been
planted in Laodicea. (Col. ii. 1; iv. 16.) This church had the benefit
of his ministry as well as that of Ephesus: and as both these churches
were comparatively near to all the other five, we may suppose that a man
of his zealous, active and persevering character and habits, would
"impart unto them some spiritual gift." (Rom. i. 11.)

It is evident that this church had degenerated more than all the others.
In her there is nothing to commend. Her officers and members are
described in their real character by him who is the "Amen, the faithful
and true Witness, the beginning of the creation of God." Each of these
titles speaks the divine dignity of Christ. They are all to be
understood in an absolute, not in a comparative sense. As "there is none
_good_ (absolutely so,) but one; that is, God," Matt. xix. 17; so Christ
only is the "Amen" in such sense that he "cannot lie" as a "witness.'"
He "speaks that which he has seen with his Father." (John viii. 38.)
Jesus is, moreover, the "Beginning;" the author, owner and sovereign
ruler of "the creation of God." This is clearly taught in Col. i. 15-18,
where the same person, who (in v. 18) is called "the beginning," as
here; is (in v. 17,) said to "be before all things;" by whom (v. 16,)
"were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in
earth."--Creation is a work proper to God only. But our Redeemer has
"created all things." Now, according to Heb. iii. 4, "he that built all
things is God;" therefore he of whom these things are spoken is "the
Most High God." And so said the inspired prophet long ago, "For thy
Maker is thine husband." (Isa. liv. 5.) In the language of Jeremiah, (x.
11,)--thus do we say to Arians, Socinians, and other self-styled
Unitarians,--"The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth,
even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens:"
and their blinded votaries, "except they repent, shall all likewise
perish."--However far the body of this church had declined, it does not
appear that they had yet, as a community, gone the length of "denying
the Lord that bought them."

Spiritual pride, self-sufficiency, seems to have been the prevailing sin
among these degenerate professors. Like the Pharisee, they would boast
of their riches, the spiritual gifts which they possessed, by which they
flattered themselves that "they were not as other men." Possibly they
might excel in knowledge, that "knowledge which puffeth up;" in
utterance,--"great swelling words of vanity," by which they gained both
"filthy lucre" and the admiration of an ignorant and carnal multitude.
Such is too often the actual condition of ministers and people, when
they are all the while under the power of sin, and wholly "blind" to
their spiritual destitution. Self-deception is fatal; and it would be
just in the Lord Jesus to give such persons up to their own hearts'
lusts. So he threatens,--"I will spue thee out of my mouth," as a man's
stomach loathes that which is nauseating. The like figure is used by
Isaiah, (lxv. 5,) personating his Lord when describing similar
characters:--"These are a smoke in my nose,"--intolerably offensive.--To
us the case of this church would appear hopeless. It is not so, however:
on the contrary, he assures them that these sharp rebukes proceed from
love. "As many as I love, I rebuke, and chasten." (Heb. xii. 6-8.) And
from the "counsel" which he gives, as farther evidence of his love, we
learn wherein this church was lacking,--in grace, justifying
righteousness, and the saving self searching illumination of the Holy
Spirit. As this church had not the promise of exemption from the coming
"temptation," (v. 10,) the "gold tried in the fire" of persecution will
be indispensable to preserve any from apostacy, whereby their cloak of
hypocrisy would be removed, and they be exposed to "shame."--Christ
"stands and knocks."--If the church refuses him admittance, yet if but
one will "hear his voice and open the door," he will certainly
communicate such consolations,--the "joy of his salvation," that it may
be said they sup together. (Song v. 1.)

This, as before, is the "hundred-fold," promised in this life, as a
foretaste and pledge of heavenly felicity.--There is added, a
participation in his honor and authority; for those who suffer with him
shall also reign with him. (2 Tim. ii. 12.) Whilst "this honour is to
all his saints," it is to be conferred upon them by Christ. This
assertion may seem to contradict what Christ said to the mother of
Zebedee's sons, (Matt. xx. 23,)--"to sit on my right hand, and on my
left, is not mine to give."--No, it is not his to give,--"but, except to
them for whom it is prepared of his Father." Then it is his to
give,--his right. Of the honor and felicity promised to such as "fight
the good fight of faith," none can have an adequate conception without
actual experience. (1 John iii. 2.)


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.

Although the fundamental doctrine of the _Trinity in Unity_ be not
expressly taught or asserted in these epistles, it is nevertheless often
and plainly presupposed. Each epistle begins and closes with express
mention of two divine persons as equally the author. What Christ says,
the Spirit says to these churches. But there is a _third_ divine person
often mentioned who is called "God," and "Father." (Ch. ii. 7, 18, 27,
etc.;) and in the first verse of chapter third, one speaks who has the
seven Spirits of God," where the _Trinity_ is included. Thus, while in
these epistles this important doctrine of the adorable Trinity,--a
doctrine which lies at the very foundation of a sinner's hope, is
obscurely revealed, as being clearly discovered in the preceding parts
of the Holy Scriptures; the subsequent part of this book of Revelation
is intended, among other objects, to demonstrate _the distinct
subsistence and economical actings_ of the co-equal and eternal Three,
in the protection and salvation of the church, and in the control and
moral government of the universe.

Again, on the groundless and chimerical assumption of those expositors
who view these epistles as prophetical of seven successive periods of
the destiny of the church general, the last estate would be worse than
the first,--Laodicea being the worst of all. But this is obviously
contrary to the description contained in ch. xx. 1-10, where the saints
are represented as in possession and exercise of all their purchased and
social rights. Neither does authentic history prove that the church of
Christ was more prosperous under the "ten persecutions" by the heathen
Roman emperors than in the apostolic age, as the superior condition of
the church in Smyrna to that of Ephesus would require. The very contrary
is true; and hence the groundlessness of such interpretation, however
respectable the names of its authors. The object of our Saviour in all
the instructions, counsels, warnings, rebukes and threatenings addressed
to these several churches is doubtless the real benefit of his people in
after generations;--just as his dealings with the church in Old
Testament times, "were written for our admonition and learning." (Rom.
xv. 4; 1 Cor. x. 11.) Moreover, some persons have inferred from our
Lord's treatment of these churches, a _divine warrant_ for the
existence, and an imperative Christian duty for the charitable
recognition, of all the conflicting and antagonistic organizations of
our time, popularly styled Christian churches. But as the designation,
"Christian churches," is in the apprehension of some too general, the
term "evangelical" is used by them as restrictive of the term
"Christian." Still the question will present itself,--What constitutes a
church "evangelical?" And this question is still without any definite
answer. Perhaps no two persons would include in one category the same
denominations of professing Christians. For example,--Is a community to
be considered a Christian church in which the "doctrine of Balaam" is
taught? Does the law of charity require the recognition of an
organization as a Christian church, in which a "Jezebel would be
suffered to teach, and to seduce the servants of Christ?" Is that a
Christian church which denies the supreme deity of Christ, and rejects
the seals of the covenant of grace,--the only charter of the Christian
church's existence, on earth? Or is that combination to be viewed as a
Christian church which has no regular ministry, but expressly rejects
the "pastors and teachers" of Christ's appointment and the morality of
the sabbath? These, and many other questions of similar or analogous
import, will suggest negative answers to all who fear God, respect his
authority, and are free from the bewildering effects of popular error.

It ought to be considered that all these _seven_ churches were _one
church_, as originally constituted, having the same,--that, is, a
divine, scriptural organization. And although in the divine forbearance,
they were still owned by Christ, notwithstanding the errors, heresies
and immoralities which had crept into them; yet it is manifest that he
threatens some of them with divorce, total extinction in case of
impenitence. He has indeed fulfilled his awful threats in making them a
desolation. Is it reasonable to suppose that he would reorganize these,
or recognise others which incorporate the same or the like corruptions
in doctrine and practice for tolerating which he has "removed their
candlestick," or "spued them out of his mouth?" (_Absit blasphemia_.) To
say so, or write so, does not manifest the "charity which rejoiceth not
in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth." Alas! the present condition of
the church general contains frequent evidences, that our Saviour's
affectionate counsels, solemn warnings, and awful threatenings, are
neither duly pondered nor dutifully regarded.




