CHAPTER I.


1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto
his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and
signified it by his angel unto his servant John:

2. Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus
Christ, and of all things that he saw.

3. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; for the time
is at hand.

Verses 1-3.--Here, our divine Mediator appears in the continued exercise
of his prophetical office "in his estate of exaltation." While present
with his disciples on earth, he told them he had many things to say to
them, but they could not hear them then. (John xvi. 12) Upon his
ascension he fulfilled his own and his Father's promise in sending the
Holy Spirit to guide them into all truth--bring all things to their
remembrance, and show them _things to come_. (v. 13.) The fulfilment of
this promise we have in the whole of the New Testament,--doctrines,
facts and predictions.

Jesus said,--"Of mine own-self I can do nothing." (v. 30.) The same is
true of his teachings as of his works:--"The words that I speak unto
you, I speak not of myself, (xiv. 10.) In all that "Jesus began both to
do and to teach," (Acts i. 1,) he was instructed by his Father. These
things are all plainly implied in the first verse. Indeed, the official
actings of the three Persons in the Godhead had been frequently taught
by Christ during the time of his personal ministry; and they are more
fully and frequently recorded by the beloved disciple than by any other
evangelist, in that gospel which still bears this apostle's name. Thus,
it appears that although this book is called a "Revelation of Jesus
Christ," he is not the ultimate author. It is a revelation "which God
gave unto him." By God here, we are to understand the person of the
Father. The reader is thus conducted to the divine origin of all
supernatural revelation,--the eternal purpose of God. (Heb. i. 1, 2.)
The object of the whole Bible, in the evolvement of the divine economy
of man's redemption, appears to be the unfolding of the ineffable
mystery of the Trinity, and displaying the perfections of the Godhead,
to his own glory as the highest and last end.

The channel through which the divine will comes to the church, is
exhibited in the beginning of this book. Originating with God the
Father, passing to the Mediator, communicated to a holy angel; by his
ministry it is made known to John, who reveals it to the church! How
beautiful the order here! How wonderful and condescending on the part of
God!

Although we commonly and justly designate the whole Bible by the name
"Revelation;" yet we are to consider that this book is so called by way
of eminence. Doubtless it is so styled by its divine Author because it
reveals events which were then future, and which could not be discovered
by human sagacity. But this holds equally true of other parts of the
Scriptures, especially those parts which are prophetical. It may be that
this book is called "Apocalypse" because of the opposition which it was
to encounter from Antichrist, as also because of its singular and
intended use to a peculiar portion of professing Christians. As on the
one hand the Romish church, and too many who protest against her
encroachments, prohibit or discourage the disciples of Christ from
reading this book; so, on the other hand, it has been of singular use to
others in strengthening their faith and ministering to their comfort.

John "bare record of the word of God and of the testimony of Jesus
Christ and of all things that he saw." A question arises here,--What is
the difference, if any, between the "word of God" and the "testimony of
Jesus Christ?" Or is there any distinction intended by the Holy Spirit?
Most readers as well as expositors view these expressions as identical.
We shall meet with them, or their equivalent, frequently hereafter; and
it may be proper at the outset to inquire a little into this familiar
phraseology. (See chapters i. 9; vi. 9; xii. 11, 17; xx. 4, etc.)

Recognising the inspired rule of interpretation,--"comparing spiritual
things with spiritual," we refer to Psalm lxxviii. 5, where "testimony
and law" are obviously distinguished. The same distinction will be found
in Isa. viii. 16, 20. The prophet refers the reader to _two tests_ of
doctrine and practice: first the "law." But as the spouse of Christ is
unable, in her perplexity, to apply the law to the present case in a
manner satisfactory to herself, she is directed by her Lord, (Song i.
8,) to "go forth by the footsteps of the flock." That is, search and
ascertain how the disciples applied the law in similar circumstances,
and imitate their approved example. This is a rule recognised and often
inculcated in the New Testament. (Heb. vi. 12.)

The inspired penman in Psalm lxxviii. 5, refers to the covenant
transaction at Mount Sinai, where the "law" was exhibited as an appendix
to the covenant of grace--"added to the promise." (Gal. iii. 19.) The
reader will find this whole matter set before him, perhaps to his
surprise and delight in Exod. xx. 1-17. The Lord (Jehovah) is the God
(Elohim) of his people. How shall they know that he is _their_ God? By
the law?--No, for that is a rule to all men. They know by the
_testimony_ as distinct from the law. Testimony consists of _facts_.
God's people knew that he was their God, because he "brought them out of
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage." This was "the doing of
the Lord,"--"the testimony of Jesus Christ." And so it is an important
and precious truth to us at the present day.--"The preface to the Ten
Commandments teacheth us, that God is the Lord (Jehovah) and _our
God_."--This great historical fact is the controlling motive to
acceptable obedience to the moral law. To this, among other truths of
the gospel, every faithful minister will "bear witness" with the apostle
John.

John also bore witness to "all things that he saw," as presented to him
in a succession of visions to the end of this book, in view of some of
which, he "wondered with great admiration." (xvii. 6.)

In the third verse there is a "blessing" pronounced on all such as
"hear, read and keep those things which are written in the words of this
prophecy." A mere reading and hearing of the Apocalypse will not secure
the blessing. It is suspended on the _keeping_. "Blessed is he that
_keepeth_ the sayings of the prophecy of this book." (Ch. xxii. 7.) The
divine and compassionate Author of this prophecy, who "knoweth the end
from the beginning," foresaw the violent and ignorant opposition even to
the _reading_ of it, which would be encountered by those for whose
special direction and comfort it was given. While the "man of sin" would
attempt to deprive the church of the light of the Bible in general, the
great "Antichrist" would join him in special hostility to this book. The
judgment of the former is, that the Bible in the hands of the people
will generate _heresies_; of the latter,--the Apocalypse is so "hard to
be understood" as to be unintelligible. A revelation, and yet
unintelligible! This is very nearly a contradiction. Such sentiments
betray rebellion against the authority, and a reflection upon the wisdom
and beneficence of God. All Christians acknowledge, as Peter says of the
writings of Paul, that in this book are "some things dark and hard to be
understood:" but there have been always and now are, some disciples who
do not subscribe to the teaching of most expositors of this book,--that
their actual fulfilment, alone, will interpret these
predictions.--Doubtless it was in view of such discouragements that our
Lord prefixed and repeated the special blessing. And this promised
blessing of the Master himself is sufficient to countervail all the
discouragements and hostility of the adversaries, thrown in the way of
the reader and expositor. Moses "endured as having respect unto the
recompense of the reward." Let us copy his example. "He is faithful that
promised." Let the pious reader, therefore, disregard the counsel to
"omit the reading, of this book in family worship," as we have sometimes
heard; whether it be tendered by Papist, Prelate or Presbyterian,
because it is directly contrary to the express command of Christ, (John
v. 39,) and because by following such counsel, he would forfeit the
special blessing here promised.


4. John, to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be unto you, and
peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and from
the seven Spirits which are before his throne;

5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful Witness, and the
First-begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the kings of the earth.
Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,

6. And hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to whom
be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Vs. 4-6.--Here we have the customary salutation, addressed to the
churches of Asia Minor. Many other churches had been organized in other
parts of the earth at this date; (A.D. 96:) but the special reason why
John saluted these seven, and addressed an epistle to each, would seem
to be his vicinity to them in the place of his present sojourning, and
probably his personal acquaintance with them in the exercise of his
ministry among them, (v. 11.) His prayer for these churches is
substantially the same as that prefixed to most of Paul's epistles.
Grace and peace are inseparable in the divine arrangement. "There is no
peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isa. lvii. 21.)

The solitary pilgrim in his place of banishment, contemplating the
Abrahamic covenant, and realizing that grace and that peace in which he
desires his fellow disciples to share, sets before us the threefold
source whence these divine influences flow. First, "from him which is,
and which was, and which is to come;" a description of God the Father,
whose personal subsistence has priority in the Godhead, and who occupies
the like priority in voluntary relationship and economic standing. From
the Father personally, as the representative of Trinity, we have seen
(in verse 1,) this book emanated; and now from the same we are taught
that "grace and peace" come to fallen man. Second, John's prayer here,
differs from Paul's usual form in the beginning of his epistles; for
Paul omits the Holy Spirit, commonly saying,--"Grace be to you, and
peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ," (as in Gal.
i. 3.) In this last book of Scripture we have the co-equal Three
introduced as co-operating in the work of man's redemption. Thus our
attention is directed to the "seven Spirits which are before the
throne;" by which we are to understand the Holy Ghost, in his essential
equality with God the Father, but in the place of official
subordination. The Holy Spirit is _one_ personally, but _seven_ in his
manifold gifts and graces, with special reference to the "seven
churches." And whereas the divine Spirit, in the order of his personal
subsistence and operation is _third,_ here he occupies the _second_
place in the order of revelation. Third, The special reason for
reserving the notice of our Saviour to the last place, is doubtless that
the "beloved disciple" may take occasion to leave on record an
expression of his admiration of the Mediator's person, one of whose
names is "Wonderful," (Isa. ix. 6;) and that he might exemplify the
ruling principle of his own heart,--"We love him, because he first loved
us." (1 John iv. 19.) The apostle dwells upon the personal glory of
Immanuel, contemplating him in his threefold office of prophet, priest
and king.--He is "the faithful witness" in his prophetical office. "The
only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared
him." (John i. 18;) "who, before Pontius Pilate, witnessed a good
confession." (John xviii. 37.) He is "the first-begotten of the dead."
He "died unto sin once," as an expiatory sacrifice to atone for the
guilt of an elect world. Being a "priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedek," "he ever liveth to make intercession,"--"death hath no
more dominion over him," as it had over Lazarus and many others who
"came out of the graves after his resurrection." (Matt, xxvii. 52, 53.)
_Among all_, he has the preeminence. (Col. i. 18.) He is "the Prince of
the kings of the earth." There is not in the sacred volume a title of
our Redeemer more full or expressive than this, on his headship or royal
office. A _prince_ is of royal parentage. Such is the understanding of
mankind in all civilized nations. Joseph in Egypt typified, in part, the
kingly office of Christ; and Solomon on the throne of Israel partially
typified him in his dominion: but as Balaam foretold that he should be
"higher than Agag," (Num. xxiv. 7,) so we may say he is higher than
Joseph,--"A greater than Solomon is here." "Pharaoh said unto Joseph,
Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my
people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than thou." When
the Father says to the Son, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever,"
(Ps. xlv. 6,) this is consistent with "excepting him that did put all
things under him." (1 Cor. xv. 27.) Although we are not warranted to say
with some, "The Father is the fountain of the Godhead, we may
warrantably and boldly say, the Father is the _fountain_ of _authority_.
(John vi. 38.) The dominion of the Mediator is universal, reaching "from
the roofless heaven to the bottomless hell." It is comfortable to the
disciples to know this in anticipation of the rise and reign of
Antichrist. He is, by the appointment of the Father "head over all
things," (Eph. i. 22,)--"able to save to the uttermost all that come
unto God by him," to "consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy
with the brightness of his coming, that Wicked, the Man of Sin." (2
Thess. ii. 8.)

In view of the personal dignity and mediatorial dominion of Christ, the
apostle gives expression to his admiration and wonder at the amazing
love and condescension displayed by him on behalf of himself and all
others, on whom that love was fixed from everlasting, and whose guilt
and pollution were taken away by the atoning and cleansing blood of the
Lamb. To these saving benefits is to be added the honour to which the
redeemed are advanced as "kings and priests,--a royal priesthood." The
living Head is "a priest upon his throne," (Zech. vi. 13,) and all the
members are assimilated to him. (1 Pet. ii. 5, 9.)


7. Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they
also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because
of him. Even so, Amen.

Verse 7.--How animated the language, sublime the conception, and
awe-inspiring the sentiment here! Time is annihilated! The end is seen
from the beginning, and all eyes are directed to the sovereign Judge of
the world, as he comes in majesty to fix the final destiny of all the
children of Adam! These have constituted only two classes sincere world
began. "Every eye shall see him," but the eye will affect the heart very
differently. The hearts of some, with holy Job, will be filled with joy
unspeakable, (Job xix. 26, 27;) but others, with mercenary Balaam, will
be inspired with terror and dismay. (Num. xxiv. 17.) Of "them that
pierced him," who shall be able to abide his indignation? Judas,
Caiaphas, Herod and his men of war; Pontius Pilate, and all who have
consented to the counsel and deed of them, "must appear before his
judgment seat." "All kindreds of the earth," covering all the
combinations of "Antichrist" during the definite period of twelve
hundred and sixty years, "shall wail because of him," (Rev. xiv. 10,
11.) Assured of the equity of Messiah's judgment, the apostle, in the
exercise of "like precious faith with all them that believe," subjoins
his hearty assent,--"Even so, Amen:" "So let all thine enemies perish, O
Lord." Doubtless the design of the Holy Spirit in this verse is to
furnish ground of encouragement to those who were to be engaged in the
protracted conflict with the powers of darkness foreshadowed in the
prophecy of this book.


8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

Ver. 8.--The same divine person, to whom the apostle directs the
doxology in the 6th verse, is introduced in the 8th: that is, the Lord
Christ. He claims eternity and omnipotence. He describes himself here in
the _very words_ which in the 4th verse are descriptive of the eternal
subsistence of the person of the Father. "Alpha and Omega," the first
and last letters of the Greek alphabet, are explained in the
words,--"the beginning and the ending." This language is not to be
understood as expressing or defining the duration of the Godhead only;
but it points also to the divine purpose and providence. To the same
purpose speaks our Redeemer under the name of Wisdom:--"The Lord (the
Father) possessed me in the beginning (head, purpose) of his way, before
his works of old." (Prov. viii. 22.) In joint counsel with the Father,
ere the wheels of time began to move, and being "almighty" to execute
the purposes of God, he is perfectly qualified to act as the final Judge
of the world. And in the great and last day "every tongue must confess
that he is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." (Phil. ii. 11.) "For
to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and living." (Rom. xiv. 9.)--"God is judge
himself." (Ps. 1. 6.)


9. I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and
in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is
called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus
Christ.

Ver. 9.--Again, the inspired writer addresses the Christians in Asia,
acquainting them very briefly and simply with his present local
situation; not so much to move their sympathy with him, as to express
his unabated affection for them:--"I am your brother, and companion in
tribulation." Although the "like afflictions were accomplished in his
brethren," the Devil was permitted to "cast" only "some of them into
prison." But it is remarkable that John utters not a word, much less
manifests any resentment, against the persecutor. He was "in the isle
that is called Patmos:"--but he does not say who sent him there.
Historians tell us that he was banished by Domitian, the Roman emperor;
others say, by Nero; but the former is more probable. This island is
proverbially barren. It is situated among a number of islands in the
Aegean sea, a point of the Mediterranean running northward between
Europe and Asia, and not very remote from most of the churches here
addressed.

The ground of controversy between John and his persecutors was "the word
of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ." Of these he "bare record."
(v, 2.) "This," say most expositors, "was the cause of John's
banishment." This unguarded language confounds the difference between a
_cause_ and an _occasion_. John had given no cause of banishment to his
enemies. The true cause of their hostility was their hatred of the "word
of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ." For these John contended
earnestly, as Jude enjoined; (ver. 3:) just as Paul and others were
"bold in their God to speak the gospel of God with much contention." (1
Thes. ii. 2.) We have here the standing ground of strife between the
believer and the infidel; between Christ and Belial, between the church
and the world. There is a divine hand interposed all along in this
warfare, and the conflict will terminate only in the extermination of
one of the parties. (Gen. iii. 15; Rev. xx. 10.)


10. I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great
voice, as of a trumpet,

Ver. 10.--The beloved disciple had often "tasted the good word of God,"
while the bosom-companion of Christ in the time of his ministry on
earth: His "heart burned within him." (Luke xxiv. 32.) Especially had
this been his happy experience on the holy Sabbath. Now that his
condition is solitary, being by violence "driven out from the
inheritance of the Lord," (1 Sam. xxvi. 19,) his gracious Master favours
him with a special visit. Did he not say to his disciples while he was
yet with them,--"I will not leave you comfortless? I will come to you."
(John xiv. 18.) The Comforter was promised to supply the want of the
Saviour's bodily presence, (v. 16,) and now John is "in the Spirit," and
it is "the Lord's day,"--the Christian Sabbath. We may well suppose this
disciple never was happier, no, not when he was "leaning on Jesus'
bosom." He would not now envy the emperor or any of his persecutors in
all their outward peace and prosperity. He was in an ecstasy,--"whether
in the body or out of the body he could not tell:" but his soul was
susceptible of the impressions of Christ's love, and of the intimations
of his sovereign will. "Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I do?"
(Gen. xviii. 17.) "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth
his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos iii. 7.) John does not
boast as Balaam,--"falling into a trance, but having his eyes open:" yet
he heard and saw as distinctly and clearly as if his perceptions had
come through the medium of his bodily ears and eyes. "He heard behind
him a great voice as of a trumpet," not to alarm, but to engage
attention.


11. Saying, I am Alpha and Omega; the first and the last: and, What thou
seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in
Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto
Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.

V. 11.--Christ speaks, asserting his eternity, and consequently his
equality with the Father. This book being written in the Greek language,
our Saviour names and appropriates to himself the first and last letters
of the alphabet in that language, and gives the interpretation,--"the
first and the last," as in v. 8. John is directed to write and send to
the seven churches all that is contained in this last book of the Bible.
The churches are named here, and in the second and third chapters they
are addressed severally in a letter to each. It may be noted that
besides the general commission to preach the gospel to every creature,
apostles had a special call to _write_; and sometimes a
prohibition,--"write not," (ch. x. 4.) Many of the most learned and
godly divines whom we would consider best qualified, have never left any
writings for the instruction of posterity; whilst others less qualified,
either in respect of literature or piety, or not at all qualified, have
filled the world with books without a special call from Christ. (John
xx. 30, 31; xxi. 25.)


12. And I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And, being turned,
I saw seven golden candlesticks;

13. And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of
man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps
with a golden girdle.

14. His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and
his eyes were as a flame of fire;

15. And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace;
and his voice as the sound of many waters.

16. And he had in his right hand seven stars; and out of his mouth went
a sharp two-edged sword; and his countenance was as the sun shineth in
his strength.

Vs. 12-16.--His attention being arrested, the apostle "turned to see the
voice,"--that is, the person from whom the voice came. A glorious vision
was presented to his view,--"seven golden candlesticks" or lamp-bearers,
in allusion to the golden candlestick with the seven lamps as placed in
the tabernacle. (Exod. xxv. 31-40.) "In the midst of the candlesticks
appeared one like unto the Son of man," the Mediator, clothed in
sacerdotal garments, supplying oil for the light, after the example of
Aaron and his sons. (Exod. xxvii. 20, 21.) The "garment" may signify his
mediatorial righteousness,--the "golden girdle" the preciousness of his
love,--"his head and his hairs white like wool," his purity and
eternity,--"his eyes as a flame of fire," his omniscience, by which he
searches the reins and hearts, and sees the end from the beginning; "his
feet like unto fine brass," the stability of his appointments and the
excellency of his providential dispensations,--"his voice," the
irresistible energy of his word to quicken, terrify or destroy at his
pleasure. (John v. 25, Heb. xii. 26.) "The sharp two-edged sword" will
represent his awful justice against the impenitent who resist his
righteous authority. "With the breath of his lips shall he slay the
wicked." (Is. xi. 4; Luke xix. 27.) "His countenance as the sun shining
in his strength," disclosed to the beloved disciple such splendor as to
overwhelm him. The like display of divine majesty was insupportable to
Saul of Tarsus when on his way to Damascus. (Acts xxvi. 13.) To the
workers of iniquity, "our God is a consuming fire." (Heb. xii. 29.) It
is a certain truth,--"The vengeance of the gospel is weighter than the
vengeance of the law." (Heb. x. 28, 31.) "Let us therefore fear."


17. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his
right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the
last:

18. I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for
evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.

19. Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and
the things which shall be hereafter;

20. The mystery of the seven stars, which thou sawest in my right hand,
and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the
seven churches; and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the
seven churches.

Vs. 17-20.--We have the effect of the vision upon the beloved disciple.
He who had leaned on Christ's bosom at supper, and who had seen his
Master transfigured on the holy mount, was now utterly overwhelmed with
the effulgence of his glory. John "fell at his feet as dead." So it was
with Daniel, "a man greatly beloved." (Daniel x. 4-8.) But the
compassionate Saviour dispelled his fears, as in all similar cases;
making known to his astonished servant his supreme deity and real
humanity, as "the first and the last," who died for the sins, and was
raised again for the justification of his people. (Rom. iv. 25.) He is
"alive for evermore,"--become "the first fruits of them that slept." (1
Cor. xv. 20.) He "dieth no more. Death hath no more dominion over him."
(Rom. vi. 9.) And so complete is his victory over the king of terrors,
the last enemy of the believer, that he hath "the keys of hell and of
death." He has the "key of the bottomless pit," (xx. 1;) having
triumphed over principalities and powers, making a show of them openly.
(Col. ii. 15.) Whether Christ used the word, "amen," to ratify the truth
of his immortality; or whether this is an expression by John of his
joyful acquiescence in that truth, is not material: we know on
satisfactory evidence, that our Lord is a prophet and king, as well as a
priest, "after the power of an endless life." (Heb. vii. 16; Rom. xiv.
9.)

John is next commanded to write,--_First_, "the things which he had
seen;" that is, the description of the foregoing vision:--_Second_, "the
things which are;" that is, the actual condition of the church, as
delineated in the diverse characters of the seven churches addressed, as
in the next two chapters:--_Third_, "the things which shall be
hereafter:" that is, the prophetical part of the book, from the
beginning of the fourth chapter to the close, as containing the
prospective history of the church and of the nations, as she was to be
affected by them, or they by her, till the consummation of all things.
This is the division of the book made by the divine Author himself, and
it is a natural and intelligible one. All attempts of learned and pious
men by other divisions to render this mysterious part of the Bible more
clear to the unlearned reader, tend only to display the ingenuity of the
writers,--not to say their temerity, while they "darken counsel by words
without knowledge." Such artificial divisions are as unfounded, in the
apprehension of sober expositors, as the attempts of impious Arians and
others, to turn the historical narrative of the creation and fall of man
into an allegory!

The meaning of the "seven stars and seven candlesticks" is then
explained to John. The word, "are," is used in a figurative sense, and
not to be taken literally. It means here, _symbolize, represent_ or
_signify_. It is to be interpreted in the same sense as in the following
places of sacred Scripture:--"It _is_ the Lord's passover." (Exod. xii.
11.) "That rock _was_ Christ." (1 Cor. x. 4.) "This _is_ my body."
(Matt. xxvi. 26.) None but a Papist will have any difficulty here, or
perhaps,--a Lutheran!




