CHAPTER VIII

     Let gallows gape for dog:  let man go free.
     --Henry V.


A page had been brought up in Gamwell-Hall, who, while he was little,
had been called Little John, and continued to be so called after he had
grown to be a foot taller than any other man in the house. He was full
seven feet high. His latitude was worthy of his longitude, and his
strength was worthy of both; and though an honest man by profession, he
had practiced archery on the king’s deer for the benefit of his master’s
household, and for the improvement of his own eye and hand, till his
aim had become infallible within the range of two miles. He had fought
manfully in defence of his young master, took his captivity exceedingly
to heart, and fell into bitter grief and boundless rage when he heard
that he had been tried in Nottingham and sentenced to die. Alice
Gamwell, at Little John’s request, wrote three letters of one tenour;
and Little John, having attached them to three blunt arrows, saddled the
fleetest steed in old Sir Guy of Gamwell’s stables, mounted, and rode
first to Arlingford Castle, where he shot one of the three arrows over
the battlements; then to Rubygill Abbey, where he shot the second into
the abbey-garden; then back past Gamwell-Hall to the borders of Sherwood
Forest, where he shot the third into the wood. Now the first of these
arrows lighted in the nape of the neck of Lord Fitzwater, and lodged
itself firmly between his skin and his collar; the second rebounded with
the hollow vibration of a drumstick from the shaven sconce of the abbot
of Rubygill; and the third pitched perpendicularly into the centre of a
venison pasty in which Robin Hood was making incision.

Matilda ran up to her father in the court of Arlingford Castle, seized
the arrow, drew off the letter, and concealed it in her bosom before the
baron had time to look round, which he did with many expressions of rage
against the impudent villain who had shot a blunt arrow into the nape of
his neck.

“But you know, father,” said Matilda, “a sharp arrow in the same place
would have killed you; therefore the sending a blunt one was very
considerate.”

“Considerate, with a vengeance!” said the baron. “Where was the
consideration of sending it at all? This is some of your forester’s
pranks. He has missed you in the forest, since I have kept watch and
ward over you, and by way of a love-token and a remembrance to you takes
a random shot at me.”

The abbot of Rubygill picked up the missile-missive or messenger
arrow, which had rebounded from his shaven crown, with a very unghostly
malediction on the sender, which he suddenly checked with a pious and
consolatory reflection on the goodness of Providence in having blessed
him with such a thickness of skull, to which he was now indebted for
temporal preservation, as he had before been for spiritual promotion. He
opened the letter, which was addressed to father Michael; and found it
to contain an intimation that William Gamwell was to be hanged on Monday
at Nottingham.

“And I wish,” said the abbot, “father Michael were to be hanged with
him: an ungrateful monster, after I had rescued him from the fangs of
civil justice, to reward my lenity by not leaving a bone unbruised among
the holy brotherhood of Rubygill.”

Robin Hood extracted from his venison pasty a similar intimation of the
evil destiny of his cousin, whom he determined, if possible, to rescue
from the jaws of Cerberus.

The sheriff of Nottingham, though still sore with his bruises, was so
intent on revenge, that he raised himself from his bed to attend
the execution of William Gamwell. He rode to the august structure of
retributive Themis, as the French call a gallows, in all the pride and
pomp of shrievalty, and with a splendid retinue of well-equipped knaves
and varlets, as our ancestors called honest serving-men.

Young Gamwell was brought forth with his arms pinioned behind him; his
sister Alice and his father, Sir Guy, attending him in disconsolate
mood. He had rejected the confessor provided by the sheriff, and had
insisted on the privilege of choosing his own, whom Little John had
promised to bring. Little John, however, had not made his appearance
when the fatal procession began its march; but when they reached the
place of execution, Little John appeared, accompanied by a ghostly
friar.

“Sheriff,” said young Gamwell, “let me not die with my hands pinioned:
give me a sword, and set any odds of your men against me, and let me
die the death of a man, like the descendant of a noble house, which has
never yet been stained with ignominy.”

“No, no,” said the sheriff; “I have had enough of setting odds against
you. I have sworn you shall be hanged, and hanged you shall be.”

“Then God have mercy on me,” said young Gamwell; “and now, holy friar,
shrive my sinful soul.”

The friar approached.

“Let me see this friar,” said the sheriff: “if he be the friar of the
bridge, I had as lief have the devil in Nottingham; but he shall find me
too much for him here.”

“The friar of the bridge,” said Little John, “as you very well know,
sheriff, was father Michael of Rubygill Abbey, and you may easily see
that this is not the man.”

“I see it,” said the sheriff; “and God be thanked for his absence.”

Young Gamwell stood at the foot of the ladder. The friar approached him,
opened his book, groaned, turned up the whites of his eyes, tossed up
his arms in the air, and said “Dominus vobiscum.” He then crossed both
his hands on his breast under the folds of his holy robes, and stood a
few moments as if in inward prayer. A deep silence among the attendant
crowd accompanied this action of the friar; interrupted only by the
hollow tone of the death-bell, at long and dreary intervals. Suddenly
the friar threw off his holy robes, and appeared a forester clothed in
green, with a sword in his right hand and a horn in his left. With the
sword he cut the bonds of William Gamwell, who instantly snatched a
sword from one of the sheriff’s men; and with the horn he blew a loud
blast, which was answered at once by four bugles from the quarters
of the four winds, and from each quarter came five-and-twenty bowmen
running all on a row.

“Treason! treason!” cried the sheriff. Old Sir Guy sprang to his son’s
side, and so did Little John; and the four setting back to back, kept
the sheriff and his men at bay till the bowmen came within shot and let
fly their arrows among the sheriff’s men, who, after a brief resistance,
fled in all directions. The forester, who had personated the friar, sent
an arrow after the flying sheriff, calling with a strong voice, “To the
sheriff’s left arm, as a keepsake from Robin Hood.” The arrow reached
its destiny; the sheriff redoubled his speed, and, with the one arrow in
his arm, did not stop to breathe till he was out of reach of another.

The foresters did not waste time in Nottingham, but were soon at a
distance from its walls. Sir Guy returned with Alice to Gamwell-Hall;
but thinking he should not be safe there, from the share he had had in
his son’s rescue, they only remained long enough to supply themselves
with clothes and money, and departed, under the escort of Little John,
to another seat of the Gamwells in Yorkshire. Young Gamwell, taking it
for granted that his offence was past remission, determined on joining
Robin Hood, and accompanied him to the forest, where it was deemed
expedient that he should change his name; and he was rechristened
without a priest, and with wine instead of water, by the immortal name
of Scarlet.




