CHAPTER X


     A noble girl, i’ faith.  Heart!  I think I fight with a
     familiar, or the ghost of a fencer.  Call you this an
     amorous visage? Here’s blood that would have served me these
     seven years, in broken heads and cut fingers, and now it
     runs out all together.--MIDDLETON.  Roaring Girl.


Prince John sat down impatiently before Arlingford castle in the hope
of starving out the besieged; but finding the duration of their supplies
extend itself in an equal ratio with the prolongation of his hope,
he made vigorous preparations for carrying the place by storm. He
constructed an immense machine on wheels, which, being advanced to the
edge of the moat, would lower a temporary bridge, of which one end would
rest on the bank, and the other on the battlements, and which, being
well furnished with stepping boards, would enable his men to ascend the
inclined plane with speed and facility. Matilda received intimation of
this design by the usual friendly channel of a blunt arrow, which must
either have been sent from some secret friend in the prince’s camp,
or from some vigorous archer beyond it: the latter will not appear
improbable, when we consider that Robin Hood and Little John could shoot
two English miles and an inch point-blank,

Come scrive Turpino, che non erra.


The machine was completed, and the ensuing morning fixed for the
assault. Six men, relieved at intervals, kept watch over it during
the night. Prince John retired to sleep, congratulating himself in
the expectation that another day would place the fair culprit at his
princely mercy. His anticipations mingled with the visions of his
slumber, and he dreamed of wounds and drums, and sacking and firing
the castle, and bearing off in his arms the beautiful prize through the
midst of fire and smoke. In the height of this imaginary turmoil, he
awoke, and conceived for a few moments that certain sounds which rang in
his ears, were the continuation of those of his dream, in that sort
of half-consciousness between sleeping and waking, when reality and
phantasy meet and mingle in dim and confused resemblance. He was,
however, very soon fully awake to the fact of his guards calling on him
to arm, which he did in haste, and beheld the machine in flames, and
a furious conflict raging around it. He hurried to the spot, and found
that his camp had been suddenly assailed from one side by a party of
foresters, and that the baron’s people had made a sortie on the other,
and that they had killed the guards, and set fire to the machine, before
the rest of the camp could come to the assistance of their fellows.

The night was in itself intensely dark, and the fire-light shed around
it a vivid and unnatural radiance. On one side, the crimson light
quivered by its own agitation on the waveless moat, and on the bastions
and buttresses of the castle, and their shadows lay in massy blackness
on the illuminated walls: on the other, it shone upon the woods,
streaming far within among the open trunks, or resting on the closer
foliage. The circumference of darkness bounded the scene on all sides:
and in the centre raged the war; shields, helmets, and bucklers gleaming
and glittering as they rang and clashed against each other; plumes
confusedly tossing in the crimson light, and the messy light and shade
that fell on the faces of the combatants, giving additional energy to
their ferocious expression.

John, drawing nearer to the scene of action, observed two young warriors
fighting side by side, one of whom wore the habit of a forester, the
other that of a retainer of Arlingford. He looked intently on them both:
their position towards the fire favoured the scrutiny; and the hawk’s
eye of love very speedily discovered that the latter was the fair
Matilda. The forester he did not know: but he had sufficient tact to
discern that his success would be very much facilitated by separating
her from this companion, above all others. He therefore formed a party
of men into a wedge, only taking especial care not to be the point of
it himself, and drove it between them with so much precision, that they
were in a moment far asunder.

“Lady Matilda,” said John, “yield yourself my prisoner.”

“If you would wear me, prince,” said Matilda, “you must win me:” and
without giving him time to deliberate on the courtesy of fighting with
the lady of his love, she raised her sword in the air, and lowered it on
his head with an impetus that would have gone nigh to fathom even that
extraordinary depth of brain which always by divine grace furnishes the
interior of a head-royal, if he had not very dexterously parried the
blow. Prince John wished to disarm and take captive, not in any way to
wound or injure, least of all to kill, his fair opponent. Matilda was
only intent to get rid of her antagonist at any rate: the edge of her
weapon painted his complexion with streaks of very unloverlike crimson,
and she would probably have marred John’s hand for ever signing Magna
Charta, but that he was backed by the advantage of numbers, and that her
sword broke short on the boss of his buckler. John was following up his
advantage to make a captive of the lady, when he was suddenly felled to
the earth by an unseen antagonist. Some of his men picked him carefully
up, and conveyed him to his tent, stunned and stupified.

When he recovered, he found Harpiton diligently assisting in his
recovery, more in the fear of losing his place than in that of losing
his master: the prince’s first inquiry was for the prisoner he had
been on the point of taking at the moment when his habeas corpus was
so unseasonably suspended. He was told that his people had been on the
point of securing the said prisoner, when the devil suddenly appeared
among them in the likeness of a tall friar, having his grey frock
cinctured with a sword-belt, and his crown, which whether it were shaven
or no they could not see, surmounted with a helmet, and flourishing an
eight-foot staff, with which he laid about him to the right and to the
left, knocking down the prince and his men as if they had been so
many nine-pins: in fine, he had rescued the prisoner, and made a clear
passage through friend and foe, and in conjunction with a chosen
party of archers, had covered the retreat of the baron’s men and the
foresters, who had all gone off in a body towards Sherwood forest.

Harpiton suggested that it would be desirable to sack the castle, and
volunteered to lead the van on the occasion, as the defenders were
withdrawn, and the exploit seemed to promise much profit and little
danger: John considered that the castle would in itself be a great
acquisition to him, as a stronghold in furtherance of his design on his
brother’s throne; and was determining to take possession with the first
light of morning, when he had the mortification to see the castle burst
into flames in several places at once. A piteous cry was heard from
within, and while the prince was proclaiming a reward to any one who
would enter into the burning pile, and elucidate the mystery of the
doleful voice, forth waddled the little fat friar in an agony of fear,
out of the fire into the frying-pan; for he was instantly taken into
custody and carried before Prince John, wringing his hands and tearing
his hair.

“Are you the friar,” said Prince John, in a terrible voice, “that
laid me prostrate in battle, mowed down my men like grass, rescued my
captive, and covered the retreat of my enemies? And, not content with
this, have you now set fire to the castle in which I intended to take up
my royal quarters?”

The little friar quaked like a jelly: he fell on his knees, and
attempted to speak; but in his eagerness to vindicate himself from this
accumulation of alarming charges, he knew not where to begin; his ideas
rolled round upon each other like the radii of a wheel; the words he
desired to utter, instead of issuing, as it were, in a right line from
his lips, seemed to conglobate themselves into a sphere turning on its
own axis in his throat: after several ineffectual efforts, his utterance
totally failed him, and he remained gasping, with his mouth open, his
lips quivering, his hands clasped together, and the whites of his eyes
turned up towards the prince with an expression most ruefully imploring.

“Are you that friar?” repeated the prince.

Several of the by-standers declared that he was not that friar. The
little friar, encouraged by this patronage, found his voice, and pleaded
for mercy. The prince questioned him closely concerning the burning of
the castle. The little friar declared, that he had been in too great
fear during the siege to know much of what was going forward, except
that he had been conscious during the last few days of a lamentable
deficiency of provisions, and had been present that very morning at the
broaching of the last butt of sack. Harpiton groaned in sympathy. The
little friar added, that he knew nothing of what had passed since till
he heard the flames roaring at his elbow.

“Take him away, Harpiton,” said the prince, “fill him with sack, and
turn him out.”

“Never mind the sack,” said the little friar, “turn me out at once.”

“A sad chance,” said Harpiton, “to be turned out without sack.”

But what Harpiton thought a sad chance the little friar thought a merry
one, and went bounding like a fat buck towards the abbey of Rubygill.

An arrow, with a letter attached to it, was shot into the camp, and
carried to the prince. The contents were these:--

“Prince John,--I do not consider myself to have resisted lawful
authority in defending my castle against you, seeing that you are at
present in a state of active rebellion against your liege sovereign
Richard: and if my provisions had not failed me, I would have maintained
it till doomsday. As it is, I have so well disposed my combustibles that
it shall not serve you as a strong hold in your rebellion. If you hunt
in the chases of Nottinghamshire, you may catch other game than my
daughter. Both she and I are content to be houseless for a time, in
the reflection that we have deserved your enmity, and the friendship of
Coeur-de-Lion.

“FITZWATER.”




