CHAPTER I

PERIOD I.—DIVISION I.—THALES TO ANAXAGORAS


SINCE we possess only traditions and fragments of this epoch, we may
speak here of the sources of these.

1. The first source is found in Plato, who makes copious reference to
the older philosophers. For the reason that he makes the earlier and
apparently independent philosophies, which are not so far apart when
once their Notion is definitely grasped, into concrete moments of one
Idea, Plato’s philosophy often seems to be merely a clearer statement
of the doctrines of the older philosophers, and hence it draws upon
itself the reproach of plagiarism. Plato was willing to spend much
money in procuring the writings of the older philosophers, and, from
his profound study of these, his conclusions have much weight. But
because in his writings he never himself appeared as teacher, but
always represented other people in his dialogues as the philosophers, a
distinction never has been made between what really belonged to them in
history and what was added by him through the further development which
he effected in their thoughts. In the Parmenides, for instance, we
have the Eleatic philosophy, and yet the working out of this doctrine
belongs peculiarly to Plato.

2. Aristotle is our most abundant authority; he studied the older
philosophers expressly and most thoroughly, and he has, in the
beginning of his Metaphysics especially, and also to a large extent
elsewhere, dealt with them, in historical order: he is as philosophic
as erudite, and we may rely upon him. We can do no better in Greek
philosophy than study the first book of his Metaphysics. When the
would-be-wise man depreciates Aristotle, and asserts that he has not
correctly apprehended Plato, it may be retorted that as he associated
with Plato himself, with his deep and comprehensive mind, perhaps no
one knew him better.

3. Cicero’s name may also occur to us here—although he certainly is
but a troubled spring—since he undoubtedly gives us much information;
yet because he was lacking in philosophic spirit, he understood
Philosophy rather as if it were a matter of history merely. He does
not seem to have himself studied its first sources, and even avows
that, for instance, he never understood Heraclitus; and because
this old and deep philosophy did not interest him, he did not give
himself the trouble to study it. His information bears principally
on later philosophers—the Stoics, Epicureans, the new Academy, and
the Peripatetics. He saw what was ancient through their medium,
and, generally speaking, through a medium of reasoning and not of
speculation.

4. Sextus Empiricus, a later sceptic, has importance through his
writings, _Hypotyposes Pyrrhonicæ_ and _adversus Mathematicos_.
Because, as a sceptic, he both combated the dogmatic philosophy and
also adduced other philosophers as testifying to scepticism (so that
the greater part of his writings is filled with the tenets of other
philosophers), he is the most abundant source we have for the history
of ancient philosophy, and he has retained for our use many valuable
fragments.

5. The book of Diogenes Laertius (_De vitis_, &c., Philoss. lib.
x., ed. Meibom. c. notis Menagii, Amstel. 1692) is an important
compilation, and yet it brings forward copious evidence without much
discrimination. A philosophic spirit cannot be ascribed to it; it
rambles about amongst bad anecdotes extraneous to the matter in hand.
For the lives of philosophers, and here and there for their tenets, it
is useful.

6. Finally, we must speak of Simplicius, a later Greek, from Cilicia,
living under Justinian, in the middle of the sixth century. He is the
most learned and acute of the Greek commentators of Aristotle, and of
his writings there is much still unpublished: to him we certainly owe
our thanks.

I need give no more references, for they may be found without trouble
in any compendium. In the progress of Greek philosophy men were
formerly accustomed to follow the order that showed, according to
ordinary ideas, an external connection, and which is found in one
philosopher having had another as his teacher—this connection is one
which might show him to be partly derived from Thales and partly from
Pythagoras. But such a connection is in part defective in itself, and
in part it is merely external. The one set of philosophic sects, or
of philosophers classed together, which is considered as belonging to
a system—that which proceeds from Thales—pursues its course in time
and mind far separate from the other. But, in truth, no such series
ever does exist in this isolation, nor would it do so even though the
individuals were consecutive and had been externally connected as
teacher and taught, which never is the case; mind follows quite another
order. These successive series are interwoven in spirit just as much as
in their particular content.

We come across Thales first amongst the Ionic people, to whom the
Athenians belonged, or from whom the Ionians of Asia Minor, as a whole,
derived their origin. The Ionic race appears earlier in Peloponnesus,
but seems to have been removed from thence. It is, however, not known
what nations belonged to it, for, according to Herodotus (I. 143), the
other Ionians, and even the Athenians, laid aside the name. According
to Thucydides (I. 2 and 12), the Ionic colonies in Asia Minor and the
islands proceeded principally from Athens, because the Athenians,
on account of the over-population of Attica, migrated there. We find
the greatest activity in Greek life on the coasts of Asia Minor, in
the Greek islands, and then towards the west of Magna Græcia; we see
amongst these people, through their internal political activity and
their intercourse with foreigners, the existence of a diversity and
variety in their relations, whereby narrowness of vision is done away
with, and the universal rises in its place. These two places, Ionia and
Greater Greece, are thus the two localities where this first period
in the history of Philosophy plays its part until the time when, that
period being ended, Philosophy plants itself in Greece proper, and
there makes its home. Those spots were also the seat of early commerce
and of an early culture, while Greece itself, so far as these are
concerned, followed later.

We must thus remark that the character of the two sides into which
these philosophies divide, the philosophy of Asia Minor in the east
and that of Grecian Italy in the west, partakes of the character of
the geographical distinction. On the Asia Minor side, and also in
the islands, we find Thales, Anaximander, Anaximenes, Heraclitus,
Leucippus, Democritus, Anaxagoras, and Diogenes from Crete. On the
other side are the inhabitants of Italy: Pythagoras from Samos, who
lived in Italy, however; Xenophanes, Parmenides, Zeno, Empedocles;
and several of the Sophists also lived in Italy. Anaxagoras was the
first to come to Athens, and thus his science takes a middle place
between both extremes, and Athens was made its centre. The geographical
distinction makes its appearance in the manifestation of Thought,
in the fact that, with the Orientals a sensuous, material side is
dominant, and in the west, Thought, on the contrary, prevails, because
it is constituted into the principle in the form of thought. Those
philosophers who turned to the east knew the absolute in a real
determination of nature, while towards Italy there is the ideal
determination of the absolute. These explanations will be sufficient
for us here; but Empedocles, whom we find in Sicily, is somewhat of
a natural philosopher, while Gorgias, the Sicilian sophist, remains
faithful to the ideal side.

We now have to consider further:—1, The Ionians, viz. Thales,
Anaximander, Anaximenes; 2, Pythagoras and his followers; 3, the
Eleatics, viz. Xenophanes, Parmenides, &c.; 4, Heraclitus; 5,
Empedocles, Leucippus and Democritus; 6, Anaxagoras. We have to trace
and point out the progression of this philosophy also. The first and
altogether abstract determinations are found with Thales and the
other Ionians; they grasped the universal in the form of a natural
determination, as water and air. Progression must thus take place by
leaving behind the merely natural determination; and we find that this
is so with the Pythagoreans. They say that number is the substance or
the essence of things; number is not sensuous, nor is it pure thought,
but it is a non-sensuous object of sense. It was with the Eleatics
that pure thought appeared, and that its forcible liberation from the
sensuous form and the form of number came to pass; and thus from them
proceeds the dialectic movement of thought, which negates the definite
particular in order to show that it is not the many but only the one
that is true. Heraclitus declares the Absolute to be this very process,
which, according to the Eleatics, was still subjective; he arrived at
objective consciousness, since in it the Absolute is that which moves
or changes. Empedocles, Leucippus, and Democritus, on the contrary,
rather go to the opposite extreme, to the simple, material, stationary
principle, to the substratum which underlies the process; and thus this
last, as being movement, is distinguished from it. With Anaxagoras it
is the moving, self-determining thought itself that is then known as
existence, and this is a great step forward.


A. THE IONIC PHILOSOPHY.

Here we have the earlier Ionic philosophy, which we desire to treat as
shortly as possible; and this is so much the easier, that the thought
contained in it is very abstract and barren. Other philosophers than
Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes, only come under our consideration
as names. We have no more than half a dozen passages in the whole
of the early Ionic philosophy, and that makes it an easy study. Yet
learning prides itself most upon the ancients, for we may be most
learned about that of which we know the least.


1. _Thales._

With Thales we, properly speaking, first begin the history of
Philosophy. The life of Thales occurred at the time when the Ionic
towns were under the dominion of Crœsus. Through his overthrow (Ol.
58, 1; 548 B.C.), an appearance of freedom was produced, yet the most
of these towns were conquered by the Persians, and Thales survived the
catastrophe only a few years. He was born at Miletus; his family is,
by Diogenes (I. 22, 37), stated to be the Phœnician one of Thelides,
and the date of his birth, according to the best calculation, is placed
in the first year of the 35th Olympiad (640 B.C.), but according to
Meiners it was a couple of Olympiads later (38th Olympiad, 629 B.C.).
Thales lived as a statesman partly with Crœsus and partly in Miletus.
Herodotus quotes him several times, and tells (I. 75) that, according
to the narratives of the Greeks, when Crœsus went to battle against
Cyrus and had difficulty in passing over the river Halys, Thales, who
accompanied the army, diverted the river by a trench, which he made
in the form of a crescent behind the camp, so that it could then be
forded. Diogenes (I. 25) says further of him as regards his relations
to his country, that he restrained the men of Miletus from allying
themselves with Crœsus when he went against Cyrus, and that hence,
after the conquest of Crœsus, when the other Ionic States were subdued
by the Persians, the inhabitants of Miletus alone remained undisturbed.
Diogenes records, moreover (I. 23), that he soon withdrew his attention
from the affairs of the State and devoted himself entirely to science.

Voyages to Phœnicia are recorded of him, which, however, rest on vague
tradition; but that he was in Egypt in his old age seems undoubted.[19]
There he was said to have learned geometry, but this would appear
not to have been much, judging from the anecdote, which Diogenes (I.
24, 27) retails from a certain Hieronymus. It was to the effect that
Thales taught the Egyptians to measure the height of their pyramids
by shadow—by taking the relation borne by the height of a man to his
shadow. The terms of the proportion are: as the shadow of a man is to
the height of a man, so is the shadow of a pyramid to its height. If
this were something new to the Egyptians, they must have been very far
back in the theory of geometry. Herodotus tells (I. 74), moreover,
that Thales foretold an eclipse of the sun that happened exactly on
the day of the battle between the Medians and Lydians, and that he
ascribed the rising of the Nile to the contrary Etesian winds, which
drove back the waters.[20] We have some further isolated instances
of, and anecdotes about his astronomical knowledge and works.[21] “In
gazing at and making observations on the stars, he fell into a ditch,
and the people mocked him as one who had knowledge of heavenly objects
and yet could not see what lay at his own feet.” The people laugh at
such things, and boast that philosophers cannot tell them about such
matters; but they do not understand that philosophers laugh at them,
for they do not fall into a ditch just because they lie in one for
all time, and because they cannot see what exists above them. He also
showed, according to Diogenes (I. 26), that a wise man, if he wishes,
can easily acquire riches. It is more important that he fixed that the
year, as solar year, should have 365 days. The anecdote of the golden
tripod to be given to the wisest man, is recorded by Diogenes (I.
27-33); and it carries with it considerable weight, because he combines
all the different versions of the story. The tripod was given to Thales
or to Bias; Thales gave it to some one else, and thus it went through
a circle until it again came to Thales; the latter, or else Solon,
decided that Apollo was wisest, and sent it to Didyma or to Delphi.
Thales died, according to Diogenes (I. 38), aged seventy-eight or
ninety, in the 58th Olympiad; according to Tennemann (vol. i. p. 414),
it was in Olympiad 59, 2 (543 B.C.), when Pythagoras came to Crotona.
Diogenes relates that he died at one of the games, overcome by heat and
thirst.

We have no writings by Thales, and we do not know whether he was in
the habit of writing. Diogenes Laertius (I. 23, 34, 35) speaks of two
hundred verses on astronomy, and some maxims, such as “It is not the
many words that have most meaning.”

As to his philosophy, he is universally recognized as the first natural
philosopher, but all one knows of him is little, and yet we seem to
know the most of what there is. For since we find that the further
philosophic progress of which his speculative idea was capable, and the
understanding of his propositions, which they alone could have, make
their first appearance and form particular epochs with the philosophers
succeeding him, who may be recognized thereby, this development
ascribed to Thales never took place with him at all. Thus if it is the
case that a number of his other reflections have been lost, they cannot
have had any particular speculative value; and his philosophy does not
show itself to be an imperfect system from want of information about
it, but because the first philosophy cannot be a system.

We must listen to Aristotle as regards these ancient philosophers,
for he speaks most sympathetically of them. In the passage of most
importance (Metaph. I. 3), he says: “Since it is clear that we must
acquire the science of first causes (_ἐξ ἀρχῆς αἰτίν_), seeing that
we say that a person knows a thing when he becomes acquainted with
its cause, there are, we must recollect, four causes—Being and Form
first (for the ‘why’ is finally led back to the Notion, but yet the
first ‘why’ is a cause and principle); matter and substratum, second;
the cause whence comes the beginning of movement, third; and fourth
the cause which is opposed to this, the aim in view and the good (for
that is the end of every origination). Hence we would make mention of
those who have undertaken the investigation of Being before us, and
have speculated regarding the Truth, for they openly advance certain
principles and first causes. If we take them under our consideration,
it will be of this advantage, so far as our present investigation
goes, that we shall either find other kinds of causes or be enabled
to have so much the more confidence in those just named. Most of the
earliest philosophers have placed the principles of everything in
something in the form of matter (_ἐν ὕλης εἴδει_), for, that from which
everything existent comes, and out of which it takes its origin as its
first source, and into which it finally sinks, as substance (_οὐσία_),
ever remains the same and only changes in its particular qualities
(_πάθεσι_); and this is called the element (_στοιχεῖον_) and this the
principle of all that exists” (the absolute prius). “On this account
they maintain that nothing arises or passes away, because the same
nature always remains. For instance, we say that, absolutely speaking,
Socrates neither originates if he becomes beautiful or musical, nor
does he pass away if he loses these qualities, because the subject (_τὸ
ὑποκείμενον_), Socrates, remains the same. And so it is with all else.
For there must be one nature, or more than one, from which all else
arises, because it maintains its existence” (_σωζομένης ἐκείνης_),
that means that in its change there is no reality or truth. “All do not
coincide as to the number of this principle or as to its description
(_εἶδος_); Thales, the founder of this philosophy,” (which recognizes
something material as the principle and substance of all that is),
“says that it is water. Hence he likewise asserts the earth to be
founded on water.” Water is thus the _ὑποκείμενον_, the first ground,
and, according to Seneca’s statement (Quæst. Nat. vi. 6), it seems to
him to be not so much the inside of the earth, as what encloses it
which is the universal existence; for “Thales considered that the whole
earth has water as its support (_subjecto humore_), and that it swims
thereon.”

We might first of all expect some explanation of the application of
these principles, as, for example, how it is to be proved that water is
the universal substance, and in what way particular forms are deduced
from it. But as to this we must say that of Thales in particular,
we know nothing more than his principle, which is that water is the
god over all. No more do we know anything further of Anaximander,
Anaximenes and Diogenes than their principles. Aristotle brings forward
a conjecture as to how Thales derived everything directly out of water,
“Perhaps (_ἴσως_) the conclusions of Thales have been brought about
from the reflection that it was evident that all nourishment is moist,
and warmth itself comes out of moisture and thereby life continues.
But that from which anything generates is the principle of all things.
This was one reason for holding this theory, and another reason is
contained in the fact that all germs are moist in character, and water
is the principle of what is moist.” It is necessary to remark that
the circumstances introduced by Aristotle with a “perhaps” which are
supposed to have brought about the conclusions of Thales, making water
the absolute essence of everything, are not adduced as the grounds
acknowledged by Thales. And furthermore, they can hardly be called
grounds, for what Aristotle does is rather to establish, as we would
say from actuality, that the latter corresponds to the universal
idea of water. His successors, as for instance Pseudo-Plutarch (De
plac. phil. I. 3), have taken Thales’ assertion as positive and not
hypothetical; Tiedmann (_Geist der spec. Phil._ vol. I. p. 36) remarks
with great reason that Plutarch omits the “perhaps.” For Plutarch
says, “Thales suggests (_στοχάζεται_) that everything takes its origin
from water and resolves itself into the same, because as the germs of
all that live have moisture as the principle of life, all else might
likewise (_εἰκός_) take its principle from moisture; for all plants
draw their nourishment, and thus bear fruit, from water, and if they
are without it, fade away; and even the fires of sun, and stars and
world are fed through the evaporation of water.” Aristotle is contented
with simply showing in regard to moisture that, at least, it is
everywhere to be found. Since Plutarch gives more definite grounds for
holding that water is the simple essence of things, we must see whether
things, in so far as they are simple essence, are water, (_α_) The germ
of the animal, of moist nature, is undoubtedly the animal as the simple
actual, or as the essence of its actuality, or undeveloped actuality.
(_β_) If, with plants, water may be regarded as for their nourishment,
nourishment is still only the being of a thing as formless substance
that first becomes individualized by individuality, and thus succeeds
in obtaining form. (_γ_) To make sun, moon and the whole world arise
through evaporation, like the food of plants, certainly approximates to
the idea of the ancients, who did not allow the sun and moon to have
obtained independence as we do.

“There are also some,” continues Aristotle, “who hold that all the
ancients who, at the first and long before the present generation,
made theology their study, understood Nature thus. They made Oceanus
and Tethys the producers of all origination (_τῆς γενέσεως_), and
water, which by the poets is called Styx, the oath of the gods. For
what is most ancient is most revered, and the oath is that most held in
reverence.” This old tradition has within it speculative significance.
If anything cannot be proved or is devoid of objective form, such as
we have in respect of payment in a discharge, or in witnesses who have
seen the transaction, the oath, the confirmation of myself as object,
expresses the fact that my assurance is absolute truth. Now since, by
way of confirmation, men swear by what is best, by what is absolutely
certain, and the gods swore by the subterranean water, it follows that
the essence of pure thought, the inmost being, the reality in which
consciousness finds its truth, is water; I, so to speak, express this
clear certainty of myself as object, as God.

1. The closer consideration of this principle in its bearings would
have no interest. For since the whole philosophy of Thales lies in
the fact that water is this principle, the only point of interest can
be to ask how far that principle is important and speculative. Thales
comprehends essence as devoid of form. While the sensuous certitude
of each thing in its individuality is not questioned, this objective
actuality is now to be raised into the Notion that reflects itself
into itself and is itself to be set forth as Notion; in commencement
this is seen in the world’s being manifested as water, or as a simple
universal. Fluid is, in its Notion, life, and hence it is water itself,
spiritually expressed; in the so-called grounds or reasons, on the
contrary, water has the form of existent universal. We certainly
grant this universal activity of water, and for that reason call it
an element, a physical universal power; but while we find it thus to
be the universal of activity, we also find it to be this actual, not
everywhere, but in proximity to other elements—earth, air and fire.
Water thus has not got a sensuous universality, but a speculative one
merely; to be speculative universality, however, would necessitate its
being Notion and having what is sensuous removed. Here we have the
strife between sensuous universality and universality of the Notion.
The real essence of nature has to be defined, that is, nature has to
be expressed as the simple essence of thought. Now simple essence, the
Notion of the universal, is that which is devoid of form, but this
water as it is, comes into the determination of form, and is thus, in
relation to others, a particular existence just like everything that
is natural. Yet as regards the other elements, water is determined as
formless and simple, while the earth is that which has points, air is
the element of all change, and fire evidently changes into itself.
Now if the need of unity impels us to recognize for separate things a
universal, water, although it has the drawback of being a particular
thing, can easily be utilized as the One, both on account of its
neutrality, and because it is more material than air.

The proposition of Thales, that water is the Absolute, or as the
ancients say, the principle, is the beginning of Philosophy, because
with it the consciousness is arrived at that essence, truth, that which
is alone in and for itself, are one. A departure from what is in our
sensuous perception here takes place; man recedes from this immediate
existence. We must be able to forget that we are accustomed to a rich
concrete world of thought; with us the very child learns, “There is
one God in Heaven, invisible.” Such determinations are not yet present
here; the world of Thought must first be formed and there is as yet no
pure unity. Man has nature before him as water, air, stars, the arch
of the heavens; and the horizon of his ideas is limited to this. The
imagination has, indeed, its gods, but its content still is natural;
the Greeks had considered sun, mountains, earth, sea, rivers, &c.,
as independent powers, revered them as gods, and elevated them by
the imagination to activity, movement, consciousness and will. What
there is besides, like the conceptions of Homer, for instance, is
something in which thought could not find satisfaction; it produces
mere images of the imagination, endlessly endowed with animation and
form, but destitute of simple unity. It must undoubtedly be said that
in this unconsciousness of an intellectual world, one must acknowledge
that there is a great robustness of mind evinced in not granting this
plenitude of existence to the natural world, but in reducing it to
a simple substance, which, as the ever enduring principle, neither
originates nor disappears, while the gods have a Theogony and are
manifold and changing. This wild, endlessly varied imagination of
Homer is set at rest by the proposition that existence is water; this
conflict of an endless quantity of principles, all these ideas that
a particular object is an independent truth, a self-sufficient power
over others existing in its own right, are taken away, and it is shown
likewise that there is only one universal, the universal self-existent,
the simple unimaginative perception, the thought that is one and one
alone.

This universal stands in direct relationship to the particular
and to the existence of the world as manifested. The first thing
implied in what has been said, is that the particular existence
has no independence, is not true in and for itself, but is only an
accidental modification. But the affirmative point of view is that all
other things proceed from the one, that the one remains thereby the
substance from which all other things proceed, and it is only through
a determination which is accidental and external that the particular
existence has its being. It is similarly the case that all particular
existence is transient, that is, it loses the form of particular and
again becomes the universal, water. The simple proposition of Thales
therefore, is Philosophy, because in it water, though sensuous, is not
looked at in its particularity as opposed to other natural things, but
as Thought in which everything is resolved and comprehended. Thus we
approach the divorce of the absolute from the finite; but it is not
to be thought that the unity stands above, and that down here we have
the finite world. This idea is often found in the common conception
of God—where permanence is attributed to the world and where men
often represent two kinds of actuality to themselves, a sensuous and a
supersensuous world of equal standing. The philosophic point of view is
that the one is alone the truly actual, and here we must take actual in
its higher significance, because we call everything actual in common
life. The second circumstance to be remembered is that with the ancient
philosophers, the principle has a definite and, at first, a physical
form. To us this does not appear to be philosophic but only physical;
in this case, however, matter has philosophic significance. Thales’
theory is thus a natural philosophy, because this universal essence
is determined as real; consequently the Absolute is determined as the
unity of thought and Being.

2. Now if we have this undifferentiated principle predominating, the
question arises as to the determination of this first principle. The
transition from universal to particular at once becomes essential, and
it begins with the determination of activity; the necessity for such
arises here. That which is to be a veritable principle must not have
a one-sided, particular form, but in it the difference must itself
be absolute, while other principles are only special kinds of forms.
The fact that the Absolute is what determines itself is already more
concrete; we have the activity and the higher self-consciousness of the
spiritual principle, by which the form has worked itself into being
absolute form, the totality of form. Since it is most profound, this
comes latest; what has first to be done is merely to look at things as
determined.

Form is lacking to water as conceived by Thales. How is this accorded
to it? The method is stated (and stated by Aristotle, but not directly
of Thales), in which particular forms have arisen out of water; it
is said to be through a process of condensation and rarefaction
(_πυκνότητι καὶ μανότητι_), or, as it may be better put, through
greater or less intensity. Tennemann (vol. I. p. 59) in reference to
this, cites from Aristotle, _De gen. et corrupt._ I. 1, where there
is no mention of condensation and rarefaction as regards Thales, and
further, _De cælo_, III. 5, where it is only said that those who uphold
water or air, or something finer than water or coarser than air, define
difference as density and rarity, but nothing is said of its being
Thales who gave expression to this distinction. Tiedmann (vol. I. p.
38) quotes yet other authorities; it was, however, later on, that this
distinction was first ascribed to Thales.[22] Thus much is made out,
that for the first time in this natural philosophy as in the modern,
that which is essential in form is really the quantitative difference
in its existence. This merely quantitative difference, however, which,
as the increasing and decreasing density of water, constitutes its
only form-determination, is an external expression of the absolute
difference; it is an unessential distinction set up through another and
is not the inner difference of the Notion in itself; it is therefore
not worth while to spend more time over it.

Difference as regards the Notion has no physical significance,
but differences or the simple duality of form in the sides of its
opposition, must be comprehended as universally in the Notion. On this
account a sensuous interpretation must not be given to the material,
that is to particular determinations, as when it is definitely said
that rare water is air, rare air, fiery ether, thick water, mud, which
then becomes earth; according to this, air would be the rarefaction of
the first water, ether the rarefaction of air, and earth and mud the
sediment of water. As sensuous difference or change, the division here
appears as something manifested for consciousness; the moderns have
experimented in making thicker and thinner what to the senses is the
same.

Change has consequently a double sense; one with reference to existence
and another with reference to the Notion. When change is considered
by the ancients, it is usually supposed to have to do with a change
in what exists, and thus, for instance, inquiry would be made as to
whether water can be changed through chemical action, such as heat,
distillation, &c., into earth; finite chemistry is confined to this.
But what is meant in all ancient philosophies is change as regards
the Notion. That is to say, water does not become converted into air
or space and time in retorts, &c. But in every philosophic idea, this
transition of one quality into another takes place, _i.e._ this inward
connection is shown in the Notion, according to which no one thing can
subsist independently and without the other, for the life of nature
has its subsistence in the fact that one thing is necessarily related
to the other. We certainly are accustomed to believe that if water
were taken away, it would indeed fare badly with plants and animals,
but that stones would still remain; or that of colours, blue could
be abstracted without harming in the least yellow or red. As regards
merely empirical existence, it may easily be shown that each quality
exists on its own account, but in the Notion they only are, through one
another, and by virtue of an inward necessity. We certainly see this
also in living matter, where things happen in another way, for here
the Notion comes into existence; thus if, for example, we abstract the
heart, the lungs and all else collapse. And in the same way all nature
exists only in the unity of all its parts, just as the brain can exist
only in unity with the other organs.

3. If the form is, however, only expressed in both its sides as
condensation and rarefaction, it is not in and for itself, for to be
this it must be grasped as the _absolute Notion_, and as an endlessly
forming unity. What is said on this point by Aristotle (De Anima, I.
2, also 5) is this: “Thales seems, according to what is said of him,
to consider the soul as something having movement, for he says of
the loadstone that it has a soul, since it moves the iron.” Diogenes
Laertius (I. 24) adds amber to this, from which we see that even Thales
knew about electricity, although another explanation of it is that
_ἤλεκτρον_ was besides a metal. Aldobrandini says of this passage in
Diogenes, that it is a stone which is so hostile to poison that when
touched by such it immediately hisses. The above remark by Aristotle
is perverted by Diogenes to such an extent that he says: “Thales has
likewise ascribed a soul to what is lifeless.” However, this is not the
question, for the point is how he thought of absolute form, and whether
he expressed the Idea generally as soul so that absolute essence should
be the unity of simple essence and form.

Diogenes certainly says further of Thales (I. 27), “The world is
animated and full of demons,” and Plutarch (De plac. phil. I. 7)
says, “He called God the Intelligence (_νοῦς_) of the world.” But all
the ancients, and particularly Aristotle, ascribe this expression
unanimously to Anaxagoras as the one who first said that the _νοῦς_
is the principle of things. Thus it does not conduce to the further
determination of form according to Thales, to find in Cicero (De Nat.
Deor. I. 10) this passage: “Thales says that water is the beginning
of everything, but God is the Mind which forms all that is, out of
water.” Thales may certainly have spoken of God, but Cicero has
added the statement that he comprehended him as the _νοῦς_ which
formed everything out of water. Tiedmann (vol. I. p. 42) declares the
passage to be possibly corrupt, since Cicero later on (c. 11) says
of Anaxagoras that “he first maintained the order of things to have
been brought about through the infinite power of Mind.” However, the
Epicurean, in whose mouth these words are put, speaks “with confidence
only fearing that he should appear to have any doubts” (c. 8) both
previously and subsequently of other philosophers rather foolishly, so
that this description is given merely as a jest. Aristotle understands
historic accuracy better, and therefore we must follow him. But to
those who make it their business to find everywhere the conception of
the creation of the world by God, that passage in Cicero is a great
source of delight, and it is a much disputed point whether Thales is
to be counted amongst those who accepted the existence of a God. The
Theism of Thales is maintained by Plouquet, whilst others would have
him to be an atheist or polytheist, because he says that everything is
full of demons. However, this question as to whether Thales believed
in God does not concern us here, for acceptation, faith, popular
religion are not in question; we only have to do with the philosophic
determination of absolute existence. And if Thales did speak of God as
constituting everything out of this same water, that would not give us
any further information about this existence; we should have spoken
unphilosophically of Thales because we should have used an empty word
without inquiring about its speculative significance. Similarly the
word world-soul is useless, because its being is not thereby expressed.

Thus all these further, as also later, assertions do not justify us in
maintaining that Thales comprehended form in the absolute in a definite
manner; on the contrary, the rest of the history of philosophical
development refutes this view. We see that form certainly seems to
be shown forth in existence, but as yet this unity is no further
developed. The idea that the magnet has a soul is indeed always better
than saying that it has the power of attraction; for power is a quality
which is considered as a predicate separable from matter, while soul
is movement in unison with matter in its essence. An idea such as
this of Thales stands isolated, however, and has no further relation
to his absolute thought. Thus, in fact, the philosophy of Thales is
comprised in the following simple elements: (_a_) It has constituted
an abstraction in order to comprehend nature in a simple sensuous
essence. (_b_) It has brought forth the Notion of ground or principle;
that is, it has defined water to be the infinite Notion, the simple
essence of thought, without determining it further as the difference of
quantity. That is the limited significance of this principle of Thales.


2. _Anaximander._

Anaximander was also of Miletus, and he was a friend of Thales. “The
latter,” says Cicero (Acad. Quaest. IV. 37), “could not convince him
that everything consisted of water.” Anaximander’s father was called
Praxiades; the date of his birth is not quite certain; according to
Tennemann (vol. I. p. 413), it is put in Olympiad 42, 3 (610 B.C.),
while Diogenes Laertius (II. I, 2) says, taking his information
from Apollodorus, an Athenian, that in Ol. 58, 2 (547 B.C.), he was
sixty-four years old, and that he died soon after, that is to say about
the date of Thales’ death. And taking for granted that he died in his
ninetieth year, Thales must have been nearly twenty-eight years older
than Anaximander. It is related of Anaximander that he lived in Samos
with the tyrant Polycrates, where were Pythagoras and Anacreon also.
Themistius, according to Brucker (Pt. I. p. 478), says of him that
he first put his philosophic thoughts into writing, but this is also
recorded of others, as for example, of Pherecydes, who was older than
he. Anaximander is said to have written about nature, the fixed stars,
the sphere, besides other matters; he further produced something like a
map, showing the boundary (_πρίμετρον_) of land and sea; he also made
other mathematical inventions, such as a sun-dial that he put up in
Lacedæmon, and instruments by which the course of the sun was shown,
and the equinox determined; a chart of the heavens was likewise made by
him.

His philosophical reflections are not comprehensive, and do not extend
as far as to determination. Diogenes says in the passage quoted
before: “He adduced the Infinite” (_τὸ ἄπειρον_, the undetermined),
“as principle and element; he neither determined it as air or water or
any such thing.” There are, however, few attributes of this Infinite
given. (_α_.) “It is the principle of all becoming and passing away;
at long intervals infinite worlds or gods rise out of it, and again
they pass away into the same.” This has quite an oriental tone. “He
gives as a reason that the principle is to be determined as the
Infinite, the fact that it does not need material for continuous
origination. It contains everything in itself and rules over all: it
is divine, immortal, and never passes away.”[23] (_β_.) Out of the
one, Anaximander separates the opposites which are contained in it,
as do Empedocles and Anaxagoras; thus everything in this medley is
certainly there, but undetermined.[24] That is, everything is really
contained therein in possibility (_δυνάμει_), “so that,” says Aristotle
(Metaphys. XI. 2), “it is not only that everything arises accidentally
out of what is not, but everything also arises from what is, although
it is from incipient being which is not yet in actuality.” Diogenes
Laertius adds (II. 1): “The parts of the Infinite change, but it itself
is unchangeable.” (_γ_.) Lastly, it is said that the infinitude is in
size and not in number, and Anaximander differs thus from Anaxagoras,
Empedocles and the other atomists, who maintain the absolute discretion
of the infinite, while Anaximander upholds its absolute continuity.[25]
Aristotle (Metaphys. I. 8) speaks also of a principle which is neither
water nor air, but is “thicker than air and thinner than water.” Many
have connected this idea with Anaximander, and it is possible that it
belongs to him.

The advance made by the determination of the principle as infinite in
comprehensiveness rests in the fact that absolute essence no longer is
a simple universal, but one which negates the finite. At the same time,
viewed from the material side, Anaximander removes the individuality
of the element of water; his objective principle does not appear to
be material, and it may be understood as Thought. But it is clear
that he did not mean anything else than matter generally, universal
matter.[26] Plutarch reproaches Anaximander “for not saying what (_τι_)
his infinite is, whether air, water or earth.” But a definite quality
such as one of these is transient; matter determined as infinitude
means the motion of positing definite forms, and again abolishing the
separation. True and infinite Being is to be shown in this and not in
negative absence of limit. This universality and negation of the finite
is, however, our operation only: in describing matter as infinite,
Anaximander does not seem to have said that this is its infinitude.

He has said further (and in this, according to Theophrastus, he agrees
with Anaxagoras), “In the infinite the like separates itself from the
unlike and allies itself to the like; thus what in the whole was gold
becomes gold, what was earth, earth, &c., so that properly nothing
originates, seeing that it was already there.”[27] These, however, are
poor determinations, which only show the necessity of the transition
from the undetermined to the determined; for this still takes place
here in an unsatisfying way. As to the further question of how the
infinite determines the opposite in its separation, it seems that the
theory of the quantitative distinction of condensation and rarefaction
was held by Anaximander as well as by Thales. Those who come later
designate the process of separation from the Infinite as development.
Anaximander supposes man to develop from a fish, which abandoned water
for the land.[28] Development comes also into prominence in recent
times, but as a mere succession in time—a formula in the use of which
men often imagine that they are saying something brilliant; but there
is no real necessity, no thought, and above all, no Notion contained in
it.

But in later records the idea of warmth, as being the disintegration of
form, and that of cold, is ascribed to Anaximander by Stobæus (Eclog.
Phys. c. 24, p. 500); this Aristotle (Metaphys. I. 5) first ascribed
to Parmenides. Eusebius (De præp. Evang. I. 8), out of a lost work of
Plutarch, gives us something from Anaximander’s Cosmogony which is
dark, and which, indeed, Eusebius himself did not rightly understand.
Its sense is approximately this: “Out of the Infinite, infinite
heavenly spheres and infinite worlds have been set apart; but they
carry within them their own destruction, because they only are through
constant dividing off.” That is, since the Infinite is the principle,
separation is the positing of a difference, i.e. of a determination or
something finite. “The earth has the form of a cylinder, the height
of which is the third part of the breadth. Both of the eternally
productive principles of warmth and cold separate themselves in the
creation of this earth, and a fiery sphere is formed round the air
encircling the earth, like the bark around a tree. As this broke up,
and the pieces were compressed into circles, sun, moon, and stars
were formed.” Hence Anaximander, according to Stobæus (Ecl. Phys. 25,
p. 510), likewise called the stars “wheel-shaped with fire-filled
wrappings of air.” This Cosmogony is as good as the geological
hypothesis of the earth-crust which burst open, or as Buffon’s
explosion of the sun, which beginning, on the other hand, with the sun,
makes the planets to be stones projected from it. While the ancients
confined the stars to our atmosphere, and made the sun first proceed
from the earth, we make the sun to be the substance and birthplace of
the earth, and separate the stars entirely from any further connection
with us, because for us, like the gods worshipped by the Epicureans,
they are at rest. In the process of origination, the sun, indeed,
descends as the universal, but in nature it is that which comes later;
thus in truth the earth is the totality, and the sun but an abstract
moment.


3. _Anaximenes._

Anaximenes still remains as having made his appearance between the
55th and 58th Olympiads (560-548 B.C.). He was likewise of Miletus, a
contemporary and friend of Anaximander; he has little to distinguish
him, and very little is known about him. Diogenes Laertius says neither
with consideration nor consistency (II. 3): “He was born, according
to Apollodorus in the 63rd Olympiad, and died in the year Sardis was
conquered” (by Cyrus, Olympiad 58th).

In place of the undetermined matter of Anaximander, he brings forward
a definite natural element; hence the absolute is in a real form,
but instead of the water of Thales, that form is air. He found that
for matter a sensuous being was indeed essential, and air has the
additional advantage of being more devoid of form; it is less corporeal
than water, for we do not see it, but feel it first in movement.
Plutarch (De plac. phil. I. 3) says: “Out of it everything comes forth,
and into it everything is again resolved.” According to Cicero (De Nat.
Deor. I. 10), “he defined it as immeasurable, infinite, and in constant
motion.” Diogenes Laertius expresses this in the passage already
quoted: “The principle is air and the infinite” (_οὖτος ἀρχὴν ἀέρα εἶπε
καὶ τὸ ἄπειρον_) as if there were two principles; however, _ἀρχὴν καὶ
ἄπειρον_ may be taken together as subject, and _ἀέρα_ regarded as the
predicate in the statement. For Simplicius, in dealing with the Physics
of Aristotle, expressly says (p. 6, a) “that the first principle was to
him one and infinite in nature as it was to Anaximander, but it was not
indefinite as with the latter, but determined, that is, it was air,”
which, however, he seems to have understood as endowed with soul.

Plutarch characterizes Anaximenes’ mode of representation which makes
everything proceed from air—later on it was called ether—and resolve
itself therein, better thus: “As our soul, which is air, holds us
together (_συγρατεῖ_), one spirit (_πνεῦμα_) and air together likewise
hold (_περιέχει_) the whole world together; spirit and air are
synonymous.” Anaximenes shows very clearly the nature of his essence
in the soul, and he thus points out what may be called the transition
of natural philosophy into the philosophy of consciousness, or the
surrender of the objective form of principle. The nature of this
principle has hitherto been determined in a manner which is foreign
and negative to consciousness; both its reality, water or air, and the
infinite are a “beyond” to consciousness. But soul is the universal
medium; it is a collection of conceptions which pass away and come
forth, while the unity and continuity never cease. It is active as
well as passive, from its unity severing asunder the conceptions and
sublating them, and it is present to itself in its infinitude, so that
negative signification and positive come into unison. Speaking more
precisely, this idea of the nature of the origin of things is that of
Anaxagoras, the pupil of Anaximenes.

Pherecydes has also to be mentioned as the teacher of Pythagoras; he
is of Syros, one of the Cyclades islands. He is said to have drawn
water from a spring, and to have learned therefrom that an earthquake
would take place in three days; he is also said to have predicted of
a ship in full sail that it would go down, and it sank in a moment.
Theopompus in Diogenes Laertius (I. 116), relates of this Pherecydes
that “he first wrote to the Greeks about Nature and the gods” (which
was before said of Anaximander). His writings are said to have been in
prose, and from what is related of them it is clear that it must have
been a theogony of which he wrote. The first words, still preserved
to us, are: “Jupiter and Time and what is terrestrial (_χθών_) were
from eternity (_εἰς ἀεί_); the name of earthly (_χθονίῃ_) was given
to the terrestrial sphere when Zeus granted to it gifts.”[29] How it
goes on is not known, but this cannot be deemed a great loss. Hermias
tells us only this besides:[30] “He maintained Zeus or Fire (_αἰθέρα_),
Earth and Chronos or Time as principles—fire as active, earth as
passive, and time as that in which everything originates.” Diogenes of
Apollonia, Hippasus, and Archelaus are also called Ionic philosophers,
but we know nothing more of them than their names, and that they gave
their adherence to one principle or the other.

We shall leave these now and go on to Pythagoras, who was a
contemporary of Anaximander; but the continuity of the development of
the principle of physical philosophy necessitated our taking Anaximenes
with him. We see that, as Aristotle said, they placed the first
principle in a form of matter—in air and water first, and then, if
we may so define Anaximander’s matter, in an essence finer than water
and coarser than air. Heraclitus, of whom we have soon to speak, first
called it fire. “But no one,” as Aristotle (Metaph. I. 8) remarks,
“called earth the principle, because it appears to be the most complex
element” (_διὰ τὴν μεγαλομέρειαν_); for it seems to be an aggregate of
many units. Water, on the contrary, is the one, and it is transparent;
it manifests in sensuous guise the form of unity with itself, and this
is also so with air, fire, matter, &c. The principle has to be one,
and hence must have inherent unity with itself; if it shows a manifold
nature as does the earth, it is not one with itself, but manifold. This
is what we have to say about the early Ionic Philosophy. The importance
of these poor abstract thoughts lies (_a_) in the comprehension of a
universal substance in everything, and (_b_) in the fact that it is
formless, and not encumbered by sensuous ideas.

No one recognized better the deficiencies in this philosophy than
did Aristotle in the work already quoted. Two points appear in his
criticism of these three modes of determining the absolute: “Those who
maintain the original principle to be matter fall short in many ways.
In the first place, they merely give the corporeal element and not the
incorporeal, for there also is such.” In treating of nature in order
to show its essence, it is necessary to deal with it in its entirety,
and everything found in it must be considered. That is certainly but an
empirical instance. Aristotle maintains the incorporeal to be a form of
things opposed to the material, and indicates that the absolute must
not be determined in a one-sided manner; because the principle of these
philosophers is material only, they do not manifest the incorporeal
side, nor is the object shown to be Notion. Matter is indeed itself
immaterial as this reflection into consciousness; but such philosophers
do not know that what they express is an existence of consciousness.
Thus the first great defect here rests in the fact that the universal
is expressed in a particular form.

Secondly, Aristotle says (Metaph. I. 3): “From this it may be seen
that first cause has only been by all these expressed in the form of
matter. But because they proceeded thus, the thing itself opened out
their way for them, and forced them into further investigation. For
whether origin and decay are derived from one or more, the question
alike arises, ‘How does it happen and what is the cause of it?’ For
the fundamental substance (_τὸ ὑποκείμενον_) does not make itself to
change, just as neither wood nor metal are themselves the cause of
change; wood neither forms a bed nor does brass a statue, but something
else is the cause of the change. To investigate this, however, is
to investigate the other principle, which, as we would say, is the
Principle of Motion.” This criticism holds good even now, where the
Absolute is represented as the one fixed substance. Aristotle says
that change is not conceivable out of matter as such, or out of water
not itself having motion; he reproaches the older philosophers for
the fact that they have not investigated the principle of motion for
which men care most. Further, object is altogether absent; there is no
determination of activity. Hence Aristotle says in the former passage:
“In that they undertake to give the cause of origin and decay, they in
fact remove the cause of movement. Because they make the principle to
be a simple body (earth being excepted), they do not comprehend the
mutual origination and decay whereby the one arises out of the other:
I am here referring to water, air, fire, and earth. This origination
is to be shown as separation or as union, and hence the contradiction
comes about that one in time comes earlier than the other. That is,
because this kind of origination is the method which they have adopted,
the way taken is from the simple universal, through the particular, to
the individual as what comes latest. Water, air, and fire are, however,
universal. Fire seems to be most suitable for this element, seeing that
it is the most subtle. Thus those who made it to be the principle, most
adequately gave expression to this method (_λόγῳ_) of origination; and
others thought very similarly. For else why should no one have made the
earth an element, in conformity with the popular idea? Hesiod says that
it was the original body—so ancient and so common was this idea. But
what in Becoming comes later, is the first in nature.” However, these
philosophers did not understand this so, because they were ruled by the
process of Becoming only, without again sublating it, or knowing that
first formal universal as such, and manifesting the third, the totality
or unity of matter and form, as essence. Here, we see, the Absolute is
not yet the self-determining, the Notion turned back into itself, but
only a dead abstraction; the moderns were the first, says Aristotle,
(Metaph. I. 6; III. 3) to understand the fundamental principle more in
the form of genus.

We are able to follow the three moments in the Ionic philosophy:
(_α_) The original essence is water; (_β_) Anaximander’s infinite is
descriptive of movement, simple going out of and coming back into the
simple, universal aspects of form—condensation and rarefaction; (_γ_)
the air is compared to the soul. It is now requisite that what is
viewed as reality should be brought into the Notion; in so doing we see
that the moments of division, condensation, and rarefaction are not in
any way antagonistic to the Notion. This transition to Pythagoras, or
the manifestation of the real side as the ideal, is Thought breaking
free from what is sensuous, and, therefore, it is a separation between
the intelligible and the real.


B. PYTHAGORAS AND THE PYTHAGOREANS.

The later Neo-Pythagoreans have written many extensive biographies
of Pythagoras, and are especially diffuse as regards the Pythagorean
brotherhood. But it must be taken into consideration that these often
distorted statements must not be regarded as historical. The life of
Pythagoras thus first comes to us in history through the medium of the
ideas belonging to the first centuries after Christ, and more or less
in the style in which the life of Christ is written, on the ground of
ordinary actuality, and not in a poetic atmosphere; it appears to be
the intermingling of many marvellous and extravagant tales, and to
take its origin in part from eastern ideas and in part from western.
In acknowledging the remarkable nature of his life and genius and of
the life which he inculcated on his followers, it was added that his
dealings were not with right things, and that he was a magician and
one who had intercourse with higher beings. All the ideas of magic,
that medley of unnatural and natural, the mysteries which pervade
a clouded, miserable imagination, and the wild ideas of distorted
brains, have attached themselves to him.

However corrupt the history of his life, his philosophy is as much so.
Everything engendered by Christian melancholy and love of allegory
has been identified with it. The treatment of Plato in Christian
times has quite a different character. Numbers have been much used
as the expression of ideas, and this on the one hand has a semblance
of profundity. For the fact that another significance than that
immediately presented is implied in them, is evident at once; but how
much there is within them is neither known by him who speaks nor by
him, who seeks to understand; it is like the witches’ rhyme (one time
one) in Goethe’s “Faust.” The less clear the thoughts, the deeper they
appear; what is most essential, but most difficult, the expression
of oneself in definite conceptions, is omitted. Thus Pythagoras’
philosophy, since much has been added to it by those who wrote of it,
may similarly appear as the mysterious product of minds as shallow
and empty as they are dark. Fortunately, however, we have a special
knowledge of the theoretic, speculative side of it, and that, indeed,
from Aristotle and Sextus Empiricus, who have taken considerable
trouble with it. Although later Pythagoreans disparage Aristotle on
account of his exposition, he has a place above any such disparagement,
and therefore to them no attention must be given.

In later times a quantity of writings were disseminated and foisted
upon Pythagoras. Diogenes Laertius (VIII. 6, 7) mentions many which
were by him, and others which were set down to him in order to obtain
authority for them. But in the first place we have no writings by
Pythagoras, and secondly it is doubtful whether any ever did exist.
We have quotations from these in unsatisfactory fragments, not from
Pythagoras, but from Pythagoreans. It cannot be decisively determined
which developments and interpretations belonged to the ancients and
which to the moderns; yet with Pythagoras and the ancient Pythagoreans
the determinations were not worked out in so concrete a way as later.

As to the life of Pythagoras, we hear from Diogenes Laertius (VIII.
1-3, 45) that he flourished about the 60th Olympiad (540 B.C.). His
birth is usually placed in the 49th or 50th Olympiad (584 B.C.); by
Larcher in Tennemann (Vol. I., pp. 413, 414), much earlier—in the
43rd Olympiad (43, 1, i.e. 608 B.C.). He was thus contemporaneous with
Thales and Anaximander. If Thales’ birth were in the 38th Olympiad
and that of Pythagoras in the 43rd, Pythagoras was only twenty-one
years younger than he; he either only differed by a couple of years
from Anaximander (Ol. 42, 3) in age, or the latter was twenty-six
years older. Anaximenes was from twenty to twenty-five years younger
than Pythagoras. His birthplace was the Island of Samos, and hence he
belonged to the Greeks of Asia Minor, which place we have hitherto
found to be the seat of philosophy. Pythagoras is said by Herodotus
(IV., 93 to 96) to have been the son of Mnesarchus, with whom Zalmoxis
served as slave in Samos; Zalmoxis obtained freedom and riches, became
ruler of the Getæ, and asserted that he and his people would not die.
He built a subterranean habitation and there withdrew himself from
his subjects; after four years he re-appeared;[31] hence the Getans
believed in immortality. Herodotus thinks, however, that Zalmoxis was
undoubtedly much older than Pythagoras.

His youth was spent at the court of Polycrates, under whose rule Samos
was brought, not only to wealth, but also to the possession of culture
and art. In this prosperous period, according to Herodotus (III., 39),
it possessed a fleet of a hundred ships. His father was an artist or
engraver, but reports vary as to this, as also as to his country, some
saying that his family was of Tyrrhenian origin and did not go to Samos
till after Pythagoras’ birth. That may be as it will, for his youth
was spent in Samos and he must hence have been naturalized there, and
to it he belongs. He soon journeyed to the main land of Asia Minor
and is said there to have become acquainted with Thales. From thence
he travelled to Phœnicia and Egypt, as Iamblichus (III., 13, 14) says
in his biography of Pythagoras. With both countries Asia Minor had
many links, commercial and political, and it is related that he was
recommended by Polycrates to King Amasis, who, according to Herodotus
(II. 154), attracted many Greeks to the country, and had Greek troops
and colonies. The narratives of further journeys into the interior
of Asia, to the Persian magicians and Indians, seem to be altogether
fabulous, although travelling, then as now, was considered to be a
means of culture. As Pythagoras travelled with a scientific purpose, it
is said that he had himself initiated into nearly all the mysteries of
Greeks and of Barbarians, and thus he obtained admission into the order
or caste of the Egyptian priesthood.

These mysteries that we meet with amongst the Greeks, and which are
held to be the sources of much wisdom, appear in their religion to have
stood in the relationship of doctrine to worship. This last existed in
offerings and solemn festivals only, but to ordinary conceptions, to
a consciousness of these conceptions, there is no transition visible
unless they were preserved in poems as traditions. The doctrines
themselves, or the act of bringing the actual home to the conception,
seems to have been confined to the mysteries; we find it to be the
case, however, that it is not only the ideas as in our teaching, but
also the body that is laid claim to—that there was brought home to man
by sending him to wander amongst his fellow-men, both the abandonment
of his sensuous consciousness and the purification and sanctification
of the body. Of philosophic matter, however, there is as little openly
declared as possible, and just as we know the system of freemasonry,
there is no secret in those mysteries.

His alliance with the Egyptian priesthood had a most important
influence upon Pythagoras, not through the derivation of profound
speculative wisdom therefrom, but by the idea obtained through it of
the realization of the moral consciousness of man; the individual, he
learned, must attend to himself, if inwardly and to the outer world
he is to be meritorious and to bring himself, morally formed and
fashioned, into actuality. This is a conception which he subsequently
carried out, and it is as interesting a matter as his speculative
philosophy. Just as the priests constituted a particular rank and
were educated for it, they also had a special rule, which was binding
throughout the whole moral life. From Egypt Pythagoras thus without
doubt brought the idea of his Order, which was a regular community
brought together for purposes of scientific and moral culture, which
endured during the whole of life. Egypt at that time was regarded as
a highly cultured country, and it was so when compared with Greece;
this is shown even in the differences of caste which assumes a division
amongst the great branches of life and work, such as the industrial,
scientific and religious. But beyond this, we need not seek great
scientific knowledge amongst the Egyptians, nor think that Pythagoras
got his science there. Aristotle (Metaph. I.) only says that “in Egypt
mathematical sciences first commenced, for there the nation of priests
had leisure.”[32]

Pythagoras stayed a long time in Egypt, and returned from thence
to Samos; but he found the internal affairs of his own country in
confusion, and left it soon after. According to Herodotus’ account
(III. 45-47), Polycrates had—not as tyrant—banished many citizens
from Samos, who sought and found support amongst the Lacedæmonians, and
a civil war had broken out. The Spartans had, at an earlier period,
given assistance to the others, for, as Thucydides says (I. 18), to
them thanks were generally ascribed for having abolished the rule of
the few, and caused a reversion to the system of giving public power to
the people; later on they did the opposite, abolishing democracy and
introducing aristocracy. Pythagoras’ family was necessarily involved in
these unpleasant relations, and a condition of internal strife was not
congenial to Pythagoras, seeing that he no longer took an interest in
political life, and that he saw in it an unsuitable soil for carrying
out his plans. He traversed Greece, and betook himself from thence to
Italy, in the lower parts of which Greek colonies from various states
and for various motives had settled, and there flourished as important
trading towns, rich in people and possessions.

In Crotona he settled down, and lived in independence, neither as
a statesman, warrior, nor political law-giver to the people, so
far as external life was concerned, but as a public teacher, with
the provision that his teaching should not be taken up with mere
conviction, but should also regulate the whole moral life of the
individual. Diogenes Laertius says that he first gave himself the name
_φιλόσοφος_, instead of _σοφός_; and men called this modesty, as if he
thereby expressed, not the possession of wisdom, but only the struggle
towards it, as towards an end which cannot be attained.[33] But _σοφός_
at the same time means a wise man, who is also practical, and that
not in his own interest only, for that requires no wisdom, seeing
that every sincere and moral man does what is best from his own point
of view. Thus _φιλόσοφος_ signifies more particularly the opposite
to participation in practical matters, that is in public affairs.
Philosophy is thus not the love of wisdom, as of something which one
sets oneself to acquire; it is no unfulfilled desire. _Φιλόσοφος_
means a man whose relation to wisdom is that of making it his object;
this relationship is contemplation, and not mere Being; but it must
be consciously that men apply themselves to this. The man who likes
wine (_φίλοινος_) is certainly to be distinguished from the man who is
full of wine, or a drunkard. Then does _φίλοινος_ signify only a futile
aspiration for wine?

What Pythagoras contrived and effected in Italy is told us by later
eulogists, rather than by historians. In the history of Pythagoras by
Malchus (this was the Syrian name of Porphyry) many strange things
are related, and with the Neo-Platonists the contrast between their
deep insight and their belief in the miraculous is surprising. For
instance, seeing that the later biographers of Pythagoras had already
related a quantity of marvels, they now proceeded to add yet more to
these with reference to his appearance in Italy. It appears that they
were exerting themselves to place him, as they afterwards did with
Apollonius of Tyana, in opposition to Christ. For the wonders which
they tell of him seem partly to be an amplification of those in the
New Testament, and in part they are altogether absurd. For instance,
they make Pythagoras begin his career in Italy with a miracle. When he
landed in the Bay of Tarentum, at Crotona, he encountered fishermen on
the way to the town who had caught nothing. He called upon them to draw
their nets once more, and foretold the number of fishes that would be
found in them. The fishermen, marvelling at this prophecy, promised
him that if it came true they would do whatever he desired. It came to
pass as he said, and Pythagoras then desired them to throw the fishes
alive back into the sea, for the Pythagoreans ate no flesh. And it is
further related as a miracle which then took place, that none of the
fishes whilst they were out of the water died during the counting. This
is the kind of miracle that is recorded, and the stories with which
his biographers fill his life are of the same silly nature. They then
make him effect such a general impression upon the mind of Italy, that
all the towns reformed upon their luxurious and depraved customs, and
the tyrants partly gave up their powers voluntarily, and partly they
were driven out. They thereby, however, commit such historical errors
as to make Charondas and Zaleucus, who lived long before Pythagoras,
his disciples; and similarly to ascribe the expulsion and death of the
tyrant Phalaris to him, and to his action.[34]

Apart from these fables, there remains as an historic fact, the great
work which he accomplished, and this he did chiefly by establishing
a school, and by the great influence of his order upon the principal
part of the Greco-Italian states, or rather by means of the rule
which was exercised in these states through this order, which lasted
for a very long period of time. It is related of him that he was a
very handsome man, and of a majestic appearance, which captivated as
much as it commanded respect. With this natural dignity, nobility of
manners, and the calm propriety of his demeanour, he united external
peculiarities, through which he seemed a remarkable and mysterious
being. He wore a white linen garment, and refrained from partaking of
certain foods.[35] Particular personality, as also the externalities of
dress and the like, are no longer of importance; men let themselves be
guided by general custom and fashion, since it is a matter outside of
and indifferent to them not to have their own will here; for we hand
over the contingent to the contingent, and only follow the external
rationality that consists in identity and universality. To this outward
personality there was added great eloquence and profound perception;
not only did he undertake to impart this to his individual friends, but
he proceeded to bring a general influence to bear on public culture,
both in regard to understanding and to the whole manner of life and
morals. He not merely instructed his friends, but associated them in a
particular life in order to constitute them into persons and make them
skilful in business and eminent in morals. The Institute of Pythagoras
grew into a league, which included all men and all life in its embrace;
for it was an elaborately fashioned piece of work, and excellently
plastic in design.

Of the regulations of Pythagoras’ league, we have descriptions from
his successors, more especially from the Neo-Platonists, who are
particularly diffuse as regards its laws. The league had, on the
whole, the character of a voluntary priesthood, or a monastic order
of modern times. Whoever wished to be received was proved in respect
of his education and obedience, and information was collected about
his conduct, inclinations, and occupations. The members were subject
to a special training, in which a difference was made amongst those
received, in that some were exoteric and some esoteric. These last were
initiated into the highest branches of science, and since political
operations were not excluded from the order, they were also engaged
in active politics; the former had to go through a novitiate of five
years. Each member must have surrendered his means to the order, but he
received them again on retiring, and in the probationary period silence
was enjoined (_ἐχεμυθία_).[36]

This obligation to cease from idle talk may be called an essential
condition for all culture and learning; with it men must begin if
they wish to comprehend the thoughts of others and relinquish their
own ideas. We are in the habit of saying that the understanding is
cultivated through questioning, objecting and replying, &c., but, in
fact, it is not thus formed, but made from without. What is inward
in man is by culture got at and developed; hence though he remains
silent, he is none the poorer in thought or denser of mind. He rather
acquires thereby the power of apprehension, and comes to know that his
ideas and objections are valueless; and as he learns that such ideas
are valueless, he ceases to have them. Now the fact that in Pythagoras
there is a separation between those in the course of preparation and
those initiated, as also that silence is particularly enjoined, seems
most certainly to indicate that in his brotherhood both were formal
elements and not merely as present in the nature of things, as might
occur spontaneously in the individual without any special law or the
application of any particular consideration. But here it is important
to remark that Pythagoras may be regarded as the first instructor
in Greece who introduced the teachings of science; neither Thales,
who was earlier than he, nor his contemporary Anaximander taught
scientifically, but only imparted their ideas to their friends. There
were, generally speaking, no sciences at that time; there was neither a
science of philosophy, mathematics, jurisprudence or anything else, but
merely isolated propositions and facts respecting these subjects. What
was taught was the use of arms, theorems, music, the singing of Homer’s
or Hesiod’s songs, tripod chants, &c., or other arts. This teaching
is accomplished in quite another way. Now if we said that Pythagoras
had introduced the teaching of science amongst a people who, though
like the Greeks, untaught therein, were not stupid but most lively,
cultured and loquacious, the external conditions of such teaching might
in so far be given as follows:—(_α_) He would distinguish amongst
those who as yet had no idea of the process of learning a science, so
that those who first began should be excluded from that which was to
be imparted to those further on; and (_β_) he would make them leave
the unscientific mode of speaking of such matters, or their idle
prattle, alone, and for the first time study science. But the fact
that this action both appeared to be formal and likewise required to
be made such, was, on account of its unwonted character, a necessary
one, just because the followers of Pythagoras were not only numerous,
necessitating a definite form and order, but also, generally speaking,
they lived continually together. Thus a particular form was natural to
Pythagoras, because it was the very first time that a teacher in Greece
arrived at a totality, or a new principle, through the cultivation of
the intelligence, mind and will. This common life had not only the
educational side and that founded on the exercise of physical ingenuity
or skill, but included also that of the moral culture of practical men.
But even now everything relating to morality appears and is or becomes
altogether formal, or rather this is so in as far as it is consciously
thought of as in this relation, for to be formal is to be universal,
that which is opposed to the individual. It appears so particularly
to him who compares the universal and the individual and consciously
reflects over both, but this difference disappears for those living
therein, to whom it is ordinary habit.

Finally, we have sufficient and full accounts of the outward forms
observed by the Pythagoreans in their common life and also of their
discipline. For much of this, however, we are indebted to the
impressions of later writers. In the league, a life regulated in
all respects was advocated. First of all, it is told us, that the
members made themselves known by a similar dress—the white linen of
Pythagoras. They had a very strict order for each day, of which each
hour had its work. The morning, directly after rising, was set aside
for recalling to memory the history of the previous day, because what
is to be done in the day depends chiefly on the previous day; similarly
the most constant self-examination was made the duty of the evening
in order to find whether the deeds done in the day were right or
wrong. True culture is not the vanity of directing so much attention to
oneself and occupying oneself with oneself as an individual, but the
self-oblivion that absorbs oneself in the matter in hand and in the
universal; it is this consideration of the thing in hand that is alone
essential, while that dangerous, useless, anxious state does away with
freedom. They had also to learn by heart from Homer and from Hesiod;
and all through the day they occupied themselves much with music—one
of the principal parts of Greek education and culture.[37] Gymnastic
exercises in wrestling, racing, throwing, and so on, were with them
also enforced by rule. They dined together, and here, too, they had
peculiar customs, but of these the accounts are different. Honey and
bread were made their principal food, and water the principal, and
indeed only, drink; they must thus have entirely refrained from eating
meat as being associated with metempsychosis. A distinction was also
made regarding vegetables—beans, for example, being forbidden. On
account of this respect for beans, they were much derided, yet in the
subsequent destruction of the political league, several Pythagoreans,
being pursued, preferred to die than to damage a field of beans.[38]

The order, the moral discipline which characterized them, the common
intercourse of men, did not, however, endure long; for even in
Pythagoras’ life-time the affairs of his league must have become
involved, since he found enemies who forcibly overthrew him. He drew
down upon him, it is said, the envy of others, and was accused of
thinking differently from what he seemed to indicate, and thus of
having an _arrière pensée_. The real fact of the case was that the
individual belonged, not entirely to his town, but also to another.
In this catastrophe, Pythagoras himself, according to Tennemann (Vol.
I. p. 414), met his death in the 69th Olympiad (504, B.C.) in a
rising of the people against these aristocrats; but it is uncertain
whether it happened in Crotona or in Metapontum, or in a war between
the Syracusans and the Agrigentines. There is also much difference of
opinion about the age of Pythagoras, for it is given sometimes as 80,
and sometimes as 104.[39] For the rest, the unity of the Pythagorean
school, the friendship of the members, and the connecting bond of
culture have even in later times remained, but not in the formal
character of a league, because what is external must pass away. The
history of Magna Græcia is in general little known, but even in
Plato’s[40] time we find Pythagoreans appearing at the head of states
or as a political power.

The Pythagorean brotherhood had no relation with Greek public and
religious life, and therefore could not endure for long: in Egypt and
in Asia exclusiveness and priestly influence have their home, but
Greece, in its freedom, could not let the Eastern separation of caste
exist. Freedom here is the principle of civic life, but still it is
not yet determined as principle in the relations of public and private
law. With us the individual is free since all are alike before the law;
diversity in customs, in political relations and opinions may thus
exist, and must indeed so do in organic states. In democratic Greece,
on the contrary, manners, the external mode of life, necessarily
preserved a certain similarity, and the stamp of similarity remained
impressed on these wider spheres; for the exceptional condition of the
Pythagoreans, who could not take their part as free citizens, but were
dependent on the plans and ends of a combination and led an exclusive
religious life, there was no place in Greece. The preservation of the
mysteries certainly belonged to the Eumolpidæ, and other special forms
of worship to other particular families, but they were not regarded
in a political sense as of fixed and definite castes, but as priests
usually are, politicians, citizens, men like their fellows; nor, as
with the Christians, was the separation of religious persons driven to
the extreme of monastic rule. In ordinary civic life in Greece, no one
could prosper or maintain his position who held peculiar principles,
or even secrets, and differed in outward modes of life and clothing;
for what evidently united and distinguished them was their community
of principles and life—whether anything was good for the commonwealth
or not, was by them publicly and openly discussed. The Greeks are
above having particular clothing, maintaining special customs of
washing, rising, practising music, and distinguishing between pure and
impure foods. This, they say, is partly the affair of the particular
individual and of his personal freedom, and has no common end in view,
and partly it is a general custom and usage for everybody alike.

What is most important to us is the Pythagorean philosophy—not
the philosophy of Pythagoras so much as that of the Pythagoreans,
as Aristotle and Sextus express it. The two must certainly be
distinguished, and from comparing what is given out as Pythagorean
doctrine, many anomalies and discrepancies become evident, as we shall
see. Plato bears the blame of having destroyed Pythagorean philosophy
through absorbing what is Pythagorean in it into his own. But the
Pythagorean philosophy itself developed to a point which left it
quite other than what at first it was. We hear of many followers of
Pythagoras in history who have arrived at this or that conclusion,
such as Alcmæon and Philolaus; and we see in many cases the simple
undeveloped form contrasted with the further stages of development in
which thought comes forth in definiteness and power. We need, however,
go no further into the historical side of the distinction, for we
can only consider the Pythagorean philosophy generally; similarly
we must separate what is known to belong to the Neo-Platonists and
Neo-Pythagoreans, and for this end we have sources to draw from which
are earlier than this period, namely the express statements found in
Aristotle and Sextus.

The Pythagorean philosophy forms the transition from realistic to
intellectual philosophy. The Ionic school said that essence or
principle is a definite material. The next conclusion is (_α_)
that the absolute is not grasped in natural form, but as a thought
determination. (_β_) Then it follows that determinations must
be posited while the beginning was altogether undetermined. The
Pythagorean philosophy has done both.

1. _The System of Numbers_. Thus the original and simple proposition
of the Pythagorean philosophy is, according to Aristotle (Metaph. I.
5), “that number is the reality of things, and the constitution of the
whole universe in its determinations is an harmonious system of numbers
and of their relations.” In what sense is this statement to be taken?
The fundamental determination of number is its being a measure; if we
say that everything is quantitatively or qualitatively determined,
the size and measure is only one aspect or characteristic which is
present in everything, but the meaning here is that number itself is
the essence and the substance of things, and not alone their form.
What first strikes us as surprising is the boldness of such language,
which at once sets aside everything which to the ordinary idea is real
and true, doing away with sensuous existence and making it to be the
creation of thought. Existence is expressed as something which is not
sensuous, and thus what to the senses and to old ideas is altogether
foreign, is raised into and expressed as substance and as true Being.
But at the same time the necessity is shown for making number to be
likewise Notion, to manifest it as the activity of its unity with
Being, for to us number does not seem to be in immediate unity with the
Notion.

Now although this principle appears to us to be fanciful and wild, we
find in it that number is not merely something sensuous, therefore it
brings determination with it, universal distinctions and antitheses.
The ancients had a very good knowledge of these. Aristotle (Metaph.
I. 6) says of Plato: “He maintained that the mathematical elements in
things are found outside of what is merely sensuous, and of ideas,
being between both; it differs from what is sensuous in that it
is eternal and unchangeable, and from ideas, in that it possesses
multiplicity, and hence each can resemble and be similar to another,
while each idea is for itself one alone.” That is, number can be
repeated; thus it is not sensuous, and still not yet thought. In
the life of Pythagoras, this is further said by Malchus (46, 47):
“Pythagoras propounded philosophy in this wise in order to loose
thought from its fetters. Without thought nothing true can be discerned
or known; thought hears and sees everything in itself, the rest is lame
and blind. To obtain his end, Pythagoras makes use of mathematics,
since this stands midway between what is sensuous and thought, as a
kind of preliminary to what is in and for itself.” Malchus quotes
further (48, 53) a passage from an early writer, Moderatus: “Because
the Pythagoreans could not clearly express the absolute and the first
principles through thought, they made use of numbers, of mathematics,
because in this form determinations could be easily expressed.” For
instance, similarity could be expressed as one, dissimilarity as two.
“This mode of teaching through the use of numbers, whilst it was the
first philosophy, is superseded on account of its mysterious nature.
Plato, Speusippus, Aristotle, &c., have stolen the fruits of their work
from the Pythagoreans by making a simple use of their principle.” In
this passage a perfect knowledge of numbers is evident.

The enigmatic character of the determination through number is what
most engages our attention. The numbers of arithmetic answers to
thought-determinations, for number has the “one” as element and
principle; the one, however, is a category of being-for-self, and
thus of identity with self, in that it excludes all else and is
indifferent to what is “other.” The further determinations of number
are only further combinations and repetitions of the one, which all
through remains fixed and external; number, thus, is the most utterly
dead, notionless continuity possible; it is an entirely external and
mechanical process, which is without necessity. Hence number is not
immediate Notion, but only a beginning of thought, and a beginning in
the worst possible way; it is the Notion in its extremest externality,
in quantitative form, and in that of indifferent distinction. In so
far, the one has within itself both the principle of thought and
that of materiality, or the determination of the sensuous. In order
that anything should have the form of Notion, it must immediately in
itself, as determined, relate itself to its opposite, just as positive
is related to negative; and in this simple movement of the Notion we
find the ideality of differences and negation of independence to be
the chief determination. On the other hand, in the number three, for
instance, there are always three units, of which each is independent;
and this is what constitutes both their defect and their enigmatic
character. For since the essence of the Notion is innate, numbers are
the most worthless instruments for expressing Notion-determinations.

Now the Pythagoreans did not accept numbers in this indifferent way,
but as Notion. “At least they say that phenomena must be composed of
simple elements, and it would be contrary to the nature of things if
the principle of the universe pertained to sensuous phenomena. The
elements and principles are thus not only intangible and invisible, but
altogether incorporeal.”[41] But how they have come to make numbers
the original principle or the absolute Notion, is better shown from
what Aristotle says in his Metaphysics (I. 5), although he is shorter
than he would have been, because he alleges that elsewhere (infra., p.
214) he has spoken of it. “In numbers they thought that they perceived
much greater similitude to what is and what takes place than in fire,
water, or earth; since a certain property of numbers (_τοιονδὶ πάθος_)
is justice, so is it with (_τοιονδὶ_) the soul and understanding;
another property is opportunity, and so on. Since they further saw the
conditions and relations of what is harmonious present in numbers, and
since numbers are at the basis of all natural things, they considered
numbers to be the elements of everything, and the whole heavens to
be a harmony and number.” In the Pythagoreans we see the necessity
for one enduring universal idea as a thought-determination. Aristotle
(Met. XII. 4), speaking of ideas, says: “According to Heraclitus,
everything sensuous flows on, and thus there cannot be a science of the
sensuous; from this conviction the doctrine of ideas sprang. Socrates
is the first to define the universal through inductive methods; the
Pythagoreans formerly concerned themselves merely with a few matters
of which they derived the notions from numbers—as, for example, with
what opportuneness, or right, or marriage are.” It is impossible to
discern what interest this in itself can have; the only thing which
is necessary for us as regards the Pythagoreans, is to recognize any
indications of the Idea, in which there may be a progressive principle.

This is the whole of the Pythagorean philosophy taken generally. We now
have to come to closer quarters, and to consider the determinations,
or universal significance. In the Pythagorean system numbers seem
partly to be themselves allied to categories—that is, to be at
once the thought-determinations of unity, of opposition and of the
unity of these two moments. In part, the Pythagoreans from the
very first gave forth universal ideal determinations of numbers as
principles, and recognized, as Aristotle remarks (Metaph. I. 5), as
the absolute principles of things, not so much immediate numbers in
their arithmetic differences, as the principles of number, _i.e._ their
rational differences. The first determination is unity generally, the
next duality or opposition. It is most important to trace back the
infinitely manifold nature of the forms and determinations of finality
to their universal thoughts as the most simple principles of all
determination. These are not differences of one thing from another,
but universal and essential differences within themselves. Empirical
objects distinguish themselves by outward form; this piece of paper
can be distinguished from another, shades are different in colour,
men are separated by differences of temperament and individuality.
But these determinations are not essential differences; they are
certainly essential for the definite particularity of the things,
but the whole particularity defined is not an existence which is in
and for itself essential, for it is the universal alone which is the
self-contained and the substantial. Pythagoras began to seek these
first determinations of unity, multiplicity, opposition, &c. With him
they are for the most part numbers; but the Pythagoreans did not remain
content with this, for they gave them the more concrete determinations,
which really belong to their successors. Necessary progression and
proof are not to be sought for here; comprehension, the development
of duality out of unity are wanting. Universal determinations are
only found and established in a quite dogmatic form, and hence the
determinations are dry, destitute of process or dialectic, and
stationary.

a. The Pythagoreans say that the first simple Notion is unity
(_μονάς_); not the discrete, multifarious, arithmetic one, but identity
as continuity and positivity, the entirely universal essence. They
further say, according to Sextus (adv. Math. X. 260, 261): “All
numbers come under the Notion of the one; for duality is one duality
and triplicity is equally a ‘one,’ but the number ten is the one chief
number. This moved Pythagoras to assert unity to be the principle of
things, because, through partaking of it, each is called one.” That
is to say, the pure contemplation of the implicit being of a thing
is the one, the being like self; to all else it is not implicit,
but a relationship to what is other. Things, however, are much more
determined than being merely this dry “one.” The Pythagoreans have
expressed this remarkable relationship of the entirely abstract one
to the concrete existence of things through “simulation” (_μίμησις_).
The same difficulty which they here encounter is also found in Plato’s
Ideas; since they stand over against the concrete as species, the
relation of concrete to universal is naturally an important point.
Aristotle (Metaph. I. 6) ascribes the expression “participation”
(_μέθεξις_) to Plato, who took it in place of the Pythagorean
expression “simulation.” Simulation is a figurative, childish way of
putting the relationship; participation is undoubtedly more definite.
But Aristotle says, with justice, that both are insufficient; that
Plato has not here arrived at any further development, but has only
substituted another name. “To say that ideas are prototypes and that
other things participate in them is empty talk and a poetic metaphor;
for what is the active principle that looks upon the ideas?” (Metaph.
I. 9). Simulation and participation are nothing more than other names
for relation; to give names is easy, but it is another thing to
comprehend.

b. What comes next is the opposition, the duality (_δυάς_), the
distinction, the particular; such determinations have value even now in
Philosophy; Pythagoras merely brought them first to consciousness. Now,
as this unity relates to multiplicity, or this being-like-self to being
another, different applications are possible, and the Pythagoreans
have expressed themselves variously as to the forms which this first
opposition takes.

(_α_) They said, according to Aristotle (Metaph. I. 5): “The elements
of number are the even and the odd; the latter is the finite” (or
principle of limitation) “and the former is the infinite; thus the
unity proceeds from both and out of this again comes number.” The
elements of immediate number are not yet themselves numbers: the
opposition of these elements first appears in arithmetical form rather
than as thought. But the one is as yet no number, because as yet it is
not quantity; unity and quantity belong to number. Theon of Smyrna[42]
says: “Aristotle gives, in his writings on the Pythagoreans, the reason
why, in their view, the one partakes of the nature of even and odd;
that is, one, posited as even, makes odd; as odd, it makes even. This
is what it could not do unless it partook of both natures, for which
reason they also called the one, even-odd” (_ἀρτιοπέριττον_).

(_β_) If we follow the absolute Idea in this first mode, the opposition
will also be called the undetermined duality (_ἀόριστος δυάς_). Sextus
speaks more definitely (adv. Math. X. 261, 262) as follows: “Unity,
thought of in its identity with itself (_κατ̓ αὐτότητα ἑαυτῆς_), is
unity; if this adds itself to itself as something different (_καθ̓
ἑτερότητα_), undetermined duality results, because no one of the
determined or otherwise limited numbers is this duality, but all are
known through their participation in it, as has been said of unity.
There are, according to this, two principles in things; the first
unity, through participation in which all number-units are units,
and also undetermined duality through participation in which all
determined dualities are dualities.” Duality is just as essential a
moment in the Notion as is unity. Comparing them with one another, we
may either consider the unity to be form and duality matter, or the
other way; and both appear in different modes. (_αα_) Unity, as the
being-like-self, is the formless; but in duality, as the unlike, there
comes division or form. (_ββ_) If, on the other hand, we take form
as the simple activity of absolute form, the one is what determines;
and duality as the potentiality of multiplicity, or as multiplicity
not posited, is matter. Aristotle (Met. I. 6) says that it is
characteristic of Plato that “he makes out of matter many, but with him
the form originates only once; whereas out of one matter only one table
proceeds, whoever brings form to matter, in spite of its unity, makes
many tables.” He also ascribes this to Plato, that “instead of showing
the undetermined to be simple (_ἀντὶ τοῦ ἀπείρου ὡς ἑνός_), he made of
it a duality—the great and small.”

(_γ_) Further consideration of this opposition, in which Pythagoreans
differ from one another, shows us the imperfect beginning of a table
of categories which were then brought forward by them, as later on by
Aristotle. Hence the latter was reproached for having borrowed these
thought-determinations from them; and it certainly was the case that
the Pythagoreans first made the opposite to be an essential moment in
the absolute. They further determined the abstract and simple Notions,
although it was in an inadequate way, since their table presents a
mixture of antitheses in the ordinary idea and the Notion, without
following these up more fully. Aristotle (Met. I. 5) ascribes these
determinations either to Pythagoras himself, or else to Alcmæon “who
flourished in the time of Pythagoras’ old age,” so that “either Alcmæon
took them from the Pythagoreans or the latter took them from him.” Of
these antitheses or co-ordinates to which all things are traced, ten
are given, for, according to the Pythagoreans, ten is a number of great
significance:—

  1. The finite and the infinite.
  2. The odd and the even.
  3. The one and the many.
  4. The right and the left.
  5. The male and the female.
  6. The quiescent and the moving.
  7. The straight and the crooked.
  8. Light and darkness.
  9. Good and evil.
  10. The square and the parallelogram.

This is certainly an attempt towards a development of the Idea of
speculative philosophy in itself, _i.e._ in Notions; but the attempt
does not seem to have gone further than this simple enumeration.
It is very important that at first only a collection of general
thought-determinations should be made, as was done by Aristotle; but
what we here see with the Pythagoreans is only a rude beginning of the
further determination of antitheses, without order and sense, and very
similar to the Indian enumeration of principles and substances.

(_δ_) We find the further progress of these determinations in Sextus
(adv. Math. X. 262-277), when he speaks about an exposition of the
later Pythagoreans. It is a very good and well considered account of
the Pythagorean theories, which has some thought in it. The exposition
follows these lines: “The fact that these two principles are the
principles of the whole, is shown by the Pythagoreans in manifold ways.”

א. “There are three methods of thinking things; firstly, in accordance
with diversity, secondly, with opposition, and thirdly, according
to relation. (_αα_) What is considered in its mere diversity, is
considered for itself; this is the case with those subjects in which
each relates only to itself, such as horse, plant, earth, air, water
and fire. Such matters are thought of as detached and not in relation
to others.” This is the determination of identity with self or of
independence. (_ββ_) “In reference to opposition, the one is determined
as evidently contrasting with the other; we have examples of this in
good and evil, right and wrong, sacred and profane, rest and movement,
&c. (_γγ_) According to relation (_πρός τι_), we have the object
which is determined in accordance with its relationship to others,
such as right and left, over and under, double and half. One is only
comprehensible from the other; for I cannot tell which is my left
excepting by my right.” Each of these relations in its opposition,
is likewise set up for itself in a position of independence. “The
difference between relationship and opposition is that in opposition
the coming into existence of the ‘one’ is at the expense of the
‘other,’ and conversely. If motion is taken away, rest commences; if
motion begins, rest ceases; if health is taken away, sickness begins,
and conversely. In a condition of relationship, on the contrary, both
take their rise, and both similarly cease together; if the right
is removed, so also is the left; the double goes and the half is
destroyed.” What is here taken away is taken not only as regards its
opposition, but also in its existence. “A second difference is that
what is in opposition has no middle; for example, between sickness and
health, life and death, rest and motion, there is no third. Relativity,
on the contrary, has a middle, for between larger and smaller there
is the like; and between too large and too small the right size is
the medium.” Pure opposition passes through nullity to opposition;
immediate extremes, on the other hand, subsist in a third or middle
state, but in such a case no longer as opposed. This exposition shows
a certain regard for universal, logical determinations, which now and
always have the greatest possible importance, and are moments in all
conceptions and in everything that is. The nature of these opposites
is, indeed, not considered here, but it is of importance that they
should be brought to consciousness.

ב. “Now since these three represent three different genera, the
subjects and the two-fold opposite, there must be a higher genus over
each of them which takes the first place, since the genus comes before
its subordinate kinds. If the universal is taken away, so is the kind;
on the other hand, if the kind, not the genus, for the former depends
on the latter, but not the contrary way.” (_αα_) “The Pythagoreans have
declared the one to be the highest genus of what is considered as in
and for itself” (of subjects in their diversity); this is, properly
speaking, nothing more than translating the determinations of the
Notion into numbers. (_ββ_) “What is in opposition has, they say, as
its genus the like and the unlike; rest is the like, for it is capable
of nothing more and nothing less; but movement is the unlike. Thus
what is according to nature is like itself; it is a point which is not
capable of being intensified (_ἀνεπίτατος_); what is opposed to it is
unlike. Health is like, sickness is unlike. (_γγ_) The genus of that
which is in an indifferent relationship is excess and want, the more
and the less;” in this we have the quantitative relation just as we
formerly had the qualitative.

ג. We now come for the first time to the two opposites: “These three
genera of what is for itself, in opposition and in relationship,
must now come under”—yet simpler, higher—“genera,” _i.e._
thought-determinations. “Similarity reduces itself to the determination
of unity.” The genus of the subjects is the very being on its own
account. “Dissimilarity, however, consists of excess and want, but both
of these come under undetermined duality;” they are the undetermined
opposition, opposition generally. “Thus from all these relationships
the first unity and the undetermined duality proceed;” the Pythagoreans
said that such are found to be the universal modes of things. “From
these, there first comes the ‘one’ of numbers and the ‘two’ of numbers;
from the first unity, the one; from the unity and the undetermined
duality the two; for twice the one is two. The other numbers take their
origin in a similar way, for the unity over moves forward, and the
undetermined duality generates the two.” This transition of qualitative
into quantitative opposition is not clear. “Hence underlying these
principles, unity is the active principle” or form, “but the two is
the passive matter; and just as they make numbers arise from them, so
do they make the system of the world and that which is contained in
it.” The nature of these determinations is to be found in transition
and in movement. The deeper significance of this reflection rests in
the connection of universal thought-determinations with arithmetic
numbers—in subordinating these and making the universal genus first.

Before I say anything of the further sequence of these numbers, it
must be remarked that they, as we see them represented here, are pure
Notions. (_α_) The absolute, simple essence divides itself into unity
and multiplicity, of which the one sublates the other, and at the same
time it has its existence in the opposition. (_β_) The opposition has
at the same time subsistence, and in this is found the manifold nature
of equivalent things. (_γ_) The return of absolute essence into itself
is the negative unity of the individual subject and of the universal
or positive. This is, in fact, the pure speculative Idea of absolute
existence; it is this movement: with Plato the Idea is nothing else.
The speculative makes its appearance here as speculative; whoever does
not know the speculative, does not believe that in indicating simple
Notions such as these, absolute essence is expressed. One, many, like,
unlike, more or less, are trivial, empty, dry moments; that there
should be contained in them absolute essence, the riches and the
organization of the natural, as of the spiritual world, does not seem
possible to him who, accustomed to ordinary ideas, has not gone back
from sensuous existence into thought. It does not seem to such a one
that God is, in a speculative sense, expressed thereby—that what is
most sublime can be put in those common words, what is deepest, in
what is so well known, self-evident and open, and what is richest, in
the poverty of these abstractions.

It is at first in opposition to common reality that this idea of
reality as the manifold of simple essence, has in itself its opposition
and the subsistence of the same; this essential, simple Notion of
reality is elevation into thought, but it is not flight from what is
real, but the expression of the real itself in its essence. We here
find the Reason which expresses its essence; and absolute reality is
unity immediately in itself. Thus it is pre-eminently in relation
to this reality that the difficulties of those who do not think
speculatively have become so intense. What is its relation to common
reality? What has taken place is just what happens with the Platonic
Ideas, which approximate very closely to these numbers, or rather
to pure Notions. That is to say, the first question is, “Numbers,
where are they? Dispersed through space, dwelling in independence in
the heaven of ideas? They are not things immediately in themselves,
for a thing, a substance, is something quite other than a number:
a body bears no similarity to it.” To this we may answer that the
Pythagoreans did not signify anything like that which we understand
by prototypes—as if ideas, as the laws and relations of things,
were present in a creative consciousness as thoughts in the divine
understanding, separated from things as are the thoughts of an artist
from his work. Still less did they mean only subjective thoughts in our
consciousness, for we use the absolute antithesis as the explanation of
the existence of qualities in things, but what determines is the real
substance of what exists, so that each thing is essentially just its
having in it unity, duality, as also their antithesis and connection.
Aristotle (Met. I. 5, 6) puts it clearly thus: “It is characteristic of
the Pythagoreans that they did not maintain the finite and the infinite
and the One, to be, like fire, earth, &c., different natures or to have
another reality than things; for the Infinite and the abstract One
are to them, the substance of the things of which they are predicated.
Hence too, they said, Number is the essence of all things. Thus they
do not separate numbers from things, but consider them to be things
themselves. Number to them is the principle and matter of things, as
also their qualities and forces;” hence it is thought as substance, or
the thing as it is in the reality of thought.

These abstract determinations then became more concretely determined,
especially by the later philosophers, in their speculations regarding
God. We may instance Iamblichus, for example, in the work _θεολογούμενα
ἀριθμητικῆς_, ascribed to him by Porphyry and Nicomachus. Those
philosophers sought to raise the character of popular religion, for
they inserted such thought-determinations as these into religious
conceptions. By Monas they understood nothing other than God; they also
call it Mind, the Hermaphrodite (which contains both determinations,
odd as well as even), and likewise substance, reason, chaos (because it
is undetermined), Tartarus, Jupiter, and Form. They called the duad by
similar names, such as matter, and then the principle of the unlike,
strife, that which begets, Isis, &c.

c. The triad (_τριάς_) has now become a most important number,
seeing that in it the monad has reached reality and perfection. The
monad proceeds through the duad, and again brought into unity with
this undetermined manifold, it is the triad. Unity and multiplicity
are present in the triad in the worst possible way—as an external
combination; but however abstractly this is understood, the triad
is still a profound form. The triad then is held to be the first
perfect form in the universal. Aristotle (De Cœlo I. 1) puts this
very clearly: “The corporeal has no dimension outside of the Three;
hence the Pythagoreans also say that the all and everything is
determined through triplicity,” that is, it has absolute form. “For
the number of the whole has end, middle, and beginning; and this
is the triad.” Nevertheless there is something superficial in the
wish to bring everything under it, as is done in the systematization
of the more modern natural philosophy. “Therefore we, too, taking
this determination from nature, make use of it in the worship of the
gods, so that we believe them to have been properly apostrophized
only when we have called upon them three times in prayer. Two we call
both, but not all; we speak first of three as all. What is determined
through three is the first totality (_πᾶν_); what is in triple form
is perfectly divided. Some is merely in one, other is only in two,
but this is All.” What is perfect, or has reality, is its identity,
opposition and unity, like number generally; but in triplicity this
is actual, because it has beginning, middle, and end. Each thing is
simple as beginning; it is other or manifold as middle, and its end
is the return of its other nature into unity or mind; if we take this
triplicity from a thing, we negate it and make of it an abstract
construction of thought.

It is now comprehensible that Christians sought and found the Trinity
in this threefold nature. It has often been made a superficial reason
for objecting to them; sometimes the idea of the Trinity as it was
present to the ancients, was considered as above reason, as a secret,
and hence, too high; sometimes it was deemed too absurd. But from the
one cause or from the other, they did not wish to bring it into closer
relation to reason. If there is a meaning in this Trinity, we must try
to understand it. It would be an anomalous thing if there were nothing
in what has for two thousand years been the holiest Christian idea; if
it were too holy to be brought down to the level of reason, or were
something now quite obsolete, so that it would be contrary to good
taste and sense to try to find a meaning in it. It is the Notion of the
Trinity alone of which we can speak, and not of the idea of Father and
Son, for we am not dealing with these natural relationships.

d. The Four (_τετράς_) is the triad but more developed, and hence with
the Pythagoreans it held a high position. That the tetrad should be
considered to be thus complete, reminds one of the four elements, the
physical and the chemical, the four continents, &c. In nature four
is found to be present everywhere, and hence this number is even now
equally esteemed in natural philosophy. As the square of two, the
fourfold is the perfection of the two-fold in as far as it—only having
itself as determination, i.e. being multiplied with itself—returns
into identity with itself. But in the triad the tetrad is in so far
contained, as that the former is the unity, the other-being, and
the union of both these moments, and thus, since the difference, as
posited, is a double, if we count it, four moments result. To make this
clearer, the tetrad is comprehended as the _τετρακτύς_, the efficient,
active four (from _τέτταρα_ and _ἄγω_); and afterwards this is by the
Pythagoreans made the most notable number. In the fragments of a poem
of Empedocles, who originally was a Pythagorean, it is shown in what
high regard this tetraktus, as represented by Pythagoras, was held:

                            “If thou dost this,
  It will lead thee in the path of holy piety. I swear it
  By the one who to our spirit has given the Tetraktus,
  Which has in it eternal nature’s source and root.”[43]

e. From this the Pythagoreans proceed to the ten, another form of this
tetrad. As the four is the perfect form of three, this fourfold, thus
perfected and developed so that all its moments shall be accepted as
real differences, is the number ten (_δεκάς_), the real tetrad. Sextus
(adv. Math. IV. 3; VII. 94, 95) says: “Tetraktus means the number
which, comprising within itself the four first numbers, forms the most
perfect number, that is the number ten; for one and two and three and
four make ten. When we come to ten, we again consider it as a unity
and begin once more from the beginning. The tetraktus, it is said,
has the source and root of eternal nature within itself, because it
is the Logos of the universe, of the spiritual and of the corporeal.”
It is an important work of thought to show the moments not merely to
be four units, but complete numbers; but the reality in which the
determinations are laid hold of, is here, however, only the external
and superficial one of number; there is no Notion present although
the tetraktus does not mean number so much as idea. One of the later
philosophers, Proclus, (in Timæum, p. 269) says, in a Pythagorean
hymn:—

                    “The divine number goes on,”...
  “Till from the still unprofaned sanctuary of the Monad
  It reaches to the holy Tetrad, which creates the mother of all that
        is;
  Which received all within itself, or formed the ancient bounds of all,
  Incapable of turning or of wearying; men call it the holy Dekad.”

What we find about the progression of the other numbers is more
indefinite and unsatisfying, and the Notion loses itself in them. Up to
five there may certainly be a kind of thought in numbers, but from six
onwards they are merely arbitrary determinations.

2. _Application of the System to the Universe_. This simple idea and
the simple reality contained therein, must now, however, be further
developed in order to come to reality as it is when put together and
expanded. The question now meets us as to how, in this relation, the
Pythagoreans passed from abstract logical determinations to forms which
indicate the concrete use of numbers. In what pertains to space or
music, determinations of objects formed by the Pythagoreans through
numbers, still bear a somewhat closer relation to the thing, but when
they enter the region of the concrete in nature and in mind, numbers
become purely formal and empty.

a. To show how the Pythagoreans constructed out of numbers the
system of the world, Sextus instances (adv. Math. X. 277-283), space
relations, and undoubtedly we have in them to do with such ideal
principles, for numbers are, in fact, perfect determinations of
abstract space. That is to say, if we begin with the point, the first
negation of vacuity, “the point corresponds to unity; it is indivisible
and the principle of lines, as the unity is that of numbers. While
the point exists as the monad or One, the line expresses the duad or
Two, for both become comprehensible through transition; the line is
the pure relationship of two points and is without breadth. Surface
results from the threefold; but the solid figure or body belongs to
the fourfold, and in it there are three dimensions present. Others say
that body consists of one point” (_i.e._ its essence is one point),
“for the flowing point makes the line, the flowing line, however, makes
surface, and this surface makes body. They distinguish themselves from
the first mentioned, in that the former make numbers primarily proceed
from the monad and the undetermined duad, and then points and lines,
plane surfaces and solid figures, from numbers, while they construct
all from one point.” To the first, distinction is opposition or form
set forth as duality; the others have form as activity. “Thus what is
corporeal is formed under the directing influence of numbers, but from
them also proceed the definite bodies, water, air, fire, and the whole
universe generally, which they declare to be harmonious. This harmony
is one which again consists of numeral relations only, which constitute
the various concords of the absolute harmony.”

We must here remark that the progression from the point to actual space
also has the signification of occupation of space, for “according to
their fundamental tenets and teaching,” says Aristotle (Metaph. I. 8),
“they speak of sensuously perceptible bodies in nowise differently
from those which are mathematical.” Since lines and surfaces are only
abstract moments in space, external construction likewise proceeds from
here very well. On the other hand, the transition from the occupation
of space generally to what is determined, to water, earth, &c., is
quite another thing and is more difficult; or rather the Pythagoreans
have not taken this step, for the universe itself has, with them,
the speculative, simple form, which is found in the fact of being
represented as a system of number-relations. But with all this, the
physical is not yet determined.

b. Another application or exhibition of the essential nature of the
determination of numbers is to be found in the relations of music,
and it is more especially in their case that number constitutes
the determining factor. The differences here show themselves as
various relations of numbers, and this mode of determining what is
musical is the only one. The relation borne by tones to one another
is founded on quantitative differences whereby harmonies may be
formed, in distinction to others by which discords are constituted.
The Pythagoreans, according to Porphyry (De vita Pyth. 30), treated
music as something soul-instructing and scholastic [Psychagogisches
und Pädagogisches]. Pythagoras was the first to discern that musical
relations, these audible differences, are mathematically determinable,
that what we hear as consonance and dissonance is a mathematical
arrangement. The subjective, and, in the case of hearing, simple
feeling which, however, exists inherently in relation, Pythagoras has
justified to the understanding, and he attained his object by means
of fixed determinations. For to him the discovery of the fundamental
tones of harmony are ascribed, and these rest on the most simple
number-relations. Iamblichus (De vita Pyth. XXVI. 115) says that
Pythagoras, in passing by the workshop of a smith, observed the strokes
that gave forth a particular chord; he then took into consideration
the weight of the hammer giving forth a certain harmony, and from that
determined mathematically the tone as related thereto.[44] And finally
he applied the same, and experimented in strings, by which means there
were three different relations presented to him—Diapason, Diapente,
and Diatessaron. It is known that the tone of a string, or, in the wind
instrument, of its equivalent, the column of air in a reed, depends on
three conditions; on its length, on its thickness, and on the amount
of tension. Now if we have two strings of equal thickness and length,
a difference in tension brings about a difference in sound. If we want
to know what tone any string has, we have only to consider its tension,
and this may be measured by the weight depending from the string,
by means of which it is extended. Pythagoras here found that if one
string were weighted with twelve pounds, and another with six (_λόγος
διπλάσιος_, 1 : 2) it would produce the musical chord of the octave
(_διὰ πασῶν_); the proportion of 8 : 12, or of 2 : 3 (_λόγος ἡμιόλιος_)
would give the chord of the fifth (_διὰ πέντε_); the proportion of 9
: 12, or 3 : 4 (_λόγος ἐπίτριτος_), the fourth (_διὰ τεσσάρων_).[45]
A different number of vibrations in like times determines the height
and depth of the tone, and this number is likewise proportionate to
the weight, if thickness and length are equal. In the first case, the
more distended string makes as many vibrations again as the other;
in the second case, it makes three vibrations for the other’s two,
and so it goes on. Here number is the real factor which determines
the difference, for tone, as the vibration of a body, is only a
quantitatively determined quiver or movement, that is, a determination
made through space and time. For there can be no determination for the
difference excepting that of number or the amount of vibrations in one
time; and hence a determination made through numbers is nowhere more
in place than here. There certainly are also qualitative differences,
such as those existing between the tones of metals and catgut strings,
and between the human voice and wind instruments; but the peculiar
musical relation borne by the tone of one instrument to another, in
which harmony is to be found, is a relationship of numbers.

From this point the Pythagoreans enter into further applications of
the theory of music, in which we cannot follow them. The _à priori_
law of progression, and the necessity of movement in number-relations,
is a matter which is entirely dark; minds confused may wander about at
will, for everywhere ideas are hinted at, and superficial harmonies
present themselves and disappear again. But in all that treats of the
further construction of the universe as a numerical system, we have
the whole extent of the confusion and turbidity of thought belonging
to the later Pythagoreans. We cannot say how much pains they took
to express philosophic thought in a system of numbers, and also to
understand the expressions given utterance to by others, and to put in
them all the meaning possible. When they determined the physical and
the moral universe by means of numbers, everything came into indefinite
and insipid relationships in which the Notion disappeared. In this
matter, however, so far as the older Pythagoreans are concerned, we
are acquainted with the main principles only. Plato exemplifies to us
the conception of the universe as a system of numbers, but Cicero and
the ancients always call these numbers the Platonic, and it does not
appear that they were ascribed to the Pythagoreans. It was thus later
on that this came to be said; even in Cicero’s time they had become
proverbially dark, and there is but little after all that is really old.

c. The Pythagoreans further constructed the heavenly bodies of the
visible universe by means of numbers, and here we see at once the
barrenness and abstraction present in the determination of numbers.
Aristotle says (Met. I. 5), “Because they defined numbers to be
the principles of all nature, they brought under numbers and their
relationships all determinations and all sections, both of the heavens
and of all nature; and where anything did not altogether conform, they
sought to supply the deficiency in order to bring about a harmony.
For instance, as the Ten or dekad appeared to them to be the perfect
number, or that which embraces the whole essence of numbers, they
said that the spheres moving in the heavens must be ten; but as only
nine of these are visible, they made out a tenth, the Antichthone
(_ἀντίχθονα_).” These nine are, first the milky way, or the fixed
stars, and after that the seven stars which were then all held to be
planets: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Sun, Moon, and in
the last and ninth place, the Earth. The tenth is thus the Antichthone,
and in regard to this it must remain uncertain whether the Pythagoreans
considered it to be the side of the Earth which is turned away, or as
quite another body.

Aristotle says, in reference to the specially physical character of
these spheres (De cœlo II. 13 and 9), “Fire was by the Pythagoreans
placed in the middle, but the Earth was made a star that moved around
this central body in a circle.” This circle is, then, a sphere, which,
as the most perfect of figures, corresponds to the dekad. We here
find a certain similarity to our ideas of the solar system, but the
Pythagoreans did not believe the fire to be the sun. “They thus,” says
Aristotle, “rely, not on sensuous appearance, but on reasons,” just as
we form conclusions in accordance with reasons as opposed to sensuous
appearances; and indeed this comes to us still as the first example of
things being in themselves different from what they appear. “This fire,
that which is in the centre, they called Jupiter’s place of watch.
Now these ten spheres make, like all that is in motion, a tone; but
each makes a different one, according to the difference in its size
and velocity. This is determined by means of the different distances,
which bear an harmonious relationship to one another, in accordance
with musical intervals; by this means an harmonious sound arises in the
moving spheres”—a universal chorus.

We must acknowledge the grandeur of this idea of determining everything
in the system of the heavenly spheres through number-relations which
have a necessary connection amongst themselves, and have to be
conceived of as thus necessarily related; it is a system of relations
which must also form the basis and essence of what can be heard, or
music. We have, comprehended here in thought, a system of the universe;
the solar system is alone rational to us, for the other stars are
devoid of interest. To say that there is music in the spheres, and
that these movements are tones, may seem just as comprehensible to us
as to say that the sun is still and the earth moves, although both are
opposed to the dictates of sense. For, seeing that we do not see the
movement, it may be that we do not hear the notes. And there is little
difficulty in imagining a universal silence in these vast spheres,
since we do not hear the chorus, but it is more difficult to give a
reason for not hearing this music. The Pythagoreans say, according to
the last quoted passage of Aristotle, that we do not hear it because
we live in it, like the smith who gets accustomed to the blows of
his hammer. Since it belongs to our substance and is identical with
ourselves, nothing else, such as silence, by which we might know
the other, comes into relationship with us, for we are conceived of
as entirely within the movement. But the movement does not become a
tone, in the first place, because pure space and time, the elements in
movement, can only raise themselves into a proper voice, unstimulated
from without, in an animate body, and movement first reaches this
definite, characteristic individuality in the animal proper; and, in
the next place, because the heavenly bodies are not related to one
another as bodies whose sound requires for its production, contact,
friction, or shock, in response to which, and as the negation of its
particularity its own momentary individuality resounds in elasticity;
for heavenly bodies are independent of one another, and have only a
general, non-individual, free motion.

We may thus set aside sound; the music of the spheres is indeed a
wonderful conception, but it is devoid of any real interest for us.
If we retain the conception that motion, as measure, is a necessarily
connected system of numbers, as the only rational part of the theory,
we must maintain that nothing further has transpired to the present
day. In a certain way, indeed, we have made an advance upon Pythagoras.
We have learned from Kepler about laws, about eccentricity, and the
relation of distances to the times of revolution, but no amount of
mathematics has as yet been able to give us the laws of progression
in the harmony through which the distances are determined. We know
empirical numbers well enough, but everything has the semblance of
accident and not of necessity. We are acquainted with an approximate
rule of distances, and thus have correctly foretold the existence
of planets where Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, &c., were afterwards
discovered—that is, between Mars and Jupiter. But astronomy has not as
yet found in it a consistent sequence in which there is rationality;
on the other hand, it even looks with disdain on the appearance of
regularity presented by this sequence, which is, however, on its own
account, a most important matter, and one which should not be forgotten.

d. The Pythagoreans also applied their principle to the Soul, and
thus determined what is spiritual as number. Aristotle (De anim. I.
2) goes on to tell that they thought that solar corpuscles are soul,
others, that it is what moves them; they adopted this idea because
the corpuscles are ever moving, even in perfect stillness, and hence
they must have motion of their own. This does not signify much, but
it is evident from it that the determination of self-movement was
sought for in the soul. The Pythagoreans made a further application
of number-conceptions to the soul after another form, which Aristotle
describes in the same place as follows:—“Thought is the one, knowledge
or science is the two, for it comes alone out of the one. The number
of the plane is popular idea, opinion; the number of the corporeal
is sensuous feeling. Everything is judged of either by thought, or
science, or opinion, or feeling.” In these ideas, which we must,
however, ascribe to later Pythagoreans, we may undoubtedly find some
adequacy, for while thought is pure universality, knowledge deals with
something “other,” since it gives itself a determination and a content;
but feeling is the most developed in its determinateness. “Now because
the soul moves itself, it is the self-moving number,” yet we never find
it said that it is connected with the monad.

This is a simple relationship to number-determinations. Aristotle
instances (De anim. I. 3) one more intricate from Timæus: “The soul
moves itself, and hence also the body because it is bound up with body;
it consists of elements and is divided according to harmonic numbers,
and hence it has feeling and an immediately indwelling (_σύμφυτον_)
harmony. In order that the whole may have an harmonious movement,
Timæus has bent the straight line of harmony (_εὐθυωρίαν_) into a
circle, and again divided off from the whole circle two circles,
which are doubly connected; and the one of these circles is again
divided into seven circles, so that the movements of the soul may
resemble those of the heavens.” The more definite significance of these
ideas Aristotle unfortunately has not given; they contain a profound
knowledge of the harmony of the whole, but yet they are forms which
themselves remain dark, because they are clumsy and unsuitable. There
is always a forcible turning and twisting, a struggle with the material
part of the representation, as there is in mythical and distorted
forms: nothing has the pliability of thought but thought itself. It
is remarkable that the Pythagoreans have grasped the soul as a system
which is a counterpart of the system of the heavens. In Plato’s Timæus
this same idea is more definitely brought forward. Plato also gives
further number-relations, but not their significance as well; even to
the present day no one has been able to make any particular sense out
of them. An arrangement of numbers such as this is easy, but to give to
it a real significance is difficult, and, when done, it always must be
arbitrary.

There is still something worthy of attention in what is said by the
Pythagoreans in reference to the soul, and this is their doctrine
of the transmigration of souls. Cicero (Tusc. Quæst. I. 16) says:
“Pherecydes, the teacher of Pythagoras, first said that the souls
of men were immortal.” The doctrine of the transmigration of souls
extends even to India, and, without doubt, Pythagoras took it from
the Egyptians; indeed Herodotus (II. 123) expressly says so. After he
speaks of the mythical ideas of the Egyptians as to the lower world,
he continues: “The Egyptians were the first to say that the soul of
man is immortal, and that, when the body disappears, it goes into
another living being; and when it has gone through all the animals of
land and sea, and likewise birds, it again takes the body of a man,
the period being completed in 3000 years.” Diogenes Laertius says in
this connection (VIII. 14) that the soul, according to Pythagoras, goes
through a circle. “These ideas,” proceeds Herodotus, “are also found
amongst the Greeks; there are some who, earlier or later, have made
use of this particular doctrine, and have spoken of it as if it were
their own; I know their names very well, but I will not mention them.”
He undoubtedly meant Pythagoras and his followers. In the sequel,
much that is given utterance to is fictitious: “Pythagoras himself
is said to have stated that his former personality was known to him.
Hermes granted him a knowledge of his circumstances before his birth.
He lived as the son of Hermes, Æthalides, and then in the Trojan
war as Euphorbus, the son of Panthous, who killed Patroclus, and was
killed by Menelaus; in the third place he was Hermotimus; fourthly,
Pyrrhus, a fisherman of Delos; in all he lived 207 years. Euphorbus’
shield was offered up to Apollo by Menelaus, and Pythagoras went to the
temple and, from the mouldering shield, showed the existence of signs,
hitherto not known of, by which it was recognized.”[46] We shall not
treat further of these very various and foolish stories.

As in the case of the brotherhood copied from the Egyptian priesthood,
so must we here set aside this oriental and un-Greek idea of the
transmigration of souls. Both were too far removed from the Greek
spirit to have had a place and a development there. With the Greeks,
the consciousness of a higher, freer individuality has become too
strong to allow any permanence to the idea of metempsychosis, according
to which, man, this independent and self-sufficing Being, takes the
form of a beast. They have, indeed, the conception of men as becoming
springs of water, trees, animals, &c., but the idea of degradation
which comes as a consequence of sin, lies at its root. Aristotle (De
anim. I. 3) shortly and in his own manner deals with and annihilates
this idea of the Pythagoreans. “They do not say for what reason soul
dwells in body, nor how the latter is related to it. For owing to
their unity of nature when one acts the other suffers: one moves and
the other is moved, but none of this happens in what is mutually
contingent. According to the Pythagorean myths any soul takes to any
body, which is much like making architects take to flutes. For crafts
must necessarily have tools and soul body; but each tool must have
its proper form and kind.” It is implied in the transmigration of
souls that the organization of the body is something accidental to
the human soul; this refutation by Aristotle is complete. The eternal
idea of metempsychosis had philosophic interest only as the inner
Notion permeating all these forms, the oriental unity which appears in
everything; we have not got this signification here, or at best we have
but a glimmering of it. If we say that the particular soul is, as a
definite thing, to wander about throughout all, we find firstly, that
the soul is not a thing such as Leibnitz’ Monad, which, like a bubble
in the cup of coffee, is possibly a sentient, thinking soul; in the
second place an empty identity of the soul-thing such as this has no
interest in relation to immortality.

3. _Practical Philosophy_. As regards the practical philosophy of
Pythagoras, which is closely connected with what has gone before, there
is but little that is philosophic known to us. Aristotle (Magn. Moral.
I. 1) says of him that “he first sought to speak of virtue, but not in
the right way, for, because he deduced the virtues from numbers, he
could not form of them any proper theory.” The Pythagoreans adopted ten
virtues as well as ten heavenly spheres. Justice, amongst others, is
described as the number which is like itself in like manner (_ἴσακις
ἴσος_); it is an even number, which remains even when multiplied with
itself. Justice is pre-eminently what remains like itself; but this
is an altogether abstract determination, which applies to much that
is, and which does not exhaust the concrete, thus remaining quite
indeterminate.

Under the name of the “Golden words,” we have a collection of
hexameters which are a succession of moral reflections, but which are
rightly ascribed to later Pythagoreans. They are old, well-known, moral
maxims, which are expressed in a simple and dignified way, but which
do not contain anything remarkable. They begin with the direction “to
honour the immortal gods as they are by law established,” and further,
“Honour the oath and then the illustrious heroes;” elsewhere they go
on to direct “honour to be paid to parents and to relatives,” &c.[47]
Such matter does not deserve to be regarded as philosophy, although it
is of importance in the process of development.

The transition from the form of outward morals to morality as existent,
is more important. As in Thales’ time, law-givers and administrators
of states were preeminent in possessing a physical philosophy, so we
see that with Pythagoras practical philosophy is advocated as the means
of constituting a moral life. There we have the speculative Idea,
the absolute essence, in its reality, and in a definite, sensuous
existence; and similarly the moral life is submerged in actuality
as the universal spirit of a people, and as their laws and rule. In
Pythagoras, on the contrary, we have the reality of absolute essence
raised, in speculation, out of sensuous reality, and expressed, though
still imperfectly, as the essence of thought. Morality is likewise
partly raised out of actuality as ordinarily known; it is certainly a
moral disposition of all actuality, but as a brotherhood, and not as
the life of a people. The Pythagorean League is an arbitrary existence
and not a part of the constitution recognized by public sanction; and
in his person Pythagoras isolated himself as teacher, as he also did
his followers. The universal consciousness, the spirit of a people, is
the substance of which the accident is the individual consciousness;
the speculative is thus the fact that pure, universal law is absolute,
individual consciousness, so that this last, because it draws therefrom
its growth and nourishment, becomes universal self-consciousness. These
two sides do not, however, come to us in the form of the opposition;
it is first of all in morality that there is properly this Notion of
the absolute individuality of consciousness which does everything on
its own account. But we see that it was really present to the mind
of Pythagoras that the substance of morality is the universal, from
an example in Diogenes Laertius (VIII. 16). “A Pythagorean answered
to the question of a father who inquired as to the best education he
could give his son, that it should be that which would make him the
citizen of a well-regulated State.” This answer is great and true; to
the great principle of living in the spirit of one’s people, all other
circumstances are subordinate. Nowadays men try to keep education free
from the spirit of the times, but they cannot withdraw themselves
from this supreme power, the State, for even if they try to separate
themselves, they unconsciously remain beneath this universal. The
speculative meaning of the practical philosophy of Pythagoras thus is,
that in this signification, the individual consciousness shall obtain
a moral reality in the brotherhood. But as number is a middle thing
between the sensuous and Notion, the Pythagorean brotherhood is a
middle between universal, actual morality and maintaining that in true
morality the individual, as an individual, is responsible for his own
behaviour; this morality ceases to be universal spirit. If we wish to
see practical philosophy reappear, we shall find it; but, on the whole,
we shall not see it become really speculative until very recent times.

We may satisfy ourselves with this as giving us an idea of the
Pythagorean system. I will, however, shortly give the principal
points of the criticism which Aristotle (Met. I. 8) makes upon the
Pythagorean number-form. He says justly, in the first place: “If only
the limited and the unlimited, the even and odd are made fundamental
ideas, the Pythagoreans do not explain how movement arises, and how,
without movement and change there can be coming into being and passing
away, or the conditions and activities of heavenly objects.” This
defect is significant; arithmetical numbers are dry forms and barren
principles in which life and movement are deficient. Aristotle says
secondly, “From number no other corporeal determinations, such as
weight and lightness, are conceivable;” or number thus cannot pass
into what is concrete. “They say that there is no number outside of
those in the heavenly spheres.” For instance, a heavenly sphere and
a virtue, or a natural manifestation in the earth, are determined as
one and the same number. Each of the first numbers may be exhibited
in each thing or quality; but in so far as number is made to express
a further determination, this quite abstract, quantitative difference
becomes altogether formal; it is as if the plant were five because it
has five stamens. This is just as superficial as are determination
through elements or through particular portions of the globe; it is a
method as formal as that by which men now try to apply the categories
of electricity, magnetism, galvanism, compression and expansion, of
manly and of womanly, to everything. It is a purely empty system of
determination where reality should be dealt with.

To Pythagoras and his disciples there are, moreover, many scientific
conclusions and discoveries ascribed, which, however, do not concern us
at all. Thus, according to Diogenes Laertius (VIII. 14, 27), he is said
to have known that the morning and evening star is the same, and that
the moon derives her light from the sun. We have already mentioned what
he says of music. But what is best known is the Pythagorean Theorem;
it really is the main proposition in geometry, and cannot be regarded
like any other theorem. According to Diogenes, (VIII. 12), Pythagoras,
on discovering the theorem, sacrificed a hecatomb, so important did he
think it; and it may indeed seem remarkable that his joy should have
gone so far as to ordain a great feast to which rich men and all the
people were invited. It was worth the trouble; it was a rejoicing, a
feast of spiritual cognition—at the cost of the oxen.

Other ideas which are brought forward by the Pythagoreans casually and
without any connection, have no philosophic interest, and need only
be mentioned. Aristotle, for instance, says (Phys. IV. 6) that “the
Pythagoreans believed in an empty space which the heavens inspire, and
an empty space which separates natural things and brings about the
distinction between continuous and discrete; it first exists in numbers
and makes them to be different.” Diogenes Laertius (VIII. 26-28) says
much more, all of which is dull; this is like the later writers,
who, generally speaking, take up what is external and devoid of any
intellectual meaning. “The air which encircles the earth is immovable”
(_ἄσειστον_, at least through itself) “and diseased, and all that is
in it is mortal; but what is highest is in continual movement, pure
and healthy, and in it everything is immortal—divine. Sun, moon and
the other stars are gods, for in them warmth has predominance and is
the cause of life. Man is related to the gods because he participates
in warmth, and hence God cares for us. A ray penetrates from the sun
through the thick and cold ether and gives life to everything; they
call air, cold ether, the sea and moisture, thick ether. The soul is a
detached portion of ether.”


C. THE ELEATIC SCHOOL.

The Pythagorean philosophy has not yet got the speculative form of
expression for the Notion. Numbers are not pure Notion, but Notion in
the form of ordinary idea or sensuous perception, and hence a mixture
of both. This expression of absolute essence in what is a pure Notion
or something thought, and the movement of the Notion or of Thought,
is that which we find must come next, and this we discover in the
Eleatic school. In it we see thought becoming free for itself; and in
that which the Eleatics express as absolute essence, we see Thought
grasp itself in purity, and the movement of Thought in Notions. In
the physical philosophy we saw movement represented as an objective
movement, as an origination and passing away. The Pythagoreans
similarly did not reflect upon these Notions, and also treated their
essence, Number, as fleeting. But since alteration is now grasped in
its highest abstraction as Nothing, this objective movement changes
into a subjective one, comes over to the side of consciousness, and
existence becomes the unmoved. We here find the beginning of dialectic,
_i.e._ simply the pure movement of thought in Notions; likewise we
see the opposition of thought to outward appearance or sensuous
Being, or of that which is implicit to the being-for-another of this
implicitness, and in the objective existence we see the contradiction
which it has in itself, or dialectic proper. When we reflect in
anticipation on how the course of pure thought must be formed, we
find (_α_) that pure thought (pure Being, the One) manifests itself
immediately in its rigid isolation and self-identity, and everything
else as null; (_β_) that the hitherto timid thought—which after it
is strengthened, ascribes value to the “other” and constitutes itself
therefrom—shows that it then grasps the other in its simplicity and
even in so doing shows its nullity; (_γ_) finally, Thought manifests
the other in the manifold nature of its determinations. We shall see
this in the development and culture of the Eleatics in history. These
Eleatic propositions still have interest for Philosophy, and are
moments which must necessarily there appear.

Xenophanes, Parmenides, Melissus and Zeno are to be reckoned as
belonging to this school. Xenophanes may be regarded as the founder
of it; Parmenides is supposed to have been his pupil, and Melissus,
and especially Zeno, are called the pupils of Parmenides. In fact,
they are to be taken together as forming the Eleatic school; later on
it lost the name, being then called Sophistic, and its locality was
transferred to Greece proper. What Xenophanes began, Parmenides and
Melissus developed further, and similarly Zeno perfected what these
two taught. Aristotle (Metaph. I. 5) characterizes the first three
thus: “Parmenides seems to comprehend the one as Notion (_κατὰ τὸν
λόγον_), Melissus as matter (_κατὰ τὴν ὕλην_); hence the former says
that it is limited (_πεπερασμένον_) and the latter that it is unlimited
(_ἄπειρον_). But Xenophanes, who was the first of them to express the
theory of the One, made the matter no plainer (_διεσαφήνισεν_), nor did
he deal with either of these aspects (_φύσεως_), but looking into the
heavens”—as we say, into the blue—“said, God is the One. Xenophanes
and Melissus are on the whole less civilized (_μικρὸν ἀγροικότεροι_);
Parmenides, however, is more acute (_μᾶλλον βλέπων_).” There is less to
say of Xenophanes and Melissus, and what has come to us from the latter
in particular—in fragments and derived from the sayings of others—is
still in a state of ferment, and in his case there is least knowledge
obtainable. On the whole, philosophic utterances and Notions are still
poor, and it was in Zeno that Philosophy first attained to a purer
expression of itself.


1. XENOPHANES.

The period at which he lived is clear enough, and as this suffices,
it is a matter of indifference that the year of his birth and of his
death is unknown. According to Diogenes Laertius (IX. 18), he was
contemporary with Anaximander and Pythagoras. Of his circumstances
further than this, it is only known that he, for reasons which are
unknown, escaped from his native town, Colophon, in Asia Minor, to
Magna Græcia, and resided for the most part at Zancle, (now Messina)
and Catana (still called Catania) in Sicily. I find it nowhere said
by the ancients that he lived at Elea, although all recent writers on
the history of Philosophy repeat it, one after the other. Tennemann,
in particular, says (Vol. I. pp. 151 and 414), that about the 61st
Olympiad (536 B.C.), he repaired from Colophon to Elea. Diogenes
Laertius (IX. 20), however, only says that he flourished about the 60th
Olympiad and that he made two thousand verses on the colonization of
Elea, from which it might be easily concluded that he was also born
at Elea. Strabo says this in the beginning of his sixth book—when
describing Elea—of Parmenides and Zeno only, and these he called
Pythagoreans; hence, according to Cicero (Acad. Quæst. IV. 42) the
Eleatic school took its name from these two. Xenophanes was nearly a
hundred years old, and lived to see the Median wars: it is said that he
became so poor that he had not the means of having his children buried,
and was obliged to do so with his own hands. Some say that he had no
teacher; others name Archelaus, which is a chronological error.

He wrote a book “On Nature,” the general subject and title of
Philosophy at that time; some verses have been preserved to us which so
far show no powers of reasoning. Professor Brandis of Bonn collected
them together, with the fragments of Parmenides and Melissus, under
the title “Commentationum Eleaticarum, P. 1,” Altonæ, 1813. The older
philosophers wrote in verse, for prose comes much later on; on account
of the awkward and confused mode of expression in Xenophanes’ poems,
Cicero calls them (Acad. Quæst. IV. 23): _minus boni versus_.

As to his philosophy, Xenophanes in the first place maintained absolute
existence to be the one, and likewise called this God. “The all is
One and God is implanted in all things; He is unchangeable, without
beginning, middle or end.”[48] In some verses by Xenophanes found in
Clemens of Alexandria (Strom. V. 14, p. 714, ed. Potter), it is said:

  “One God is greatest amongst gods and men.
  Neither like unto mortals in spirit or in form;”

and in Sextus Empiricus (adv. Math. IX. 144):

  “He sees everywhere, thinks everywhere, and hears everywhere,”

to which words Diogenes Laertius (IX, 19) adds: “Thought and reason
are everything and eternal.” By this Xenophanes denied the truth of the
conceptions of origination and of passing away, of change, movement,
&c., seeing that they merely belong to sensuous perception. “He found,”
says Tennemann (Vol. I. p. 156) “all origination to be inconceivable:”
the One as the immediate product of pure thought, is, in its immediacy,
Being.

For us the determination of Being is already known and trivial, but
if we know about Being, the One, we place this, as a particular
determination, in a line with all the rest. Here, on the contrary, it
signifies that all else has no reality and is only a semblance. We
must forget our own ideas; we know of God as Spirit. But, because the
Greeks only had before them the sensuous world, these gods of their
imagination, and found in them no satisfaction, they rejected all
as being untrue, and thus came to pure thought. This is a wonderful
advance, and thought thus becomes for the first time free for itself in
the Eleatic school. Being, the One of the Eleatic school, is just this
immersion in the abyss of the abstract identity of the understanding.
Just as this comes first, so it also comes last, as that to which the
understanding comes back, and this is proved in recent times when God
is grasped only as the highest Being. If we say of God that this the
highest Being is outside of and over us, we can know nothing more of
it but that it is, and thus it is the undetermined; for if we knew of
determinations, this would be to possess knowledge. The truth then
simply is that God is the One, not in the sense that there is one God
(this is another determination), but only that He is identical with
Himself; in this there is no other determination, any more than in the
utterance of the Eleatic school. Modern thought has, indeed, passed
through a longer path, not only through what is sensuous, but also
through philosophic ideas and predicates of God, to this all negating
abstraction; but the content, the result arrived at is the same.

With this the dialectic reasoning of the Eleatics is closely connected
in respect that they have also proved that nothing can originate or
pass away. This deduction is to be found in Aristotle’s work, De
Xenophane, Zenone et Gorgia, c. 3. “It is impossible, he says,[49] that
if anything is, it arises (and he even applies this to the Godhead);
for it must arise either from the like or from the unlike. But both are
equally impossible: for it is no more probable that the like should be
engendered from the like, than that it should engender it, for the like
must have determinations identical with one another.” In acknowledging
similarity, the distinction between begetting and begotten falls away.
“Just as little can unlike arise from unlike, for if from the weaker
the stronger takes its rise; or from the smaller, the greater; or from
the worse, the better: or if, conversely, the worse proceeds from the
better, non-being would result from Being: this is impossible, and thus
God is eternal.” The same thing has been expressed as Pantheism or
Spinozaism, which rests on the proposition _ex nihilo fit nihil_. The
unity of God is further proved by Xenophanes: “If God is the mightiest,
He must be One; for were He two or more, He would not have dominion
over the others, but, not having dominion over the others, He could not
be God. Thus were there several, they would be relatively more powerful
or weaker, and thus they would not be gods, for God’s nature is to have
nothing mightier than He. Were they equal, God would no longer possess
the quality of being the mightiest, for the like is neither worse nor
better than the like”—or it does not differ therefrom. “Hence if
God is, and is such as this, He is only one; He could not, were there
several, do what He willed. Since He is one, He is everywhere alike.
He hears, sees and has also the other senses everywhere, for were this
not the case, the parts of God would be one more powerful than the
other, which is impossible. Since God is everywhere alike, He has a
spherical form, for He is not here thus and elsewhere different, but is
everywhere the same. Since He is eternal and one and spherical in form,
He is neither unlimited nor limited. To be unlimited is non-being;
for that has neither middle, beginning, end, nor part; and what is
unlimited corresponds to this description. But whatever non-being is,
Being is not. Mutual limitation would take place if there were several,
but since there is only One, it is not limited. The one does not move
itself, nor is it unmoved; to be unmoved is non-being, for to it none
other comes, nor does it go into another; but to be moved must mean to
be several, for one must move into another. Thus the One neither rests
nor is it moved, for it is neither non-being nor is it many. In all
this God is thus indicated; He is eternal and One, like Himself and
spherical, neither unlimited nor limited, neither at rest nor moved.”
From this result, that nothing can arise from the like or from the
unlike, Aristotle (De Xenophane, Zenone et Gorgia c. 4) draws this
conclusion: “that either there is nothing excepting God, or all else is
eternal.”

We here see a dialectic which may be called metaphysical reasoning, in
which the principle of identity is fundamental. “The nothing is like
nothing and does not pass into Being or conversely; thus nothing can
originate from like.” This, the oldest mode of argument, holds its
place even to the present day, as, for example, in the so-called proof
of the unity of God. This proceeding consists of making presuppositions
such as the power of God, and from them drawing conclusions and denying
the existence of predicates; that is the usual course in our mode of
reasoning. In respect of determinations, it must be remarked that
they, as being negative, are all kept apart from the positive and
merely real being. We reach this abstraction by a more ordinary way,
and do not require a dialectic such as that of the Eleatic school: we
say God is unchangeable, change concerns finite things alone (which
we represent as an empirical proposition); on the one hand we thus
have finite things and change, and on the other, unchangeableness in
this abstract absolute unity with itself. It is the same separation,
only that we also allow the finite to be Being, which the Eleatics
deny. Or else we too proceed from finite things to kinds and genera,
leaving the negative out bit by bit; and the highest order of all is
God, who, as the highest Being, is affirmative only, but devoid of any
determination. Or we pass from what is finite to the infinite, for we
say that the finite as limited must have its basis in the infinite.
In all these different forms which are quite familiar to us, there is
the same difficult question which exists in reference to the Eleatic
thought. Whence comes determination and how is it to be grasped—how
is it in the one, leaving the finite aside, and also how does the
infinite pass out into the finite? The Eleatics in their reflections
were distinguished from this our ordinary reflecting thought, in that
they went speculatively to work (the speculative element being that
change does not exist at all) and that they thus showed that, as Being
was presupposed, change in itself is contradictory and inconceivable.
For from the one, from Being, the determination of the negative, of
the manifold, is withdrawn. Thus while we, in our conception, allow
the actuality of the finite world, the Eleatics are more consistent,
in that they proceeded to say that only the One exists and that the
negative does not exist at all;—a consequence which, if it necessarily
arouses in us surprise, still none the less remains a great abstraction.

Sceptics saw in this the point of view of the uncertainty of all
things, and Sextus several times[50] quotes verses such as these:—

  “No man at any time knew clearly and truly; nor will he ever know
  What of the gods I say, as also of the universe.
  For what he thinks to speak most perfectly
  He knows that not at all; his own opinions cleave to all.”

Sextus, generalizing, explains this in the first passage thus: “Let us
imagine that in a house in which are many valuables, there were those
who sought for gold by night; in such a case everyone would think that
he had found the gold, but would not know certainly whether he actually
had found it. Thus philosophers come into this world as into a great
house to seek the truth, but were they to reach it, they could not tell
whether they really had attained to it.” The indefinite expressions
of Xenophanes might also merely mean that none knows that which he
(Xenophanes) here makes known. In the second passage Sextus puts it
thus: “Xenophanes does not make all knowledge void, but only the
scientific and infallible; opinionative knowledge is, however, left. He
expresses this in saying that opinion cleaves to all. So that with him
the criterion is made to be opinion, i.e. the apparent, and not that
which is firm and sure; Parmenides, on the contrary, condemns opinion.”
But from his doctrine of the One, there follows the annihilation of
ordinary ideas, which is what he did in the foregoing dialectic; it
is evident, however, that nobody could know the truth which he hereby
utters. If a thought such as this passed through one’s head, one could
not tell that it was true, and in such a case it would only be an
opinion.

We here find in Xenophanes a double consciousness; a pure consciousness
and consciousness of Being, and a consciousness of opinion. The former
was to him the consciousness of the divine, and it is the pure
dialectic, which is negatively related to all that is determined and
which annuls it. The manner in which he expresses himself towards the
sensuous world and finite thought-determinations is seen most clearly
in his allusions to the Greek mythological conceptions of the gods. He
says, amongst other things, according to Brandis (Comment. Eleat. P. I.
p. 68):—

  “Did beasts and lions only have hands,
  Works of art thereby to bring forth, as do men,
  They would, in creating divine forms, give to them
  What in image and size belongs to themselves.”

He also animadverts on the ideas of the gods held by Homer and Hesiod
in verses which Sextus (adv. Math. IX. 193) has preserved to us:—

  “Hesiod and Homer have attached to the gods
  All that which brings shame and censure to men;
  Stealing, adultery, and mutual deceit.”

As, on the one hand, he defined absolute Being to be simple, making
that which is, however, break through and be immediately present in
it, on the other hand he philosophizes on appearances; in reference to
this certain fragments only are transmitted to us, and such physical
opinions as these can have no great interest. They are meant to have no
speculative significance any more than are those of our own physicists.
When he says in this connection

  “Out of the earth comes all, and returns to it again,
  We all have come from earth and water alike,
  Thus all that grows and takes its rise is only earth and water,”[51]

this does not signify existence, physical principles, as did the water
of Thales. For Aristotle expressly says, that no one regarded the earth
as the absolute principle.


2. PARMINIDES.

Parmenides is a striking figure in the Eleatic school, and he arrives
at more definite conceptions than does Xenophanes. He was, according
to Diogenes (IX. 21), born at Elea of a rich and honourable race. Of
his life, however, little is known; Aristotle only says (Met. I. 5)
from tradition that he was a scholar of Xenophanes. Sextus Empiricus
(adv. Math. VII. 111) calls him a friend (_γνώριμος_) of Xenophanes.
Diogenes Laertius further states: “He heard Anaximander and Xenophanes
also, but did not follow the latter” (which seems only to refer to
his place of abode), “but he lived with Aminias and Diochartes the
Pythagorean, attached himself to the latter, and by the former, and
not by Xenophanes, was prevailed upon to lead a quiet life.” That the
period in which his life falls comes between Xenophanes and Zeno—so
that he is contemporaneous with them, though younger than the former
and older than the latter—is ascertained. According to Diogenes (IX.
23) he flourished about the 69th Olympiad (504-501 B.C.). What is
most important is his journey to Athens with Zeno, where Plato makes
them talk with Socrates. This may be accepted generally, but what is
strictly historical in it cannot be ascertained. In the Thætetus Plato
makes Socrates reply to the invitation to examine the Eleatic system:
“For Melissus and the others who assert the All to be One at rest,
I have a certain respect; I have even more for Parmenides. For, to
speak in Homeric language, he seems to me both venerable and strong.
I knew him when he was an old man and I was still quite young, and I
heard wonderful things from him.”[52] And in the Platonic Dialogue
Parmenides (p. 127. Steph. p. 4. Bekk.) where, as is well known, the
conversation is carried on by Parmenides and Socrates, the historic
circumstances of this interview are related in detail. “Parmenides was
very old, had hair which was quite grey, was beautiful in countenance,
about sixty-five years old, and Zeno almost forty.” Tennemann (Vol. I.
p. 415) places the journey in the 80th Olympiad (460-457 B.C.). Thus
Socrates, since he was born in Olympiad 77, 4 (469 B.C.), would seem to
have been still too young to have carried on a dialogue such as Plato
describes, and the principal matter of this dialogue, which is written
in the spirit of the Eleatic school, belongs to Plato himself. Besides,
we know from Parmenides’ life, that he stood in high respect with his
fellow-citizens at Elea, whose prosperity must be chiefly ascribed to
the laws which Parmenides gave them.[53] We also find in the _πίναξ_ of
Cebes (towards the beginning) “a Parmenidian life” used synonymously
with a moral life.

It must be remarked that here, where the Eleatic school is definitely
treated of, Plato does not speak of Xenophanes at all, but only of
Melissus and Parmenides. The fact that Plato, in one of his dialogues,
likewise accords the chief part to Parmenides, and puts in his mouth
the most lofty dialectic that ever was given, does not concern us here.
If with Xenophanes, by the proposition that out of nothing nothing
comes, origination and what depends upon or can be traced back to it is
denied, the opposition between Being and non-being makes its appearance
still more clearly with Parmenides, though still unconsciously. Sextus
Empiricus and Simplicius have preserved to us the most important
fragments from the poems of Parmenides; for Parmenides also propounded
his philosophy as a poem. The first long fragment in Sextus (adv. Math.
VII. 111) is an allegorical preface to his poem on Nature. This preface
is majestic; it is written after the manner of the times, and in it all
there is an energetic, impetuous soul which strives with Being to grasp
and to express it. We can show Parmenides’ philosophy best in his own
words. The introduction runs thus:—

  “Horses that bore me, impelled by their courage,
  Brought me to the much-famed streets of the goddess
  Who leads the wise man to every kind of knowledge.
  Maidens point out the way.
  The axle sings hot as the daughters of Helios quickly approach,
  Leaving the dwelling of night, pressing on to the light,
  With mighty hands raising the sheltering veil.”

The maidens are, according to Sextus (adv. Math. VII. 112, 113), the
senses, and Helios’ daughters are more especially the eyes:—

  “These are the gates of the pathways of night and of day.
  Now the heavenly maidens approach the great doors,
  Whose lock double-turned the punishing Dice protects.
  To this one soft words were by the maidens addressed
  Subtly persuading her the barriers of oak from the gates,
  Now to withdraw. Yet these,
  Directly the yawning breadth of the doors was revealed,
  Drove the horses and waggon, on through the gate.
  The goddess received me in friendship, seized with her one hand my
        right,
  And turning towards me, she said:
  ‘Oh, thou, who with guides all immortal and horses,
  Camest here in my palace,—be welcome, young man.
  For no evil fate has led thee into this path,
  (Indeed it lies far from the ways of a man)
  But Themis and Dice. Now shalt thou all things explore,
  The heart never-flinching of the truth that persuades,
  The transient opinions which are not to be trusted.
  But from such paths keep the inquiring soul far away.
  On this way let not the much followed custom
  Cause thee to take the rash eye as thy guide,
  Or the confused sounding ear and the tongue. Ponder considerately
  With thy reason alone, the doctrine much and often examined,
  Which I will proclaim. For there lacks but desire on your way.’”

The goddess develops everything from the double knowledge (_α_)
of thought, of the truth, and (_β_) of opinion; these make up the
two parts of the poem. In another fragment taken from Simplicius’
Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics (p. 25; 19 a) and from Proclus
on the Timæus (p. 29 b), we have the principal part of what is here
related preserved to us. “Understand,” says the goddess, “which are the
two roads of knowledge. The one which is only Being, and which is not
non-being, is the path of conviction, the truth is in it. The other
that is not Being, and which is necessarily non-being, is, I must tell
you, a path quite devoid of reason, for thou canst neither know, or
attain to, or express, non-being.” The nothing, in fact, turns into
something, since it is thought or is said: we say something, think
something, if we wish to think and say the nothing. “It is necessary
that saying and thinking should be Being; for Being is, but nothing is
not at all.” There the matter is stated in brief; and in this nothing,
falls negation generally, or in more concrete form, limitation, the
finite, restriction: _determinatio est negatio_ is Spinoza’s great
saying. Parmenides says, whatever form the negation may take, it
does not exist at all. To consider the nothing as the true is “the
way of error in which the ignorant and double-minded mortals wander.
Perplexity of mind sways the erring sense. Those who believe Being
and non-being to be the same, and then again not the same, are like
deaf and blind men surprised, like hordes confusedly driven.” The
error is to confuse them and to ascribe the same value to each, or to
distinguish them as if non-being were the limited generally. “Whichever
way is taken, it leads back to the point from which it started.” It is
a constantly self-contradictory and disintegrating movement. To human
ideas, now this is held to be reality and now its opposite, and then
again a mixture of both.

Simplicius quotes further, in writing on Aristotle’s Physics (p.
17 a; 31, 19): “But the truth is only the ‘is’; this is neither
begotten of anything else, nor transient, entire, alone in its class
(_μουνογενές_), unmoved and without end; it neither was, nor will be,
but is at once the all. For what birth wouldst thou seek for it? How
and whence should it be augmented? That it should be from that which
is not, I shall allow thee neither to say nor to think, for neither
can it be said or thought that the ‘is’ is not. What necessity had
either later or earlier made it begin from the nothing? Thus must it
throughout only be or not be; nor will any force of conviction ever
make something else arise out of that which is not. Thus origination
has disappeared, and decease is incredible. Being is not separable,
for it is entirely like itself; it is nowhere more, else would it not
hold together, nor is it less, for everything is full of Being. The all
is one coherent whole, for Being flows into unison with Being: it is
unchangeable and rests securely in itself; the force of necessity holds
it within the bounds of limitation. It cannot hence be said that it is
imperfect; for it is without defect, while non-existence is wanting in
all.” This Being is not the undetermined (_ἄπειρον_) for it is kept
within the limits of necessity; we similarly find in Aristotle that
limitation is ascribed to Parmenides. The sense in which the expression
“limit” is to be taken is uncertain. According to Parmenides, however,
this absolute limitation is as _Δίκη_, absolute necessity clearly
determined in itself; and it is an important fact that he went beyond
the uncultured conception of the infinite. “Thought, and that on
account of which thought is, are the same. For not without that which
is, in which it expresses itself (_ἐν ᾦ πεφατισμένον ἐστίν_), wilt thou
find Thought, seeing that it is nothing and will be nothing outside of
that which is.” That is the main point. Thought produces itself, and
what is produced is a Thought. Thought is thus identical with Being,
for there is nothing beside Being, this great affirmation. Plotinus,
in quoting (V. Ennead. I. 8) this last fragment says: “Parmenides
adopted this point of view, inasmuch as he did not place Being in
sensuous things; identifying Being with Thought, he maintained it to be
unchangeable.” The Sophists concluded from this: “All is truth; there
is no error, for error is the non-existent, that which is not to be
thought.”

Since in this an advance into the region of the ideal is observable,
Parmenides began Philosophy proper. A man now constitutes himself free
from all ideas and opinions, denies their truth, and says necessity
alone, Being, is the truth. This beginning is certainly still dim and
indefinite, and we cannot say much of what it involves; but to take
up this position certainly is to develop Philosophy proper, which has
not hitherto existed. The dialectic that the transient has no truth,
is implied in it, for if these determinations are taken as they are
usually understood, contradictions ensue. In Simplicius (in Arist.
Phys. p. 27 b.; 31 b.) we have further metaphorical images from
Parmenides. “Since the utmost limit of Being is perfect, it resembles
on every side the form of a well rounded sphere, which from its centre
extends in all directions equally, for it can be neither larger or
smaller in one part or another. There is no non-being which prevents it
from attaining to the like”—from coming into unity with itself—“and
there is no Being where it was devoid of Being, here more and there
less. Because the all is without defect, it is in all places in the
same way like itself in its determinations.” Plotinus in the passage
quoted says: “He compares Being with the spherical form, because it
comprehends all in itself, and Thought is not outside of this, but is
contained in it.” And Simplicius says: “We must not wonder at him,
for on account of the poetic form, he adopts a mythological fiction
(_πλάσματος_).” It immediately strikes us that the sphere is limited,
and furthermore in space, and hence another must be above it; but
then the Notion of the sphere is the similarity of withholding the
different, notwithstanding that even the undifferentiated must be
expressed; hence this image is inconsistent.

Parmenides adds to this doctrine of the truth, the doctrine of human
opinions, the illusive system of the world. Simplicius, writing on
Aristotle’s Physics (p. 7 b; 39 a), tells us that he says: “Men have
two forms of opinion, one of which should not be, and in it they
are mistaken; they set them in opposition to one another in form
and symbol. The one, the ethereal fire of the flame, is quite fine,
identical with itself throughout, but not identical with the other,
for that is also for itself; on the other hand there is what belongs
to night, or thick and ponderous existence.” By the former, warmth,
softness, lightness is expressed, and by the latter, cold. “But since
everything is called light and night, and their qualities are suited
both to the one kind of things and the other, everything alike is
filled with light and dark night; both are alike since nothing exists
without both.” Aristotle (Met. I. 3 and 5), and the other historians,
likewise unanimously attribute to Parmenides the fact that he sets
forth two principles for the system of manifest things, warmth and
cold, through the union of which everything is. Light, fire, is the
active and animate; night, cold, is called the passive.

Parmenides also speaks like a Pythagorean—he was called _ἀνὲρ
Πυθαγορεῖος_ by Strabo—in the following, and likewise mythological
conception: “There are circlets wound round one another, one of which
is of the rare element and the other of the dense, between which others
are to be found, composed of light and darkness mingled. Those which
are less are of impure fire, but those over them of night, through
which proceed the forces of the flames. That which holds this all
together, however, is something fixed, like a wall, under which there
is a fiery wreath, and the most central of the rare spheres again is
fiery. The most central of those mixed is the goddess that reigns over
all, the Divider (_κληροῦχος_), Dice and Necessity. For she is the
principle of all earthly produce and intermingling, which impels the
male to mix with the female, and conversely; she took Love to help
her, creating him first amongst the gods. The air is an exhalation
(_ἀναπνοή_) of the earth; the sun and the milky way, the breath of
fire; and the moon is air and fire mingled, &c.”[54]

It still remains to us to explain the manner in which Parmenides
regarded sensation and thought, which may undoubtedly at first sight
seem to be materialistic. Theophrastus,[55] for example, remarks in
this regard: “Parmenides said nothing more than that there are two
elements. Knowledge is determined according to the preponderance of
the one or of the other; for, according as warmth or cold predominate,
thought varies; it becomes better and purer through warmth, and yet it
requires also a certain balance.”

  “For as in each man there still is in his dispersive limbs an
        intermingling,
  So is the understanding of man; for that
  Which is thought by men, is the nature of the limbs,
  Both in one and all; for thought is indeed the most.”[56]

He thus takes sensation and thought to be the same, and makes
remembrance and oblivion to arise from these through mingling them,
but whether in the intermingling they take an equal place, whether
this is thought or not, and what condition this is, he leaves quite
undetermined. But that he ascribes sensation to the opposites in and
for themselves is clear, because he says: “The dead do not feel
light or warmth or hear voices, because the fire is out of them;
they feel cold, stillness and the opposite, however, and, speaking
generally, each existence has a certain knowledge.” In fact, this view
of Parmenides is really the opposite of materialism, for materialism
consists in putting together the soul from parts, or independent forces
(the wooden horse of the senses).


3. MELISSUS.

There is little to tell about the life of Melissus. Diogenes Laertius
(IX. 24) calls him a disciple of Parmenides, but the discipleship is
uncertain; it is also said of him that he associated with Heraclitus.
He was born in Samos, like Pythagoras, and was besides a distinguished
statesman amongst his people. It is said by Plutarch (in Pericle, 26)
that, as admiral of the Samians, he gained in battle a victory over the
Athenians. He flourished about the 84th Olympiad (444 B.C.).

In regard to his philosophy, too, there is little to say. Aristotle,
where he mentions him, places him always with Parmenides, as resembling
him in mode of thought. Simplicius, writing on Aristotle’s Physics
(p. 7 sqq.), has preserved several fragments of his prose writings on
Nature, which show the same kind of thoughts and arguments as we find
in Parmenides, but, in part, somewhat more developed. It was a question
whether the reasoning in which it is shown that change does not exist,
or contradicts itself, which, by Aristotle in his incomplete, and, in
some parts, most corrupt work on Xenophanes, Zeno, and Gorgias (c. 2.),
was ascribed to Xenophanes, did not really belong to Melissus.[57]

Since the beginning, in which we are told whose reasoning it is, is
wanting, conjecture only applies it to Xenophanes. The writing begins
with the words “He says,” without any name being given. It thus depends
on the superscription alone whether Aristotle speaks of the philosophy
of Xenophanes or not, and it must be noticed that different hands have
put different superscriptions. Indeed, there is in this work (c. 2) an
opinion of Xenophanes mentioned in such a way that it appears as though
had what was previously quoted by Aristotle been by him ascribed to
Xenophanes, the expression would have been different. It is possible
that Zeno is meant, as the internal evidence abundantly shows. There
is in it a dialectic more developed in form, more real reflexion, than
from the verses could be expected, not from Xenophanes alone, but even
from Parmenides. For Aristotle expressly says that Xenophanes does not
yet determine with precision; thus the cultured reasoning contained in
Aristotle must certainly be denied to Xenophanes; at least, it is so
far certain that Xenophanes himself did not know how to express his
thoughts in a manner so orderly and precise as that found here. We find
it said:—

“If anything is, it is eternal (_ἀΐδιον_).” Eternity is an awkward
word, for it immediately makes us think of time and mingle past and
future as an infinite length of time; but what is meant is that
_ἀΐδιον_ is the self-identical, supersensuous, unchangeable, pure
present, which is without any time-conception. It is, origination and
change are shut out; if it commences, it does so out of nothing or
out of Being. “It is impossible that anything should arise from the
nothing. If everything could have arisen, or could it merely not have
been everything eternally, it would equally have arisen out of nothing.
For, if everything had arisen, nothing would once have existed. If some
were alone the existent out of which the rest sprang, the one would be
more and greater. But the more and greater would thus have arisen out
of the nothing of itself, for in the less there is not its more, nor in
the smaller its greater.”

Simplicius makes this note to the Physics of Aristotle (p. 22 b): “No
more can anything arise out of the existent, for the existent already
is, and thus does not first arise from the existent.”

“As eternal, the existent also is unlimited, since it has no beginning
from which it came, nor end in which it ceases. The infinite all is
one, for, if there were two or more, they would limit one another,”
and thus have a beginning and end. The one would be the nothing of the
other and come forth from this nothing. “This one is like itself; for
if it were unlike it would no longer be the one that was posited, but
many. This one is likewise immovable, inasmuch as it does not move
itself, since it does not pass out into anything. In passing out, it
would require to do so into what is full or what is empty; it could
not be into the full, for that is an impossibility, and just as little
could it be into what is empty, for that is the nothing. The one,
therefore, is in this way devoid of pain or suffering, not changing in
position or form, or mingling with what is different. For all these
determinations involve the origination of non-being and passing away
of Being, which is impossible.” Thus here again the contradiction
which takes place when origination and passing away are spoken of, is
revealed.

Now Melissus places opinion in opposition to this truth. The change
and multiplicity extinguished in Being appears on the other side, in
consciousness, as in what is opinionative; it is necessary to say this
if only the negative side, the removal of these moments, the Absolute
as destitute of predicate, is laid hold of. “In sensuous perception the
opposite is present for us; that is to say, a number of things, their
change, their origination and passing away, and their intermingling.
Thus that first knowledge must take its place beside this second,
which has as much certainty for ordinary consciousness as the first.”
Melissus does not seem to have decided for the one or the other, but,
oscillating between both, to have limited the knowledge of the truth to
the statement that, speaking generally, between two opposite modes of
presentation, the more probable opinion is to be preferred, but that
what is so preferred is only to be regarded as the stronger opinion,
and not as truth. This is what Aristotle says of him.

Since Aristotle, in distinguishing his philosophy from the philosophy
of Parmenides, maintains that in the first place Parmenides seems
to understand the One as the principle of thought, and Melissus as
matter, we must remark that this distinction falls away in pure
existence, Being, or the One. Pure matter, as also pure thought (if
I am to speak of such a distinction), are not present to Parmenides
and Melissus, since they are abrogated; and it must only be in the
manner of his expression that one of them—according to Aristotle
(Phys. I. 2), on account of his clumsier mode of treatment (_μᾶλλον
φορτικός_)—could seem to have conceived of the other sense. If the
difference consisted secondly in the fact that Parmenides regarded the
one as limited and Melissus as unlimited, this limitation of the one
would, in effect, immediately contradict the philosophy of Parmenides;
for since limit is the non-being of Being, non-being would thus be
posited. But when Parmenides speaks of limit, we see that his poetic
language is not altogether exact; limit, however, as pure limit, is
just simple Being and absolute negativity, in which all else said and
set forth is sublated. Necessity, as this pure negativity and movement
within itself, although impassive thought, is absolutely bound to
its opposite. In the third place it may be said that Parmenides set
forth a concomitant philosophy of opinion or reality, to which Being
as existence for thought was thus more opposed than was the case with
Melissus.


4. ZENO.

What specially characterizes Zeno is the dialectic which, properly
speaking, begins with him; he is the master of the Eleatic school in
whom its pure thought arrives at the movement of the Notion in itself
and becomes the pure soul of science. That is to say, in the Eleatics
hitherto considered, we only have the proposition: “The nothing has
no reality and is not at all, and thus what is called origin and
decease disappears.” With Zeno, on the contrary, we certainly see just
such an assertion of the one and removal of what contradicts it, but
we also see that this assertion is not made the starting point; for
reason begins by calmly demonstrating in that which is established as
existent, its negation. Parmenides asserts that “The all is immutable,
for, in change, the non-being of that which is would be asserted,
but Being only is; in saying that non-being is, the subject and the
predicate contradict themselves.” Zeno, on the other hand, says:
“Assert your change; in it as change there is the negation to it, or
it is nothing.” To the former change existed as motion, definite and
complete. Zeno protested against motion as such, or pure motion. “Pure
Being is not motion; it is rather the negation of motion.” We find it
specially interesting that there is in Zeno the higher consciousness,
the consciousness that when one determination is denied, this negation
is itself again a determination, and then in the absolute negation
not one determination, but both the opposites must be negated. Zeno
anticipated this, and because he foresaw that Being is the opposite
of nothing, he denied of the One what must be said of the nothing.
But the same thing must occur with all the rest. We find this higher
dialectic in Plato’s Parmenides; here it only breaks forth in respect
to some determinations, and not to the determination of the One and of
Being. The higher consciousness is the consciousness of the nullity of
Being as of what is determined as against the nothing, partly found in
Heraclitus and then in the Sophists; with them it never has any truth,
it has no existence in itself, but is only the for-another, or the
assurance of the individual consciousness, and assurance as refutation,
i.e. the negative side of dialectic.

According to Diogenes Laertius, (IX. 25) Zeno was likewise an Eleat;
he is the youngest, and lived most in company with Parmenides. The
latter became very fond of him and adopted him as a son; his own
father was called Telentagoras. Not in his State alone was his conduct
held in high respect, for his fame was universal, and he was esteemed
particularly as a teacher. Plato mentions that men came to him from
Athens and other places, in order to profit from his learning.[58]
Proud self-sufficiency is ascribed to him by Diogenes (IX. 28) because
he—with the exception of a journey made to Athens—continued to reside
in Elea, and did not stay a longer time in the great, mighty Athens,
and there attain to fame. In very various narratives his death was made
for ever celebrated for the strength of his mind evinced in it; it was
said that he freed a State (whether his own home at Elea or in Sicily,
is not known) from its Tyrant (the name is given differently, but an
exact historical account has not been recorded) in the following way,
and by the sacrifice of his life. He entered into a plot to overthrow
the Tyrant, but this was betrayed. When the Tyrant now, in face of the
people, caused him to be tortured in every possible way to get from him
an avowal of his confederates, and when he questioned him about the
enemies of the State, Zeno first named to the Tyrant all his friends as
participators in the plot, and then spoke of the Tyrant himself as the
pest of the State. The powerful remonstrances or the horrible tortures
and death of Zeno aroused the citizens, inspired them with courage to
fall upon the Tyrant, kill him, and liberate themselves. The manner of
the end, and his violent and furious state of mind, is very variously
depicted. He is said to have pretended to wish to say something into
the Tyrant’s ear, and then to have bitten his ear, and thus held him
fast until he was slain by the others. Others say that he seized him by
the nose between his teeth; others that as on his reply great tortures
were applied, he bit off his tongue and spat it into the Tyrant’s face,
to show him that he could get nothing from him, and that he then was
pounded in a mortar.[59]

It has just been noticed that Zeno had the very important character
of being the originator of the true objective dialectic. Xenophanes,
Parmenides, and Melissus, start with the proposition: “Nothing is
nothing; the nothing does not exist at all, or the like is real
existence,” that is, they make one of the opposed predicates to be
existence. Now when they encounter the opposite in a determination,
they demolish this determination, but it is only demolished through
another, through my assertion, through the distinction that I form, by
which one side is made to be the true, and the other the null. We have
proceeded from a definite proposition; the nullity of the opposite does
not appear in itself; it is not that it abrogates itself, i.e. that it
contains a contradiction in itself. For instance, I assert of something
that it is the null; then I show this by hypothesis in motion, and
it follows that it is the null. But another consciousness does not
assert this; I declare one thing to be directly true; another has the
right of asserting something else as directly true, that is to say,
motion. Similarly what seems to be the case when one philosophic system
contradicts another, is that the first is pre-established, and that men
starting from this point of view, combat the other. The matter is thus
easily settled by saying: “The other has no truth, because it does not
agree with me,” and the other has the right to say the same. It does
not help if I prove my system or my proposition and then conclude that
thus the opposite is false; to this other proposition the first always
seems to be foreign and external. Falsity must not be demonstrated
through another, and as untrue because the opposite is true, but in
itself; we find this rational perception in Zeno.

In Plato’s Parmenides (pp. 127, 128, Steph., pp. 6, 7, Bekk.) this
dialectic is very well described, for Plato makes Socrates say of
it: “Zeno in his writings asserts fundamentally the same as does
Parmenides, that All is One, but he would feign delude us into
believing that he was telling something new. Parmenides thus shows in
his poems that All is One; Zeno, on the contrary, shows that the Many
cannot be.” Zeno replies, that “He wrote thus really against those who
try to make Parmenides’ position ridiculous, for they try to show what
absurdities and self-contradictions can be derived from his statements;
he thus combats those who deduce Being from the many, in order to show
that far more absurdities arise from this than from the statements of
Parmenides.” That is the special aim of objective dialectic, in which
we no longer maintain simple thought for itself, but see the battle
fought with new vigour within the enemy’s camp. Dialectic has in Zeno
this negative side, but it has also to be considered from its positive
side.

According to the ordinary ideas of science, where propositions result
from proof, proof is the movement of intelligence, a connection brought
about by mediation. Dialectic is either (_α_) external dialectic,
in which this movement is different from the comprehension of the
movement, or (_β_) not a movement of our intelligence only, but what
proceeds from the nature of the thing itself, i.e. from the pure Notion
of the content. The former is a manner of regarding objects in such a
way that reasons are revealed and new light thrown, by means of which
all that was supposed to be firmly fixed, is made to totter; there
may be reasons which are altogether external too, and we shall speak
further of this dialectic when dealing with the Sophists. The other
dialectic, however, is the immanent contemplation of the object; it is
taken for itself, without previous hypothesis, idea or obligation, not
under any outward conditions, laws or causes; we have to put ourselves
right into the thing, to consider the object in itself, and to take it
in the determinations which it has. In regarding it thus, it shows from
itself that it contains opposed determinations, and thus breaks up;
this dialectic we more especially find in the ancients. The subjective
dialectic, which reasons from external grounds, is moderate, for it
grants that: “In the right there is what is not right, and in the false
the true.” True dialectic leaves nothing whatever to its object, as if
the latter were deficient on one side only; for it disintegrates itself
in the entirety of its nature. The result of this dialectic is null,
the negative; the affirmative in it does not yet appear. This true
dialectic may be associated with the work of the Eleatics. But in their
case the real meaning and quality of philosophic understanding was not
great, for they got no further than the fact that through contradiction
the object is a nothing.

Zeno’s dialectic of matter has not been refuted to the present
day; even now we have not got beyond it, and the matter is left in
uncertainty. Simplicius, writing on the Physics of Aristotle (p. 30),
says: “Zeno proves that if the many is, it must be great and small; if
great, the many must be infinite in number” (it must have gone beyond
the manifold, as indifferent limit, into the infinite; but what is
infinite is no longer large and no longer many, for it is the negation
of the many). “If small, it must be so small as to have no size,”
like atoms. “Here he shows that what has neither size, thickness nor
mass, cannot be. For if it were added to another, it would not cause
its increase; were it, that is to say, to have no size and be added
thereto, it could not supplement the size of the other and consequently
that which is added is nothing. Similarly were it taken away, the other
would not be made less, and thus it is nothing. If what has being is,
each existence necessarily has size and thickness, is outside of one
another, and one is separate from the other; the same applies to all
else (_περὶ τοῦ προὔχοντος_), for it, too, has size, and in it there is
what mutually differs (_προέξει αὐτοῦ τι_). But it is the same thing
to say something once and to say it over and over again; in it nothing
can be a last, nor will there not be another to the other. Thus if many
are, they are small and great; small, so that they have no size; great,
so that they are infinite.”

Aristotle (Phys. VI. 9) explains this dialectic further; Zeno’s
treatment of motion was above all objectively dialectical. But the
particulars which we find in the Parmenides of Plato are not his.
For Zeno’s consciousness we see simple unmoved thought disappear,
but become thinking movement; in that he combats sensuous movement,
he concedes it. The reason that dialectic first fell on movement is
that the dialectic is itself this movement, or movement itself the
dialectic of all that is. The thing, as self-moving, has its dialectic
in itself, and movement is the becoming another, self-abrogation. If
Aristotle says that Zeno denied movement because it contains an inner
contradiction, it is not to be understood to mean that movement did not
exist at all. The point is not that there is movement and that this
phenomenon exists; the fact that there is movement is as sensuously
certain as that there are elephants; it is not in this sense that Zeno
meant to deny movement. The point in question concerns its truth.
Movement, however, is held to be untrue, because the conception of it
involves a contradiction; by that he meant to say that no true Being
can be predicated of it.

Zeno’s utterances are to be looked at from this point of view, not as
being directed against the reality of motion, as would at first appear,
but as pointing out how movement must necessarily be determined, and
showing the course which must be taken. Zeno now brings forward four
different arguments against motion; the proofs rest on the infinite
divisibility of space and time.

(a) This is his first form of argument:—“Movement has no truth,
because what is in motion must first reach the middle of the space
before arriving at the end.” Aristotle expresses this thus shortly,
because he had earlier treated of and worked out the subject at length.
This is to be taken as indicating generally that the continuity of
space is presupposed. What moves itself must reach a certain end, this
way is a whole. In order to traverse the whole, what is in motion must
first pass over the half, and now the end of this half is considered as
being the end; but this half of space is again a whole, that which also
has a half, and the half of this half must first have been reached, and
so on into infinity. Zeno here arrives at the infinite divisibility of
space; because space and time are absolutely continuous, there is no
point at which the division can stop. Every dimension (and every time
and space always have a dimension) is again divisible into two halves,
which must be measured off; and however small a space we have, the
same conditions reappear. Movement would be the act of passing through
these infinite moments, and would therefore never end; thus what is in
motion cannot reach its end. It is known how Diogenes of Sinope, the
Cynic, quite simply refuted these arguments against movement; without
speaking he rose and walked about, contradicting them by action.[60]
But when reasons are disputed, the only valid refutation is one derived
from reasons; men have not merely to satisfy themselves by sensuous
assurance, but also to understand. To refute objections is to prove
their non-existence, as when they are made to fall away and can hence
be adduced no longer; but it is necessary to think of motion as Zeno
thought of it, and yet to carry this theory of motion further still.

We have here the spurious infinite or pure appearance, whose simple
principle Philosophy demonstrates as universal Notion, for the first
time making its appearance as developed in its contradiction; in the
history of Philosophy a consciousness of this contradiction is also
attained. Movement, this pure phenomenon, appears as something thought
and shown forth in its real being—that is, in its distinction of pure
self-identity and pure negativity, the point as distinguished from
continuity. To us there is no contradiction in the idea that the here
of space and the now of time are considered as a continuity and length;
but their Notion is self-contradictory. Self-identity or continuity is
absolute cohesion, the destruction of all difference, of all negation,
of being for self; the point, on the contrary, is pure being-for-self,
absolute self-distinction and the destruction of all identity and
all connection with what is different. Both of these, however,
are, in space and time, placed in one; space and time are thus the
contradiction; it is necessary, first of all, to show the contradiction
in movement, for in movement that which is opposed is, to ordinary
conceptions, inevitably manifested. Movement is just the reality of
time and space, and because this appears and is made manifest, the
apparent contradiction is demonstrated, and it is this contradiction
that Zeno notices. The limitation of bisection which is involved in
the continuity of space, is not absolute limitation, for that which
is limited is again continuity; however, this continuity is again not
absolute, for the opposite has to be exhibited in it, the limitation
of bisection; but the limitation of continuity is still not thereby
established, the half is still continuous, and so on into infinity.
In that we say “into infinity,” we place before ourselves a beyond,
outside of the ordinary conception, which cannot reach so far. It is
certainly an endless going forth, but in the Notion it is present,
it is a progression from one opposed determination to others, from
continuity to negativity, from negativity to continuity; but both of
these are before us. Of these moments one in the process may be called
the true one; Zeno first asserts continuous progression in such a way
that no limited space can be arrived at as ultimate, or Zeno upholds
progression in this limitation.

The general explanation which Aristotle gives to this contradiction, is
that space and time are not infinitely divided, but are only divisible.
But it now appears that, because they are divisible—that is, in
potentiality—they must actually be infinitely divided, for else they
could not be divided into infinity. That is the general answer of the
ordinary man in endeavouring to refute the explanation of Aristotle.
Bayle (Tom. IV. art. Zénon, not. E.) hence says of Aristotle’s answer
that it is “pitoyable: C’est se moquer du monde que de se servir de
cette doctrine; car si la matière est divisible à l’infini, elle
contient un nombre infini de parties. Ce n’est donc point un infini en
puissance, c’est un infini, qui existe réellement, actuellement. Mais
quand-même on accorderait cet infini en puissance, qui deviendrait
un infini par la division actuelle de ses parties, on ne perdrait
pas ses avantages; car le mouvement est une chose, qui a la même
vertu, que la division. Il touche une partie de l’espace sans toucher
l’autre, et il les touche toutes les unes après les autres. N’est-ce
pas les distinguer actuellement? N’est-ce pas faire ce que ferait un
géomètre sur une table en tirant des lignes, qui désignassent tous les
demi-pouces? Il ne brise pas la table en demi-pouces, mais il y fait
néanmoins une division, qui marque la distinction actuelle des parties;
et je ne crois pas qu’Aristote eut voulu nier, que _si_ l’on tirait une
infinité de lignes sur un pouce de matière, on n’y introduisît une
division, qui réduirait en infini actuel ce qui n’était selon lui qu’un
infini virtual.” This _si_ is good! Divisibility is, as potentiality,
the universal; there is continuity as well as negativity or the point
posited in it—but posited as moment, and not as existent in and for
itself. I can divide matter into infinitude, but I only can do so; I
do not really divide it into infinitude. This is the infinite, that no
one of its moments has reality. It never does happen that, in itself,
one or other—that absolute limitation or absolute continuity—actually
comes into existence in such a way that the other moment disappears.
There are two absolute opposites, but they are moments, i.e. in the
simple Notion or in the universal, in thought, if you will; for in
thought, in ordinary conception, what is set forth both is and is not
at the same time. What is represented either as such, or as an image
of the conception, is not a thing; it has no Being, and yet it is not
nothing.

Space and time furthermore, as _quantum_, form a limited extension,
and thus can be measured off; just as I do not actually divide space,
neither does the body which is in motion. The partition of space as
divided, is not absolute discontinuity [Punktualität], nor is pure
continuity the undivided and indivisible; likewise time is not pure
negativity or discontinuity, but also continuity. Both are manifested
in motion, in which the Notions have their reality for ordinary
conception—pure negativity as time, continuity as space. Motion itself
is just this actual unity in the opposition, and the sequence of both
moments in this unity. To comprehend motion is to express its essence
in the form of Notion, _i.e._, as unity of negativity and continuity;
but in them neither continuity nor discreteness can be exhibited as
the true existence. If we represent space or time to ourselves as
infinitely divided, we have an infinitude of points, but continuity is
present therein as a space which comprehends them: as Notion, however,
continuity is the fact that all these are alike, and thus in reality
they do not appear one out of the other like points. But both these
moments make their appearance as existent; if they are manifested
indifferently, their Notion is no longer posited, but their existence.
In them as existent, negativity is a limited size, and they exist as
limited space and time; actual motion is progression through a limited
space and a limited time and not through infinite space and infinite
time.

That what is in motion must reach the half is the assertion of
continuity, i.e. the possibility of division as mere possibility; it is
thus always possible in every space, however small. It is said that it
is plain that the half must be reached, but in so saying, everything
is allowed, including the fact that it never will be reached; for to
say so in one case, is the same as saying it an infinite number of
times. We mean, on the contrary, that in a larger space the half can be
allowed, but we conceive that we must somewhere attain to a space so
small that no halving is possible, or an indivisible, non-continuous
space which is no space. This, however, is false, for continuity is a
necessary determination; there is undoubtedly a smallest in space, i.e.
a negation of continuity, but the negation is something quite abstract.
Abstract adherence to the subdivision indicated, that is, to continuous
bisection into infinitude, is likewise false, for in the conception of
a half, the interruption of continuity is involved. We must say that
there is no half of space, for space is continuous; a piece of wood
may be broken into two halves, but not space, and space only exists in
movement. It might equally be said that space consists of an endless
number of points, i.e. of infinitely many limits and thus cannot be
traversed. Men think themselves able to go from one indivisible point
to another, but they do not thereby get any further, for of these there
is an unlimited number. Continuity is split up into its opposite,
a number which is indefinite; that is to say, if continuity is not
admitted, there is no motion. It is false to assert that it is possible
when one is reached, or that which is not continuous; for motion is
connection. Thus when it was said that continuity is the presupposed
possibility of infinite division, continuity is only the hypothesis;
but what is exhibited in this continuity is the being of infinitely
many, abstractly absolute limits.

(b) The second proof, which is also the presupposition of continuity
and the manifestation of division, is called “Achilles, the Swift.”
The ancients loved to clothe difficulties in sensuous representations.
Of two bodies moving in one direction, one of which is in front and
the other following at a fixed distance and moving quicker than the
first, we know that the second will overtake the first. But Zeno says,
“The slower can never be overtaken by the quicker.” And he proves it
thus: “The second one requires a certain space of time to reach the
place from which the one pursued started at the beginning of the given
period.” Thus during the time in which the second reached the point
where the first was, the latter went over a new space which the second
has again to pass through in a part of this period; and in this way it
goes into infinity.

  c                                d                e        f    g

  B                                A

B, for instance, traverses two miles (c d) in an hour, A in the same
time, one mile (d e); if they are two miles (c d) removed from one
another, B has in one hour come to where A was at the beginning of the
hour. While B, in the next half hour, goes over the distance crossed
by A of one mile (d e), A has got half a mile (e f) further, and so
on into infinity. Quicker motion does not help the second body at all
in passing over the interval of space by which he is behind: the time
which he requires, the slower body always has at its avail in order to
accomplish some, although an ever shorter advance; and this, because of
the continual division, never quite disappears.

Aristotle, in speaking of this, puts it shortly thus. “This proof
asserts the same endless divisibility, but it is untrue, for the quick
will overtake the slow body if the limits to be traversed be granted to
it.” This answer is correct and contains all that can be said; that is,
there are in this representation two periods of time and two distances,
which are separated from one another, i.e. they are limited in relation
to one another; when, on the contrary, we admit that time and space
are continuous, so that two periods of time or points of space are
related to one another as continuous, they are, while being two, not
two, but identical. In ordinary language we solve the matter in the
easiest way, for we say: “Because the second is quicker, it covers a
greater distance in the same time as the slow; it can therefore come to
the place from which the first started and get further still.” After
B, at the end of the first hour, arrives at d and A at e, A in one and
the same period, that is, in the second hour, goes over the distance
e g, and B the distance d g. But this period of time which should be
one, is divisible into that in which B accomplishes d e and that in
which B passes through e g. A has a start of the first, by which it
gets over the distance e f, so that A is at f at the same period as
B is at e. The limitation which, according to Aristotle, is to be
overcome, which must be penetrated, is thus that of time; since it is
continuous, it must, for the solution of the difficulty, be said that
what is divisible into two spaces of time is to be conceived of as one,
in which B gets from d to e and from e to g, while A passes over the
distance e g. In motion two periods, as well as two points in space,
are indeed one.

If we wish to make motion clear to ourselves, we say that the body is
in one place and then it goes to another; because it moves, it is no
longer in the first, but yet not in the second; were it in either it
would be at rest. Where then is it? If we say that it is between both,
this is to convey nothing at all, for were it between both, it would
be in a place, and this presents the same difficulty. But movement
means to be in this place and not to be in it, and thus to be in both
alike; this is the continuity of space and time which first makes
motion possible. Zeno, in the deduction made by him, brought both these
points into forcible opposition. The discretion of space and time we
also uphold, but there must also be granted to them the overstepping of
limits, i.e. the exhibition of limits as not being, or as being divided
periods of time, which are also not divided. In our ordinary ideas we
find the same determinations as those on which the dialectic of Zeno
rests; we arrive at saying, though unwillingly, that in one period two
distances of space are traversed, but we do not say that the quicker
comprehends two moments of time in one; for that we fix a definite
space. But in order that the slower may lose its precedence, it must be
said that it loses its advantage of a moment of time, and indirectly
the moment of space.

Zeno makes limit, division, the moment of discretion in space and time,
the only element which is enforced in the whole of his conclusions, and
hence results the contradiction. The difficulty is to overcome thought,
for what makes the difficulty is always thought alone, since it keeps
apart the moments of an object which in their separation are really
united. It brought about the Fall, for man ate of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil; but it also remedies these evils.

(c) The third form, according to Aristotle, is as follows:—Zeno
says: “The flying arrow rests, and for the reason that what is in
motion is always in the self-same Now and the self-same Here, in the
indistinguishable;” it is here and here and here. It can be said of the
arrow that it is always the same, for it is always in the same space
and the same time; it does not get beyond its space, does not take in
another, that is, a greater or smaller space. That, however, is what
we call rest and not motion. In the Here and Now, the becoming “other”
is abrogated, limitation indeed being established, but only as moment;
since in the Here and Now as such, there is no difference, continuity
is here made to prevail against the mere belief in diversity. Each
place is a different place, and thus the same; true, objective
difference does not come forth in these sensuous relations, but in the
spiritual.

This is also apparent in mechanics; of two bodies the question as
to which moves presents itself before us. It requires more than two
places—three at least—to determine which of them moves. But it is
correct to say this, that motion is plainly relative; whether in
absolute space the eye, for instance, rests, or whether it moves,
is all the same. Or, according to a proposition brought forward by
Newton, if two bodies move round one another in a circle, it may be
asked whether the one rests or both move. Newton tries to decide this
by means of an external circumstance, the strain on the string. When I
walk on a ship in a direction opposed to the motion of the ship, this
is in relation to the ship, motion, and in relation to all else, rest.

In both the first proofs, continuity in progression has the
predominance; there is no absolute limit, but an overstepping of all
limits. Here the opposite is established; absolute limitation, the
interruption of continuity, without however passing into something
else; while discretion is presupposed, continuity is maintained.
Aristotle says of this proof: “It arises from the fact that it is taken
for granted that time consists of the Now; for if this is not conceded,
the conclusions will not follow.”

(d) “The fourth proof,” Aristotle continues, “is derived from similar
bodies which move in opposite directions in the space beside a similar
body, and with equal velocity, one from one end of the space, the other
from the middle. It necessarily results from this that half the time
is equal to the double of it. The fallacy rests in this, that Zeno
supposes that what is beside the moving body, and what is beside the
body at rest, move through an equal distance in equal time with equal
velocity, which, however, is untrue.”

                                     1
                        _E_|——|——|——|——|_F_
            _k_         _i_       _m_
            _C_|——|——|——|——|_D_
              _g_  _n_  _h_
  _A_|——|——|——|——|_B_

In a definite space such as a table (A B) let us suppose two bodies
of equal length with it and with one another, one of which (C D) lies
with one end (C) on the middle (g) of the table, and the other (E F),
being in the same direction, has the point (E) only touching the end
of the table (h); and supposing they move in opposite directions, and
the former (C D) reaches in an hour the end (h) of the table; we have
the result ensuing that the one (E F) passes in the half of the time
through the same space (i k) which the other does in the double (g h);
hence the half is equal to the double. That is to say, this second
passes (let us say, in the point l) by the whole of the first C D. In
the first half-hour l goes from m to i, while k only goes from g to n.

                              1
                 _E_|——|——|——|——|_F_
                   _k_  _o_  _i_       _m_
                 _C_|——|——|——|——|_D_
              _g_  _n_  _h_
  _A_|——|——|——|——|_B_

In the second half-hour l goes past o to k, and altogether passes from
m to k, or the double of the distance.

                         1
            _E_|——|——|——|——|_F_
                        _k_  _o_  _i_       _m_
                      _C_|——|——|——|——|_D_
               _g_ _n_  _h_
  _A_|——|——|——|——|_B_

This fourth form deals with the contradiction presented in opposite
motion; that which is common is given entirely to one body, while it
only does part for itself. Here the distance travelled by one body
is the sum of the distance travelled by both, just as when I go two
feet east, and from the same point another goes two feet west, we are
four feet removed from one another; in the distance moved both are
positive, and hence have to be added together. Or if I have gone two
feet forwards and two feet backwards, although I have walked four feet,
I have not moved from the spot; the motion is then nil, for by going
forwards and backwards an opposition ensues which annuls itself.

This is the dialectic of Zeno; he had a knowledge of the determinations
which our ideas of space and time contain, and showed in them their
contradiction; Kant’s antinomies do no more than Zeno did here. The
general result of the Eleatic dialectic has thus become, “the truth is
the one, all else is untrue,” just as the Kantian philosophy resulted
in “we know appearances only.” On the whole the principle is the same;
“the content of knowledge is only an appearance and not truth,” but
there is also a great difference present. That is to say, Zeno and
the Eleatics in their proposition signified “that the sensuous world,
with its multitudinous forms, is in itself appearance only, and has
no truth.” But Kant does not mean this, for he asserts: “Because we
apply the activity of our thought to the outer world, we constitute
it appearance; what is without, first becomes an untruth by the fact
that we put therein a mass of determinations. Only our knowledge, the
spiritual, is thus appearance; the world is in itself absolute truth;
it is our action alone that ruins it, our work is good for nothing.”
It shows excessive humility of mind to believe that knowledge has no
value; but Christ says, “Are ye not better than the sparrows?” and we
are so inasmuch as we are thinking; as sensuous we are as good or as
bad as sparrows. Zeno’s dialectic has greater objectivity than this
modern dialectic.

Zeno’s dialectic is limited to Metaphysics; later, with the Sophists,
it became general. We here leave the Eleatic school, which perpetuates
itself in Leucippus and, on the other side, in the Sophists, in such
a way that these last extended the Eleatic conceptions to all reality,
and gave to it the relation of consciousness; the former, however, as
one who later on worked out the Notion in its abstraction, makes a
physical application of it, and one which is opposed to consciousness.
There are several other Eleatics mentioned, to Tennemann’s surprise,
who, however, cannot interest us. “It is so unexpected,” he says (Vol.
I., p. 190), “that the Eleatic system should find disciples; and yet
Sextus mentions a certain Xeniades.”


D. HERACLITUS.

If we put aside the Ionics, who did not understand the Absolute as
Thought, and the Pythagoreans likewise, we have the pure Being of the
Eleatics, and the dialectic which denies all finite relationships.
Thought to the latter is the process of such manifestations; the world
in itself is the apparent, and pure Being alone the true. The dialectic
of Zeno thus lays hold of the determinations which rest in the content
itself, but it may, in so far, also be called subjective dialectic,
inasmuch as it rests in the contemplative subject, and the one, without
this movement of the dialectic, is abstract identity. The next step
from the existence of the dialectic as movement in the subject, is that
it must necessarily itself become objective. If Aristotle blames Thales
for doing away with motion, because change cannot be understood from
Being, and likewise misses the actual in the Pythagorean numbers and
Platonic Ideas, taken as the substances of the things which participate
in them, Heraclitus at least understands the absolute as just this
process of the dialectic. The dialectic is thus thre-fold: (_α_)
the external dialectic, a reasoning which goes over and over again
without ever reaching the soul of the thing; (_β_) immanent dialectic
of the object, but falling within the contemplation of the subject;
(_γ_) the objectivity of Heraclitus which takes the dialectic itself
as principle. The advance requisite and made by Heraclitus is the
progression from Being as the first immediate thought, to the category
of Becoming as the second. This is the first concrete, the Absolute, as
in it the unity of opposites. Thus with Heraclitus the philosophic Idea
is to be met with in its speculative form; the reasoning of Parmenides
and Zeno is abstract understanding. Heraclitus was thus universally
esteemed a deep philosopher and even was decried as such. Here we see
land; there is no proposition of Heraclitus which I have not adopted in
my Logic.

Diogenes Laertius says (IX. 1) that Heraclitus flourished about the
69th Olympiad (500 B.C.), and that he was of Ephesus and in part
contemporaneous with Parmenides: he began the separation and withdrawal
of philosophers from public affairs and the interests of the country,
and devoted himself in his isolation entirely to Philosophy. We
have thus three stages: (_α_) the seven sages as statesmen, regents
and law-givers; (_β_) the Pythagorean aristocratic league; (_γ_)
an interest in science for its own sake. Little more is known of
Heraclitus’ life than his relations to his countrymen the Ephesians,
and according to Diogenes Laertius (IX. 15, 3), these were for the
most part found in the fact that they despised him and were yet more
profoundly despised by him—a relationship such as we have now-a-days,
when each man exists for himself, and despises everyone else. In the
case of this noble character, the disdain and sense of separation
from the crowd emanates from the deep sense of the perversity of
the ordinary ideas and life of his people: in reference to this,
isolated expressions used on various occasions are still preserved.
Cicero (Tusc. Quæst. V. 36) and Diogenes Laertius (IX. 2) relate that
Heraclitus said: “The Ephesians all deserve to have their necks broken
as they grow up, so that the town should be left to minors” (people now
say that only youth knows how to govern), “because they drove away his
friend Hermodorus, the best of them all, and gave as their reason for
so doing that amongst them none should be more excellent than the rest;
and if any one were so, it should be elsewhere and amongst others.” It
was for the same reason that in the Athenian Democracy great men were
banished. Diogenes adds: “His fellow-citizens asked him to take part in
the administration of public affairs, but he declined, because he did
not like their constitution, laws and administration.” Proclus (T. III.
pp. 115, 116, ed. Cousin) says: “The noble Heraclitus blamed the people
for being devoid of understanding or thought. ‘What is,’ he says,
‘their understanding or their prudence? Most of them are bad, and few
are good.’” Diogenes Laertius (IX. 6) furthermore says: “Antisthenes
cites, as a proof of Heraclitus’ greatness, that he left his kingdom
to his brother.” He expresses in the strongest manner his contempt
for what is esteemed to be truth and right, in the letter preserved
to us by Diogenes (IX. 13, 14), in which, to the invitation of Darius
Hystaspes, “to make him acquainted with Greek wisdom—for his work
on Nature contains a very forcible theory of the world, but it is in
many passages obscure—to come to him and explain to him what required
explanation” (this is certainly not very probable if Heraclitus’ turn
of mind was also Oriental), he is said to have replied: “All mortal men
depart from truth and justice and are given over to excess and vain
opinions according to their evil understandings. But I, since I have
attained to an oblivion of all evil, and shun the overpowering envy
that follows me, and the vanity of high position, shall not come to
Persia. I am content with little and live in my own way.”

The only work that he wrote, and the title of which, Diogenes tells
us, was by some stated to be “The Muses” and by others “On Nature,”
he deposited in the temple of Diana at Ephesus. It seems to have been
preserved until modern times; the fragments which have come down to
us are collected together in Stephanus’ _Poësis philosophica_ (p.
129, seq.). Schleiermacher also collected them and arranged them in a
characteristic way. The title is “Heraclitus, the Dark, of Ephesus,
as represented in fragments of his work and by the testimony of the
ancients,” and it is to be found in Wolf and Buttmann’s “Museum of
ancient Learning,” vol. I. (Berlin, 1807) pp. 315-533. Seventy-three
passages are given. Kreuzer made one hope that he would work at
Heraclitus more critically and with a knowledge of the language.
He made a more complete collection, particularly from grammarians;
however, as, for lack of time, he left it to be worked up by a younger
scholar, and as the latter died, it never came before the public.
Compilations of the kind are as a rule too copious: they contain a
mass of learning and are more easily written than read. Heraclitus
has been considered obscure, and is indeed celebrated for this; it
also drew upon him the name of _σκοτεινός_. Cicero (De Nat. Deor. I.
26; III. 14; De Finib. II. 5) takes up a wrong idea, as often happens
to him; he thinks that Heraclitus purposely wrote obscurely. Any
such design would, however, be a very shallow one, and it is really
nothing but the shallowness of Cicero himself ascribed by him to
Heraclitus. Heraclitus’ obscurity is rather a result of neglecting
proper composition and of imperfect language; this is what was thought
by Aristotle (Rhet. III. 5), who, from a grammatical point of view,
ascribed it to a want of punctuation: “We do not know whether a word
belongs to what precedes or what succeeds.” Demetrius is of the same
opinion (De Elocutione, § 192, p. 78, ed. Schneider). Socrates, as
Diogenes Laertius relates (II. 22; IX. 11-12), said of this book: “What
he understood of it was excellent, and what he did not understand he
believed to be as good, but it requires a vigorous (_Δηλίου_) swimmer
to make his way through it.” The obscurity of this philosophy, however,
chiefly consists in there being profound speculative thought contained
in it; the Notion, the Idea, is foreign to the understanding and
cannot be grasped by it, though it may find mathematics quite simple.

Plato studied the philosophy of Heraclitus with special diligence; we
find much of it quoted in his works, and he got his earlier philosophic
education most indubitably from this source, so that Heraclitus may
be called Plato’s teacher. Hippocrates, likewise, is a philosopher of
Heraclitus’ school. What is preserved to us of Heraclitus’ philosophy
at first seems very contradictory, but we find the Notion making its
appearance, and a man of profound reflection revealed. Zeno began
to abrogate the opposed predicates, and he shows the opposition in
movement, an assertion of limitation and an abrogation of the same;
Zeno expressed the infinite, but on its negative side only, in
reference to its contradiction as being the untrue. In Heraclitus we
see the perfection of knowledge so far as it has gone, a perfecting of
the Idea into a totality, which is the beginning of Philosophy, since
it expresses the essence of the Idea, the Notion of the infinite, the
potentially and actively existent, as that which it is, i.e. as the
unity of opposites. From Heraclitus dates the ever-remaining Idea which
is the same in all philosophers to the present day, as it was the Idea
of Plato and of Aristotle.

1. _The Logical Principle._ Concerning the universal principle, this
bold mind, Aristotle tells us (Metaph. IV. 3 and 7), first uttered the
great saying: “Being and non-being are the same; everything is and yet
is not.” The truth only is as the unity of distinct opposites and,
indeed, of the pure opposition of being and non-being; but with the
Eleatics we have the abstract understanding that Being is alone the
truth. We say, in place of using the expression of Heraclitus, that
the Absolute is the unity of being and non-being. When we understand
that proposition as that “Being is and yet is not,” this does not seem
to make much sense, but only to imply complete negation and want of
thought. But we have another sentence that gives the meaning of the
principle better. For Heraclitus says: “Everything is in a state of
flux; nothing subsists nor does it ever remain the same.” And Plato
further says of Heraclitus: “He compares things to the current of a
river: no one can go twice into the same stream,”[61] for it flows on
and other water is disturbed. Aristotle tells us (Met. IV. 5) that his
successors even said “it could not once be entered,” for it changed
directly; what is, is not again. Aristotle (De Cœlo, III. 1) goes on
to say that Heraclitus declares that “there is only one that remains,
and from out of this all else is formed; all except this one is not
enduring (_παγίως_).”

This universal principle is better characterized as Becoming, the truth
of Being; since everything is and is not, Heraclitus hereby expressed
that everything is Becoming. Not merely does origination belong to it,
but passing away as well; both are not independent, but identical.
It is a great advance in thought to pass from Being to Becoming,
even if, as the first unity of opposite determinations, it is still
abstract. Because in this relationship both must be unrestful and
therefore contain within themselves the principle of life, the lack of
motion which Aristotle has demonstrated in the earlier philosophies
is supplied, and this last is even made to be the principle. This
philosophy is thus not one past and gone; its principle is essential,
and is to be found in the beginning of my Logic, immediately after
Being and Nothing. The recognition of the fact that Being and non-being
are abstractions devoid of truth, that the first truth is to be found
in Becoming, forms a great advance. The understanding comprehends
both as having truth and value in isolation; reason, on the other
hand, recognizes the one in the other, and sees that in the one its
“other” is contained. If we do not take the conception of existence
as complete, the pure Being of simple thought in which everything
definite is denied, is the absolute negative; but nothing is the
same, or just this self-identity. We here have an absolute transition
into the opposite which Zeno did not reach, for he remained at the
proposition, “From nothing, comes nothing.” With Heraclitus, however,
the moment of negativity is immanent, and the Notion of Philosophy as
complete is therefore dealt with.

In the first place we have here the abstract idea of Being and
non-being in a form altogether immediate and general; but when we look
closer, we find that Heraclitus also conceived of the opposites and
their unification in a more definite manner. He says: “The opposites
are combined in the self-same one, just as honey is both sweet and
bitter.” Sextus remarks of this (Pyrrh. Hyp. I. 29, §§ 210, 211; II. 6,
§ 63): “Heraclitus, like the Sceptics, proceeds from ordinary ideas; no
one will deny that healthy men call honey sweet, while those who are
sick will say it is bitter.” If it is only sweet, it cannot alter its
nature in another individual; it would in all places and even to the
jaundiced patient be sweet. Aristotle (De mundo, 5) quotes this from
Heraclitus: “Join together the complete whole and the incomplete” (the
whole makes itself the part, and the meaning of the part is to become
the whole), “what coincides and what conflicts, what is harmonious and
what discordant, and from out of them all comes one, and from one,
all.” This one is not an abstraction, but the activity of dividing
itself into opposites; the dead infinite is a poor abstraction as
compared with the depths of Heraclitus. All that is concrete, as that
God created the world, divided Himself, begot a Son, is contained in
this determination. Sextus Empiricus mentions (adv. Math. IX. 337) that
Heraclitus said: “The part is something different from the whole and
is yet the same as the whole; substance is the whole and the part, the
whole in the universe and the part in this living being.” Plato says in
his Symposium (p. 187, Steph.; p. 397, Bekk.) of Heraclitus’ principle:
“The one, separated from itself, makes itself one with itself like the
harmony of the bow and the lyre.” He then makes Eryximachus, who speaks
in the Symposium, criticize this thus: “In harmony there is discord, or
it arises from opposites; for harmony does not arise from height and
depth in that they are different, but from their union through the art
of music.” But this does not contradict Heraclitus, who means the same
thing. That which is simple, the repetition of a tone, is no harmony;
difference is clearly necessary to harmony, or a definite antithesis;
for it is the absolute becoming and not mere change. The real fact is
that each particular tone is different from another—not abstractly so
from any other, but from _its_ other—and thus it also can be one. Each
particular only is, in so far as its opposite is implicitly contained
in its Notion. Subjectivity is thus the “other” of objectivity and not
of a piece of paper, which would be meaningless; since each is the
“other” of the “other” as its “other,” we here have their identity.
This is Heraclitus’ great principle; it may seem obscure, but it
is speculative. And this to the understanding which maintains the
independence of Being and non-being, the subjective and objective, the
real and the ideal, is always difficult and dim.

2. _Natural Philosophy._ In his system Heraclitus did not rest content
with thus expressing himself in Notions, or with what is purely
logical. But in addition to this universal form in which he advanced
his principle, he gave his idea a real and more natural form, and
hence he is still reckoned as belonging to the Ionic school of natural
philosophers. However, as regards this form of reality, historians are
at variance; most of them, and amongst others, Aristotle (Met. I. 3,
8), say that he maintained fire to be the existent principle; others,
according to Sextus (adv. Math. IX. 360; X. 233), say it was air, and
others again assert that he made vapour to be the principle rather
than air;[62] even time is, in Sextus (adv. Math. X. 216), given as
the primary existence. The question arises as to how this diversity is
to be comprehended. It must not be believed that all these accounts
are to be ascribed to the inaccuracy of historians, for the witnesses
are of the best, like Aristotle and Sextus Empiricus, who do not speak
casually of these forms, but definitely, without, however, remarking
upon any such differences and contradictions. We seem to have a better
reason in the obscurity of the writing of Heraclitus, which might, by
the confusion of its expression, give occasion to misunderstanding.
But when regarded closer, this difficulty, which is evident when
merely looked at superficially, disappears; it is in the profoundly
significant conceptions of Heraclitus that the true way out of this
difficulty manifests itself. Heraclitus could no longer, like Thales,
express water, air or anything similar as an absolute principle—he
could no longer do so in the form of a primeval element from which the
rest proceeds—because he thought of Being as identical with non-being,
or the infinite Notion; thus the existent, absolute principle cannot
with him come forth as a definite and actual thing such as water, but
must be water in alteration, or as process only.

_a._ Understanding the abstract process as time, Heraclitus said:
“Time is the first corporeal existence,” as Sextus (adv. Math. X. 231,
232) puts it. Corporeal is an unfortunate expression; the Sceptics
frequently pick out the crudest expressions or make thoughts crude
in the first place so that they may afterwards dispense with them.
Corporeal here means abstract sensuousness; time, as the first sensuous
existence, is the abstract representation of process. It is because
Heraclitus did not rest at the logical expression of Becoming, but gave
to his principle the form of the existent, that it was necessary that
time should first present itself to him as such; for in the sensuously
perceptible it is the first form of Becoming. Time is pure Becoming
as perceived, the pure Notion, that which is simple, and the harmony
issuing from absolute opposites; its essential nature is to be and not
to be in one unity, and besides this, it has no other character. It is
not that time _is_ or _is not_, for time _is_ non-being immediately in
Being and Being immediately in non-being: it is the transition out of
Being into non-being, the abstract Notion, but in an objective form,
i.e. in so far as it is for us. In time there is no past and future,
but only the now, and this is, but is not as regards the past; and this
non-being, as future, turns round into Being. If we were to say how
that which Heraclitus recognized as principle, might, in the pure form
in which he recognized it, exist for consciousness, we could mention
nothing else but time; and it quite accords with the principle of
thought in Heraclitus to define time as the first form of Becoming.

_b._ But this pure, objective Notion must realize itself more fully,
and thus we find in fact, that Heraclitus determined the process in a
more markedly physical manner. In time we have the moments of Being and
non-being manifested as negative only, or as vanishing immediately;
if we wish to express both these moments as one independent totality,
the question is asked, which physical existence corresponds to this
determination. To Heraclitus the truth is to have grasped the essential
being of nature, i.e. to have represented it as implicitly infinite,
as process in itself; and consequently it is evident to us that
Heraclitus could not say that the primary principle is air, water, or
any such thing. They are not themselves process, but fire is process;
and thus he maintains fire to be the elementary principle, and this is
the real form of the Heraclitean principle, the soul and substance of
the nature-process. Fire is physical time, absolute unrest, absolute
disintegration of existence, the passing away of the “other,” but also
of itself; and hence we can understand how Heraclitus, proceeding from
his fundamental determination, could quite logically call fire the
Notion of the process.

_c._ He further made this fire to be a real process; because its
reality is for itself the whole process, the moments have become
concretely determined. Fire, as the metamorphosis of bodily things, is
the transformation and exhalation of the determinate; for this process
Heraclitus used a particular word—evaporation (_ἀναθυμίασις_)—but it
is rather transition. Aristotle (De anim. I. 2) says of Heraclitus in
this regard, that, according to his view, “the soul is the principle
because it is evaporation, the origination of everything; it is what
is most incorporeal and always in a state of flux.” This is quite
applicable to the primary principle of Heraclitus.

Furthermore he determined the real process in its abstract moments
by separating two sides in it—“the way upwards (_ὁδὸς ἄνω_) and the
way downwards (_ὁδὸς κάτω_)”—the one being division, in that it is
the existence of opposites, and the other the unification of these
existent opposites. Corresponding to these, he had, according to
Diogenes (IX. 8), the further determinations “of enmity and strife
(_πόλεμος_, _ἔρις_), and friendship and harmony (_ὁμολογία_, _εἰρήνη_);
of these two, enmity and strife is that which is the principle of
the origination of differences; but what leads to combustion is
harmony and peace.” In enmity amongst men, the one sets himself up
independently of the other, or is for himself and realizes himself; but
unity and peace is sinking out of independence into indivisibility or
non-reality. Everything is thre-fold and thereby real unity; nature is
the never-resting, and the all is the transition out of the one into
the other, from division into unity, and from unity into division.

The more detailed accounts of this real process are, in great measure,
deficient and contradictory. In this connection, it is in some
accounts[63] said of Heraclitus that he defined it thus: “Of the forms
taken by fire there is first of all the sea, and then of it half is
the earth and the other half the lightning flash (_πρηστήρ_),” the fire
which springs up. This is general and very obscure. Diogenes Laertius
(IX. 9) says: “Fire is condensed into moisture, and when concrete it
becomes water; water hardens into earth and this is the way downwards.
The earth then again becomes fluid, and from it moisture supervenes,
and from this the evaporation of the sea, from which all else arises;
this is the way upwards. Water divides into a dark evaporation,
becoming earth, and into what is pure, sparkling, becoming fire and
burning in the solar sphere; what is fiery becomes meteors, planets and
stars.” These are thus not still, dead stars, but are regarded as in
Becoming, as being eternally productive. We thus have, on the whole, a
metamorphosis of fire. These oriental, metaphorical expressions are,
however, in Heraclitus not to be taken in their strictly sensuous
signification, and as if these changes were present to the outward
observation; but they depict the nature of these elements by which the
earth eternally creates its suns and comets.

Nature is thus a circle. With this in view, we find Heraclitus,
according to Clement of Alexandria (Strom. V. 14, p. 711), saying:
“The universe was made neither by God nor man, but it ever was and is,
and will be, a living fire, that which, in accordance with its laws,
(_μέτρῳ_) kindles and goes out.” We now understand what Aristotle says
of the principle being the soul, since the latter is evaporation; that
is to say, fire, as this self-moving process of the world, is the
soul. Another statement follows, which is also found in Clement of
Alexandria (Strom. VI. 2, p. 746): “To souls (to the living) death is
the becoming water; to water death is the becoming earth; on the other
hand from earth, water arises, and from water, the soul.” Thus, on the
whole, this process is one of extinction, of going back from opposition
into unity, of the re-awakening of the former, and of issuing forth
from one. The extinction of the soul, of the fire in water, the
conflagration that finally results, some, and amongst others, Diogenes
Laertius (IX. 8), Eusebius (Præp. Evang. XIV. 3) and Tennemann (Vol.
I. p. 218), falsely assert to be a conflagration of the world. What
Heraclitus is said to have spoken of as a conflagration of this world,
was thought to be an imaginary idea that after a certain time—as,
according to our ideas, at the end of the world—the world would
disappear in flames. But we see at once from passages which are most
clear,[64] that this conflagration is not meant, but that it is the
perpetual burning up as the Becoming of friendship, the universal life
and the universal process of the universe. In respect of the fact that,
according to Heraclitus, fire is the animating, or the soul, we find
in Plutarch (De esu. carn. I. p. 995, ed. Xyl.) an expression which
may seem odd, namely, that “the driest soul is the best.” We certainly
do not esteem the most moist the best, but, on the other hand, the one
which is most alive; however dry here signifies fiery and thus the
driest soul is pure fire, and this is not lifeless but life itself.

These are the principal moments of the real life-process; I will stop
here a moment because we here find expressed the whole Notion of
speculative reflection regarding Nature. In this Notion, one moment
and one element goes over into the other; fire becomes water, water
earth and fire. The contention about the transmutation and immutability
of the elements is an old one; in this conception the ordinary,
sensuous science of nature separates itself from natural philosophy.
In the speculative point of view, which is that of Heraclitus, the
simple substance in fire and the other elements in itself becomes
metamorphosed; in the other, all transition is abolished and only an
external separation of what is already there is maintained. Water is
just water, fire is fire, &c. If the former point of view upholds
transmutation, the latter believes in the possibility of demonstrating
the opposite; it no longer, indeed, maintains water, fire, &c., to
be simple realities, for it resolves them into hydrogen, oxygen,
&c., but it asserts their immutability. It justly asserts that what
is asserted and implied in the speculative point of view, must also
have the truth of actuality; for if to be the speculative means to be
the very nature and principle of its elements, this must likewise be
present. We are wrong in representing the speculative to be something
existent only in thought or inwardly, which is no one knows where. It
is really present, but men of learning shut their eyes to it because
of their limited point of view. If we listen to their account, they
only observe and say what they see; but their observation is not true,
for unconsciously they transform what is seen through their limited
and stereotyped conception; the strife is not due to the opposition
between observation and the absolute Notion, but between the one Notion
and the other. They show that changes—such as that of water into
earth—are non-existent. Even in modern times this transformation was
indeed maintained, for when water was distilled, a residuum of earth
was found. On this subject, however, Lavoisier carried on a number
of very conclusive researches; he weighed all the receptacles, and
it was shown that the residuum proceeded from the vessels. There is
a superficial process that does not carry us beyond the determinate
nature of substance. They say in reference to it, “water does not
change into air but only into moisture, and moisture always condenses
back into water again.” But in this they merely fix on a one-sided,
insufficient process, and give it out to be the absolute process. In
the real process of nature they, however, found by experience that the
crystal dissolved gives water, and in the crystal, water is lost and
solidifies, or becomes the so-called water of crystallization; they
found that the evaporation of the earth is not to be found as moisture,
in outward form in the air, for air remains quite pure, or hydrogen
entirely disappears in pure air; they have sought in vain to find
hydrogen in the atmospheric air. Similarly they discovered that quite
dry air in which they can show neither moisture nor hydrogen, passes
into mist, rain, &c. These are their observations, but they spoilt all
their perceptions of changes by the fixed conception which they brought
with them of whole and part, and of consistence out of parts, and of
the previous presence as such, of what manifests itself in coming into
existence. When the crystal dissolved reveals water, they say, “it is
not that water has arisen, for it was already present there.” When
water in its decomposition reveals hydrogen and oxygen, that means,
according to them, “these last have not arisen for they were already
there as such, as the parts of which the water subsists.” But they can
neither demonstrate water in crystal nor oxygen and hydrogen in water,
and the same is true of “latent heat.” As we find in all expression
of perception and experience, as soon as men speak, there is a Notion
present; it cannot be withheld, for in consciousness there always is a
touch of universality and truth. For the Notion is the real principle,
but it is only to cultured reason that it is absolute Notion, and not
if it remains, as here, confined in a determinate form. Hence these
men necessarily attain to their limits, and they are troubled because
they do not find hydrogen in air; hygrometers, flasks full of air
brought down from heights by an air-balloon, do not show it to exist.
And similarly the water of crystallization is no longer water, but is
changed into earth.

To come back to Heraclitus, there is only one thing wanting to the
process, which is that its simple principle should be recognized as
universal Notion. The permanence and rest which Aristotle gives, may be
missed. Heraclitus, indeed, says that everything flows on, that nothing
is existent and only the one remains; but that is the Notion of the
unity which only exists in opposition and not of that reflected within
itself. This one, in its unity with the movement of the individuals,
is the genus, or in its infinitude the simple Notion as thought; as
such, the Idea has still to be determined, and we shall thus find it
again as the _νοῦς_ of Anaxagoras. The universal is the immediate
simple unity in opposition which goes back into itself as a process of
differences; but this is also found in Heraclitus; he called this unity
in opposition Fate (_εἱμαρμένη_) or Necessity.[65] And the Notion of
necessity is none other than this, that determinateness constitutes the
principle of the existent as individual, but in that very way, relates
it to its opposite: this is the absolute “connection (_λόγος_) that
permeates the Being of the whole.” He calls this “the ethereal body,
the seed of the Becoming of everything”;[66] that to him is the Idea,
the universal as reality, as process at rest.

3. _Relation of the Principle to Consciousness._ There is still
something else to consider, and that is what position in this principle
Heraclitus gives to consciousness; his philosophy has, on the whole,
a bent towards a philosophy of nature, for the principle, although
logical, is apprehended as the universal nature-process. How does this
_λόγος_ come to consciousness? How is it related to the individual
soul? I shall explain this here in greater detail: it is a beautiful,
natural, childlike manner of speaking truth of the truth. The universal
and the unity of the principle of consciousness and of the object,
and the necessity of objectivity, make their first appearance here.
Several passages from Heraclitus are preserved respecting his views of
knowledge. From his principle that everything that is, at the same time
is not, it immediately follows that he holds that sensuous certainty
has no truth; for it is the certainty for which something exists as
actual, which is not so in fact. Not this immediate Being, but absolute
mediation, Being as thought of, Thought itself, is the true Being.
Heraclitus in this relation says of sensuous perception—according to
Clement of Alexandria—(Strom. III. 3, p. 520): “What we see waking
is dead, but what we see sleeping, a dream,” and in Sextus (adv.
Math. VII. 126, 127), “Men’s eyes and ears are bad witnesses, for
they have barbarous souls. Reason (_λόγος_) is the judge of truth,
not the arbitrary, but the only divine and universal judge”—this is
the measure, the rhythm, that runs through the Being of everything.
Absolute necessity is just the having the truth in consciousness; but
every thought, or what proceeds from the individual, every relation
in which there is only form and which has the content of the ordinary
idea, is not such; what is so is the universal understanding, the
developed consciousness of necessity, the identity of subjective and
objective. Heraclitus says in this connection, according to Diogenes
(IX. 1): “Much learning (_πολυμαθίν_) does not instruct the mind, else
it had instructed Hesiod, Pythagoras, Xenophanes and Hecatæus. The only
wisdom is to know the reason that reigns over all.”

Sextus (adv. Math. VII. 127-133), further describes the attitude of
the subjective consciousness, of particular reason, to the universal,
to this nature-process. That attitude has still a very physical
appearance, resembling the state of mind we suppose in men who are
mad or asleep. The waking man is related to things in a universal
way, which is in conformity with the relation of the things and is
the way in which others also regard them, and yet he still retains
his independence. If, and in so far as I stand in the objectively
intelligent connection of this state of mind, I am, just because of
this externality, in finitude; but waking, I have the knowledge of the
necessity of a connection in the form of objectivity, the knowledge
of the universal existence, and thus the Idea in finite form. Sextus
puts this in definite form: “Everything that surrounds us is logical
and intelligent”—yet not therefore accompanied by consciousness.
“If we draw this universal reality through our breath, we shall be
intelligent, but we are so waking only, sleeping we are in oblivion.”
The waking consciousness of the outer world, what belongs to the sphere
of the understanding, is rather what may be called a condition; but
here it is taken as the whole of rational consciousness. “For in sleep
the channels of feeling are closed and the understanding that is in
us is prevented from uniting (_συμφυΐας_) with the surroundings; the
breath is the only connection (_πρόσφυσις_) maintained, and it may
be compared to a root.” This breath is thus distinguished from the
universal breath, i.e. from the being of another for us. Reason is this
process with the objective: when we are not in connection with the
whole, we only dream. “Separated, the understanding loses the power of
consciousness (_μνημονικὴν δύναμιν_) that it formerly had.” The mind
as individual unity only, loses objectivity, is not in individuality
universal, is not the Thought which has itself as object. “In a waking
condition, however, the understanding—gazing through the channels of
sense as though it were through a window, and forming a relationship
with the surroundings—maintains the logical power.” We here have the
ideal in its native simplicity. “In the same way as coals which come
near fire, themselves take fire, but apart from it, go out, the part
which is cut off from the surroundings in our bodies becomes, through
the separation, almost irrational.” This confutes those who think that
God gives wisdom in sleep or in somnambulism. But in connection with
the many channels it becomes similar to the whole. This whole, the
universal and divine understanding, in unity with which we are logical,
is, according to Heraclitus, the essence of truth. Hence that which
appears as the universal to all, carries with it conviction, for it has
part in the universal and divine Logos, while what is subscribed to by
an individual carries with it no conviction from the opposite cause. He
says in the beginning of his book on Nature: “Since the surroundings
are reason, men are irrational both before they hear and when they
first hear. For since what happens, happens according to this reason,
they are still inexperienced when they search the sayings and the works
which I expound, distinguishing the nature of everything and explaining
its relations. But other men do not know what they do awake, just as
they forget what they do in sleep.” Heraclitus says further: “We do and
think everything in that we participate in the divine understanding
(_λόγος_). Hence we must follow the universal understanding. But
many live as if they had an understanding (_φρόνησιν_) of their own;
the understanding is, however, nothing but interpretation” (being
conscious) “of the manner in which all is ordered. Hence in so far
as we participate in the knowledge (_μνήμης_) of it, we are in the
truth; but in so far as we are singular (_ἰδιάσωμεν_) we are in error.”
Great and important words! We cannot speak of truth in a truer or less
prejudiced way. Consciousness as consciousness of the universal, is
alone consciousness of truth; but consciousness of individuality and
action as individual, an originality which becomes a singularity of
content or of form, is the untrue and bad. Wickedness and error thus
are constituted by isolating thought and thereby bringing about a
separation from the universal. Men usually consider, when they speak of
thinking something, that it must be something particular, but this is
quite a delusion.

However much Heraclitus may maintain that there is no truth in sensuous
knowledge because all that exists is in a state of flux, and that
the existence of sensuous certainty is not while it is, he maintains
the objective method in knowledge to be none the less necessary. The
rational, the true, that which I know, is indeed a withdrawal from the
objective as from what is sensuous, individual, definite and existent;
but what reason knows within itself is necessity or the universal
of being; it is the principle of thought, as it is the principle of
the world. It is this contemplation of truth that Spinoza in his
Ethics (P. II. propos. XLIV., coroll. II. p. 118, ed. Paul), calls “a
contemplation of things in the guise of eternity.” The being-for-self
of reason is not an objectless consciousness, or a dream, but a
knowledge, that which is for itself; but this being-for-self is
awake, or is objective and universal, _i.e._ is the same for all. The
dream is a knowledge of something of which I alone know; fancy may
be instanced as just such a dream. Similarly it is by feeling that
something is for me alone, and that I have something in me as in this
subject; the feeling may profess to be ever so elevated, yet it really
is the case that for me as this subject, it is what I feel, and not an
object independent of me. But in truth, the object is for me something
essentially free, and I am for myself devoid of subjectivity; similarly
this object is no imaginary one made an object by me alone, but is in
itself a universal.

There are, besides, many other fragments of Heraclitus, solitary
expressions, such as his saying, “men are mortal gods, and gods
immortal men; living is death to the former and dying is their
life.”[67] Life is the death of the gods, death is the life of the
gods; the divine is the rising through thought above mere nature which
belongs to death. Hence Heraclitus also says, according to Sextus (adv.
Math. VII., 349): “the power of thinking is outside the body,” which,
in a remarkable way, Tennemann makes into: “outside of men.” In Sextus
(Pyrrh. Hyp. III. 24, § 230) we further read: “Heraclitus says that
both life and death are united in our life as in our death; for if we
live, our souls are dead and buried in us, but if we die, our souls
arise and live.” We may, in fact, say of Heraclitus what Socrates said:
“What remains to us of Heraclitus is excellent, and we must conjecture
of what is lost, that it was as excellent.” Or if we wish to consider
fate so just as always to preserve to posterity what is best, we must
at least say of what we have of Heraclitus, that it is worthy of this
preservation.

E. EMPEDOCLES, LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS.

We shall take Leucippus and Democritus with Empedocles; in them
there is manifested the ideality of the sensuous and also universal
determinateness or a transition to the universal. Empedocles was
a Pythagorean Italian, whose tendencies were Ionic; Leucippus and
Democritus, who incline to the Italians, in that they carried on the
Eleatic school, are more interesting. Both these philosophers belong
to the same philosophic system; they must be taken together as regards
their philosophic thought and considered thus.[68] Leucippus is the
older, and Democritus perfected what the former began, but it is
difficult to say what properly speaking belongs to him historically.
It is certainly recorded that he developed Leucippus’ thought, and
there is, too, some of his work preserved, but it is not worthy of
quotation. In Empedocles we see the commencement of the determination
and separation of principles. The becoming conscious of difference is
an essential moment, but the principles here have in part the character
of physical Being, and though partaking also of ideal Being, this form
is not yet thought-form. On the other hand we find in Leucippus and
Democritus the more ideal principles, the atom and the Nothing, and we
also find thought-determination more immersed in the objective—that
is, the beginning of a metaphysics of body; or pure Notions possess the
significance of the material, and thus pass over thought into objective
form. But the teaching is, on the whole, immature, and is incapable of
giving satisfaction.


1. LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS.

Nothing is accurately known of the circumstances of Leucippus’ life,
not even where he was born. Some, like Diogenes Laertius (IX. 30), make
him out to be an Eleatic; others to have belonged to Abdera (because he
was with Democritus), or to Melos—Melos is an island not far from the
Peloponnesian coast—or else, as is asserted by Simplicius in writing
on Aristotle’s Physics (p. 7), to Miletus. It is definitely stated
that he was a disciple and a friend of Zeno; yet he seems to have been
almost contemporaneous with him as well as with Heraclitus.

It is less doubtful that Democritus belonged to Abdera in Thrace, on
the Aegean Sea, a town that in later times became so notorious on
account of foolish actions. He was born, it would appear, about the
80th Olympiad (460 B.C.), or Olympiad 77, 3 (470 B.C.); the first date
is given by Apollodorus (Diog. Laert. IX. 41), the other by Thrasyllus;
Tennemann (Vol. I. p. 415) makes his birth to fall about the 71st
Olympiad (494 B.C.). According to Diogenes Laertius (IX. 34), he was
forty years younger than Anaxagoras, lived to the time of Socrates, and
was even younger than he—that is supposing him to have been born, not
in Olympiad 71, but in Olympiad 80. His connection with the Abderites
has been much discussed, and many bad anecdotes are told regarding it
by Diogenes Laertius. That he was very rich, Valerius Maximus (VIII.
7, ext. 4) judges from the fact that his father entertained the whole
of Xerxes’ army on its passage to Greece. Diogenes tells (IX. 35, 36)
that he expended his means, which were considerable, on journeys to
Egypt and in penetrating into the East, but this last is not authentic.
His possessions are stated to have amounted to a hundred talents, and
if an Attic talent was worth about from 1000 to 1200 thalers, he must
undoubtedly have been able to get far enough with that. It is always
said that he was a friend and disciple of Leucippus, as Aristotle
relates (Met. I. 4), but where they met is not told. Diogenes (IX. 39)
goes on: “After he returned from his journeys into his own country,
he lived very quietly, for he had consumed all his substance, but
he was supported by his brother and attained to high honour amongst
his countrymen”—not through his philosophy, but—“by some prophetic
utterances. According to the law, however, he who ran through his
father’s means could not have a place in the paternal burial-place. To
give no place to the calumniator or evil speaker”—as though he had
spent his means through extravagance—“he read his work _Διάκοσμος_ to
the Abderites, and the latter gave him a present of 500 talents, had
his statue publicly erected, and buried him with great pomp when, at
100 years old, he died.” That this was also an Abderite jest, those who
left us this narrative, at least, did not see.

Leucippus is the originator of the famous atomic system which, as
recently revived, is held to be the principle of rational science.
If we take this system on its own account, it is certainly very
barren, and there is not much to be looked for in it; but it must be
allowed that we are greatly indebted to Leucippus, because, as it is
expressed in our ordinary physics, he separated the universal and
the sensuous, or the primary and the secondary, or the essential and
the nonessential qualities of body. The universal quality means, in
speculative language, the fact that the corporeal is really universally
determined through the Notion or the principle of body: Leucippus
understood the determinate nature of Being, not in a superficial
manner, but in a speculative. When it is said that body has those
universal qualities, such as form, impenetrability and weight, we think
that the indeterminate conception of body is the essence, and that its
essence is something other than these qualities. But speculatively,
essential existence is just universal determinations; they are existent
in themselves, or the abstract content and the reality of existence.
To body as such, there is nothing left for the determination of reality
but pure singularity; but it is the unity of opposites, and the unity
of these predicates constitutes its reality.

Let us recollect that in the Eleatic philosophy Being and non-being
were looked at as in opposition; that only Being is, and non-being, in
which category we find motion, change, &c., is not. Being is not as yet
the unity turning back, and turned back into itself, like Heraclitus’
motion and the universal. It may be said of the point of view that
difference, change, motion, &c., fall within sensuous, immediate
perception, that the assertion that only Being is, is as contradictory
to appearances as to thought; for the nothing, that which the Eleatics
abolished, is. Or within the Heraclitean Idea, Being and non-being
are the same; Being is, but non-being, since it is one with Being, is
as well, or Being is both the predicate of Being and of non-being.
But Being and non-being are both expressed as having the qualities of
objectivity, or as they are for sensuous perception, and hence they are
the opposition of full and empty. Leucippus says this; he expresses as
existent what was really present to the Eleatics. Aristotle says (Met.
I. 4): “Leucippus and his friend Democritus maintain that the full and
the empty are the elements, and they call the one the existent, and the
other the non-existent; that is, the full and solid are the existent,
the empty and rare, the non-existent. Hence they also say that Being
is no more than non-being because the empty is as well as the bodily;
and these form the material sources of everything.” The full has the
atom as its principle. The Absolute, what exists in and for itself,
is thus the atom and the empty (_τὰ ἄτομα καὶ τὸ κενόν_): this is an
important, if at the same time, an insufficient explanation. It is not
atoms as we should speak of them, such, for example, as we represent
to ourselves as floating in the air, that are alone the principle, for
the intervening nothing is just as essential. Thus here we have the
first appearance of the atomic system. We must now give the further
signification and determination of this principle.

_a. The Logical Principle_

The principal point of consideration is the One, existent for
itself: this determination is a great principle and one which we
have not hitherto had. Parmenides establishes Being or the abstract
universal; Heraclitus, process; the determination of being-for-self
belongs to Leucippus. Parmenides says that the nothing does not exist
at all; with Heraclitus Becoming existed only as the transition of
Being into nothing where each is negated; but the view that each is
simply at home with itself, the positive as the self-existent one and
the negative as empty, is what came to consciousness in Leucippus, and
became the absolute determination. The atomic principle in this manner
has not passed away, for it must from this point of view always exist;
the being-for-self must in every logical philosophy[69] be an essential
moment and yet it must not be put forward as ultimate. In the logical
progression from Being and Becoming to this thought-determination,
Being as existent here and now[70] certainly first appears, but
this last belongs to the sphere of finality and hence cannot be the
principle of Philosophy. Thus, though the development of Philosophy
in history must correspond to the development of logical philosophy,
there will still be passages in it which are absent in historical
development. For instance, if we wished to make Being as existent here
the principle, it would be what we have in consciousness—there are
things, these things are finite and bear a relation to one another—but
this is the category of our unthinking knowledge, of appearance.
Being-for-self, on the other hand, is, as Being, simple relation to
itself, but through negation of the other-Being. If I say I am for
myself, I not only am, but I negate in me all else, exclude it from
me, in so far as it seems to me to be external. As negation of other
being, which is just negation in relation to me, being-for-self is
the negation of negation and thus affirmation; and this is, as I call
it, absolute negativity in which mediation indeed is present, but a
mediation which is just as really taken away.

The principle of the One is altogether ideal and belongs entirely to
thought, even though we wish to say that atoms exist. The atom may be
taken materially, but it is supersensuous, purely intellectual. In our
times, too, more especially through the instrumentality of Gassendi,
this conception of atoms has been renewed. The atoms of Leucippus are,
however, not molecules, the small particles of Physics. In Leucippus,
according to Aristotle, (De gen. et corr. I. 8) there is to be found
the idea that “atoms are invisible because of the smallness of their
body,” which is much like the way in which molecules are now-a-days
spoken of: but this is merely a way of speaking of them. The One can
neither be seen nor shown with magnifying glasses or measures, because
it is an abstraction of thought; what is shown is always matter that is
put together. It is just as futile when, as in modern times, men try
by the microscope to investigate the inmost part of the organism, the
soul, and think they can discover it by means of sight and feeling.
Thus the principle of the One is altogether ideal, but not in the
sense of being in thought or in the head alone, but in such a way that
thought is made the true essence of things. Leucippus understood it
so, and his philosophy is consequently not at all empirical. Tennemann
(Vol. 1, p. 261), on the other hand, says, quite wrongly, “The system
of Leucippus is opposed to that of the Eleatics; he recognizes the
empirical world as the only objective reality, and body as the only
kind of existence.” But the atom and the vacuum are not things of
experience; Leucippus says that it is not the senses through which
we become conscious of the truth, and thereby he has established an
idealism in the higher sense and not one which is merely subjective.

_b. The Constitution of the World_

However abstract this principle might be to Leucippus, he was
anxious to make it concrete. The meaning of atom is the individual,
the indivisible; in another form the One is thus individuality,
the determination of subjectivity. The universal and, on the other
side, the individual, are great determinations which are involved
in everything, and men first know what they have in these abstract
determinations, when they recognize in the concrete that even there
they are predominant. To Leucippus and Democritus this principle, which
afterwards came to light with Epicurus, remained physical; but it also
appears in what is intellectual. Mind indeed, is also an atom and one;
but as one within itself, it is at the same time infinitely full. In
freedom, right and law, in exercising will, our only concern is with
this opposition of universality and individuality. In the sphere of
the state the point of view that the single will is, as an atom, the
absolute, may be maintained; the more modern theories of the state
which also made themselves of practical effect, are of this kind. The
state must rest on the universal, that is, on the will that exists
in and for itself; if it rests on that of the individual, it becomes
atomic and is comprehended in accordance with the thought-determination
of the one, as is the case in Rousseau’s _Contrat Social_. From what
Aristotle tells us in the passage last quoted, Leucippus’ idea of all
that is concrete and actual is further this: “The full is nothing
simple, for it is an infinitely manifold. These infinitely many, move
in the vacuum, for the vacuum exists; their conglomeration brings
about origination” (that is, of an existing thing, or what is for the
senses), “disintegration and separation result in passing away.” All
other categories are included here. “Activity and passivity subsist in
the fact, that they are contiguous; but their contiguity is not their
becoming one, for from that which is truly” (abstractly) “one there
does not come a number, nor from that which is truly many, one.” Or,
it may be said, they are in fact neither passive nor active, “for they
merely abide through the vacuum” without having as their principle,
process. Atoms thus are, even in their apparent union in that which
we call things, separated from one another through the vacuum which
is purely negative and foreign to them, _i.e._ their relation is not
inherent in themselves, but is with something other than them, in which
they remain what they are. This vacuum, the negative in relation to the
affirmative, is also the principle of the movement of atoms; they are
so to speak solicited by the vacuum to fill up and to negate it.

These are the doctrines of the atomists. We see that we have reached
the extreme limits of these thoughts, for when relation comes into
question, we step beyond them. Being and non-being, as something
thought, which, when represented for consciousness as differing in
regard to one another, are the plenum and the vacuum, have no diversity
in themselves; for the plenum has likewise negativity in itself; as
independent, it excludes what is different; it is one and infinitely
many ones, while the vacuum is not exclusive, but pure continuity. Both
these opposites, the one and continuity, being now settled, nothing is
easier to imagine than that atoms should float in existent continuity,
now being separated and now united; and thus that their union should
be only a superficial relation, or a synthesis that is not determined
through the inherent nature of what is united, but in which these
self-existent beings really remain separated still. But this is an
altogether external relationship; the purely independent is united to
the independent, and thus a mechanical combination alone results. All
that is living, spiritual, &c., is then merely thrown together; and
change, origination, creation, are simple union.

However highly these principles are to be esteemed as a forward step,
they at once reveal to us their total inadequacy, as is also the
case when we enter with them on further concrete determinations.
Nevertheless, we need not add what is in great measure added by the
conception of a later date, that once upon a time, there was a chaos, a
void filled with atoms, which afterwards became united and orderly, and
that the world thereby arose; it is now and ever that what implicitly
exists is the plenum and the vacuum. The satisfying point of view which
natural science found in such thoughts, is just the simple fact that in
these the existent is in its antithesis as what is thought and what is
opposed to thought, and is hereby what exists in and for itself. The
Atomists are therefore, generally speaking, opposed to the idea of the
creation and maintenance of this world by means of a foreign principle.
It is in the theory of atoms that science first feels released from
the sense of having no foundation for the world. For if nature is
represented as created and held together by another, it is conceived
of as not existent in itself, and thus as having its Notion outside
itself, _i.e._ its principle or origin is foreign to it and it has no
principle as such, only being conceivable from the will of another; as
it is, it is contingent, devoid of necessity and Notion in itself. In
the conception of the atomist, however, we have the conception of the
inherency of nature, that is to say, thought finds itself in it, or
its principle is in itself something thought, and the Notion finds its
satisfaction in conceiving and establishing it as Notion. In abstract
existence, nature has its ground in itself and is simply for itself;
the atom and the vacuum are just such simple Notions. But we cannot
here see or find more than the formal fact that quite general and
simple principles, the antithesis between the one and continuity, are
represented.

If we proceed from a wider, richer point of view in nature, and demand
that from the atomic theory, it, too, must be made comprehensible, the
satisfaction at once disappears and we see the impossibility of getting
any further. Hence we must get beyond these pure thoughts of continuity
and discontinuity. For these negations, the units, are not in and for
themselves; the atoms are indivisible and like themselves, or their
principle is made pure continuity, so that they may be said to come
directly into one clump. The conception certainly keeps them separate
and gives them a sensuously represented Being; but if they are alike,
they are, as pure continuity, the same as what is empty. But that which
is, is concrete and determined. How then can diversity be conceived
of from these principles? Whence comes the determinate character of
plants, colour, form? The point is, that though these atoms as small
particles may be allowed to subsist as independent, their union becomes
merely a combination which is altogether external and accidental. The
determinate difference is missed; the one, as that which is for itself,
loses all its determinateness. If various matters, electrical, magnetic
and luminous, are assumed, and, at the same time, a mechanical shifting
about of molecules, on the one hand unity is quite disregarded, and, on
the other, no rational word is uttered in regard to the transition of
phenomena, but only what is tautological.

Since Leucippus and Democritus wished to go further, the necessity of
a more definite distinction than this superficial one of union and
separation was introduced, and they sought to bring this about by
ascribing diversity to atoms, and, indeed, by making their diversity
infinite. Aristotle (Met. I. 4) says: “This diversity they sought to
determine in three ways. They say that atoms differ in figure, as A
does from N; in order” (place) “as AN from NA; in position”—as to
whether they stand upright or lie—“as Z from N. From these all other
differences must come.” We see that figure, order and posture are again
external relationships, indifferent determinations, _i.e._ unessential
relations which do not affect the nature of the thing in itself nor its
immanent determinateness, for their unity is only in another. Taken on
its own account, this difference is indeed inconsistent, for as the
entirely simple one, the atoms are perfectly alike, and thus any such
diversity cannot come into question.

We here have an endeavour to lead the sensuous back into few
determinations. Aristotle (De gen. et corr. I. 8) says in this
connection of Leucippus: “He wished to bring the conception of the
phenomenal and sensuous perception nearer, and thereby represented
movement, origination and decease, as existent in themselves.” In
this we see no more than that actuality from him receives its rights,
while others speak only of deception. But when Leucippus in the end
represents the atom as also fashioned in itself, he brings existence
certainly so much nearer to sensuous perception, but not to the Notion;
we must, indeed, go on to fashioning, but so far we are still a long
way off from the determination of continuity and discretion. Aristotle
(De sensu, 4) therefore says: “Democritus, and most of the other
ancient philosophers are, when they speak of what is sensuous, very
awkward, because they wish to make all that is felt into something
tangible; they reduce everything to what is evident to the sense of
touch, black being rough, and white smooth.” All sensuous qualities are
thus only led back to form, to the various ways of uniting molecules
which make any particular thing capable of being tasted or smelt; and
this endeavour is one which is also made by the atomists of modern
times. The French particularly, from Descartes onward, stand in this
category. It is the instinct of reason to understand the phenomenal
and the perceptible, only the way is false; it is a quite unmeaning,
undetermined universality. Since figure, order, posture and form,
constitute the only determination of what is in itself, nothing is said
as to how these moments are experienced as colour, and indeed variety
of colour, &c.; the transition to other than mechanical determinations
is not made, or it shows itself to be shallow and barren.

How it was that Leucippus, from these poor principles of atoms and
of the vacuum, which he never got beyond, because he took them to be
the absolute, hazarded a construction of the whole world (which may
appear to us as strange as it is empty), Diogenes Laertius tells us
(IX. 31-33) in an account which seems meaningless enough. But the
nature of the subject allows of little better, and we can do no more
than observe from it the barrenness of this conception. It runs thus:
“Atoms, divergent in form, propel themselves through their separation
from the infinite, into the great vacuum.” (Democritus adds to this,
“by means of their mutual resistance (_ἀντιτυπία_) and a tremulous,
swinging motion (_παλμός_).”)[71] “Here gathered, they form one vortex
(_δίνην_) where, by dashing together and revolving round in all sorts
of ways, the like are separated off with the like. But since they are
of equal weight, when they cannot, on account of their number, move
in any way, the finer go into outer vacuum, being so to speak forced
out; and the others remain together and, being entangled, run one
against another, and form the first round system. But this stands apart
like a husk that holds within it all sorts of bodies; since these, in
pressing towards the middle, make a vortex movement, this encircling
skin becomes thin, because from the action of the vortex, they are
continually running together. The earth arises in this way, because
these bodies, collected in the middle, remain together. That which
encircles and which is like a husk, again becomes increased by means of
the adherence of external bodies, and since it also moves within the
vortex, it draws everything with which it comes in contact to itself.
The union of some of these bodies again forms a system, first the moist
and slimy, and then the dry, and that which circles in the vortex of
the whole; after that, being ignited, they constitute the substance of
the stars. The outer circle is the sun, the inner the moon,” &c. This
is an empty representation; there is no interest in these dry, confused
ideas of circle-motion, and of what is later on called attraction
and repulsion, beyond the fact that the different kinds of motion are
looked at as the principle of matter.

_c. The Soul_

Finally Aristotle relates (De anim. I. 2) that in regard to the
soul, Leucippus and Democritus said that “it is spherical atoms.” We
find further from Plutarch (De plac. phil. IV. 8) that Democritus
applied himself to the relation borne by consciousness to the
explanation, amongst other things, of the origin of feelings, because
with him, the conceptions that from things fine surfaces, so to speak,
free themselves, and fly into the eyes, ears, &c., first began. We see
that, thus far, Democritus expressed the difference between the moments
of implicit Being and Being-for-another more distinctly. For he said,
as Sextus tells us (adv. Math. VII. 135): “Warmth exists according
to opinion (_νόμῳ_), and so do cold and colour, sweet and bitter:
only the indivisible and void are truthful (_ἐτεῇ_).” That is to say,
only the void and indivisible and their determinations are implicit;
unessential, different Being, such as warmth, &c., is for another. But
by this the way is at once opened up to the false idealism that means
to be done with what is objective by bringing it into relation with
consciousness, merely saying of it that it is _my_ feeling. Thereby
sensuous individuality is, indeed, annulled in the form of Being, but
it still remains the same sensuous manifold; a sensuously notionless
manifold of feeling is established, in which there is no reason, and
with which this idealism has no further concern.


2. EMPEDOCLES.

The fragments of Empedocles left, have several times been collected.
Sturz of Leipzig collected above 400 verses.[72] Peyron arranged a
collection of fragments of Empedocles and Parmenides,[73] which was put
into print in Leipzig in 1810. In Wolff’s Analects, a treatise is to be
found on Empedocles by Ritter.

Empedocles’ birthplace was Agrigentum in Sicily, while Heraclitus
belonged to Asia Minor. We thus come back to Italy, for our history
changes about between these two sides; from Greece proper, as the
middle point, we have as yet had no philosophies at all. Empedocles,
according to Tennemann (Vol. I. p. 415), flourished about the 80th
Olympiad (460 B.C.). Sturz (pp. 9, 10) quotes Dodwell’s words: (De
ætate Pythag. p. 220), which indicate that Empedocles was born in
Olympiad 77, 1 (472 B.C.). They are as follows: “In the second year of
the 85th Olympiad Parmenides had reached his 65th year, so that Zeno
was born in the second year of the 75th Olympiad;[74] thus he was six
years older than his fellow-student Empedocles, for the latter was
only one year old when Pythagoras died in the first or second year of
the 77th Olympiad.” Aristotle says (Met. I. 3): “In age Empedocles is
subsequent to Anaxagoras, but his works are earlier.” But not only did
he philosophize earlier as regards time, that is, at a younger age,
but in reference to the stage reached by the Notion, his philosophy is
earlier and less mature than that of Anaxagoras.

From Diogenes’ accounts of his life (VIII. 59, 60-73), he also seems
to have been a kind of magician and sorcerer, like Pythagoras. During
his life he was much respected by his fellow-citizens, and, after
his death, a statue was erected to him in his native town; his fame
extended very far. He did not live apart, like Heraclitus, but in the
exercise of great influence on the affairs of the town of Agrigentum,
like Parmenides in Elea. He acquired the credit, after the death of
Meton, the ruler of Agrigentum, of bringing about a free constitution
and equal rights to all citizens. He likewise frustrated several
attempts which were made by people of Agrigentum to seize upon the
rulership of their city; and when the esteem of his fellow-citizens
rose so high that they offered him the crown, he rejected their offers,
and lived ever after amongst them as a respected private individual.
Both of his life and death much which was fabulous was told. Seeing
that he was famous in life, we are told that he wished not to appear
to die an ordinary death, as a proof that he was not a mortal man, but
had merely passed out of sight. After a feast he is said either to have
suddenly disappeared, or else to have been on Etna with his friends,
and suddenly to have been seen of them no more. But what became of him
was revealed by the fact that one of his shoes was thrown up by Etna,
and found by one of his friends; this made it clear that he threw
himself into Etna, thereby to withdraw himself from the notice of
mankind, and to give rise to the idea that he did not really die, but
that he was taken up amongst the gods.

The origin and occasion for this fable seems to lie in a poem in which
there are several verses that, taken alone, make great professions.
He says, according to Sturz, (p. 530: Reliquiæ _τῶν καθαρμῶν_, v.
364-376):—

  “Friends who dwell within the fort on yellow Acragas
  And who in the best of works are busy, I greet you!
  To you I am an immortal god, no more a mortal man,
  Do ye not see how that where’er I go, all honour me,
  My head being ‘circled round with diadems and crowns of green?
  When so decked out, I show myself in towns of wealth,
  Men and women pray to me. And thousands follow
  My steps, to seek from me the way to bliss,
  Others ask for prophecies; others again,
  Healing words for ailments manifold beseech.
  But what is this to me—as though ‘twere anything
  By art to conquer much corrupted man.”

But, taken in the context, this laudation means that I am highly
honoured, but what is the value of that to me; it expresses weariness
of the honour given him by men.

Empedocles had Pythagoreans as pupils, and went about with them; he
is sometimes considered to have been a Pythagorean like Parmenides
and Zeno, but this is the only ground for such a statement. It is a
question whether he belonged to the League; his philosophy has no
resemblance to the Pythagorean. According to Diogenes Laertius (VIII.
56), he was also called Zeno’s fellow-pupil. There have, indeed, been
many isolated reflections of a physical kind preserved to us, as also
some words of exhortation, and in him thought as penetrating within
reality, and the knowledge of nature seem to have attained to greater
breadth and compass; we find in him, however, less speculative depth
than in Heraclitus, but a Notion more imbued with the point of view
of reality, and a culture derived from natural philosophy or the
contemplation of nature. Empedocles is more poetic than definitely
philosophical; he is not very interesting, and much cannot be made of
his philosophy.

As to the particular Notion which governs it, and which really begins
in it to appear, we may call it Combination or Synthesis. It is as
combination that the unity of opposites first presents itself; this
Notion, first opening up with Heraclitus, is, while in a condition
of rest, conceived of as combination, before thought grasps the
universal in Anaxagoras. Empedocles’ synthesis, as a completion of
the relationship, thus belongs to Heraclitus, whose speculative Idea,
though in reality, is process, but this is so without the individual
moments in reality being mutually related as Notions. Empedocles’
conception of synthesis holds good to the present day. He also is
the originator of the common idea that has even come down to us, of
regarding the four known physical elements of fire, air, water, and
earth, as fundamental; by chemists they are certainly no longer held
to be elements, because they understand by elements a simple chemical
substance. I will now give Empedocles’ ideas shortly, and draw the many
units mentioned into the connection of a whole.

His general ideas Aristotle[75] shortly sums up thus: “To the three
elements, fire, air, and water, each of which was in turn considered
as the principle from which everything proceeded, Empedocles added
the Earth as the fourth corporeal element, saying that it is these
which always remain the same, never becoming, but being united and
separated as the more or the less, combining into one and coming
out of one.” Carbon, metal, &c., are not something existing in and
for itself which remains constant and never becomes; thus nothing
metaphysical is signified by them. But with Empedocles this undoubtedly
is the case: every particular thing arises through some kind of union
of the four. These four elements, to our ordinary idea, are not so
many sensuous things if we consider them as universal elements; for,
looked at sensuously, there are various other sensuous things. All
that is organic, for example, is of another kind; and, further, earth
as one, as simple, pure earth, does not exist, for it is in manifold
determinateness. In the idea of four elements we have the elevation of
sensuous ideas into thought.

Aristotle further says in reference to the abstract Notion of their
relation to one another (Met. I. 4), that Empedocles did not only
require the four elements as principles, but also Friendship and
Strife, which we have already met with in Heraclitus; it is at once
evident that these are of another kind, because they are, properly
speaking, universal. He has the four natural elements as the real, and
friendship and strife as the ideal principles, so that six elements,
of which Sextus[76] often speaks, make their appearance in lines
that Aristotle (Met. II. 4) and Sextus (adv. Math. VII. 92) have
preserved:—

  “With the earth, we see the earth, with water, water,
  With air, heavenly air, with fire, eternal fire,
  With love, love is seen, and strife with sorrowful strife.”

Through our participation in them they become for us. There we have the
idea that spirit, the soul, is itself the unity, the very totality of
elements, in which the principle of earth relates to earth, water to
water, love to love, &c.[77] In seeing fire, the fire is in us for whom
objective fire is, and so on.

Empedocles also speaks of the process of these elements, but he did not
comprehend it further; the point to be remarked is that he represented
their unity as a combination. In this synthetic union, which is a
superficial relation devoid of Notion, being partly related and partly
unrelated, the contradiction necessarily results that at one time the
unity of elements is established and at another, their separation:
the unity is not the universal unity in which they are moments,
being even in their diversity one, and in their unity different, for
these two moments, unity and diversity, fall asunder, and union and
separation are quite indeterminate relationships. Empedocles says in
the first book of his poem on Nature, as given by Sturz (p. 517, v.
106-109): “There is no such thing as a Nature, only a combination and
separation of what is combined; it is merely called Nature by men.”
That is to say, that which constitutes anything, as being its elements
or parts, is not as yet called its nature, but only its determinate
unity. For example, the nature of an animal is its constant and real
determinateness, its kind, its universality, which is simple. But
Empedocles does away with nature in this sense, for every thing,
according to him, is the combination of simple elements, and thus
not in itself the universal, simple and true: this is not what is
signified by us when we speak of nature. Now this nature in which a
thing moves in accordance with its own end, Aristotle (De gen. et
corr. II. 6) misses in Empedocles; in later times this conception was
still further lost. Because the elements were thus existent simply in
themselves, there was, properly speaking, no process established in
them, for in process they are only vanishing moments, and not existent
in themselves. Being thus implicit, they must have been unchangeable,
or they could not constitute themselves into a unity; for in the one
their subsistence, or their implicit existence would be destroyed. But
because Empedocles says that things subsist from these elements, he
immediately establishes their unity.

These are the principal points in Empedocles’ philosophy. I will quote
the remarks that Aristotle (Met. I. 4) makes in this regard.

(_α_) “If we wish to follow this up, and do so in accordance with
the understanding, not merely stumbling over it like Empedocles, we
should say that friendship is the principle of good and strife the
principle of evil, so that in a measure we may assert that Empedocles
maintained—and was the first to do so—that the evil and the good
are the absolute principles, because the good is the principle of all
good, and the bad the principle of all evil.” Aristotle shows the trace
of universality present here; for to him it may be termed essential
in dealing with the Notion of the principle, that which is in and for
itself. But this is only the Notion, or the thought which is present
in and for itself; we have not yet seen such a principle, for we find
it first in Anaxagoras. If Aristotle found the principle of motion
missed in ancient philosophers, in the Becoming of Heraclitus, he again
missed in Heraclitus the still deeper principle of the Good, and hence
wished to discover it in Empedocles. By the good the “why” is to be
understood, that which is an end in and for itself, which is clearly
established in itself, which is on its own account, and through which
all else is; the end has the determination of activity, the bringing
forth of itself, so that it, as end to itself, is the Idea, the Notion
that makes itself objective and, in its objectivity, is identical with
itself. Aristotle thus entirely controverts Heraclitus, because his
principle is change alone, without remaining like self, maintaining
self, and going back within self.

(_β_) Aristotle also says in criticizing further the relationship
and determination of these two universal principles of Friendship
and Strife, as of union and separation, that “Empedocles neither
adequately made use of them nor discovered in them what they involved
(_ἐξευρίσκει τὸ ὁμολογούμενον_); for with him friendship frequently
divides and strife unites. That is, when the All falls asunder through
strife amongst the elements, fire is thereby united into one, and
so is each of the other elements.” The separation of the elements
which are comprised within the All, is just as necessarily the union
amongst themselves of the parts of each element; that which, on the
one hand, is the coming into separation, as independent, is at the
same time something united within itself. “But when everything through
friendship goes back into one, it is necessary that the parts of
each element undergo separation again.” The being in one is itself a
manifold, a diverse relation of the four diversities, and thus the
going together is likewise a separation. This is the case generally
with all determinateness, that it must in itself be the opposite, and
must manifest itself as such. The remark that, speaking generally,
there is no union without separation, no separation without union, is
a profound one; identity and non-identity are thought-determinations
of this kind which cannot be separated. The reproach made by Aristotle
is one that lies in the nature of the thing. And when Aristotle says
that Empedocles, although younger than Heraclitus, “was the first to
maintain such principles, because he did not assert that the principle
of motion is one, but that it is different and opposed,” this certainly
relates to the fact that he thought it was in Empedocles that he first
found design, although his utterances on the subject were dubious.

(_γ_) As to the real moments in which this ideal realizes
itself, Aristotle further says, “He does not speak of them as
four”—equivalents in juxtaposition—“but on the contrary as two;
fire he puts by itself on the one side, and the three others, earth,
air, and water, on the other.” What would be most interesting is the
determination of their relationship.

(_δ_) In what deals with the relationship of the two ideal moments,
friendship and strife, and of the four real elements, there is thus
nothing rational, for Empedocles, according to Aristotle (Met. XII.
10), did not properly separate, but co-ordinated them, so that we often
see them in proximity and counted as having equal value; but it is
self-evident that Empedocles also separated these two sides, the real
and the ideal, and expressed thought as their relation.

(_ε_) Aristotle says with justice (De gen. et corr. I. 1) that
“Empedocles contradicts both himself and appearances. For at one time
he maintains that none of the elements springs out of the other, but
all else comes from them; and, at another time, he makes them into a
whole through friendship, and again destroys this unity through strife.
Thus through particular differences and qualities, one becomes water,
the other fire, &c. Now if the particular differences are taken away
(and they can be taken away since they have arisen), it is evident
that water arises from earth, and the reverse. The All was not yet
fire, earth, water, and air, when these were still one, so that it
is not clear whether he made the one or the many to be, properly
speaking, real existence.” Because the elements become one, their
special character, that through which water is water, is nothing in
itself, that is, they are passing into something different; but this
contradicts the statement that they are the absolute elements, or that
they are implicit. He considers actual things as an intermingling
of elements, but in regard to their first origin, he thinks that
everything springs from one through friendship and strife. This
customary absence of thought is in the nature of synthetic conceptions;
it now upholds unity, then multiplicity, and does not bring both
thoughts together; as sublated, one is also not one.[78]


F. ANAXAGORAS.

With Anaxagoras[79] a light, if still a weak one, begins to dawn,
because the understanding is now recognized as the principle. Aristotle
says of Anaxagoras (Met. I. 3): “But he who said that reason (_νοῦς_),
in what lives as also in nature, is the origin of the world and of all
order, is like a sober man as compared with those who came before and
spoke at random (_εἰκῆ_).” As Aristotle says, hitherto philosophers may
“be compared to the fencers who fence in an unscientific way. Just as
the latter often make good thrusts in their struggle, though not by any
skill, these philosophers seem to speak without any knowledge of what
they say.” Now if Anaxagoras, as a sober man amongst drunkards, was
the first to reach this consciousness—for he says that pure thought
is the actually existent universal and true—he yet, to a considerable
extent, still thrusts into space.

The connection of his philosophy with what precedes is as follows:
In Heraclitus’ Idea as motion, all moments are absolutely vanishing.
Empedocles represents the gathering together of this motion into a
unity, but into a synthetic unity; and with Leucippus and Democritus
it is the same. With Empedocles, however, the moments of this
unity are the existent elements of fire, water, &c., and with the
others, pure abstractions, implicit being, thoughts. But in this way
universality is directly asserted, for the opposing elements have no
longer any sensuous support. We have had Being, Becoming, the One, as
principles; they are universal thoughts and not sensuous, nor are they
figures of the imagination; the content and its parts are, however,
taken from what is sensuous, and they are thoughts in some sort of
a determination. Anaxagoras now says that it is not gods, sensuous
principles, elements, or thoughts—which really are determinations of
reflection—but that it is the Universal, Thought itself, in and for
itself, without opposition, all embracing, which is the substance or
the principle. The unity as universal, returns from the opposition into
itself, while in the synthesis of Empedocles, what is opposed is still
apart from it and independent, and Thought is not Being. Here, however,
Thought as pure, free process in itself, is the self-determining
universal, and is not distinguished from conscious thought. In
Anaxagoras quite new ground is thus opened up.

Anaxagoras concludes this period, and after him a fresh one begins.
In accordance with the favourite idea of there being a genealogical
descent of principles from the teacher to the taught, because he was
an Ionian, he is often represented as perpetuating the Ionic school,
and as an Ionic philosopher: Hermotimus of Clazomenæ, too, was his
teacher. To support this theory Diogenes Laertius (II. 6) makes him a
disciple of Anaximenes, whose birth is, however, placed in Ol. 55-58,
or about sixty years earlier than that of Anaxagoras.

Aristotle says (Met. I. 3) that Anaxagoras first began by these
determinations to express absolute reality as understanding. Aristotle
and others after him, such as Sextus (adv. Math. IX. 7), mention
the bare fact that Hermotimus gave rise to this conception, but it
was clearly due to Anaxagoras. Little is gained if such a fact were
true, since we learn no more about the philosophy of Hermotimus; it
cannot have been much. Others have made numerous historical researches
respecting this Hermotimus. The name we have already mentioned amongst
those of whom it is said that Pythagoras existed in them before he
lived as Pythagoras. We also have a story of Hermotimus to the effect
that he possessed the peculiar gift of being able to make his soul quit
his body. But this did him bad service in the end, since his wife,
with whom he had a dispute, and who besides knew very well how matters
stood, showed to their acquaintances this soul-deserted body as dead,
and it was burnt before the soul reinstated itself—which soul must
have been astonished.[80] It is not worth while to investigate what
lies at the ground of these ancient stories, i.e. into how we should
regard the matter: we may think of it as implying a state of ecstasy.

We must consider the life of Anaxagoras before his philosophy.
Anaxagoras, according to Diogenes (II. 7), born in Ol. 70 (500 B.C.),
comes earlier than Democritus, and in age also precedes Empedocles,
yet, on the whole, he was contemporaneous with these, as also with
Parmenides; he was as old as Zeno, and lived somewhat earlier than
Socrates, but still they were acquainted with one another. His native
town was Clazomenæ, in Lydia, not very far from Colophon and Ephesus,
and situated on an isthmus by which a great peninsula is connected
with the mainland. His life is shortly summed up in the statement that
he devoted himself to the study of the sciences, withdrew from public
affairs; according to Valerius Maximus (VIII. 7, extr. 6) he made
numerous journeys, and finally, according to Tennemann (Vol. I. pp.
300, 415), in the forty-fifth year of his age, in the 81st Olympiad
(456 B.C.), and at a propitious time, he came to Athens.

With him we thus find Philosophy in Greece proper, where so far there
had been none, and coming, indeed, as far as Athens; hitherto either
Asia Minor or Italy had been the seat of Philosophy, though, when the
inhabitants of Asia Minor fell under Persian rule, with their loss of
freedom, it expired amongst them. Anaxagoras, himself a native of Asia
Minor, lived in the important period between the war of the Medes and
the age of Pericles, principally in Athens, which had now reached the
zenith of its greatness, for it was both the head of Grecian power, and
the seat and centre of the arts and sciences. Athens, after the Persian
wars, brought the greater part of the Greek islands into subjection,
as also a number of maritime towns in Thrace, and even further into
the Black Sea. As the greatest artists collected in Athens, so also
did the most noted philosophers and sophists live there—a circle
of luminaries in the arts and sciences such as we have in Æschylus,
Sophocles, Aristophanes, Thucydides, Diogenes of Apollonia, Protagoras,
Anaxagoras, and others from Asia Minor. Pericles then ruled the State,
and raised it to that height of splendour which may be called the
golden age in Athenian life; Anaxagoras, although living in the most
flourishing time of Athenian life, touches on its decay, or rather
reaches the first threatening of that decay, which ended in a total
extermination of this beautiful life.

What is of special interest at this time is the opposition between
Athens and Lacedæmon, the two Greek nations which contended with one
another for the foremost place in Greece; here we must therefore allude
to the principles of these celebrated States. While the Lacedæmonians
had no arts or sciences, Athens had to thank the character of its
constitution, and of its whole spirit, for the fact that it was the
seat of the sciences and fine arts. But the constitution of Lacedæmon
is also worthy of high esteem, for it regulated and restrained the
high Doric spirit, and its principal feature was that all personal
peculiarity was subordinated, or rather sacrificed, to the general aim
of the life of the State, and the individual had the consciousness of
his honour and sufficiency only in the consciousness of working for
the State. A people of such genuine unity, in whom the will of the
individual had, properly speaking, quite disappeared, were united by
an indestructible bond, and Lacedæmon was hence placed at the head of
Greece, and obtained the leadership, which, we find, it held among the
Argives in the days of Troy. This is a great principle which must exist
in every true State, but which with the Lacedæmonians retained its
one-sided character; this one-sidedness was avoided by the Athenians,
and by that means they became the greater. In Lacedæmon personality
proper was so much disregarded that the individual could not have
free development or expression; individuality was not recognized, and
hence not brought into harmony with the common end of the State. This
abrogation of the rights of subjectivity, which, expressed in his own
way, is also found in Plato’s Republic, was carried very far with the
Lacedæmonians. But the universal is living spirit only in so far as the
individual consciousness finds itself as such within it; the universal
is not constituted of the immediate life and being of the individual,
the mere substance, but formed of conscious life. As individuality
which separates itself from the universal is powerless and falls to
the ground, the one-sided universal, the morality of individuality
cannot stand firm. The Lacedæmonian spirit, which had not taken into
account the freedom of consciousness, and whose universal had isolated
itself therefrom, had hence to see it break forth in opposition to the
universal; and though the first to come forward as the liberators of
Greece from its tyranny were the Spartans, whom even Athens thanks for
the expulsion of the descendants of Pisistratus, their relationship
to their confederates soon passes into that of common, mean, tyranny.
Within the State it likewise ends in a harsh aristocracy, just as the
fixed equilibrium of property (each family retaining its inheritance,
and through forbidding the possession of money, or trade and commerce,
preventing the possibility of inequality in riches) passes into an
avarice which, as opposed to this universal, is brutal and mean. This
essential moment of particularity, not being taken into the State,
and hence not made legal and moral (moral first of all), comes forth
as vice. In a rational organization all the elements of the Idea are
present; if the liver were isolated as bile it would become not more,
and not less active, but becoming antagonistic, it would isolate itself
from the corporate economy of the body. Solon, on the contrary, gave to
the Athenians not only equality of laws and unity of spirit in their
constitution (which was a purer democracy than in Sparta), but although
each citizen had his substantial consciousness in unity with the laws
of the State, he also gave free play to the individual mind, so that
each might do as he would, and might find expression for himself.
Solon entrusted the executive to the people, not to the Ephors, and
this became self-government after the displacement of the tyrants,
and thus in truth a free people arose; the individual had the whole
within himself, as he had his consciousness and action in the whole.
Thus we see in this principle the formation of free consciousness
and the freedom of individuality in its greatness. The principle of
subjective freedom appears at first, however, still in unison with the
universal principle of Greek morality as established by law, and even
with mythology; and thus in its promulgation, because the genius of its
conceptions could develop freely, it brought about these masterpieces
in the beautiful plastic arts, and the immortal works of poetry and
history. The principle of subjectivity had, thus far, not taken the
form that particularity, as such, should be set free, and that its
content should be a subjectively particular, at least distinguished
from the universal principle, universal morality, universal religion,
universal laws. Thus we do not see the carrying out of isolated ideas,
but the great, moral, solid, divine content made in these works object
for consciousness, and generally brought before consciousness. Later
we shall find the form of subjectivity becoming free for itself, and
appearing in opposition to the substantial, to morality, religion, and
law.

The basis of this principle of subjectivity, though it is still a
merely general one, we now see in Anaxagoras. But amongst this noble,
free, and cultured people of Athens, he who had the happiness to be
first, was Pericles, and this circumstance raised him in the estimation
of the individual to a place so high that few could reach it. Of all
that is great amongst men, the power of ruling over the will of men who
have but one will, is the greatest, for this controlling individuality
must be both the most universal and the most living—a lot for a mortal
being than which hardly any better can be found. His individuality was,
according to Plutarch, (in Pericle 5) as deep as it was perfect; as
serious (he never laughed), as full of energy and restfulness: Athens
had him the whole day long. Thucydides has preserved some of Pericles’
speeches to the people which allow of few works being compared to them.
Under Pericles the highest culture of the moral commonwealth is to be
found, the juncture where individuality is still under and also in the
universal. Presently individuality prevails, because its activity falls
into extremes, since the state as state, is not yet independently
organized within itself. Because the essence of the Athenian State
was the common spirit, and the religious faith of individuals in this
constituted their essence, there disappears with the disappearance of
this faith, the inner Being of the people, since the spirit is not in
the form of the Notion as it is in our states. The speedy transition
to this last is the _νοῦς_, subjectivity, as Being, self-reflection.
When Anaxagoras at this time, the principle of which has just been
given, came to Athens, he was sought out by Pericles, and, as his
friend, lived in very intimate relations with him, before the latter
occupied himself with public affairs. But Plutarch (in Pericle 4, 16)
also relates that Anaxagoras came to want because Pericles neglected
him—did not supply the illuminating lamp with oil.

A more important matter is that Anaxagoras (as happened later with
Socrates and many other philosophers) was accused of despising those
whom the people accepted as gods. The prose of the understanding
came into contact with the poetic, religious point of view. It
is distinctly said by Diogenes Laertius (II. 12) that Anaxagoras
believed the sun and stars to be burning stones; and he is, according
to Plutarch, (in Pericle, 6) blamed for having explained something
that the prophets stated to be a marvellous omen, in a natural way;
it quite tallies with this that he is said to have foretold that on
the day of Ægos-Potamos, where the Athenians lost their last fleet
against Lysander, a stone should fall from heaven.[81] The general
remark might be made of Thales, Anaximander, &c., that the sun,
moon, earth and stars were counted as mere things, i.e. as objects
external to mind, and that they no longer held them to be living
gods, but represented them in different ways—which ideas, for the
rest, deserve no further consideration, since these matters belong
properly to ordinary learning. Things may be derived from thought;
thought really brings about the result that certain objects which may
be called divine, and certain conceptions of these which may be called
poetic, together with the whole range of superstitious beliefs, are
demolished—they are brought down to being what are called natural
things. For in thought, as the identity of itself and of Being, mind
knows itself as the truly actual, so that for mind in thought, the
unspiritual and material is brought down to being mere things, to the
negative of mind. All the ideas of those philosophers have this in
common, that nature is through them undeified; they brought the poetic
view of nature down to the prosaic, and destroyed the poetic point of
view which ascribes to all that is now considered to be lifeless, a
life proper to itself, perhaps also sensation, and, it may be, a being
after the usual order of consciousness. The loss of this point of view
is not to be lamented as if unity with nature, pure faith, innocent
purity and childlike spirit went with it. Innocent and childlike it
may certainly have been, but reason is just the going forth from
such innocence and unity with nature. So soon as mind grasps itself,
is for itself, it must for that very reason confront the ‘other’ of
itself as a negation of consciousness, i.e. look on it as something
devoid of mind, an unconscious and lifeless thing, and it must first
come to itself through this opposition. There is in this a fixing of
self-moving things such as are met with in the myths of the ancients,
who relate such tales as that the Argonauts secured the rocks on the
Straits of the Hellespont which formerly moved like scissors. Similarly
progressive culture consolidated that which formerly was thought to
have its own motion and life in itself, and made it into unmoving
matter. This transition of the mythical point of view into the prosaic,
here comes to be recognized by the Athenians. A prosaic point of
view such as this, assumes that man has requirements quite different
from those he formerly had; in this we find traces of the powerful,
necessary conversion brought about in the ideas of man through the
strengthening of thought, through knowledge of himself, and through
Philosophy.

The institution of charges of atheism, which we shall touch upon
more fully in dealing with Socrates, is, in Anaxagoras’ case, quite
comprehensible, from the specific reason that the Athenians, who were
envious of Pericles, who contended with him for the first place, and
who did not venture to proceed against him openly, took his favourites
to law, and sought through charges against his friend, to injure him.
Thus his friend Aspasia was brought under accusation, and the noble
Pericles had, according to Plutarch (in Pericle, 32), in order to save
her from condemnation, to beg the individual citizens of Athens with
tears for her acquittal. The Athenian people in their freedom, demanded
such acts of the potentates to whom they allowed supremacy, for thereby
an acknowledgment was given of their subordination to the people; they
thus made themselves the Nemesis in respect to the high place accorded
to the great, for they placed themselves in a position of equality with
these, while these again made evident their dependence, subjection
and powerlessness before the others. What is told about the result of
this charge against Anaxagoras is quite contradictory and uncertain:
Pericles certainly saved him from condemnation to death. He was either,
as some say, condemned only to banishment after Pericles had led him
before the people, speaking and entreating for him, after, by reason
of his age, attenuation and weakness the sympathy of the people had
been aroused; or else, as others say, with the help of Pericles, he
escaped from Athens and was in absence condemned to death, the judgment
never being executed upon him. Others again say that he was liberated,
but from the vexation that he felt respecting these charges, and from
apprehension as to their repetition, he voluntarily left Athens. And at
about sixty or seventy years of age, he died in Lampsacus in the 88th
Olympiad (428 B.C.).[82]

1. _The Universal Principle._ The logical principle of Anaxagoras was
that he recognized the _νοῦς_ as the simple, absolute essence of the
world. The simplicity of the _νοῦς_ is not a Being but a universality
which is distinguished from itself, though in such a way that the
distinction is immediately sublated and the identity is set forth for
itself. This universal for itself, sundered, exists in purity only
as thought; it exists also in nature as objective existence, but in
that case no longer purely for itself, but as having particularity as
an immediate in it. Space and time are, for example, the most ideal,
universal facts in nature as such, but there is no pure space, no pure
time and motion any more than any pure matter—for this universal is
immediately defined space, air, earth, &c. In thought, when I say, I
am I, or I = I, I certainly distinguish something from me, but the
pure unity remains; there is no movement but a distinction which is
not distinguished, or the being-for-me. And in all that I think, if
the thought has a definite content, it is my thought: I am thus known
to myself in this object. This universal which thus exists for itself
and the individual, or thought and being, thus, however, come into
definite opposition. Here the speculative unity of this universal with
the individual should be considered as it is posited as absolute unity,
but the comprehension of the Notion itself is certainly not found
with the ancients. We need not expect a pure Notion such as one of an
understanding realizing itself into a system, organized as a universe.

How Anaxagoras enunciated the Notion of the _νοῦς_, Aristotle (De
anim. I. 2) goes on to tell: “Anaxagoras maintains that the soul is
the principle of movement. Yet he does not always express himself
fully about the soul and _νοῦς_: he seems to separate _νοῦς_ and soul
from one another, and still he makes use of them as though they were
the same existence, only that by preference he makes the _νοῦς_ the
principle of everything. He certainly speaks frequently of the _νοῦς_
as of the cause of the beautiful and right, but another time he calls
it the soul. For it is in all animals, in large as well as small, the
higher kind and the lower; it alone of all existence is the simple,
unadulterated and pure; it is devoid of pain and is not in community
with any other.”[83] What we therefore have to do is to show from the
principle of motion, that it is the self-moving; and this thought is,
as existent for itself. As soul, the self-moving is only immediately
individual; the _νοῦς_, however, as simple, is the universal. Thought
moves on account of something: the end is the first simple which
makes itself result; this principle with the ancients is grasped as
good and evil, i.e. end as positive and negative. This determination
is a very important one, but with Anaxagoras it was not fully worked
out. While in the first place the principles are material, from these
Aristotle then distinguishes determination and form, and thirdly he
finds in the process of Heraclitus, the principle of motion. Then in
the fourth place there comes the reason why, the determination of end,
with the _νοῦς_; this is the concrete in itself. Aristotle adds in
the above-mentioned passage (p. 192), “according to these men” (the
Ionians and others) “and in reference to such causes” (water, fire,
&c.), “since they are not sufficient to beget the nature of things,
the philosophers are, as already said, compelled by the truth to go on
to the principle following (_ἐχομένην_). For neither the earth nor any
other principle is capable of explaining the fact that while on the
one hand all is good and beautiful, on the other, something else is
produced, and those men do not seem to have thought that this was so;
nor is it seemly to abandon such matters to hazard (_αὐτομάτῳ_) and to
chance.” Goodness and beauty express the simple restful Notion, and
change the Notion in its movement.

With this principle comes the determination of an understanding as of
self-determining activity; this has hitherto been wanting, for the
Becoming of Heraclitus, which is only process, is not yet as fate,
the independently self-determining. By this we must not represent
to ourselves subjective thought; in thinking we think immediately
of our thought as it is in consciousness. Here, on the contrary,
quite objective thought is meant, active understanding—as we say,
there is reason in the world, or we speak of genera in nature which
are the universal. The genus animal is the substantial of the dog;
the dog itself is this; the laws of nature are themselves nature’s
immanent essence. The nature is not formed from without as men
make a table; this is also made with understanding, but through an
understanding outside of this wood. This external form, which is
called the understanding, immediately occurs to us in speaking of
the understanding; but here the universal is meant, that which is
the immanent nature of the object itself. The _νοῦς_ is thus not a
thinking existence from without which regulates the world; by such
the meaning present to Anaxagoras would be quite destroyed and all
its philosophic interest taken away. For to speak of an individual,
a unit from without, is to fall into the ordinary conception and its
dualism; a so-called thinking principle is no longer a thought, but is
a subject. But still the true universal is for all that not abstract,
but the universal is just the determining in and out of itself of the
particular in and for itself. In this activity, which is independently
self-determining, the fact is at once implied that the activity,
because it constitutes process, retains itself as the universal
self-identical. Fire, which, according to Heraclitus, was process,
dies away and merely passes over, without independent existence, into
the opposite; it is certainly also a circle and a return to fire, but
the principle does not retain itself in its determinateness as the
universal, seeing that a simple passing into the opposite takes place.
This relation to itself in determination which we see appearing in
Anaxagoras, now, however, contains the determination of the universal
though it is not formally expressed, and therein we have the end or the
Good.

I have just recently (p. 316) spoken of the Notion of the end, yet
by that we must not merely think of the form of the end as it is in
us, in conscious beings. At first, end, in as far as I have it, is my
conception, which is for itself, and the realization of which depends
on my wish; if I carry it out, and if I am not unskilful, the object
produced must be conformable to the end, containing nothing but it.
There is a transition from subjectivity to objectivity through which
this opposition is always again sublated. Because I am discontented
with my end in that it is only subjective, my activity consists in
removing this defect and making it objective. In objectivity the
end has retained itself; for instance, if I have the end in view of
building a house and am active for that end, the house results in
which my end is realized. But we must not, as we usually do, abide at
the conception of this subjective end; in this case both I and the
end exist independently and externally in relation to each other. In
the conception that God, as wisdom, rules the world in accordance
with an end, for instance, the end is posited for itself in a wise,
figuratively conceiving Being. But the universal of end is the fact
that since it is a determination independently fixed, that rules
present existence, the end is the truth, the soul of a thing. The Good
in the end gives content to itself, so that while it is active with
this content, and after it has entered into externality, no other
content comes forth than what was already present. The best example of
this is presented in life; it has desires, and these desires are its
ends; as merely living, however, it knows nothing of these ends, but
yet they are first, immediate determinations which are established.
The animal works at satisfying these desires, i.e. at reaching the
end; it relates itself to external things, partly mechanically,
partly chemically. But the character of its activity does not remain
mechanical or chemical; the product is rather the animal itself,
which, as its own end, brings forth in its activity only itself, since
it negates and overturns those mechanical or chemical relationships.
In mechanical and chemical process, on the other hand, the result is
something different, in which the subject does not retain itself; but
in the end, beginning and end are alike, for we posit the subjective
objectively in order to receive it again. Self-preservation is a
continual production by which nothing new, but always the old, arises;
it is a taking back of activity for the production of itself.

Thus this self-determining activity, which is then active on something
else, enters into opposition, but it again negates the opposition,
governs it, in it reflects upon itself; it is the end, the thought,
that which conserves itself in its self-determination. The development
of these moments is the business of Philosophy from henceforth. But
if we look more closely as to how far Anaxagoras has got in the
development of this thought, we find nothing further than the activity
determining from out of itself, which sets up a limit or measure;
further than the determination of measure, development does not go.
Anaxagoras gives us no more concrete definition of the _νοῦς_, and
this we are still left to consider; we thus have nothing more than the
abstract determination of the concrete in itself. The above-mentioned
predicates which Anaxagoras gives the _νοῦς_, may thus indeed be
affirmed, but they are, on their own account, one-sided only.

2. _The Homœomeriæ._ This is the one side in the principle of
Anaxagoras; we now have to consider the going forth of the _νοῦς_
into further determinations. This remaining part of the philosophy of
Anaxagoras at first, however, makes us think that the hopes in which
such a principle justified us must be very much diminished. On the
other side, this universal is confronted by Being, matter, the manifold
generally, potentiality as distinguished from the former as actuality.
For if the Good or the end is also determined as potentiality, the
universal, as the self-moving, may rather be called the actual in
itself, the being-for-self, as opposed to implicit being, potentiality,
passivity. Aristotle says in an important passage (Met. I. 8): “If
any one should say of Anaxagoras that he adopted two principles,
he would rest his statement on a point respecting which the latter
never really clearly defined himself, but which he had necessarily
to acknowledge to those who adduced it.... That is, Anaxagoras says
that originally everything is mingled.... But where nothing is yet
separated, no distinguishing feature is present; such substance is
neither a white, black, gray, nor any other colour, but colourless; it
has no quality nor quantity nor determination (_τί_). All is mingled
except the _νοῦς_; this is unmingled and pure. With this in view, it
thus occurs to him to denominate as principles the one, for it alone is
single and unmingled, and the other-being (_θάτερον_), what we call the
indeterminate, before it has become determined or partakes of any kind
of form.”

This other principle is celebrated under the name of homœomeries
(_ὁμοιομερῆ_), of like parts or homogeneous, in Aristotle’s rendering
(Met. I. 3, 7); Riemer translates _ἡ ὁμοιομερεια_ “the similarity of
individual parts to the whole,” and _αἱ ὁμοιομέρειαι_ “the elementary
matter,” yet this latter word seems to be of a later origin.[84]
Aristotle says, “Anaxagoras sets forth” (in respect of the material)
“infinitely many principles, for he maintained that, like water
and fire in Empedocles’ system, nearly all that is formed of like
parts only arises from union and passes away through separation;
other arising and passing away there is none, for equal parts remain
eternal.” That is, the existent, the individual matter, such as bones,
metal, flesh, &c., in itself consists of parts like itself—flesh
of small particles of flesh, gold of small gold particles, &c. Thus
he said at the beginning of his work, “All has been alike” (i.e.
unseparated as in a chaos), “and has rested for an infinitude of time;
then came the _νοῦς_, and it brought in movement, separated and brought
order into the separated creation (_διεκόσμησεν_), in that it united
the like.”[85]

The homœomeriæ become clearer if we compare them with the conceptions
of Leucippus and Democritus and others. In Leucippus and Democritus, as
well as Empedocles, we saw this matter, or the absolute as objective
existence, determined so that simple atoms—with the latter the four
elements and with the former infinitely many—were set forth as
separate only in form; their syntheses and combinations were existing
things. Aristotle (De cœlo, III. 3) says further on this point,
“Anaxagoras asserts of the elements the opposite to Empedocles. For
the latter takes as original principles, fire, air, earth, and water,
through whose union all things arise. On the other hand, Anaxagoras
maintains what are of like parts such as flesh, bones, or the like to
be simple materials; such things as water and fire, on the contrary,
are a mixture of the original elements. For any one of these four
consists of the infinite admixture of all invisible, existing things
of like parts, which hence come forth from these.” The principle
held good for him as for the Eleatics, that “the like only comes out
of the like; there is no transition into the opposite, no union of
opposites possible.” All change is hence to him only a separation
and union of the like; change as true change, would be a Becoming
out of the negative of itself. “That is, because Anaxagoras,” says
Aristotle (Phys. I, 4), “partook of the view of all physicists that
it is impossible that anything can come out of nothing, there was
nothing left but to admit that what becomes was already present as an
existent, but that, on account of its small size, it was imperceptible
to us.” This point of view is also quite different from the conception
of Thales and Heraclitus, in which, not only the possibility, but
the actuality of the transformation of these like qualitative
differences is essentially maintained. But to Anaxagoras with whom
the elements are a mingled chaos formed therefrom, having only an
apparent uniformity, concrete things arise through the severance of
these infinitely many principles from such a chaos, since like finds
like. Respecting the difference between Empedocles and Anaxagoras,
there is further what Aristotle adds in the same place: “The former
allows a change (_περίοδον_) in these conditions, the latter only
their one appearance.” The conception of Democritus is similar to that
of Anaxagoras in so far as that an infinite manifold is the original
source. But with Anaxagoras the determination of the fundamental
principles appears to contain that which we consider as organized, and
to be by no means an independently existent simple; thus perfectly
individualized atoms such as particles of flesh and of gold, form,
through their coming together, that which appears to be organized. That
comes near our ordinary ideas. Means of nourishment, it is thought,
contain such parts as are homogeneous to blood, flesh, &c. Anaxagoras
hence says, according to Aristotle (De gen. anim. I. 18), “Flesh
comes to flesh through food.” Digestion is thus nothing more than the
taking up of the homogeneous and separation of the heterogeneous;
all nourishment and growth is thus not true assimilation but only
increase, because each internal organ of the animal only draws its
parts to itself out of the various plants, bodies, &c. Death is, on
the other hand, the separation of the like and the mingling with the
heterogeneous. The activity of the _νοῦς_, as the sundering of the like
out of the chaos and the putting together of the like, as also the
setting at liberty again of this like, is certainly simple and relative
to itself, but purely formal and thus for itself contentless.

This is the general standpoint of the philosophy of Anaxagoras,
and quite the same standpoint which in more recent times reigns in
chemistry for instance; flesh is certainly no longer regarded as
simple, but as being hydrogen, &c. The chemical elements are oxygen,
hydrogen, carbon and metals, &c. Chemistry says, if you want to know
what flesh, wood, stone, &c., really are, you must set forth their
simple elements, and these are ultimate. It also says that much is only
relatively simple, _e.g._ platinum consists of three or four metals.
Water and air were similarly long held to be simple, but chemistry at
length analyzed them. From this chemical point of view, the simple
principles of natural things are determined as infinitely qualitative
and thus accepted as unchangeable and invariable, so that all else
consists only of the combination of these simples. Man, according to
this, is a collection of carbon and hydrogen, some earth, oxides,
phosphorus, &c. It is a favourite idea of the physicists to place
in the water or in the air, oxygen and carbon, which exist and only
require to be separated. This idea of Anaxagoras certainly also differs
from modern chemistry; that which we consider as concrete, is for him
qualitatively determined or elementary. Yet he allows, with regard to
flesh, that the parts are not all alike. “For this reason, they say,”
remarks Aristotle (Phys. I. 4; Met. IV. 5),—but not particularly
of Anaxagoras—“everything is contained in everything, for they saw
everything arise out of everything: it only appears to be different and
is called different in accordance with the predominating number of the
particular kind of parts which have mingled themselves with others. In
truth the whole is not white, or black, or sweet, or flesh, or bones;
but the homœomeriæ which have most accumulated in any place, bring
about the result that the whole appears to us as this determinate.”
As thus each thing contains all other things, water, air, bones,
fruits, &c., on the other hand, the water contains flesh as flesh,
bones, &c. Into this infinitely manifold nature of the principles,
Anaxagoras thus goes back; the sensuous has first arisen through the
accumulation of all those parts, and in it the one kind of parts then
has a predominance.

While he defines absolute existence as universal, we see here that in
objective existence, or in matter, universality and thought abandon
Anaxagoras. The implicit is to him, indeed, no absolutely sensuous
Being; the homœomeriæ are the non-sensuous, _i.e._ the invisible and
inaudible, &c. This is the highest point reached by common physicists
in passing from sensuous Being to the non-sensuous, as to the mere
negation of the being-for-us; but the positive side is that existent
Being is itself universal. The objective is to Anaxagoras certainly
the _νοῦς_, but for him the other-Being is a mixture of simple
elements, which are neither flesh nor fish, red nor blue; again
this simple is not simple in itself, but in its essence consists of
homœomeriæ, which are, however, so small that they are imperceptible.
The smallness thus does not take away their existence, for they are
still there; but existence is just the being perceptible to sight,
smell, &c. These infinitely small homœomeriæ undoubtedly disappear in
a more complete conception; flesh, for instance, is such itself, but
it is also a mixture of everything, _i.e._ it is not simple. Further
analysis equally shows how such a conception must, to a greater or
lesser degree, become confused; on the one side each form is thus
in its main elements, original, and these parts together constitute
a corporeal whole; this whole has, however, on the other side, to
contain everything in itself. The _νοῦς_, then, is only what binds and
separates, what divides and arranges [_das diakosmirende_]. This may
suffice us; however easily we may get confused with the homœomeriæ of
Anaxagoras, we must hold fast to the main determination. The homœomeriæ
still form a striking conception, and it may be asked how it conforms
with the rest of Anaxagoras’ principle.

3. _The Relation of the Two._ Now as to the relation of the _νοῦς_
to that matter, both are not speculatively posited as one, for
the relation itself is not set forth as one, nor has the Notion
penetrated it. Here the ideas become in some measure superficial, and
in some measure the conceptions are more consistent as regards the
particular, than they at first appear. Because the understanding is the
self-determining, the content is end, it retains itself in relation to
what is different; it does not arise and pass away although it is in
activity. The conception of Anaxagoras that concrete principles subsist
and retain themselves, is thus consistent; he abolishes arising and
passing away and accepts only an external change, a uniting together,
and a severance of what is so united. The principles are concrete and
have content, _i.e._ so many ends; in the change that takes place the
principles really retain themselves. Like only goes with like even if
the chaotic mixture is a combination of the unlike; but this is only a
combination and not an individual, living form which maintains itself,
binding like to like. Thus, however rude these ideas are, they are
still really in harmony with the _νοῦς_.

But if the _νοῦς_ is with Anaxagoras the moving soul in all, it yet
remains to the real, as the soul of the world and the organic system of
the whole, a mere word. For the living as living, since the soul was
conceived of as principle, the ancients demanded no further principle
(for it is the self-moving), but for determinateness, which the
animal is as element in the system of the whole, they again required
only the universal of these determinations. Anaxagoras calls the
understanding such a principle, and in fact the absolute Notion, as
simple existence, the self-identical in its differences, the dividing,
the reality-establishing, must be known as such. But that Anaxagoras
showed forth the understanding in the universe, or had grasped it as
a rational system—of this not only do we not find a trace, but the
ancients expressly say that he simply let the matter pass, just as
when we say that the world or nature is a great system, the world is
wisely ordered or is generally speaking rational. By this we are shown
no more of the realization of this reason or the comprehensibility of
the world. The _νοῦς_ of Anaxagoras is thus still formal, although
the identity of the principle with the realization was recognized.
Aristotle (Met. I. 4) recognizes the insufficiency of the Anaxagorean
principle: “Anaxagoras, indeed, requires the _νοῦς_ for his formation
of the world-system; that is, when he has a difficulty in showing the
reason for which it is in accordance with necessity, he brings it in;
otherwise he employs anything for the sake of explanation, rather than
thought.”

It is nowhere more clearly set forth that the _νοῦς_ of Anaxagoras is
still formal, than in the well-known passage out of Plato’s Phædo (p.
97-99, Steph.; p. 85-89, Bekk.), which is noteworthy for its exposition
of the philosophy of Anaxagoras. Socrates, according to Plato, states
most definitely both what the absolute to them was, and why Anaxagoras
did not satisfy them. I quote this because it will best of all lead
us on to the main conception which we recognize in the philosophic
consciousness of the ancients; at the same time it is an example of the
loquacity of Socrates. Socrates’ understanding of the _νοῦς_ as end
is better because its determinations are congenial to him, so that we
also see in it the principal forms that appear in Socrates. Plato makes
Socrates, in prison, an hour before his death, relate at considerable
length his experiences with regard to Anaxagoras: “When I heard it read
from a book of Anaxagoras, that he said that the understanding is the
disposer of the world and the first cause, I rejoiced in such a cause,
and I held that if Mind apportioned out all reality, it would apportion
it for the best” (the end would be shown forth). “Now if anyone wished
to find the cause of the individual thing, how it becomes, and how it
passes away, or how it is, he must discover this from what is best for
that thing, whether it is being or in some way suffering or doing.”
That the understanding is cause, or that everything is made for the
best, means the same thing; this will become clearer from the opposite.
It is further said, “For this reason a man has only to consider for
himself, as for all others, what is best and most perfect, and then he
would of necessity know the worse, for the same science comprises both.
Thus reflecting, I rejoiced that I could believe that I had found in
Anaxagoras a teacher of the cause of existence” (of the good) “such
as I approved of; he would, I believed, tell me whether the earth was
flat or round, and if he told me this, he would show me the cause and
necessity of the fact, because he would show me the one or the other
as being the better; and if he said that the earth is in the centre,
he would show me that it was better that it should be in the centre”
(i.e. its implicitly and explicitly determined end, and not utility as
an externally determined end). “And when he had shown me this, I should
be satisfied though he brought forward no other kind of causes, for
the same would hold good for the sun, the moon, and the other stars,
their respective velocities, returnings, and other conditions. Because
he assigned its cause to each and to all in common, I thought that he
would explain what was best for each and what was best for all” (the
free, implicitly and explicitly existent Idea, the absolute end). “I
would not have given up this hope for a great deal, but seized these
writings zealously and read them as soon as possible in order to learn
as soon as possible the good and the evil. These bright hopes faded
when I saw that he did not require thought at all nor any reason for
the formation of things, but had recourse to air, fire, water and many
other eccentricities.” We here see how to what is best, according to
the understanding (the relation of final end), that which we call
natural causes is opposed, just as in Leibnitz the operating and the
final causes are different.

Socrates explains this in the following way: “It appears to me to be
as if some one were to say that Socrates performs all his actions with
understanding, and then in going on to give the reasons for each of
my actions, were to say that I sit here because my body consists of
bones and muscles; the bones are fixed and have joints that divide
them (_διαφυὰς_), but the muscles have the power of extending and
bending, and they cover the bones with flesh and skin; it is as though
he were further to bring forward as the cause of my talking with
you, other similar causes, sounds, and air, hearing, and a thousand
other things, but omitted to give the true cause” (free independent
determination), “which is that the Athenians judged it fit to condemn
me, and therefore I judged it better and more just to sit here and to
suffer the punishment which they accorded” (we must recollect that one
of his friends had arranged everything for the flight of Socrates, but
that he refused to go) “for else, by the dog of Egypt, how long ago
would these bones and muscles have gone to Megara or to Boeotia, had
they been moved only by their opinion of what was best, and had I not
considered it juster and better to bear the punishment which the State
laid upon me, instead of escaping and fleeing from it.” Plato here
correctly places the two kinds of reason and cause in opposition to one
another—the cause proceeding from ends, and the inferior, subject, and
merely external causes of chemistry, mechanism, &c.—in order to show
the discrepancy between them, as here exemplified in the case of a man
with consciousness. Anaxagoras seems to define an end and to wish to
proceed from it; but he immediately lets this go again and proceeds to
quite external causes. “But to call these” (these bones and muscles)
“causes is quite improper. If, however, anyone were to say that without
having bones and muscles and whatever else I have, I could not do
that which I consider best, he would be quite right. But to say that
from such causes, I do that which I do, and do with understanding;
to say that I do not do it from the choice of what is best—to make
such an assertion shows a great want of consideration; it signifies an
incapacity to distinguish that the one is the true cause and the other
is only that without which the cause could not operate,” _i.e._ the
conditions.

This is a good example for showing that we miss the end in such modes
of explanation. On the other hand, it is not a good example, because it
is taken from the kingdom of the self-conscious will, where deliberate
and not unconscious end reigns. In this criticism of the Anaxagorean
_νοῦς_ we can certainly see it generally expressed that Anaxagoras
made no application of his _νοῦς_ to reality. But the positive
element in the conclusion of Socrates seems, on the other hand, to
be unsatisfying, because it goes to the other extreme, namely, to
desire causes for nature which do not appear to be in it, but which
fall outside of it in consciousness. For what is good and beautiful is
partly due to the thought of consciousness as such; end or purposive
action is mainly an act of consciousness and not of nature. But in so
far as ends become posited in nature, the end, as end, on the other
hand, falls outside of it in our judgment only; as such it is not in
nature itself, for in it there are only what we call natural causes,
and for its comprehension we have only to seek and show causes that
are immanent. According to this, we distinguish, for instance, in
Socrates the end and ground of his action as consciousness, and the
causes of his actual action: and the latter we would undoubtedly seek
in his bones, muscles, nerves, &c. Since we banish the consideration
of nature in relation to ends—as present in our thought and not
existent in nature—we also banish from our consideration teleological
explanations in nature formerly admired, _e.g._ that grass grows that
animals may eat it, and that these last exist and eat grass, so that we
may eat them. The end of trees is said to be that their fruit may be
consumed and that they should give us wood for heat; many animals have
skins for warm clothing; the sea in northern climates floats timber to
the shores because on these shores themselves no wood grows, and the
inhabitants can hence obtain it, and so on. Thus presented, the end,
the Good, lies outside of the thing itself: the nature of a thing then
becomes considered, not in and for itself, but only in relation to
another which is nothing to it. Thus, because things are only useful
for an end, this determination is not their own but one foreign to
them. The tree, the grass, is as natural existence, independent, and
this adaptation of it to an end, such as making grass that which is
to be eaten, does not concern the grass as grass, just as it does
not concern the animal that man should clothe himself in his skin;
Socrates may hence seem to miss in Anaxagoras this mode of looking at
nature. But this to us familiar way of regarding the good and expedient
is on the one hand not the only one, and does not represent Plato’s
meaning, while, on the other, it is likewise necessary. We have not to
represent the good or the end in so one-sided a manner that we think
of it existing as such in the perceiving mind, and in opposition to
what is; but set free from this form, we must take it in its essence
as the Idea of all existence. The nature of things must be recognized
in accordance with the Notion, which is the independent, unfettered
consideration of things; and because it is that which things are in and
for themselves, it controls the relationship of natural causes. This
Notion is the end, the true cause, but that which recedes into itself;
it is the implicitly existent first from which movement proceeds and
which becomes result; it is not only an end present in the imagination
before its actuality exists, but is also present in reality. Becoming
is the movement through which a reality or totality becomes; in the
animal or plant its essence as universal genus, is that which begins
its movement and brings it forth. But this whole is not the product of
something foreign, but its own product, what is already present as
germ or seed; thus it is called end, the self-producing, that which
in its Becoming is already implicitly existent. The Idea is not a
particular thing, which might have another content than reality or
appear quite different. The opposition is the merely formal opposition
of possibility and actuality; the active impelling substance and
the product are the same. This realization goes right through the
opposition; the negative in the universal is just this process. The
genus sets itself in a state of opposition as individual and universal,
and thus, in what lives, the genus realizes itself in the opposition of
races which are opposed, but whose principle is the universal genus.
They, as individuals, aim at their own self-preservation as individuals
in eating, drinking, &c., but what they thereby bring to pass is genus.
Individuals sublate themselves, but genus is that which is ever brought
forth; plants bring forth only the same plants whose ground is the
universal.

In accordance with this, the distinction between what have been badly
named natural causes and the final causes has to be determined. Now
if I isolate individuality and merely regard it as movement and the
moments of the same, I show what are natural causes. For example,
where has this life taken its origin? Through the generation of this
its father and mother. What is the cause of these fruits? The tree
whose juices so distil themselves that the fruit forthwith arises.
Answers of this kind give the causes, _i.e._ the individuality
opposed to an individuality; but their principle is the genus. Now
nature cannot represent essence as such. The end of generation is the
sublation of the individuality of Being; but nature which in existence
certainly brings about this sublation of individuality, does not set
the universal in its place, but another individual. Bones, muscles,
&c., bring forth a movement; they are causes, but they themselves are
so through other causes, and so on into infinitude. The universal,
however, takes them up into itself as moments which undoubtedly appear
in movement as causes, though the fundamental ground of these parts
actually is the whole. It is not they which come first, but the result
into which the juices of the plants, &c., pass, is the first, just
as in origination it appears only as product, as seed, that which
constitutes the beginning and the end, even though they be in different
individuals. Their real nature is the same.

But such a genus is itself a particular genus and is essentially
related to another, _e.g._ the Idea of the plant to that of the animal;
the universal moves on. This looks like external teleology—that plants
are eaten by animals, &c., in which their limitation as genus lies.
The genus of the plant has the absolute totality of its realization in
the animal, the animal in the conscious existence, just as the earth
has it in the plant. This is the system of the whole in which each
moment is transitory. The double method of considering the matter thus
is that each Idea is a circle within itself, the plant or the animal
the Good of its kind; and, on the other hand, each is a moment in the
universal Good. If I consider the animal merely as externally adapted
to an end, as created for something else, I consider it in a one-sided
way; it is real existence, in and for itself universal. But it is just
as one-sided to say that the plant, for instance, is only in and for
itself, only end to itself, only shut up within itself and going back
into itself. For each idea is a circle which is complete in itself,
but whose completion is likewise a passing into another circle; it
is a vortex whose middle point, that into which it returns, is found
directly in the periphery of a higher circle which swallows it up.
Thus, for the first time, we reach the determination of an end in the
world which is immanent within it.

These explanations are necessary here, since hereafter we see the
speculative Idea coming more into the universal; it was formerly
expressed as Being and the moments and movements were called existent.
What has to be avoided in this transition is that we should thereby
think that Being is given up and that we pass into consciousness
as opposed to Being (in so doing the universal would lose all its
speculative significance); the universal is immanent in nature. This
is the meaning which is present when we represent to ourselves that
thought constitutes, orders, &c., the world. It is not, so to speak,
the activity of the individual consciousness, in which I stand here
on one side and, opposite to me, an actuality, matter, which I form,
dispose and order as I will; for the universal, Thought, must abide in
Philosophy without this opposition. Being, pure Being, is universal
when we thereby keep in mind that Being is absolute abstraction,
pure thought; but Being as it is thus set forth as Being, has the
significance of the opposite to this Being-reflected-into-itself,
to thought and recollection; the universal, on the contrary, has
reflection immediately in itself. So far, the ancients really got:
it does not seem far. “Universal” is a dry determination; everyone
knows about the universal, but not of it as real existence. Thought,
indeed, reaches to the invisibility of the sensuous; not to the
positive determinateness of thinking it as universal, but only to the
predicateless absolute as to the merely negative; and that is as far
as the common ideas of the present day have come. With this discovery
of thought we conclude the first Section and enter upon the second
period. The profit to be derived from the first period is not very
great. Some, indeed, think that there is still some special wisdom in
it, but thought is still young, the determinations are thus still poor,
abstract and arid. Thought here has but few determinations—water,
Being, number, &c.—and these cannot endure; the universal must go
forth on its own account as the self-determining activity, and this we
find it doing in Anaxagoras alone.

We have still to consider the relationship of the universal as opposed
to Being, or consciousness as such in its relation to what is. By
Anaxagoras’ determination of real existence, this relationship of
consciousness is also determined. In this regard nothing satisfactory
can be found; for he recognized, on the one hand, thought as real
existence, without, however, bringing this thought to bear on ordinary
reality. Thus, on the other hand, this is destitute of thought and
independent, an infinite number of homœomeriæ, _i.e._ an infinite
amount of a sensuous implicit existence, which now, however, is
sensuous Being; for existent Being is an accumulation of homœomeriæ.
The relationship borne by consciousness to real existence may likewise
be various. Anaxagoras could thus either say that the truth is only in
thought and in rational knowledge, or that it is sensuous perception;
for in this we have the homœomeriæ which are themselves implicit. Thus,
in the first place, we find from him—as Sextus tells us, (adv. Math.
VII., 89-91) “that the understanding (_λόγος_) is the criterion of
the truth; the senses cannot judge of the truth on account of their
weakness”—weakness for the homœomeriæ are the infinitely small;
the senses could not grasp them, do not know that they have to be
something ideal and thought. A celebrated example of this is given by
him according to Sextus (Pyrrh. Hyp. I. 13, §. 33), in the assertion
that “the snow is black, for it is water, and water is black.” He
here asserts the truth in a reason. In the second place, according to
Aristotle (Met. III. 7), Anaxagoras is said to have asserted that,
“there is a medium between contradiction (_ἀντιφάσεως_); so that
everything is untrue. For because the two sides of the opposition are
mingled, what is mingled is neither good nor not good, and thus not
true.” Aristotle also quotes another time from him (Met. III. 5): “That
one of his apothegms to his disciples was that to them things were as
they supposed them.” This may relate to the fact that because existent
Being is an accumulation of homœomeriæ which are what really exists,
sensuous perception takes things as they are in truth.

There is little more to be made of this. But here we have the beginning
of a more distinct development of the relationship of consciousness to
Being, the development of the nature of knowledge as a knowledge of the
true. The mind has gone forth to express real existence as Thought;
and thus real existence as existent, is in consciousness as such; it
is implicit but likewise in consciousness. This Being is such only in
so far as consciousness recognizes it, and real existence is only the
knowledge of it. The mind has no longer to seek existence in something
foreign, since it is in itself; for what formerly appeared foreign
is Thought, _i.e._ consciousness has this real existence in itself.
But this consciousness in opposition is an individual consciousness;
thereby in fact, implicit Being is sublated, for the implicit is
what is not opposed, not singled out, but universal. It is, indeed,
known, but what is, only is in knowledge, or it is no other Being than
that of the knowledge of consciousness. We see this development of
the universal in which real existence goes right over to the side of
consciousness, in the so much decried worldly wisdom of the Sophists;
we may view this as indicating that the negative nature of the
universal is now developing.




