CHAPTER II

FIRST PERIOD, SECOND DIVISION: FROM THE SOPHISTS TO THE SOCRATICS.


IN this second division we have first to consider more particularly
the Sophists, secondly Socrates, and thirdly the Socratics, while we
distinguish from these Plato, and take him along with Aristotle in the
third division. The _νοῦς_, which is at first only grasped in a very
subjective manner as end, that is to say as that which is end to men,
_i.e._ the Good, in Plato and Aristotle became understood in what is on
the whole an objective way, as genus or Idea. Because thought has now
become set forth as principle, and this at first presents a subjective
appearance as being the subjective activity of thought, there now sets
in (since the absolute is posited as subject) an age of subjective
reflection; _i.e._ there begins in this period—which coincides with
the disintegration of Greece in the Peloponnesian war—the principle of
modern times.

Since in the _νοῦς_ of Anaxagoras, as the still formal self-determining
activity, determination is as yet quite undetermined, general and
abstract, and along with that contentless throughout, the universal
standpoint is the immediate necessity of going on to a content which
begins actual determination. But what is this absolute, universal
content which abstract thought as self-determining activity gives
itself? That is the real question here. Consciousness now confronts
the untrammeled thought of those ancient philosophers, whose general
ideas we have considered. While hitherto the subject, when it reflected
on the absolute, only produced thoughts, and had this content before
it, it is now seen that what is here present is not the whole, but
that the thinking subject likewise really belongs to the totality of
the objective. Furthermore, this subjectivity of thought has again
the double character of at once being the infinite, self-relating
form, which as this pure activity of the universal, receives
content-determinations; and, on the other hand, as consciousness
reflects that it is the thinking subject which is thus positing, of
also being a return of spirit from objectivity into itself. Thus if
thought, because it immersed itself in the object, had as such, and
like the _νοῦς_ of Anaxagoras, at first no content, because this
stood on the other side, so now, with the return of thought as to
the consciousness that the subject is what thinks, we have the other
side—that what has to be dealt with is the attainment of a truly
absolute content. This content, taken abstractly, may itself be again
a double one. Either the “I” is in respect of determination the real
when it makes itself and its interests the content, or the content
becomes determined as the altogether universal. According to this,
we have two questions to deal with, which are—how the determination
of what is in and for itself is to be comprehended, and how this is
likewise in immediate relation to the “I” as thinking. It comes to pass
in Philosophy that although the “I” is the positing, yet the posited
content of that which is thought is the object existent in and for
itself. If one were to remain at saying that the “I” is that which
posits, this would be the false idealism of modern times: in earlier
times men did not remain at saying that what is thought is bad because
I posit it.

To the Sophists the content is _mine_, and subjective: Socrates grasped
the content which is in and for itself, and the followers of Socrates
have, in direct connection with him, merely further defined this
content.


A.—THE SOPHISTS.

The Notion, which reason has found in Anaxagoras to be real existence,
is the simple negative into which all determination, all that is
existent and individual sinks. Before the Notion nothing can exist,
for it is simply the predicateless absolute to which everything is
clearly a moment only; for it there is thus nothing so to speak
permanently fixed and sealed. The Notion is just the constant change
of Heraclitus, the movement, the causticity, which nothing can resist.
Thus the Notion which finds itself, finds itself as the absolute
power before which everything vanishes; and thereby all things, all
existence, everything held to be secure, is now made fleeting. This
security—whether it be a security of natural Being or the security of
definite conceptions, principles, customs and laws—becomes vacillation
and loses its stability. As universal, such principles, &c., certainly
themselves pertain to the Notion, yet their universality is only
their form, for the content which they have, as determinate, falls
into movement. We see this movement arising in the so-called Sophists
whom we here encounter for the first time. They gave themselves the
name _σοφισταί_, as teachers of wisdom, _i.e._ as those who could
make wise (_σοφίζειν_). The learning of the Sophists is thus directly
the opposite to ours, which only aspires to acquire information and
investigate what is and has been—it is a mass of empirical matter, in
which the discovery of a new form, a new worm, or other vermin is held
to be a point of great importance. Our learned professors are in so
far much less responsible than the Sophists; however, Philosophy has
nothing to do with this lack of responsibility.

But as regards the relation of the Sophists to what is ordinarily
believed, they are, by the healthy human understanding, as much
decried as by morality. By the former this is on account of their
theoretic teaching, since it is senseless to say that nothing is;
and in respect of practice because they subvert all principles and
laws. For the first mentioned, things certainly cannot be left in
this confusion of movement and in their negative aspect merely; yet
the rest into which they pass is not the restoration of what is
moved into its former condition of security, as if in the end the
result were the same and the action were a superfluous one. Now the
sophistry of common opinion, which is without the culture of thought
and without scientific knowledge, is found in the fact that to it its
determinations are, as such, held to be existent in and for themselves,
and a number of rules of life, maxims, principles, &c., are considered
as absolutely fixed truths. Mind itself is, however, the unity of these
in many ways limited truths, which in it are all recognized as being
present as sublated only, as merely relative truths, _i.e._ with their
restrictions, in their limitation, and not as existent in themselves.
Hence these truths to the ordinary understanding, are, in fact, no
more, for on another occasion it allows and even asserts the opposite
to have a value also for consciousness; or it does not know that it
says directly the opposite to what it means, its expression being thus
only an expression of contradiction. In its actions generally, and not
in its bad actions, ordinary understanding breaks these its maxims and
its principles itself, and if it leads a rational life, it is properly
speaking only a standing inconsistency, the making good of one narrow
maxim of conduct through breaking off from others. For example, a
statesman of experience and culture is one who knows how to steer a
middle course, and has practical understanding, _i.e._ deals with the
whole extent of the case before him and not with one side of it, which
expresses itself in one maxim only. On the other hand, he, whoever he
is, who acts on one maxim, is a pedant and spoils things for himself
and others. Most commonly it is thus. For example, we hear it said, “it
is certain that the things that I see are; I believe in their reality.”
Anyone can say this quite easily. But in fact it is not true that
he believes in their reality; really he assumes the contrary. For he
eats and drinks them, _i.e._ he is convinced that these things are not
in themselves, and their being has no security, no subsistence. Thus
common understanding is in its actions better than it thinks, for in
action it is Mind as a whole. But it is not here known to itself as
Mind, for what comes within its consciousness are definite laws, rules,
general propositions, such as by its understanding are esteemed to be
the absolute truth, whose limitation it, however, sets aside in action.
Now, when the Notion turns to the riches which consciousness thinks to
possess, and when the latter is sensible of the danger to its truth
without which it would not be, when its fixed realities are destroyed,
it is enraged; and the Notion which in this its realization applies
itself to the common verities, draws hatred and disdain upon itself.
This is the ground of the universal denunciation of the Sophists; a
denunciation of healthy human understanding which does not know how
else to help itself.

Sophistry is certainly a word of ill-repute, and indeed it is
particularly through the opposition to Socrates and Plato that the
Sophists have come into such disrepute that the word usually now
signifies that, by false reasoning, some truth is either refuted and
made dubious, or something false is proved and made plausible. We
have to put this evil significance on one side and to forget it. On
the other hand, we now wish to consider further from the positive
and properly speaking scientific side, what was the position of the
Sophists in Greece.

It was the Sophists who now applied the simple Notion as thought
(which with Zeno in the Eleatic school had commenced to turn towards
its pure counterpart, motion) to worldly objects generally, and with
it penetrated all human relations. For it is conscious of itself as
the absolute and single reality, and, jealous of all else, exercises
its power and rule in this reality as regards all else, since this
desires to be considered as the determinate which is not Thought. The
thought identical with itself, thus directs its negative powers towards
the manifold determination of the theoretical and the practical, the
truths of natural consciousness and the immediately recognized laws
and principles; and what to the ordinary conception is established,
dissolves itself in it, and in so doing leaves it to particular
subjectivity to make itself first and fixed, to relate everything to
itself.

Now that this Notion has appeared, it has become a more universal
Philosophy, and not so much simple Philosophy as the universal culture
of which every man who did not belong to those devoid of thought,
partook, and necessarily partook. For we call culture just the Notion
as applied in actuality, in so far as it makes its appearance not
purely in its abstraction, but in unity with the manifold content of
all ordinary conceptions. But in culture, the Notion is the predominant
as also the actuating, because in both the determinate is recognized
in its limits, in its transition into something else. This culture
became the general aim of education, and there were hence a number
of teachers of Sophistry. Indeed, the Sophists are the teachers of
Greece through whom culture first came into existence in Greece, and
thus they took the place of poets and of rhapsodists, who before this
were the ordinary instructors. For religion was no instructress, since
no teaching was in it imparted; and though priests certainly offered
sacrifices, prophesied and interpreted the sayings of the oracle,
instruction is something quite different from this. But the Sophists
educated men in wisdom, in the sciences, music, mathematics, &c., and
this was their foremost aim. Before Pericles appeared in Greece, the
desire for culture through thought and through reflection was awakened;
men wished to be cultured in their ideas, and in their various
relations to guide themselves by thought, and no longer merely through
oracles, or through custom, passion, the feelings of the moment. For
the end of the State is the universal, under which the particular is
comprehended. Because the Sophists kept in view and enlarged upon this
culture, they prosecuted teaching as a special calling, business, or
profession, as an office taking the place of schools; they travelled
round the towns of Greece, the youth of which was by them instructed.

Now culture is certainly an indefinite expression. It has, however,
this meaning, that what free thought is to attain must come out of
itself and be personal conviction; it is then no longer believed
but investigated—in short, it is the so-called enlightenment of
modern times. Thought seeks general principles by which it criticizes
everything which is by us esteemed, and nothing has value to us which
is not in conformity with these principles. Thus, thought undertakes
to compare the positive content with itself, to dissolve the former
concrete of belief; on one side to split the content up, and, on the
other, to isolate these individualities, these particular points of
view and aspects, and to secure them on their own account. These
aspects, which are properly not independent, but only moments of a
whole, when detached from it, relate themselves to themselves, and
in this way assume the form of universality. Any one of them can
thus be elevated to a reason, _i.e._ to a universal determination,
which is again applied to particular aspects. Thus, in culture, it is
requisite that men should be acquainted with the universal points of
view which belong to a transaction, event, &c., that this point of
view and thereby the thing, should be grasped in a universal way, in
order to afford a present knowledge of what is in question. A judge
knows the various laws, _i.e._ the various legal points of view under
which a thing is to be considered; these are already for him universal
aspects through which he has a universal consciousness, and considers
the matter in a universal way. A man of culture thus knows how to say
something of everything, to find points of view in all. Greece has
to thank the Sophists for this culture, because they taught men to
exercise thought as to what should have authority for them, and thus
their culture was culture in philosophy as much as in eloquence.

In order to reach this double end, the Sophists were one in their
desire to be wise. To know what constitutes power amongst men and in
the State, and what I have to recognize as such, is counted as wisdom;
and because I know the power, I also know how to direct others in
conformity with my end. Hence the admiration that Pericles and other
statesmen excited, just because they knew their own standpoint, and
had the power of putting others in their proper place. That man is
powerful who can deduce the actions of men from the absolute ends which
move them. The object of the Sophists has thus been to teach what is
the mainspring of the world, and since Philosophy alone knows that
this is the universal thought which resolves all that is particular,
the Sophists were also speculative philosophers. Learned in the proper
sense they hence were not, because there were as yet no positive
sciences without Philosophy, such as in their aridity did not concern
all mankind and man’s essential aspects.

They further had the most ordinary practical end, to give a
consciousness of that which is involved in the moral world and which
satisfies man. Religion taught that the gods are the powers which rule
over men. Immediate morality recognized the rule of laws; man was to
find satisfaction in conforming to laws, and was to assume that others
also find satisfaction because they follow these laws. But from the
reflection which here breaks in, it no longer satisfies man to obey
law as an authority and external necessity, for he desires to satisfy
himself in himself, to convince himself, through his reflection, of
what is binding upon him, what is his end and what he has to do for
this end. Thus the impulses and desires that man has, become his
power; and only inasmuch as he affords them satisfaction does he
become satisfied. Now the Sophists taught how these powers could be
moved in empirical man, for the good as ordinarily recognized, no
longer determined them. Rhetoric, however, teaches how circumstances
may be made subject to such forces; it even makes use of the wrath
and passions of the hearer in order to bring about a conclusion. Thus
the Sophists were more especially the teachers of oratory, and that
is the aspect in which the individual could make himself esteemed
amongst the people as well as carry out what was best for the people;
this certainly characterizes a democratic constitution, in which the
citizens have the ultimate decision. Because, in this way, oratory was
one of the first requirements for the rule of a people, or for making
something clear to them through their ordinary ideas, the Sophists
trained men for common Greek life, for citizenship and for statesmen,
without appearing to prepare State officials for an examination in
specific subjects. For the particular characteristic of eloquence is
to show the manifold points of view existing in a thing, and to give
force to those which harmonize with what appears to me to be most
useful; it thus is the art of putting forward various points of view in
the concrete case, and placing others rather in the shade. Aristotle’s
_Topica_ comes to mind in the connection, inasmuch as it gives the
categories or thought-determinations (_τόπους_), according to which we
have to regard things in order to learn to speak; but the Sophists were
the first to apply themselves to a knowledge of these.

This is the position taken up by the Sophists. But we find a perfectly
definite picture of their further progress and procedure in Plato’s
Protagoras. Plato here makes Protagoras express himself more precisely
respecting the art of the Sophists. That is to say, Plato in this
dialogue represents that Socrates accompanies a young man named
Hippocrates, who desires to place himself under Protagoras, then newly
arrived in Athens, for instruction in the science of the Sophists.
On the way, Socrates now asks Hippocrates what is this wisdom of
the Sophists which he wishes to learn. Hippocrates at first replies
Rhetoric, for the Sophist is one who knows how to make men clever
(_δεινόν_) in speech. In fact, what is most striking in a man or people
of culture is the art of speaking well, or of turning subjects round
and considering them in many aspects. The uncultivated man finds it
unpleasant to associate with people who know how to grasp and express
every point of view with ease. The French are good speakers in this
sense, and the Germans call their talking prattle; but it is not mere
talk that brings about this result, for culture is also wanted. We may
have mastered a speech quite completely, but if we have not culture,
it is not good speaking. Men thus learn French, not only to be able
to speak French well, but to acquire French culture. What is to be
obtained from the Sophists is thus the power of keeping the manifold
points of view present to the mind, so that the wealth of categories by
which an object may be considered, immediately occurs to it. Socrates,
indeed, remarks that the principle of the Sophists is not hereby
determined in a sufficiently comprehensive way, and thus it is not
sufficiently known what a Sophist is, “yet,” he says, “we have a desire
to go on.”[86] For likewise, if anyone wishes to study Philosophy, he
does not as yet know what Philosophy is, else he would not need to
study it.

Having reached Protagoras with Hippocrates, Socrates finds him in
an assemblage of the foremost Sophists and surrounded by listeners,
“walking about and like an Orpheus entrancing all men by his words,
Hippias sitting meanwhile on a chair with not so many round him, and
Prodicus lying amongst a great number of admirers.” After Socrates
brought before Protagoras the request to have Hippocrates placed under
his instruction, in order that he might by him be taught how to become
eminent in the State, he also asks whether they might speak with him
in public or alone. Protagoras praises his discretion, and replies
that they act wisely to make use of this precaution. For because the
Sophists wandered about the towns, and thus youths, deserting fathers
and friends, followed them in view of improving themselves through
their intercourse with them, they drew upon themselves much envy and
ill-will—for everything new is hated. On this point Protagoras speaks
at length: “I assert that the art of the Sophists is old; but that
those of the ancients who practised it in fear of giving offence” (for
the uncultured world is antagonistic to the cultured) “veiled and
concealed it. One section, like Homer and Hesiod, taught it in their
poetry; others, like Orpheus and Musæus, through mysteries and oracles.
Some, I believe, like Iccus of Tarentum, and the Sophist now living
and unsurpassed—Herodicus, of Selymbria—in gymnastics, but many more
through music.” We see that Protagoras usually describes the end of
mental culture as being to bring about morality, presence of mind,
sense of order and general capacity. He adds: “all those who feared
envy arising against the sciences, required such veils and screens.
But I think that they do not attain their end, for men of penetration
in the State see the end appearing through, while the people notice
nothing, and only quote the others. If people behave so, they make
themselves more hated, and appear to be impostors. I have therefore
taken the opposite way, and openly acknowledge (_ὁμολογῶ_), and do not
deny that I am a Sophist” (Protagoras first used the name of Sophist),
“and that my business is to give men culture (_παιδεύειν_).”[87]

Further on, where the arts which Hippocrates was to acquire under
Protagoras’ instruction were discussed, Protagoras answered Socrates:
“What you ask is sensible, and I like to answer a sensible question.
Hippocrates will not have the same experience that he would have
with other teachers (_σοφιστῶν_). These latter are at variance with
(_λωβῶνται_) their pupils, for they take them against their wills
straight back to the arts and sciences which they just wished to
escape, inasmuch as they teach them arithmetic, geometry and music.
But he who comes to me will be instructed in nothing else than that in
which he comes to be instructed.” Thus the youths came freely, with
the wish to be made men of culture through his instruction, and in the
hope that he, as teacher, knew the way to succeed in so doing. As to
his general aim, Protagoras says, “The instruction consists in bringing
about a right perception and understanding (_εὐβουλία_) of the best
way of regulating one’s own family affairs, and similarly as regards
citizenship, in qualifying men both to speak on the affairs of the
State, and to do the best for the State.” Thus two interests are here
apparent, that of the individual and that of the State. Now Socrates
expresses dissent and surprise at Protagoras’ assertion as to imparting
instruction in political aptitude. “I thought that the political
virtues could not be learned,” for it is Socrates’ main tenet that
virtue cannot be taught. And Socrates now brings forward the following
argument, after the manner of the Sophists appealing to experience.
“Those who are masters of the art of politics cannot impart that art to
others. Pericles, the father of these youths, gave them instruction in
all that instructors could teach; but not in the science for which he
is celebrated; here he left them free to wander in the chance of their
lighting upon wisdom. Similarly other great statesmen did not teach it
to others, whether friends or strangers.”[88]

Protagoras now replied that it could be taught, and shows the reason
why great statesmen did not give this instruction, while he asks
whether he is to speak as an elder to younger men in a myth, or whether
he should give his reasons. The company left the matter to him and
he began with the following myth of everlasting interest: “The gods
commanded Prometheus and Epimetheus to adorn the world and confer on
it its qualities and powers. Epimetheus imparted strength, power of
flight, arms, clothing, herbs and fruits, but in some incomprehensible
way he gave all to the beasts, so that nothing remained to men.
Prometheus saw them unclothed, unarmed, helpless, when the moment came
in which the form of man had to go forth into the light. Then he stole
fire from heaven, the arts of Vulcan and Minerva, to equip man for
his needs. But political wisdom was wanting, and, living without any
common bond, they were in a constant state of strife and misery. Then
Zeus gave the command to Hermes to grant reverence” (natural obedience,
honour, docility, respect of children for parents, and of men for
higher and better natures), “and justice. Hermes asks, ‘How shall I
impart them? To individuals, as particular arts are distributed, just
as some have a knowledge of medicine sufficient for assisting others?’
But Zeus answers that it must be to all, for no body of men (_πόλις_)
can exist if only a few partake of those qualities. And it shall be
the law that whoever cannot acknowledge authority and justice must be
exterminated as a plague to the State. Hence the Athenians when they
wish to build, call builders into counsel, and when they contemplate
any other business, those who have experience in it, but when they
wish to come to a decision or make a regulation in State affairs, they
admit all. For all must partake of this virtue or no State could exist.
Thus if anyone is inexperienced in the art of flute-playing and yet
professes to be a master in it, he is justly thought to be mad. But in
justice it is otherwise; if anyone is not just and confesses it, he is
thought to be mad. He must profess to be so, for everybody must either
share in it or be shut out from social life.”[89]

For the fact that this political science is also so constituted “that
everyone by education and diligence (_ἐξ ἐπιμελείας_) may acquire it,”
Protagoras gives additional reasons in the following argument: “No
one blames or punishes on account of a defect or evil that has come
to anyone by nature or by chance. But defects and faults which can
be removed through diligence, exercise and teaching are considered
to be blameworthy and punishable. Impiety and injustice are of this
description and, generally speaking, all that opposes public virtue.
Men guilty of these sins are thus reproached; they are punished in the
idea that they had the power to remove the wrong and still more to
acquire political virtue through diligence and teaching. Thus men do
not punish on account of what is past—excepting as we strike a vicious
beast on the head—but on account of what is to come, so that neither
the one who committed the crime nor any other misled by his example,
should do the same again. Thus it is in this implied that virtue can be
acquired through education and exercise.”[90] This is a good argument
for the teachability of virtue.

As to the statement of Socrates that men such as Pericles, who were
famed for their political virtues, did not impart these to their
children and friends, Protagoras in the first place says that it
may on the other hand be replied, that in these virtues all men are
instructed by all men. Political virtue is so constituted that it
is the common province of all; this one essential for all men is
justice, temperance, and holiness—in one word, whatever comprises
manly virtue. In it no particular education from men of eminence is
thus required. The children are from their earliest infancy exhorted
and admonished to do what is good, and are accustomed to that which
is right. Instruction in music and gymnastics contributes to temper
the indulgence of self-will and pleasure, and to accustom men to
conform to a law or rule; and the reading of the poets who enforce
this does the same. When man steps outside this circle of education,
he enters into that of the constitution of a State which likewise
contributes to keep everyone within the bounds of law and order, so
that political virtue is a result of the education of youth. But the
objection that distinguished men did not impart their distinction to
their children and friends, Protagoras answered secondly and very
well as follows: “Let us say that in a State all the citizens had to
become flute-players, all would be instructed in the art; some would
be distinguished, many good, some mediocre, a few perhaps bad, and
yet all would have a certain amount of skill. But it might very well
be the case that the son of an artist should be a bad player, for
the distinction depends on particular talents, and a particularly
good natural capacity. From very skilful players very unskilful might
descend, and conversely, but all would have a certain knowledge of the
flute, and all would certainly be infinitely better than those who were
quite ignorant of the art. Similarly all, even the worst citizens of
a rational State are better and juster than citizens of a State where
there is no culture nor justice nor law, in a word, where there is no
necessity to bring them up to be just. For this superiority they have
to thank the education given in their State.”[91] All these are quite
good examples and striking arguments which are not at all worse than
Cicero’s reasoning—_a natura insitum_. The arguments of Socrates and
the development of these arguments are, on the contrary, examples based
upon experience, and are often not better than what is here placed in
the mouth of a Sophist.

What now confronts us is the question of how far this may be
inadequate, and particularly how far Socrates and Plato came into
collision with the Sophists and constituted the antagonism to them.
For the claim made by the Sophists in Greece was that they had given
a higher culture to their people; for this, indeed, great credit was
ascribed to them in Greece, but they were met by the reproach that
was encountered by all culture. That is to say, because the Sophists
were masters of argument and reasoning, and were within the stage of
reflective thought, they wished, passing from the particular to the
universal, to awaken attention through examples and illustrations to
what in his experience and to his mind appears to man to be right.
This, the necessary course of free, thinking reflection, which with
us has also been adopted by culture, must, however, necessarily lead
beyond implicit trust and unrestricted faith in the current morality
and religion. The statement that the Sophists thereby fell into
one-sided principles rests upon the fact that in Greek culture the
time had not yet come when, out of thinking consciousness itself, the
ultimate principles had become manifested, and thus there was something
firm to rest upon, as is the case with us in modern times. Because,
on the one hand, the need of subjective freedom existed merely to
give effect to that which man himself perceives and finds present in
his reason (thus laws, religious ideas, only in so far as I recognize
them through my thought), on the other hand, no fixed principle had
so far been found in thought; thought was rather reasoning, and
what remained indeterminate could thus only be fulfilled through
self-will. It is otherwise in our European world where culture is, so
to speak, introduced under the protection and in presupposition of
a spiritual religion, _i.e._ not of a religion of the imagination,
but by presupposing a knowledge of the eternal nature of Spirit and
of the absolute end, of the end of man, to be in a spiritual way
actual and to posit himself in unity with the absolute spirit. Thus
here there is a groundwork of a fixed spiritual principle which
thus satisfies the needs of the subjective mind; and from this
absolute principle all further relationships, duties, laws, &c.,
are established. Consequently culture cannot receive the variety of
direction—and hence the aimlessness—of the Greeks and of those who
extended culture over Greece, the Sophists. As regards the religion
of the imagination, as regards the undeveloped principle of the Greek
State, culture was able to divide itself into many points of view, or
it was easy to it to represent particular subordinate points of view as
highest principles. Where, on the contrary, as is the case with us, a
universal aim so high, indeed the highest possible, floats before the
imagination, a particular principle cannot so easily reach this rank,
even if the reflection of reason attains to the position of determining
and recognizing from itself what is highest; for the subordination
of special principles is already determined, although in form our
enlightenment may have the same standpoint as that of the Sophists.

As regards content, the standpoint of the Sophists differed from
that of Socrates and Plato, in that the mission of Socrates was to
express the beautiful, good, true, and right, as the end and aim of
the individual, while with the Sophists the content was not present
as an ultimate end, so that all this was left to the individual will.
Hence came the evil reputation obtained by the Sophists through the
antagonism of Plato, and this is certainly their defect. As to their
outward lives, we know that the Sophists accumulated great riches;[92]
they became very proud, and some of them lived very luxuriously. But in
respect of the inward life, reasoning thought has, in distinction to
Plato, this prevailing characteristic, that it makes duty, that which
has to be done, not come from the Notion of the thing as determined in
and for itself; for it brings forward external reasons through which
right and wrong, utility and harmfulness, are distinguished. To Plato
and Socrates, on the other hand, the main point is that the nature of
the conditions should be considered, and that the Notion of the thing
in and for itself should become evolved. Socrates and Plato wished to
bring forward this Notion as opposed to the consideration of things
from points of view and reasonings which are always merely particular
and individual, and thus opposed to the Notion itself. The distinction
in the two points of view is thus that cultured reasoning only belongs,
in a general way, to the Sophists, while Socrates and Plato determined
thought through a universal determination (the Platonic Idea), or
something fixed, which mind finds eternally in itself.

If sophistry is bad in the sense that it signifies a quality of which
only bad men are guilty, it is at the same time much more common
than this would imply; for all argumentative reasoning, adducing of
arguments and counterarguments, bringing into prominence particular
points of view, is sophistry. And just as utterances of the Sophists
are adduced against which nothing can be said (as they are by Plato),
men of our day are urged to all that is good for the very reasons that
are reasons to the Sophists. Thus it is said, “do not cheat, else you
lose your credit, hence your wealth,” or, “be temperate, or you will
spoil your appetite and have to suffer.” Or for punishment men give the
external reasons of improvement, &c.; or else an action is defended on
external grounds taken from the result. If, on the other hand, firmly
rooted principles lie at the foundation—as in the Christian Religion,
although men now remember this no longer—it is said, “the grace of God
in respect of holiness, &c., thus directs the life of men;” and these
external grounds fall away. Sophistry thus does not lie so far from
us as we think. When educated men discuss matters now-a-days, it may
seem all very good, but it is in no way different from what Socrates
and Plato called sophistry—although they themselves have adopted
this standpoint as truly as did the Sophists. Educated men fall into
it when they judge of concrete cases in which a particular point of
view determines the result, and we must in ordinary life do the same
if we wish to make up our minds in action. If duties and virtues are
advocated as in sermons (this is so in most sermons), we must hear such
reasons given. Other speakers, such as those in parliament, likewise
make use of arguments and counterarguments similar to these, through
which they try to persuade and convince. On the one hand something
definite is in question, such as the constitution, or a war, and from
the fixed direction thus given, certain provisions have to be deduced
consistently; but this consistency, on the other, soon disappears, just
because the matter can be arranged either this way or that, and thus
particular points of view always are decisive. Men likewise make use of
good arguments, after the manner of the Sophists, against Philosophy.
There are, they say, various philosophies, various opinions, and this
is contrary to the one Truth; the weakness of human reason allows of
no knowledge. What is Philosophy to the feelings, mind, and heart?
Abstract thinking about such matters produces abstruse results which
are of no use in the practical life of man. We no longer apply the word
sophistry thus, but it is the way of the Sophists not to take things
as they are, but to bring about their proofs by arguments derived from
feelings as ultimate ends. We shall see this characteristic of the
Sophists more clearly still in Socrates and Plato.

With such reasoning men can easily get so far as to know (where they
do not, it is owing to the want of education—but the Sophists were
very well educated) that if arguments are relied upon, everything can
be proved by argument, and arguments for and against can be found
for everything; as particular, however, they throw no light upon the
universal, the Notion. Thus what has been considered the sin of the
Sophists is that they taught men to deduce any conclusion required by
others or by themselves; but that is not due to any special quality
in the Sophists, but to reflective reasoning. In the worst action
there exists a point of view which is essentially real; if this is
brought to the front, men excuse and vindicate the action. In the
crime of desertion in time of war, there is, for example, the duty of
self-preservation. Similarly in more modern times the greatest crimes,
assassination, treachery, &c., have been justified, because in the
purpose there lay a determination which was actually essential, such as
that men must resist the evil and promote the good. The educated man
knows how to regard everything from the point of view of the good, to
maintain in everything a real point of view. A man does not require to
make great progress in his education to have good reasons ready for the
worst action; all that has happened in the world since the time of Adam
has been justified by some good reason.

It appears that the Sophists were conscious of this reasoning, and
knew, as educated men, that everything could be proved. Hence in
Plato’s Gorgias it is said that the art of the Sophists is a greater
gift than any other; they could convince the people, the senate, the
judges, of what they liked.[93] The advocate has similarly to inquire
what arguments there are in favour of the party which claims his help,
even if it be the opposite one to that which he wished to support.
That knowledge is no defect, but is part of the higher culture of
the Sophists; and if uneducated men naturally form conclusions from
external grounds which are those alone coming to their knowledge, they
may perhaps be mainly determined by something besides what they know
(by their integrity, for instance). The Sophists thus knew that on
this basis nothing was secure, because the power of thought treated
everything dialectically. That is the formal culture which they had
and imparted, for their acquaintanceship with so many points of view
shook what was morality in Greece (the religion, duties, and laws,
unconsciously exercised), since through its limited content, that
came into collision with what was different. Once it was highest
and ultimate, then it was deposed. Ordinary knowledge thus becomes
confused, as we shall see very clearly in Socrates, for something
is held to be certain to consciousness, and then other points of
view which are also present and recognized, have similarly to be
allowed; hence the first has no further value, or at least loses its
supremacy. We saw in the same way, how bravery, which lies in the
hazarding of one’s life, is made dubious by the duty of preserving
life, if put forward unconditionally. Plato quotes several examples
of this unsettling tendency, as when he makes Dionysodorus maintain:
“Whoever gives culture to one who does not possess knowledge, desires
that he should no longer remain what he is. He desires to direct
him to reason, and this is to make him not the same as he is.” And
Euthydemus, when the others say that he lies, answers, “Who lies, says
what is not; men cannot say what is not, and thus no one can lie.”[94]
And again Dionysodorus says, “You have a dog, this dog has young,
and is a father; thus a dog is your father, and you are brother to
its young.”[95] Sequences put together thus are constantly found in
critical treatises.

With this comes the question which the nature of thought brings along
with it. If the field of argument, that which consciousness holds to
be firmly established, is shaken by reflection, what is man now to
take as his ultimate basis? For something fixed there must be. This is
either the good, the universal, or the individuality, the arbitrary
will of the subject; and both may be united, as is shown later on in
Socrates. To the Sophists the satisfaction of the individual himself
was now made ultimate, and since they made everything uncertain, the
fixed point was in the assertion, “it is my desire, my pride, glory,
and honour, particular subjectivity, which I make my end.” Thus the
Sophists are reproached for countenancing personal affections, private
interests, &c. This proceeds directly from the nature of their culture,
which, because it places ready various points of view, makes it depend
on the pleasure of the subject alone which shall prevail, that is, if
fixed principles do not determine. Here the danger lies. This takes
place also in the present day where the right and the true in our
actions is made to depend on good intention and on my own conviction.
The real end of the State, the best administration and constitution, is
likewise to demagogues very vague.

On account of their formal culture, the Sophists have a place in
Philosophy; on account of their reflection they have not. They are
associated with Philosophy in that they do not remain at concrete
reasoning, but go on, at least in part, to ultimate determinations.
A chief part of their culture was the generalization of the Eleatic
mode of thought and its extension to the whole content of knowledge
and of action; the positive thus comes in as, and has become, utility.
To go into particulars respecting the Sophists would lead us too
far; individual Sophists have their place in the general history of
culture. The celebrated Sophists are very numerous; the most celebrated
amongst them are Protagoras, Gorgias, and also Prodicus, the teacher
of Socrates, to whom Socrates ascribes the well-known myth of “The
choice of Hercules”[96]—an allegory, beautiful in its own way, which
has been repeated hundreds and thousands of times. I will deal only
with Protagoras and Gorgias, not from the point of view of culture,
but in respect of proving further how the general knowledge which
they extended to everything, has, with one of them, the universal
form which makes it pure science. Plato is the chief source of our
acquaintanceship with the Sophists, for he occupied himself largely
with them; then we have Aristotle’s own little treatise on Gorgias;
and Sextus Empiricus, who preserved for us much of the philosophy of
Protagoras.


1. PROTAGORAS.

Protagoras, born at Abdera,[97] was somewhat older than Socrates;
little more is known of him, nor, indeed, could there be much known.
For he led a uniform life, since he spent it in the study of the
sciences; he appeared in Greece proper as the first public teacher. He
read his writings[98] like the rhapsodists and poets, the former of
whom sang the verses of others, and the latter their own. There were
then no places of learning, no books from which men could be taught,
for to the ancients, as Plato says,[99] “the chief part of culture”
(_ραιδείας_) “consisted in being skilled” (_δεινόν_) “in poetry,”
just as with us fifty years ago the principal instruction of the
people consisted of Bible History and Biblical precepts. The Sophists
now gave, in place of a knowledge of the poets, an acquaintanceship
with thought. Protagoras also came to Athens and there lived for
long, principally with the great Pericles, who also entered into this
culture. Indeed, the two once argued for a whole day as to whether the
dart or the thrower or he who arranged the contest was guilty of the
death of a man who thus met his death.[100] The dispute is over the
great and important question of the possibility of imputation; guilt
is a general expression, the analysis of which may undoubtedly become
a difficult and extensive undertaking. In his intercourse with such
men, Pericles developed his genius for eloquence; for whatever kind of
mental occupation may be in question, a cultivated mind can alone excel
in it; and true culture is only possible through pure science. Pericles
was a powerful orator, and we see from Thucydides how deep a knowledge
he had of the State and of his people. Protagoras had the same fate
as Anaxagoras, in being afterwards banished from Athens. The cause of
this sentence was a work written by him beginning, “As to the gods,
I am not able to say whether they are or are not; for there is much
which prevents this knowledge, both in the obscurity of the matter,
and in the life of man which is so short.” This book was also publicly
burned in Athens by command of the State, and, so far as we know, it
was the first to be treated so. At the age of seventy or ninety years
Protagoras was drowned while on a voyage to Sicily.[101]

Protagoras was not, like other Sophists, merely a teacher of culture,
but likewise a deep and solid thinker, a philosopher who reflected
on fundamental determinations of an altogether universal kind. The
main point in his system of knowledge he expressed thus: “Man is the
measure of all things; of that which is, that it is; of that which
is not, that it is not.”[102] On the one hand, therefore, what had
to be done was to grasp thought as determined and as having content;
but, on the other, to find the determining and content-giving; this
universal determination then becomes the standard by which everything
is judged. Now Protagoras’ assertion is in its real meaning a great
truth, but at the same time it has a certain ambiguity, in that as man
is the undetermined and many-sided, either he may in his individual
particularity, as this contingent man, be the measure, or else
self-conscious reason in man, man in his rational nature and his
universal substantiality, is the absolute measure. If the statement is
taken in the former sense, all is self-seeking, all self-interest, the
subject with his interests forms the central point; and if man has a
rational side, reason is still something subjective, it is “he.” But
this is just the wrong and perverted way of looking at things which
necessarily forms the main reproach made against the Sophists—that
they put forward man in his contingent aims as determining; thus with
them the interest of the subject in its particularity, and the interest
of the same in its substantial reason are not distinguished.

The same statement is brought forward in Socrates and Plato, but
with the further modification that here man, in that he is thinking
and gives himself a universal content, is the measure. Thus here the
great proposition is enunciated on which, from this time forward,
everything turns, since the further progress of Philosophy only
explains it further: it signifies that reason is the end of all
things. This proposition further expresses a very remarkable change
of position in asserting that all content, everything objective,
is only in relation to consciousness; thought is thus in all truth
expressed as the essential moment, and thereby the Absolute takes the
form of the thinking subjectivity which comes before us principally
in Socrates. Since man, as subject, is the measure of everything,
the existent is not alone, but is for my knowledge. Consciousness is
really the producer of the content in what is objective, and subjective
thinking is thus really active. And this view extends even to the most
modern philosophy, as when, for instance, Kant says that we only know
phenomena, _i.e._ that what seems to us to be objective reality, is
only to be considered in its relation to consciousness, and does not
exist without this relation. The fact that the subject as active and
determining brings forth the content, is the important matter, but now
the question comes as to how the content is further determined—whether
it is limited to the particularity of consciousness or is determined
as the universal, the existent in and for itself. God, the Platonic
Good, is certainly at first a product of thought, but in the second
place He is just as really in and for Himself. Since I, as existent,
fixed and eternal, only recognize what is in its content universal,
this, posited as it is by me, is likewise the implicitly objective, not
posited by me.

Protagoras himself shows us much more of what is implied in his theory,
for he says, “Truth is a manifestation for consciousness. Nothing is
in and for itself one, but everything has a relative truth only,”
_i.e._ it is what it is but for another, which is man. This relativity
is by Protagoras expressed in a way which seems to us in some measure
trivial, and belongs to the first beginnings of reflective thought. The
insignificant examples which he adduces (like Plato and Socrates when
they follow out in them the point of view of reflection), by way of
explanation, show that in Protagoras’ understanding what is determined
is not grasped as the universal and identical with self. Hence the
exemplifications are taken mostly from sensuous manifestation. “In a
wind it may be that one person is cold and another is not; hence of
this wind we cannot tell whether in itself it is cold or hot.”[103]
Frost and heat are thus not anything which exist, but only are in their
relation to a subject; were the wind cold in itself, it would always be
so to the subject. Or again, “if we have here six dice, and place by
them four others, we should say of the former that there are more of
them. But, again, if we put twelve by them we say that these first six
are the fewer.”[104] Because we say of the same number that it is more
and fewer, the more and the less is merely a relative determination;
thus what is the object, is so in the idea present to consciousness
only. Plato, on the contrary, considered one and many, not like the
Sophists in their distinction, but as being one and the same.

Plato says further on this point, that the white, warm, &c., or
everything that we say of things, does not exist for itself, but that
the eye, sensation, is necessary to make it for us. This reciprocal
movement is what first creates the white, and in it the white is not a
thing in itself, but what we have present is a seeing eye, or, to speak
generally, sight, and particularly the seeing of white, the feeling
of warmth, &c. Undoubtedly warmth, colour, &c., really are only in
relation to another, but the conceiving mind divides itself into itself
and into a world in which each also has its relation. This objective
relativity is expressed better in the following way. If the white were
in itself, it would be that which brought forth the sensation of it; it
would be the action or the cause, and we, on the contrary, the passive
and receptive. But the object which thus requires to be active, is not
active until it enters into (_ξυνέλθῃ_) relation with the passive;
similarly the passive is only in relation to the active. Thus what
is said in defining anything never concerns the thing as in itself,
but clearly only as being related to something else. Nothing is thus
constituted in and for itself as it appears, but the truth is just
this phenomenon to which our activity contributes. As things appear
to the healthy man they are thus not in themselves, but for him; as
they appear to the sick or deranged man, they are to him, without our
being able to say that as they appear to him, they are not true.[105]
We feel the awkwardness of calling any such thing true, for after all
the existent, if related to consciousness, is yet not related to it as
fixed, but to sensuous knowledge; and then this consciousness itself
is a condition, _i.e._ something which passes away. Protagoras rightly
recognized this double relativity when he says, “Matter is a pure flux,
it is not anything fixed and determined in itself, for it can be
everything, and it is different to different ages and to the various
conditions of waking and sleep, &c.”[106] Kant separates himself from
this standpoint only in that he places the relativity in the “I,”
and not in objective existence. The phenomenon is, according to him,
nothing but the fact of there being outside an impulse, an unknown
_x_, which first receives these determinations through our feeling.
Even if there were an objective ground for our calling one thing cold
and another warm, we could indeed say that they must have diversity
in themselves, but warmth and cold first become what they are in our
feeling. Similarly it can only be in our conception that things are
outside of us, etc. But if the experience is quite correctly called
a “phenomenon,” _i.e._ something relative, because it does not come
to pass without the determinations of the activity of our senses, nor
without categories of thought, yet that one, all-pervading, universal,
which permeates all experience, which to Heraclitus was necessity, has
to be brought into consciousness.

We see that Protagoras possesses great powers of reflective thought,
and indeed reflection on consciousness came to consciousness with
Protagoras. But this is the form of manifestation which was again
taken by the later sceptics. The phenomenal is not sensuous Being,
for because I posit this as phenomenal, I assert its nullity. But the
statements “What is, is only for consciousness,” or “The truth of
all things is the manifestation of them in and for consciousness,”
seem quite to contradict themselves. For it appears as though a
contradiction were asserted—first that nothing is in itself as
it appears, and then that it is true as it appears. But objective
significance must not be given to the positive, to what is true, as
if, for example, this were white in itself because it appears so;
for it is only this manifestation of the white that is true, the
manifestation being just this movement of the self-abrogating sensuous
Being, which, taken in the universal, stands above consciousness as
truly as above Being. The world is consequently not only phenomenal
in that it is for consciousness, and thus that its Being is only one
relative to consciousness, for it is likewise in itself phenomenal. The
element of consciousness which Protagoras has demonstrated, and owing
to which the developed universal has in it the moment of the negative
Being-for-another, has thus indeed to be asserted as a necessary
moment; but taken for itself, alone and isolated, it is one-sided,
since the moment of implicit Being is likewise essential.


2. GORGIAS.

This scepticism reached a much deeper point in Gorgias of Leontium in
Sicily, a man of great culture, and also distinguished as a statesman.
During the Peloponnesian war he was, in Ol. 88, 2 (427 B.C.), a few
years after Pericles’ death in Ol. 87, 4, sent from his native town
to Athens.[107] And when he attained his object, he went through many
other Greek towns, such as Larissa in Thessaly, and taught in them.
Thus he obtained great wealth, along with much admiration, and this
lasted till his death at over a hundred years of age.

He is said to have been a disciple of Empedocles, but he also knew the
Eleatics, and his dialectic partakes of the manner and method of the
latter; indeed Aristotle, who preserves this dialectic, in the work
_De Xenophane, Zenone et Gorgia_, which has indeed only come to us in
fragments, deals with them together. Sextus Empiricus also gives us in
full the dialectic of Gorgias. He was strong in the dialectic requisite
for eloquence, but his preeminence lies in his pure dialectic
respecting the quite universal categories of Being and non-being, which
indeed is not like that of the Sophists. Tiedemann (Geist. der Spec.
Phil. vol. I. p. 362) says very falsely: “Gorgias went much further
than any man of healthy mind could go.” Tiedemann could say of every
philosopher that he went further than healthy human understanding, for
what men call healthy understanding is not Philosophy, and is often
far from healthy. Healthy human understanding possesses the modes of
thought, maxims, and judgments of its time, the thought-determinations
of which dominate it without its being conscious thereof. In this
way Gorgias undoubtedly went further than healthy understanding.
Before Copernicus it would have been contrary to all healthy human
understanding if anyone had said that the earth went round the sun,
or before the discovery of America, if it were said that there was a
continent there. In India or in China a republic would even now be
contrary to all healthy understanding. The dialectic of Gorgias moves
more purely in Notion than that found in Protagoras. Since Protagoras
asserted the relativity, or the non-implicit nature of all that is,
this only exists in relation to another which really is essential to
it; and this last, indeed, is consciousness. Gorgias’ demonstration of
the non-implicitness of Being is purer, because he takes in itself what
passes for real existence without presupposing that other, and thus
shows its own essential nullity and separates therefrom the subjective
side and Being as it is for the latter.

Gorgias’ treatise “On Nature,” in which he composes his dialectic,
falls, according to Sextus Empiricus (adv. Math. VII. 65), into three
parts. “In the first he proves that” (objectively) “nothing exists, in
the second” (subjectively), “that assuming that Being is, it cannot be
known; and in the third place” (both subjectively and objectively),
“that were it to exist and be knowable, no communication of what is
known would be possible.” Gorgias was a congenial subject to Sextus,
but the former still proved, and this is what the Sceptics ceased
to do. Here very abstract thought-determinations regarding the most
speculative moments of Being and non-being, of knowledge, and of
bringing into existence, of communicating knowledge, are involved; and
this is no idle talk, as was formerly supposed, for Gorgias’ dialectic
is of a quite objective kind, and is most interesting in content.

_a._ “If anything is,” (this “anything” is, however, a makeshift
that we are in the habit of using in our conversation, and which
is, properly speaking, inappropriate, for it implies an opposition
of subject and predicate, while at present the “is” alone is in
question)—then “if it _is_” (and now it becomes for the first time
defined as subject) “it is either the existent or the non-existent, or
else existence and non-existence. It is now evident of these three that
they are not.”[108]

_α_. “That which is not, is not; for if Being belonged to it, there
would at the same time be existence and non-existence. That is, in so
far as it is thought of as non-existent, it is not; but in so far as
it _is_ the non-existent, it must exist. But it cannot at the same
time be and not be. Again, if the non-existent is, the existent is
not, for the two are opposed. Thus, if Being pertained to non-being,
non-being would belong to Being. But if Being does not exist, no more
does non-being.”[109] This is with Gorgias a characteristic mode of
reasoning.[110]

_β_. “But in proving,” Aristotle adds to the passages just quoted,
“that the existent is not, he follows Melissus and Zeno.” This is
the dialectic already brought forward by them. “If Being is, it is
contradictory to predicate a quality to it, and if we do this, we
express something merely negative about it.”

_αα_. For Gorgias says: “What is, either is in itself (_ἀΐδιον_)
being without beginning, or it has originated,” and he now shows
that it could neither be the one nor the other, for each leads to
contradiction. “It cannot be the former, for what is in itself has
no beginning, and is the infinite,” and hence likewise undetermined
and indeterminable. “The infinite is nowhere, for if it is anywhere,
that in which it is, is different from it.” Where it is, it is in
another, “but that is not infinite which is different from another,
and contained in another. Just as little is it contained in itself,
for then that in which it is, and that which is therein, would be the
same. What it is in, is the place; that which is in this, is the body;
but that both should be the same is absurd. The infinite does not thus
exist.”[111] This dialectic of Gorgias regarding the infinite is on
the one hand limited, because immediate existence has certainly no
beginning and no limit, but asserts a progression into infinitude; the
self-existent Thought, the universal Notion, as absolute negativity,
has, however, limits in itself. On the other hand, Gorgias is quite
right, for the bad, sensuous infinite is nowhere present, and thus
does not exist, but is a Beyond of Being; only we may take what
Gorgias takes as a diversity of place, as being diversity generally.
Thus, instead of placing the infinite, like Gorgias, sometimes in
another, sometimes within itself, _i.e._ sometimes maintaining it to be
different, sometimes abrogating the diversity, we may say better and
more universally, that this sensuous infinite is a diversity which is
always posited as different from the existent, for it is just the being
different from itself.

“In the same way Being has not originated, because it must then have
come either from the existent or from the non-existent. From the
existent it did not arise, for then it would be already; just as little
from the non-existent, because this cannot beget anything.”[112] The
sceptics followed this up further. The object to be contemplated
hence ever becomes posited under determinations with ‘either’ ‘or,’
which then contradict one another. But that is not the true dialectic,
because the object resolves itself into those determinations only; when
nothing follows respecting the nature of the object itself, then, as is
already proved, the object must be necessarily in one determination,
and not in and for itself.

_ββ_. In a similar way Gorgias shows “of what exists, that it must
either be one or many; but neither is possible. For as one, it would
have a certain magnitude, or continuity, or number, or body, but all
this is not one, but different, divisible. Every sensuous one is, in
fact, necessarily another, a manifold. If it is not one, it cannot be
many, for the many is many ones.”[113]

_γ_. “Similarly both, Being and non-being, cannot exist at the same
time. If one exists as much as the other, they are the same, and
therefore neither of them is, for the non-being does not exist, and
hence neither does the Being, since it is identical with it. Nor can
they, on the other hand, both exist, for if they are identical, I
cannot express them both,”[114] and thus both do not exist, for if I
express both, I differentiate. This dialectic, which Aristotle (De
Xenoph. &c., c. 5) likewise designates as peculiar to Gorgias, has its
truth. In speaking of Being and non-being, we always say the opposite
to what we wish. Being and non-being are the same, just as they are
not the same; if they are the same, I speak of the two as different:
if different, I express the same predicate of them, diversity. This
dialectic is not to be despised by us, as if it dealt with empty
abstractions, for these categories are, on the one hand, in their
purity the most universal, and if, on the other hand, they are not the
ultimate, yet it is always Being or non-being that are in question;
they are not, however, definitely fixed and divided off, but are
self-abrogating. Gorgias is conscious that they are vanishing moments,
while the ordinary unconscious conception also has present to it this
truth, but knows nothing about it.

_b._ The relation of the conceiver to conception, the difference
between conception and Being, is a subject which is in our mouths
to-day. “But if there is an ‘is,’ it is unknowable and unthinkable, for
what is presented is not the existent” but only a presentation. “If
what is presented is white, it is the case that white is presented;
if what is presented is not the really existent, it is the case that
what is, is not presented. For if what is presented is the real
existent, everything that is presented also exists, but no one says
that if a flying man, or waggon riding on the sea were presented to
us, it would exist. Further, if what is presented is the existent, the
non-existent is not presented, for opposites are in opposition. But
this non-existent is everywhere presented as it is in Scylla and the
Chimæra.[115] Gorgias on the one hand pronounces a just polemic against
absolute realism, which, because it represents, thinks to possess the
very thing itself, when it only has a relative, but he falls, on the
other hand, into the false idealism of modern times, according to which
thought is always subjective only, and thus not the existent, since
through thought an existent is transformed into what is thought.”

_c._ We finally have the basis of the dialectic of Gorgias in respect
of the third point, that knowledge cannot be imparted, in this: “If the
existent were presented, it could still not be expressed and imparted.
Things are visible, audible, &c., or are experienced. The visible
is grasped through sight, the audible through hearing, and not the
contrary way; thus, the one cannot be indicated by the other. Speech,
by which the existent has to be expressed, is not the existent; what is
imparted is thus not the existent, but only words.[116] In this manner
Gorgias’ dialectic is the laying hold of this difference exactly as
again occurred in Kant; if I maintain this difference, certainly that
which is, cannot be known.”

This dialectic is undoubtedly impregnable to those who maintain
sensuous Being to be real. But its truth is only this movement to
posit itself negatively as existent, and the unity is the reflection
that the existent, comprehended also as non-existent, becomes, in this
comprehension of it, universal. That this existent cannot be imparted,
must likewise be held most strongly, for _this_ individual cannot be
expressed. Philosophic truth is thus not only expressed as if there
were another truth in sensuous consciousness; but Being is present
in that philosophic truth expresses it. The Sophists thus also made
dialectic, universal Philosophy, their object, and they were profound
thinkers.


B.—SOCRATES.

Consciousness had reached this point in Greece, when in Athens the
great form of Socrates, in whom the subjectivity of thought was brought
to consciousness in a more definite and more thorough manner, now
appeared. But Socrates did not grow like a mushroom out of the earth,
for he stands in continuity with his time, and thus is not only a
most important figure in the history of Philosophy—perhaps the most
interesting in the philosophy of antiquity—but is also a world-famed
personage. For a mental turning-point exhibited itself in him in the
form of philosophic thought. If we shortly recall the periods already
passed over, we find that the ancient Ionic philosophers certainly
thought, but without reflecting on the thought or defining its product
as thought. The Atomists made objective existence into thoughts, but
these were to them only abstractions, pure entities. Anaxagoras, on the
other hand, raised thought as such, into a principle which thereby
presented itself as the all-powerful Notion, as the negative power
over all that is definite and existent. Protagoras finally expresses
thought as real existence, but it is in this its movement, which is
the all-resolving consciousness, the unrest of the Notion. This unrest
is in itself at the same time something restful or secure. But the
fixed point of motion as such, is the ‘I,’ for it has the moments of
movement outside of it; as the self-retaining, which only abrogates
what is different, the ‘I’ is negative unity, but just in that very
way individual, and not yet the universal reflected within itself. Now
we here find the ambiguity of dialectic and sophistry, which rests
in the fact that if the objective disappears, the signification of
the fixed subjective is either that of the individual opposed to the
objective, and thereby the contingent and lawless will, or that of the
objective and universal in itself. Socrates expresses real existence
as the universal ‘I,’ as the consciousness which rests in itself; but
that is the good as such, which is free from existent reality, free
from individual sensuous consciousness of feeling and desire, free
finally from the theoretically speculative thought about nature, which,
if indeed thought, has still the form of Being and in which I am not
certain of my existence.

Socrates herein adopted firstly the doctrine of Anaxagoras that
thought, the understanding, is the ruling and self-determining
universal, though this principle did not, as with the Sophists, attain
the form of formal culture or of abstract philosophizing. Thus, if with
Socrates, as with Protagoras, the self-conscious thought that abrogates
all that is determined, was real existence, with Socrates this was
the case in such a way that he at the same time grasped in thought
rest and security. This substance existing in and for itself, the
self-retaining, has become determined as end, and further as the true
and the good.

To this determination of the universal, we have, in the second place,
to add that this good, which has by me to be esteemed as substantial
end, must be known by me; with this the infinite subjectivity, the
freedom of self-consciousness in Socrates breaks out. This freedom
which is contained therein, the fact that consciousness is clearly
present in all that it thinks, and must necessarily be at home
with itself, is in our time constantly and plainly demanded; the
substantial, although eternal and in and for itself, must as truly
be produced through me; but this my part in it is only the formal
activity. Thus Socrates’ principle is that man has to find from himself
both the end of his actions and the end of the world, and must attain
to truth through himself. True thought thinks in such a way that its
import is as truly objective as subjective. But objectivity has been
the significance of substantial universality, and not of external
objectivity; thus truth is now posited as a product mediated through
thought, while untrained morality, as Sophocles makes Antigone say
(vers. 454-457), is “the eternal law of the Gods”:

  “And no one knew from whence it came.”

But though in modern times we hear much said of immediate knowledge and
belief, it is a misconception to maintain that their content, God, the
Good, Just, &c., although the content of feeling and conception, is
not, as spiritual content, also posited through thought. The animal has
no religion, because it only feels; but what is spiritual rests on the
mediation of thought, and pertains to man.

Since Socrates thus introduces the infinitely important element
of leading back the truth of the objective to the thought of the
subject, just as Protagoras says that the objective first is through
relation to us, the battle of Socrates and Plato with the Sophists
cannot rest on the ground that these, as belonging to the old faith,
maintained against the others the religion and customs of Greece, for
the violation of which Anaxagoras was condemned. Quite the contrary.
Reflection, and the reference of any judgment to consciousness, is
held by Socrates in common with the Sophists. But the opposition into
which Socrates and Plato were in their philosophy necessarily brought
in regard to the Sophists, as the universal philosophic culture of
the times, was as follows:—The objective produced through thought,
is at the same time in and for itself, thus being raised above all
particularity of interests and desires, and being the power over
them. Hence because, on the one hand, to Socrates and Plato the
moment of subjective freedom is the directing of consciousness into
itself, on the other, this return is also determined as a coming out
from particular subjectivity. It is hereby implied that contingency
of events is abolished, and man has this outside within him, as the
spiritual universal. This is the true, the unity of subjective and
objective in modern terminology, while the Kantian ideal is only
phenomenal and not objective in itself.

In the third place Socrates accepted the Good at first only in the
particular significance of the practical, which nevertheless is only
one mode of the substantial Idea; the universal is not only for me,
but also, as end existent in and for itself, the principle of the
philosophy of nature, and in this higher sense it was taken by Plato
and Aristotle. Of Socrates it is hence said, in the older histories
of Philosophy, that his main distinction was having added ethics as
a new conception to Philosophy, which formerly only took nature into
consideration. Diogenes Laertius, in like manner says (III., 56), that
the Ionics founded natural philosophy, Socrates ethics, and Plato
added to them dialectic. Now ethics is partly objective, and partly
subjective and reflected morality [Sittlichkeit und Moralität],[117]
and the teaching of Socrates is properly subjectively moral, because
in it the subjective side, my perception and meaning, is the prevailing
moment, although this determination of self-positing is likewise
sublated, and the good and eternal is what is in and for itself.
Objective morality is, on the contrary, natural, since it signifies the
knowledge and doing of what is in and for itself good. The Athenians
before Socrates were objectively, and not subjectively, moral, for
they acted rationally in their relations without knowing that they
were particularly excellent. Reflective morality adds to natural
morality the reflection that this is the good and not that; the Kantian
philosophy, which is reflectively moral, again showed the difference.

Because Socrates in this way gave rise to moral philosophy, all
succeeding babblers about morality and popular philosophy constituted
him their patron and object of adoration, and made him into a cloak
which should cover all false philosophy. As he treated it, it was
undoubtedly popular; and what contributed to make it such was that
his death gave him the never-failing interest derived from innocent
suffering. Cicero (Tusc. Quæst. V. 4), whose manner of thought was,
on the one hand, of the present, and who, on the other hand, had the
belief that Philosophy should yield itself up, and hence succeeded in
attaining to no content in it, boasted of Socrates (what has often
enough been said since) that his most eminent characteristic was
to have brought Philosophy from heaven to earth, to the homes and
every-day life of men, or, as Diogenes Laertius expresses it (II. 21),
“into the market place.” There we have what has just been said. This
would seem as if the best and truest Philosophy were only a domestic
or fireside philosophy, which conforms to all the ordinary ideas of
men, and in which we see friends and faithful ones talk together
of righteousness, and of what can be known on the earth, without
having penetrated the depths of the heavens, or rather the depths of
consciousness. But this last is exactly what Socrates, as these men
themselves indicate, first ventured to do. And it was not incumbent on
him to reflect upon all the speculations of past Philosophy, in order
to be able to come down in practical philosophy to inward thought. This
gives a general idea of his principle.

We must examine more closely this noteworthy phenomenon, and begin with
the history of Socrates’ life. This is, however, closely intertwined
with his interest in Philosophy, and the events of his life are bound
up with his principles. We have first of all to consider the beginning
of his life only. Socrates, whose birth occurs in the fourth year of
the 77th Olympiad (469 B.C.), was the son of Sophroniscus, a sculptor,
and of Phænarete, a midwife. His father brought him up to sculpture,
and it is said that Socrates acquired skill in the art, and long after,
statues of draped Graces, found in the Acropolis, were ascribed to
him. But his art did not satisfy him; a great desire for Philosophy,
and love of scientific research, got possession of him. He pursued his
art merely to get money for a necessary subsistence, and to be able to
apply himself to the study of the sciences; and it is told of Crito, an
Athenian, that he defrayed the cost of Socrates’ instruction by masters
in all the arts. During the exercise of his art, and specially after he
gave it up altogether, he read the works of ancient philosophers in so
far as he could get possession of them. At the same time he attended
Anaxagoras’ instructions, and, after his expulsion from Athens, at
which time Socrates was thirty-seven years old, those of Archelaus,
who was regarded as Anaxagoras’ successor, besides those of Sophists
celebrated in other sciences. Amongst these he heard Prodicus, a
celebrated teacher of oratory, whom, according to Xenophon (Memorab.
II. c. 1, §§ 21, 34), he mentions with affection, and other teachers of
music, poetry, etc. He was esteemed as on all sides a man of culture,
who was instructed in everything then requisite thereto.[118]

Another feature in his life was that he fulfilled the duty of
protecting his country, which rested on him as an Athenian citizen.
Hence he made three campaigns in the Peloponnesian war, which occurred
during his life. The Peloponnesian war led to the dissolution of
Greek life, inasmuch as it was preparatory to it; and what took place
politically was by Socrates carried out in thinking consciousness. In
these campaigns he not only acquired the fame of a brave warrior, but,
what was best of all, the merit of having saved the lives of other
citizens. In the first, he was present at the tedious siege of Potidæa
in Thrace. Here Alcibiades had already attached himself to him, and,
according to Plato, he recited in the Banquet (p. 219-222, Steph.; p.
461-466, Bekk.), a eulogy on Socrates for being able to endure all
toil, hunger and thirst, heat and cold, with mind at rest and health
of body. In an engagement in this campaign he saw Alcibiades wounded
in the midst of the enemy, lifted him up, forced his way through, and
saved both him and his arms. The generals rewarded him with a wreath,
which was the prize of the bravest; Socrates did not, however, take
it, maintaining that it was given to Alcibiades. In this campaign
it is said that once, sunk in deep meditation, he stood immovable
on one spot the whole day and night, until the morning sun awoke
him from his trance—a condition in which he is said often to have
been. This was a cataleptic state, which may bear some relation to
magnetic somnambulism, in which Socrates became quite dead to sensuous
consciousness. From this physical setting free of the inward abstract
self from the concrete bodily existence of the individual, we have, in
the outward manifestation, a proof of how the depths of his mind worked
within him. In him we see pre-eminently the inwardness of consciousness
that in an anthropological way existed in the first instance in him,
and became later on a usual thing. He made his other campaign in Bœotia
at Delium, a small fortification which the Athenians possessed not
far from the sea, and where they had an unfortunate, though not an
important engagement. Here Socrates saved another of his favourites,
Xenophon; he saw him in the flight, for Xenophon, having lost his
horse, lay wounded on the ground. Socrates took him over his shoulders,
carried him off, defending himself at the same time with the greatest
tranquillity and presence of mind from the pursuing enemy. Finally
he made his last campaign at Amphipolis in Edonis, on the Strymonian
Bay.[119]

Besides this, he occupied various civil offices. At the time when the
democratic constitution of Athens hitherto existing, was taken away
by the Lacedemonians, who now introduced everywhere an aristocratic
and indeed tyrannical rule, whereby they in great measure put
themselves at the head of affairs, he was chosen for the council,
which, as a representative body, took the place of the people. Here he
distinguished himself by his immovable firmness in what he held to be
right as against the wills of the thirty tyrants, as formerly against
the will of the people. For he sat in the tribunal which condemned
the ten generals to death, because, as admirals at the battle of
Arginusæ, though they certainly had conquered, yet, being kept back
through storm, they had not dragged out the bodies nor buried them
on the shore, and because they neglected to erect trophies; _i.e._
really because they did not stand their ground, and thus appeared to
have been beaten. Socrates alone did not agree with this decision,
declaring himself more emphatically against the people than against
the rulers.[120] To-day he fares badly who says anything against
the people. “The people have excellent intelligence, understand
everything, and have only the most excellent intentions.” As to rulers,
governments, ministers, it is self-evident that “they understand
nothing, and only desire and bring forth what is bad.”

Along with these to him more accidental relationships to the State, in
which he acted only from the ordinary sense of citizenship, without
spontaneously making the affairs of the State his real business, or
pressing on to the head of public affairs, the real business of his
life was to discuss moral philosophy with any who came in his way. His
philosophy, which asserts that real existence is in consciousness as a
universal, is still not a properly speculative philosophy, but remained
individual; yet the aim of his philosophy was that it should have a
universal significance. Hence we have to speak of his own individual
being, of his thoroughly noble character, which usually is depicted
as a complete catalogue of the virtues adorning the life of a private
citizen; and these virtues of Socrates are certainly to be looked at
as his own, and as made habitual to him by his own will. It has to be
noted that with the ancients these qualities have generally more of the
character of virtue, because with the ancients, in ordinary morality,
individuality, as the form of the universal, was given free scope, so
that virtues were regarded more as the actions of the individual will,
and thus as personal qualities; while with us they seem to be less what
is meritorious to the individual, or what comes from himself as this
unit. We are accustomed to think of them much more as what exists, as
duty, because we have a fuller consciousness of the universal, and
consider the pure individual, the personal inward consciousness, as
real existence and duty. With us virtues are hence actually either
elements in our dispositions and nature, or they have the form of the
universal and of what is necessary; but with Socrates they have the
form, not of ordinary morality or of a natural or necessary thing, but
of an independent determination. It is well known that his appearance
indicated naturally low and hateful qualities, which, as indeed he
says, he himself subdued.

He lived amongst his fellow-citizens, and stands before us as one
of those great plastic natures consistent through and through, such
as we often see in those times—resembling a perfect classical work
of art which has brought itself to this height of perfection. Such
individuals are not made, but have formed themselves into what they
are; they have become that which they wished to be, and are true to
this. In a real work of art the distinguishing point is that some idea
is brought forth, a character is presented in which every trait is
determined by the idea, and, because this is so, the work of art is,
on the one hand, living, and, on the other, beautiful, for the highest
beauty is just the most perfect carrying out of all sides of the
individuality in accordance with the one inward principle. Such works
of art are also seen in the great men of every time. The most plastic
individual as a statesman is Pericles, and round him, like stars,
Sophocles, Thucydides, Socrates, &c., worked out their individuality
into an existence of its own—into a character which regulated their
whole being, and which was one principle running throughout the whole
of their existence. Pericles alone lived with the sole end of being a
statesman. Plutarch (in Pericle, c. 5, 7) says of him that, from the
time that he devoted himself to the business of the State, he laughed
no more, and never again went to a feast. Thus, too, Socrates formed
himself, through his art and through the power of self-conscious
will, into this particular character, and acquired this capacity for
the business of his life. Through his principle he attained that
far-reaching influence which has lasted to the present day in relation
to religion, science, and justice, for since his time the genius of
inward conviction has been the basis which must be fundamental. And
since this principle proceeded from the plasticity of his character,
it is very inappropriate when Tennemann regrets (Vol. II. p. 26) “that
though we know what he was, we do not know how he became such.”

Socrates was a peaceful, pious example of the moral virtues—of wisdom,
discretion, temperance, moderation, justice, courage, inflexibility,
firm sense of rectitude in relation to tyrants and people; he was
equally removed from cupidity and despotism. His indifference to money
was due to his own determination, for, according to the custom of the
times, he could acquire it through the education of youth, like other
teachers. On the other side, this acquisition was purely matter of
choice, and not, as with us, something which is accepted, so that to
take nothing would be to break through a custom, thus to present the
appearance of wishing to become conspicuous, and to be more blamed than
praised. For this was not yet a State affair; it was under the Roman
emperors that there first were schools with payment. This moderation
of his life was likewise a power proceeding from conscious knowledge,
but this is not a principle found to hand, but the regulation of self
in accordance with circumstances; in company he was, however, a good
fellow. His sobriety in respect to wine is best depicted in Plato’s
“Symposium,” in a very characteristic scene in which we see what
Socrates called virtue. Alcibiades there appears, no longer sober, at a
feast given by Agathon, on the occasion of a success which his tragedy
had obtained on the previous day at the games. Since the company had
drunk much on the first day of the feast, the assembled guests, amongst
whom was Socrates, this evening took a resolution, in opposition to the
Greek custom at meals, to drink little. Alcibiades, finding that he
was coming in amongst abstemious men, and that there was no one else
in his own frame of mind, made himself king of the feast, and offered
the goblet to the others, in order to bring them into the condition
reached by himself; but with Socrates he said that he could do nothing,
because he remained as he was, however much he drank. Plato then makes
the individual who tells what happened at the Banquet, also tell that
he, with the others, at last fell asleep on the couch, and as he awoke
in the morning, Socrates, cup in hand, still talked with Aristophanes
and Agathon about comedy and tragedy, and whether one man could write
both comedies and tragedies, and then went at the usual time into the
public places, to the Lyceum, as if nothing had happened, and walked
about the whole day as usual.[121] This is not a moderation which
exists in the least possible enjoyment, no aimless abstemiousness and
self-mortification, but a power belonging to consciousness, which keeps
its self-possession in bodily excess. We see from this that we have
not to think of Socrates throughout after the fashion of the litany of
moral virtues.

His behaviour to others was not only just, true, open, without
rudeness, and honourable, but we also see in him an example of the most
perfect Attic urbanity; i.e. he moves in the freest possible relations,
has a readiness for conversation which is always judicious, and,
because it has an inward universality, at the same time always has the
right living relationship to the individual, and bears upon the case
on which it operates. The intercourse is that of a most highly cultured
man who, in his relation to others, never places anything personal in
all his wit, and sets aside all that is unpleasant. Thus Xenophon’s,
but particularly Plato’s Socratic Dialogues belong to the highest type
of this fine social culture.

Because the philosophy of Socrates is no withdrawal from existence now
and here into the free, pure regions of thought, but is in a piece
with his life, it does not proceed to a system; and the manner of his
philosophizing, which appears to imply a withdrawal from actual affairs
as it did to Plato, yet in that very way gives itself this inward
connection with ordinary life. For his more special business was his
philosophic teaching, or rather his philosophic social intercourse (for
it was not, properly speaking, teaching) with all; and this outwardly
resembled ordinary Athenian life in which the greater part of the
day was passed without any particular business, in loitering about
the market-place, or frequenting the public Lyceum, and there partly
partaking of bodily exercises, and partly and principally, talking
with one another. This kind of intercourse was only possible in the
Athenian mode of life, where most of the work which is now done by a
free citizen—by a free republican and free imperial citizen alike—was
performed by slaves, seeing that it was deemed unworthy of free men.
A free citizen could in Athens certainly be a handicraftsman, but he
had slaves who did the work, just as a master now has workmen. At
the present day such a life of movement would not be suitable to our
customs. Now Socrates also lounged about after this manner, and lived
in this constant discussion of ethical questions.[122] Thus what he
did was what came naturally to him, and what can in general be called
moralizing; but its nature and method was not that of preaching,
exhortation or teaching; it was not a dry morality. For amongst the
Athenians and in Attic urbanity, this had no place, since it is not a
reciprocal, free, and rational relationship. But with all men, however
different their characters, he entered on one kind of dialogue, with
all that Attic urbanity which, without presumption on his part, without
instructing others, or wishing to command them, while maintaining their
perfect right to freedom, and honouring it, yet causes all that is rude
to be suppressed.

1. _The Socratic Method._ In this conversation Socrates’ philosophy is
found, as also what is known as the Socratic method, which must in its
nature be dialectic, and of which we must speak before dealing with
the content. Socrates’ manner is not artificial; the dialogues of the
moderns, on the contrary, just because no internal reason justifies
their form, are necessarily tedious and heavy. But the principle of
his philosophy falls in with the method itself, which thus far cannot
be called method, since it is a mode which quite coincides with the
moralizing peculiar to Socrates. For the chief content is to know the
good as the absolute, and that particularly in relation to actions.
Socrates gives this point of view so high a place, that he both puts
aside the sciences which involve the contemplation of the universal in
nature, mind, &c., himself, and calls upon others to do the same.[123]
Thus it can be said that in content his philosophy had an altogether
practical aspect, and similarly the Socratic method, which is essential
to it, was distinguished by the system of first bringing a person to
reflection upon his duty by any occasion that might either happen
to be offered spontaneously, or that was brought about by Socrates.
By going to the work-places of tailors and shoemakers, and entering
into discourse with them, as also with youths and old men, Sophists,
statesmen, and citizens of all kinds, he in the first place took
their interests as his topic—whether these were household interests,
the education of children, or the interests of knowledge or of truth.
Then he led them on from a definite case to think of the universal,
and of truths and beauties which had absolute value, since in every
case, from the individual’s own thoughts, he derived the conviction
and consciousness of that which is the definite right. This method has
two prominent aspects, the one the development of the universal from
the concrete case, and the exhibition of the notion which implicitly
exists in every consciousness,[124] and the other is the resolution of
the firmly established, and, when taken immediately in consciousness,
universal determinations of the sensuous conception or of thought, and
the causing of confusion between these and what is concrete.

_a._ If we proceed from the general account of Socrates’ method
to a nearer view, in the first place its effect is to inspire men
with distrust towards their presuppositions, after faith had become
wavering and they were driven to seek that which is, in themselves.
Now whether it was that he wished to bring the manner of the Sophists
into disrepute, or that he was desirous to awaken the desire for
knowledge and independent thought in the youths whom he attracted to
himself, he certainly began by adopting the ordinary conceptions which
they considered to be true. But in order to bring others to express
these, he represents himself as in ignorance of them, and, with a
seeming ingenuousness, puts questions to his audience as if they
were to instruct him, while he really wished to draw them out. This
is the celebrated Socratic irony, which in his case is a particular
mode of carrying on intercourse between one person and another, and
is thus only a subjective form of dialectic, for real dialectic deals
with the reasons for things. What he wished to effect was, that when
other people brought forward their principles, he, from each definite
proposition, should deduce as its consequence the direct opposite of
what the proposition stated, or else allow the opposite to be deduced
from their own inner consciousness without maintaining it directly
against their statements. Sometimes he also derived the opposite from
a concrete case. But as this opposite was a principle held by men as
firmly as the other, he then went on to show that they contradicted
themselves. Thus Socrates taught those with whom he associated to know
that they knew nothing; indeed, what is more, he himself said that
he knew nothing, and therefore taught nothing. It may actually be
said that Socrates knew nothing, for he did not reach the systematic
construction of a philosophy. He was conscious of this, and it was also
not at all his aim to establish a science.

On the one view, this irony seems to be something untrue. But when we
deal with objects which have a universal interest, and speak about
them to one and to another, it is always the case that one does not
understand another’s conception of the object. For every individual has
certain ultimate words as to which he presupposes a common knowledge.
But if we really are to come to an understanding, we find it is these
presuppositions which have to be investigated. For instance, if in
more recent times belief and reason are discussed as the subjects of
present intellectual interest, everyone pretends that he knows quite
well what reason, &c., is, and it is considered ill-bred to ask for an
explanation of this, seeing that all are supposed to know about it. A
very celebrated divine, ten years ago,[125] published ninety theses
on reason, which contained very interesting questions, but resulted
in nothing, although they were much discussed, because one person’s
assertions issued from the point of view of faith, and the other’s
from that of reason, and each remained in this state of opposition,
without the one’s knowing what the other meant. Thus what would make
an understanding possible is just the explanation of what we think is
understood, without really being so. If faith and knowledge certainly
differ from one another at the first, yet through this declaration of
their notional determinations the common element will at once appear;
in that way questions like these and the trouble taken with them may,
for the first time, become fruitful; otherwise men may chatter this way
and that for years, without making any advance. For if I say I know
what reason, what belief is, these are only quite abstract ideas; it is
necessary, in order to become concrete, that they should be explained,
and that it should be understood that what they really are, is unknown.
The irony of Socrates has this great quality of showing how to make
abstract ideas concrete and effect their development, for on that alone
depends the bringing of the Notion into consciousness.

In recent times much has been said about the Socratic irony which,
like all dialectic, gives force to what is taken immediately, but only
in order to allow the dissolution inherent in it to come to pass;
and we may call this the universal irony of the world. Yet men have
tried to make this irony of Socrates into something quite different,
for they extended it into a universal principle; it is said to be
the highest attitude of the mind, and has been represented as the
most divine. It was Friedrich von Schlegel who first brought forward
this idea, and Ast repeated it, saying, “The most ardent love of all
beauty in the Idea, as in life, inspires Socrates’ words with inward,
unfathomable life.” This life is now said to be irony! But this irony
issues from the Fichtian philosophy, and is an essential point in the
comprehension of the conceptions of most recent times. It is when
subjective consciousness maintains its independence of everything,
that it says, “It is I who through my educated thoughts can annul all
determinations of right, morality, good, &c., because I am clearly
master of them, and I know that if anything seems good to me I can
easily subvert it, because things are only true to me in so far as they
please me now.” This irony is thus only a trifling with everything, and
it can transform all things into show: to this subjectivity nothing
is any longer serious, for any seriousness which it has, immediately
becomes dissipated again in jokes, and all noble or divine truth
vanishes away or becomes mere triviality. But the Greek gaiety, as it
breathes in Homer’s poems, is ironical, for Eros mocks the power of
Zeus and of Mars; Vulcan, limping along, serves the gods with wine, and
brings upon himself the uncontrollable laughter of the immortal gods.
Juno boxes Diana’s ears. Thus, too, there is irony in the sacrifices
of the ancients, who themselves consumed the best; in the pain that
laughs, in the keenest joy which is moved to tears, in the scornful
laughter of Mephistopheles, and in every transition from one extreme
to another—from what is best to what is worst. Sunday morning may be
passed in deep humility, profoundest contrition and self-abasement,
in striking the breast in penitence, and the evening in eating and
drinking to the full, going the round of pleasures, thus allowing self
to re-assert its independence of any such subjection. Hypocrisy, which
is of the same nature, is the truest irony. Socrates and Plato were
falsely stated to be the originators of this irony, of which it is
said that it is the “inmost and deepest life,” although they possessed
the element of subjectivity; in our time it was not permitted to us
to give effect to this irony. Ast’s “inmost, deepest life” is just
the subjective and arbitrary will, the inward divinity which knows
itself to be exalted above all. The divine is said to be the purely
negative attitude, the perception of the vanity of everything, in which
my vanity alone remains. Making the consciousness of the nullity of
everything ultimate, might indeed indicate depth of life, but it only
is the depth of emptiness, as may be seen from the ancient comedies
of Aristophanes. From this irony of our times, the irony of Socrates
is far removed; as is also the case with Plato, it has a significance
which is limited. Socrates’ premeditated irony may be called a manner
of speech, a pleasant rallying; there is in it no satirical laughter or
pretence, as though the idea were nothing but a joke. But his tragic
irony is his opposition of subjective reflection to morality as it
exists, not a consciousness of the fact that he stands above it, but
the natural aim of leading men, through thought, to the true good and
to the universal Idea.

_b._ Now the second element is what Socrates has called the art of
midwifery—an art which came to him from his mother.[126] It is the
assisting into the world of the thought which is already contained in
the consciousness of the individual—the showing from the concrete,
unreflected consciousness, the universality of the concrete, or
from the universally posited, the opposite which already is within
it. Socrates hence adopts a questioning attitude, and this kind of
questioning and answering has thus been called the Socratic method;
but in this method there is more than can be given in questions and
replies. For the answer seems occasionally to be quite different from
what was intended by the question, while in printed dialogue, answers
are altogether under the author’s control; but to say that in actual
life people are found to answer as they are here made to do, is quite
another thing. To Socrates those who reply may be called pliable
youths, because they reply directly to the questions, which are so
formed that they make the answer very easy, and exclude any originality
in reply. To this plastic manner, which we see in the method of
Socrates, as represented by Plato and Xenophon, it is objected that we
do not answer in the same relation in which the questioner asks; while,
with Socrates, the relation which the questioner adopts is respected
in the reply. The other way, which is to bring forward another point
of view, is undoubtedly the spirit of an animated conversation, but
such emulation is excluded from this Socratic method, in which the
principal matter is to keep to the point. The spirit of dogmatism,
self-assertion, stopping short when we seem to get into difficulties,
and escaping from them by a jest, or by setting them aside—all these
attitudes and methods are here excluded; they do not constitute good
manners, nor do they have a place in Socrates’ dialogues. In these
dialogues, it is hence not to be wondered at that those questioned
answered so precisely to the point, while in the best modern dialogues
there is always an arbitrary element.

This difference concerns only what is external and formal. But the
principal point, and the reason why Socrates set to work with questions
in bringing the good and right into consciousness in universal form,
was that he did not proceed from what is present in our consciousness
in a simple form through setting forth the conception allied to it
in pure necessity, which would be a deduction, a proof or, speaking
generally, a consequence following from the conception. But this
concrete, as it is in natural consciousness without thinking of it,
or universality immersed in matter, he analyzed, so that through
the separation of the concrete, he brought the universal contained
therein to consciousness as universal. We see this method also carried
on to a large extent in Plato’s dialogues, where there is, in this
regard, particular skill displayed. It is the same method which
forms in every man his knowledge of the universal; an education in
self-consciousness, which is the development of reason. The child, the
uncultured man, lives in concrete individual ideas, but to the man who
grows and educates himself, because he thereby goes back into himself
as thinking, reflection becomes reflection on the universal and the
permanent establishment of the same; and a freedom—formerly that of
moving in concrete ideas—is now that of so doing in abstractions and
in thoughts. We see such a development of universal from particular,
where a number of examples are given, treated in a very tedious way.
For us who are trained in presenting to ourselves what is abstract,
who are taught from youth up in universal principles, the Socratic
method of so-called deference, with its eloquence, has often something
tiresome and tedious about it. The universal of the concrete case is
already present to us as universal, because our reflection is already
accustomed to the universal, and we do not require, first of all, to
take the trouble of making a separation; and thus, if Socrates were now
to bring what is abstract before consciousness, we should not require,
in order to establish it as universal, that all these examples should
be adduced, so that through repetition the subjective certainty of
abstraction might arise.

_c._ The next result of this method of procedure may be that
consciousness is surprised that what it never looked for should be
found in consciousness. If we reflect, for example, on the universally
known idea of Becoming, we find that what becomes is not and yet it is;
it is the identity of Being and non-being, and it may surprise us that
in this simple conception so great a distinction should exist.

The result attained was partly the altogether formal and negative one
of bringing home to those who conversed with Socrates, the conviction
that, however well acquainted with the subject they had thought
themselves, they now came to the conclusion, “that what we knew has
refuted itself.” Socrates thus put questions in the intent that the
speaker should be drawn on to make admissions, implying a point of
view opposed to that from which he started. That these contradictions
arise because they bring their ideas together, is the drift of the
greater part of Socrates’ dialogues; their main tendency consequently
was to show the bewilderment and confusion which exist in knowledge.
By this means, he tries to awaken shame, and the perception that what
we consider as true is not the truth, from which the necessity for
earnest effort after knowledge must result. Plato, amongst others,
gives these examples in his Meno (p. 71-80, Steph.; p. 327-346, Bekk.).
Socrates is made to say, “By the gods, tell me what is virtue.” Meno
proceeds to make various distinctions: “Man’s virtue is to be skilful
in managing state affairs, and thereby to help friends and harm foes;
woman’s to rule her household; other virtues are those of boys, of
young men, of old men,” &c. Socrates interrupts him by saying, that
it is not that about which he inquires, but virtue in general, which
comprehends every thing in itself. Meno says “It is to govern and rule
over others.” Socrates brings forward the fact that the virtue of boys
and slaves does not consist in governing. Meno says that he cannot tell
what is common in all virtue. Socrates replies that it is the same as
figure, which is what is common in roundness, squareness, &c. There a
digression occurs. Meno says, “Virtue is the power of securing the good
desired.” Socrates interposes that it is superfluous to say the good,
for from the time that men know that something is an evil, they do not
desire it; and also the good must be acquired in a right way. Socrates
thus confounds Meno, and he sees that these ideas are false. The latter
says, “I used to hear of you, before I knew you, that you were yourself
in doubt (_ἀπορεῖς_), and also brought others into doubt, and now you
cast a spell on me too, so that I am at my wits’ end (_ἀπορίας_). You
seem, if I may venture to jest, to be like the torpedo fish, for it
is said of it that it makes torpid (_ναρκᾷν_) those who come near it
and touch it. You have done this to me, for I am become torpid in body
and soul, and I do not know how to answer you, although I have talked
thousands of times about virtue with many persons, and, as it seemed
to me, talked very well. But now I do not know at all what to say.
Hence you do well not to travel amongst strangers, for you might be
put to death as a magician.” Socrates again wishes to “inquire.” Now
Meno says, “How can you inquire about what you say you do not know?
Can you have a desire for what you do not know? And if you find it out
by chance, how can you know that it is what you looked for, since you
acknowledge that, you do not know it?” A number of dialogues end in the
same manner, both in Xenophon and Plato, leaving us quite unsatisfied
as to the result. It is so in the Lysis, where Plato asks the question
of what love and friendship secures to men; and similarly the Republic
commences by inquiring what justice is. Philosophy must, generally
speaking, begin with a puzzle in order to bring about reflection;
everything must be doubted, all presuppositions given up, to reach the
truth as created through the Notion.

2. _The Principle of the Good._ This, in short, is Socrates’ method.
The affirmative, what Socrates develops in the consciousness,
is nothing but the good in as far as it is brought forth from
consciousness through knowledge—it is the eternal, in and for itself
universal, what is called the Idea, the true, which just in so far
as it is end, is the Good. In this regard Socrates is opposed to the
Sophists, for the proposition that man is the measure of all things, to
them still comprehends particular ends, while to Socrates the universal
brought forth through free thought is thereby expressed in objective
fashion. Nevertheless, we must not blame the Sophists because, in the
aimlessness of their time, they did not discover the principle of the
Good; for every discovery has its time, and that of the Good, which as
end in itself is now always made the starting point, had not yet been
made by Socrates. It now seems as if we had not yet shown forth much
of the Socratic philosophy, for we have merely kept to the principle;
but the main point with Socrates is that his knowledge for the first
time reached this abstraction. The Good is nevertheless no longer
as abstract as the _νοῦς_ of Anaxagoras, but is the universal which
determines itself in itself, realizes itself, and has to be realized
as the end of the world and of the individual. It is a principle,
concrete within itself, which, however, is not yet manifested in its
development, and in this abstract attitude we find what is wanting in
the Socratic standpoint, of which nothing that is affirmative can,
beyond this, be adduced.

_a._ As regards the Socratic principle, the first determination is
the great determination which is, however, still merely formal,
that consciousness creates and has to create out of itself what is
the true. This principle of subjective freedom was present to the
consciousness of Socrates himself so vividly that he despised the
other sciences as being empty learning and useless to mankind; he has
to concern himself with his moral nature only in order to do what is
best—a one-sidedness which is very characteristic of Socrates. This
religion of the Good is to Socrates, not only the essential point to
which men have to direct their thoughts, but it is that exclusively.
We see him showing how from every individual this universal, this
absolute in consciousness may be found as his reality. Here we see
law, the true and good, what was formerly present as an existent,
return into consciousness. But it is not a single chance manifestation
in this individual Socrates, for we have to comprehend Socrates and
his manifestation. In the universal consciousness, in the spirit of
the people to which he belongs, we see natural turn into reflective
morality, and he stands above as the consciousness of this change.
The spirit of the world here begins to change, a change which was
later on carried to its completion. From this higher standpoint,
Socrates, as well as the Athenian people and Socrates in them, have
to be considered. The reflection of consciousness into itself begins
here, the knowledge of the consciousness of self as such, that it is
real existence—or that God is a Spirit, or again, in a cruder and
more sensuous form, that God takes human form. This epoch begins
where essence is given up as Being—even though it be, as hitherto,
abstract Being, Being as thought. But this epoch in a naturally moral
people in the highest state of development, makes its appearance as
the destruction threatening them or breaking in upon them unprevented.
For its morality, as was usually so with the ancients, consisted in
the fact that the Good was present as a universal, without its having
had the form of the conviction of the individual in his individual
consciousness, but simply that of the immediate absolute. It is the
authoritative, present law, without testing investigation, but yet
an ultimate ground on which this moral consciousness rests. It is
the law of the State; it has authority as the law of the gods, and
thus it is universal destiny which has the form of an existent, and
is recognized as such by all. But moral consciousness asks if this
is actually law in itself? This consciousness turned back within
itself from everything that has the form of the existent, requires to
understand, to know, that the above law is posited in truth, _i.e._
it demands that it should find itself therein as consciousness. In
thus returning into themselves the Athenian people are revealed to us:
uncertainty as to existent laws as existent has arisen, and a doubt
about what was held to be right, the greatest freedom respecting all
that is and was respected. This return into itself represents the
highest point reached by the mind of Greece, in so far as it becomes
no longer the mere existence of these moralities, but the living
consciousness of the same, which has a content which is similar, but
which, as spirit, moves freely in it. This is a culture which we never
find the Lacedæmonians reach. This deepest life of morality is so to
speak a free personal consciousness of morality or of God, and a happy
enjoyment of them. Consciousness and Being have here exactly the same
value and rank; what is, is consciousness; neither is powerful above
another. The authority of law is no oppressive bond to consciousness,
and all reality is likewise no obstacle to it, for it is secure in
itself. But this return is just on the point of abandoning the content,
and indeed of positing itself as abstract consciousness, without
the content, and, as existent, opposed to it. From this equilibrium
of consciousness and Being, consciousness takes up its position as
independent. This aspect of separation is an independent conception,
because consciousness, in the perception of its independence, no
longer immediately acknowledges what is put before it, but requires
that this should first justify itself to it, _i.e._ it must comprehend
itself therein. Thus this return is the isolation of the individual
from the universal, care for self at the cost of the State; to us,
for instance, it is the question as to whether I shall be in eternal
bliss or condemnation, whereas philosophic eternity is present now
in time, and is nothing other than the substantial man himself. The
State has lost its power, which consisted in the unbroken continuity
of the universal spirit, as formed of single individuals, so that the
individual consciousness knew no other content and reality than law.
Morals have become shaken, because we have the idea present that man
creates his maxims for himself. The fact that the individual comes to
care for his own morality, means that he becomes reflectively moral;
when public morality disappears, reflective morality is seen to have
arisen. We now see Socrates bringing forward the opinion, that in
these times every one has to look after his own morality, and thus
he looked after his through consciousness and reflection regarding
himself; for he sought the universal spirit which had disappeared from
reality, in his own consciousness. He also helped others to care for
their morality, for he awakened in them this consciousness of having
in their thoughts the good and true, _i.e._ having the potentiality
of action and of knowledge. This is no longer there immediately, but
must be provided, just as a ship must make provision of water when it
goes to places where none is to be found. The immediate has no further
authority but must justify itself to thought. Thus we comprehend the
special qualities of Socrates, and his method in Philosophy, from the
whole; and we also understand his fate from the same.

This direction of consciousness back into itself takes the form—very
markedly in Plato—of asserting that man can learn nothing, virtue
included, and that not because the latter has no relation to science.
For the good does not come from without, Socrates shows; it cannot
be taught, but is implied in the nature of mind. That is to say, man
cannot passively receive anything that is given from without like the
wax that is moulded to a form, for everything is latent in the mind
of man, and he only seems to learn it. Certainly everything begins
from without, but this is only the beginning; the truth is that this
is only an impulse towards the development of spirit. All that has
value to men, the eternal, the self-existent, is contained in man
himself, and has to develop from himself. To learn here only means
to receive knowledge of what is externally determined. This external
comes indeed through experience, but the universal therein belongs to
thought, not to the subjective and bad, but to the objective and true.
The universal in the opposition of subjective and objective, is that
which is as subjective as it is objective; the subjective is only a
particular, the objective is similarly only a particular as regards
the subjective, but the universal is the unity of both. According to
the Socratic principle, nothing has any value to men to which the
spirit does not testify. Man in it is free, is at home with himself,
and that is the subjectivity of spirit. As it is said in the Bible,
“Flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone,” that which is held by me as
truth and right is spirit of my spirit. But what spirit derives from
itself must come from it as from the spirit which acts in a universal
manner, and not from its passions, likings, and arbitrary desires.
These, too, certainly come from something inward which is “implanted
in us by nature,” but which is only in a natural way our own, for it
belongs to the particular; high above it is true thought, the Notion,
the rational. Socrates opposed to the contingent and particular inward,
that universal, true inward of thought. And Socrates awakened this real
conscience, for he not only said that man is the measure of all things,
but man as thinking is the measure of all things. With Plato we shall,
later on, find it formulated that what man seems to receive he only
remembers.

As to the question of what is the Good, Socrates recognized its
determination as being not only a determination in particularity to
the exclusion of the natural side, as determination is understood in
empirical science, but even in relation to the actions of men, he holds
the Good to be still undetermined, and the ultimate determinateness, or
the determining, is what we may call subjectivity generally. That the
Good should be determined, primarily signifies that while, at first, in
opposition to the Being of reality, it was a general maxim only, that
to which the activity of individuality was still wanting, in the second
place it was not permitted to be inert, to be mere thought, but had to
be present as the determining and actual, and thus as the effectual. It
is such only through subjectivity, through the activity of man. That
the Good is a determinate thus further means that individuals know what
the Good is, and we call this standpoint reflective morality, while
natural morality does right unconsciously. Thus to Socrates virtue is
perception. For to the proposition of the Platonic Protagoras that
all other virtues have a relationship to one another, but that it is
not so with valour, since many brave men are to be found who are the
most irreligious, unjust, intemperate and uncultured of people (such
as a band of robbers), Plato makes Socrates answer that valour, like
all virtues, also is a science, that is, it is the knowledge and the
right estimation of what is to be feared.[127] By this the distinctive
qualities of valour are certainly not unfolded. The naturally moral and
upright man is such without his having considered the matter at all; it
is his character, and what is good is securely rooted within him. When,
on the other hand, consciousness is concerned, the question arises as
to whether I directly desire the good or not. Hence this consciousness
of morality easily becomes dangerous, and causes the individual to
be puffed up by a good opinion of himself, which proceeds from the
consciousness of his own power to decide for the good. The ‘I’ is then
the master, he who chooses the Good, and in that there is the conceit
of my knowing that I am an excellent man. With Socrates this opposition
of the good and the subject as choosing is not reached, for what is
dealt with is only the determination of the Good and the connection
therewith of subjectivity; this last, as an individual person who can
choose, decides upon the inward universal. We have here on the one side
the knowledge of the Good, but, on the other, it is implied that the
subject is good, since this is his ordinary character; and the fact
that the subject is such, was by the ancients called virtue.

We understand from this the following criticism which Aristotle makes
(Magna Mor. I. 1) on the quality of virtue as expounded by Socrates.
He says: “Socrates spoke better of virtue than did Pythagoras, but
not quite justly, for he made virtues into a science (_ἐπιστήμας_).
But this is impossible, since, though all knowledge has some basis
(_λόγος_) this basis only exists in thought. Consequently, he
places all the virtues in the thinking (_λογιστικῷ_) side of the
soul. Hence it comes to pass that he does away with the feeling
(_ἄλογον_) part of the soul, that is, the inclination (_πᾶθος_) and
the habits (_ἠθος_),” which, however, also pertain to virtue. “But
Plato rightly distinguished the thinking and the feeling sides of
the soul.” This is a good criticism. We see that what Aristotle
misses in the determination of virtue in Socrates, is the side of
subjective actuality, which we now call the heart. Certainly virtue is
determination in accordance with universal, and not with particular
ends, but perception is not the only element in virtue. For in order
that the good perceived should be virtue, it must come to pass that the
whole man, the heart and mind, should be identical with it, and this
aspect of Being or of realization generally, is what Aristotle calls
_τὸ ἄλογον_. If we understand the reality of the good as universal
morality, substantiality is wanting to the perception; but matter,
when we regard the inclination of the individual subjective will as
this reality. This double want may also be considered as a want of
content and of activity, in so far as to the universal development is
wanting; and in the latter case, determining activity comes before us
as negative only in reference to the universal. Socrates thus omits,
in characterizing virtue, just what we saw had also disappeared in
actuality, that is, first the real spirit of a people, and then reality
as the sympathies of the individual. For it is just when consciousness
is not yet turned back into itself, that the universal good appears
to the individual as the object of his sympathy. To us, on the other
hand, because we are accustomed to put on one side the good or virtue
as practical reason, the other side, which is opposed to a reflective
morality, is an equally abstract sensuousness, inclination, passion,
and hence the bad. But in order that the universal should be reality,
it must be worked out through consciousness as individual, and the
carrying into effect pertains to this individuality. A passion,
as for example, love, ambition, is the universal itself, as it is
self-realizing, not in perception, but in activity; and if we did not
fear being misunderstood, we should say that for the individual the
universal is his own interests. Yet this is not the place in which to
unravel all the false ideas and contradictions present in our culture.

Aristotle (Eth. Nicom. VI. 13), supplementing the one-sidedness of
Socrates, further says of him: “Socrates in one respect worked on right
lines, but not in the other. For to call virtue scientific knowledge is
untrue, but to say that it is not without scientific basis is right.
Socrates made virtues into perceptions (_λόγους_), but we say that
virtue exists with perception.” This is a very true distinction; the
one side in virtue is that the universal of end belongs to thought. But
in virtue, as character, the other side, active individuality, real
soul, must necessarily come forth; and indeed with Socrates the latter
appears in a characteristic form of which we shall speak below (p. 421
et seq.).

_b._ If we consider the universal first, it has within it a positive
and a negative side, which we find both united in Xenophon’s
“Memorabilia,” a work which aims at justifying Socrates. And if we
inquire whether he or Plato depicts Socrates to us most faithfully
in his personality and doctrine, there is no question that in regard
to the personality and method, the externals of his teaching, we
may certainly receive from Plato a satisfactory, and perhaps a more
complete representation of what Socrates was. But in regard to the
content of his teaching and the point reached by him in the development
of thought, we have in the main to look to Xenophon.

The fact that the reality of morality had become shaken in the mind
of the people, came to consciousness in Socrates; he stands so high
because he gave expression to what was present in the times. In this
consciousness he elevated morality into perception, but this action is
just the bringing to consciousness of the fact that it is the power of
the Notion which sublates the determinate existence and the immediate
value of moral laws and the sacredness of their implicitude. When
perception likewise positively acknowledges as law that which was
held to be law (for the positive subsists through having recourse to
laws), this acknowledgment of them always passes through the negative
mode, and no longer has the form of absolute being-in-itself: it is,
however, just as far from being a Platonic Republic. To the Notion
too, because to it the determinateness of laws in the form in which
they have value to unperceiving consciousness has dissolved, only the
purely implicit universal Good is the true. But since this is empty
and without reality, we demand, if we are not satisfied with a dull
monotonous round, that again a movement should be made towards the
extension of the determination of the universal. Now because Socrates
remains at the indeterminateness of the good, its determination
means for him simply the expression of the particular good. Then it
comes to pass that the universal results only from the negation of
the particular good; and since this last is just the existing laws
of Greek morality, we have here the doubtlessly right, but dangerous
element in perception, the showing in all that is particular only its
deficiencies. The inconsistency of making what is limited into an
absolute, certainly becomes unconsciously corrected in the moral man;
this improvement rests partly on the morality of the subject and partly
on the whole of the social life; and unfortunate extremes resulting in
conflict are unusual and unfrequent. But since the dialectic sublates
the particular, the abstract universal also becomes shaken.

_α_. Now as regards the positive side, Xenophon tells us in the fourth
book of the Memorabilia (c. 2, § 40), how Socrates, once having
made the need for perception sensible to the youths, then actually
instructed them, and no longer wandered through mere subtleties in
his talk, but taught them the good in the clearest and most open way.
That is, he showed them the good and true in what is determined, going
back into it because he did not wish to remain in mere abstraction.
Xenophon gives an example of this (Memorab. IV. c. 4, §§ 12-16, 25)
in a dialogue with the Sophist Hippias. Socrates there asserts that
the just man is he who obeys the law, and that these laws are divine.
Xenophon makes Hippias reply by asking how Socrates could declare it to
be an absolute duty to obey the laws, for the people and the governors
themselves often condemn them by changing them, which is allowing that
they are not absolute. But Socrates answers by demanding if those who
conduct war do not again make peace, which is not, any more than in the
other case, to condemn war, for each was just in its turn. Socrates
thus says, in a word, that the best and happiest State is that in which
the citizens are of one mind and obedient to law. Now this is the one
side in which Socrates looks away from the contradiction and makes
laws and justice, as they are accepted by each individually, to be
the affirmative content. But if we here ask what these laws are, they
are, we find, just those which have a value at some one time, as they
happen to be present in the State and in the idea; at another time they
abrogate themselves as determined, and are not held to be absolute.

_β_. We hence see this other negative side in the same connection
when Socrates brings Euthydemus into the conversation, for he asks
him whether he did not strive after the virtue without which neither
the private man nor the citizen could be useful to himself or to his
people or the State. Euthydemus declares that this undoubtedly is
so. But without justice, replies Socrates, this is not possible, and
he further asks whether Euthydemus had thus attained to justice in
himself. Euthydemus answers affirmatively, for he says that he thinks
he is no less just than any other man. Socrates now replies, “Just
as workmen can show their work, the just will be able to say what
their works are.” This he also agrees to, and replies that he could
easily do so. Socrates now proposes if this is so to write, “on the
one hand under _Δ_ the actions of the just, and on the other, under
_Α_, those of the unjust?” With the approbation of Euthydemus, lies,
deceit, robbery, making a slave of a free man, thus fall on the side of
the unjust. Now Socrates asks, “But if a general subdues the enemy’s
State, would this not be justice?” Euthydemus says “Yes.” Socrates
replies, “Likewise if he deceives and robs the enemy and makes slaves?”
Euthydemus has to admit the justice of this. It is thus shown “that
the same qualities come under the determination both of justice and of
injustice.” Here it strikes Euthydemus to add the qualification that
he intended that Socrates should understand the action to be only in
reference to friends; as regards them it is wrong. Socrates accepts
this, but proceeds, “If a general at the decisive moment of the battle
saw his own army in fear, and he deceived them by falsely saying that
help was coming in order to lead them on to victory, could it be
deemed right?” Euthydemus acknowledges that it could. Socrates says,
“If a father gives a sick child a medicine which it does not wish to
take, in its food, and makes it well through deceit, is this right?”
Euthydemus—“Yes.” Socrates—“Or is anyone wrong who takes arms from
his friend secretly or by force, when he sees him in despair, and in
the act of taking his own life?” Euthydemus has to admit that this is
not wrong.[128] Thus it is again shown here, that as regards friends
also, the same determinations have to hold good on both sides, as
justice as well as injustice. Here we see that abstention from lying,
deceit, and robbery, that which we naturally hold to be established,
contradicts itself by being put into connection with something
different, and something which holds equally good. This example further
explains how through thought, which would lay hold of the universal in
the form of the universal only, the particular becomes uncertain.

_γ_. The positive, which Socrates sets in the place of what was
fixed and has now become vacillating, in order to give a content to
the universal, is, on the one hand, and in opposition to this last,
obedience to law (p. 416), that is, the mode of thought and idea which
is inconsistent; and, on the other hand, since such determinations
do not hold good for the Notion, it is perception, in which the
immediately posited has now, in the mediating negation, to justify
itself as a determination proceeding out of the constitution of the
whole. But it is both true that we do not find this perception present
in Socrates, for it remains in its content undetermined, and that
in reality it is a contingent, which is seen in the fact, that the
universal commands, such as “Thou shalt not kill,” are connected with
a particular content which is conditioned. Now whether the universal
maxim in this particular case has value or not, depends first on the
circumstances; and it is the perception which discovers the conditions
and circumstances whereby exceptions to this law of unconditioned
validity arise. However, because through this contingency in the
instances, the fixed nature of the universal principle disappears,
since it, too, appears as a particular only, the consciousness of
Socrates arrives at pure freedom in each particular content. This
freedom, which does not leave the content as it is in its dissipated
determination to the natural consciousness, but makes it to be
penetrated by the universal, is the real mind which, as unity of the
universal content and of freedom, is the veritable truth. Thus if we
here consider further what is the true in this consciousness, we pass
on to the mode in which the realization of the universal appeared to
Socrates himself.

Even the uneducated mind does not follow the content of its
consciousness as this content appears in it; but, as mind, it corrects
that which is wrong in its consciousness, and is thus implicitly,
if not explicitly as consciousness, free. That is, though this
consciousness expresses the universal law, “Thou shalt not kill,” as a
duty, that consciousness—if no cowardly spirit dwells within it—will
still bravely attack and slay the enemy in war. Here, if it is asked
whether there is a command to kill one’s enemies, the reply would be
affirmative, as likewise when a hangman puts to death a criminal. But
when in private life we become involved with adversaries, this command
to kill one’s enemies will not occur to us. We may thus call this the
mind which thinks at the right time, first of the one, and then of
the other; it is spirit, but an unspiritual consciousness. The first
step towards reaching a spiritual consciousness is the negative one
of acquiring freedom for one’s consciousness. For since perception
attempts to prove individual laws, it proceeds from a determination to
which, as a universal basis, particular duty is submitted; but this
basis is itself not absolute, and falls under the same dialectic.
For example, were moderation commanded as a duty on the ground that
intemperance undermined the health, health is the ultimate which is
here considered as absolute; but it is at the same time not absolute,
for there are other duties which ordain that health, and even life
itself, should be risked and sacrificed. The so-called conflict of
duties is nothing but duty, which is expressed as absolute, showing
itself as not absolute; in the constant contradiction morals become
unsettled. For a consciousness which has become consistent, law,
because it has then been brought into contact with its opposite, has
been sublated. For the positive truth has not yet become known in
its determination. But to know the universal in its determination,
_i.e._ the limitation of the universal which comes to us as fixed
and not contingent, is only possible in connection with the whole
system of actuality. Thus if with Socrates the content has become
spiritualized, yet manifold independent grounds have merely taken the
place of manifold laws. For the perception is not yet expressed as the
real perception of these grounds over which it rules; but the truth
of consciousness simply is this very movement of pure perception.
The true ground is, however, spirit, and the spirit of the people—a
perception of the constitution of a people, and the connection of the
individual with this real universal spirit. Laws, morals, the actual
social life, thus have in themselves their own corrective against the
inconsistent, which consists of the expression of a definite content
as absolute. In ordinary life we merely forget this limitation of
universal principles, and these still hold their place with us; but
the other point of view is thus when the limitation comes before our
consciousness.

When we have the perfect consciousness that in actual life fixed duties
and actions do not exist, for each concrete case is really a conflict
of many duties which separate themselves in the moral understanding,
but which mind treats as not absolute, comprehending them in the
unity of its judgment, we call this pure, deciding individuality, the
knowledge of what is right, or conscience, just as we call the pure
universal of consciousness not a particular but an all-comprehensive
one, duty. Now both sides here present, the universal law and the
deciding spirit which is in its abstraction the active individual,
are also necessary to the consciousness of Socrates as the content
and the power over this content. That is, because with Socrates the
particular law has become vacillating, there now comes in the place
of the universal single mind, which, with the Greeks, was unconscious
determination through unreflective morality, individual mind as
individuality deciding for itself. Thus with Socrates the deciding
spirit is transformed into the subjective consciousness of man, since
the power of deciding originates with himself; and the first question
now is, how this subjectivity appears in Socrates himself. Because
the person, the individual, now gives the decision, we come back to
Socrates as person, as subject, and what follows is a development
of his personal relations. But since the moral element is generally
placed in the personality of Socrates, we see the contingent nature
of the instruction and of the culture which was obtained through
Socrates’ character; for it was the actual basis on which men fortified
themselves in associating with Socrates, by actual communication with
him and by their manner of life. Thus it was true that “the intercourse
with his friends was, on the whole, beneficial and instructive to them,
but in many cases they became unfaithful to Socrates,”[129] because
not everyone attains to perception, and he who possesses it may remain
at the negative. The education of the citizens, life in the people,
is quite a fresh force in the individual, and does not mean that he
educates himself through arguments; hence, however truly educative the
intercourse with Socrates was, this contingency still entered into it.
We thus see as an unhappy symptom of disorder, how Socrates’ greatest
favourites, and those endowed with the most genial natures (such as
Alcibiades, that genius of levity, who played with the Athenian people,
and Critias, the most active of the Thirty) afterwards experienced the
fate of being judged in their own country, one as an enemy and traitor
to his fellows, and the other as an oppressor and tyrant of the State.
They lived according to the principle of subjective perception, and
thus cast a bad light on Socrates, for it is shown in this how the
Socratic principle in another form brought about the ruin of Greek
life.[130]

_c._ The characteristic form in which this subjectivity—this implicit
and deciding certainty—appears in Socrates, has still to be mentioned.
That is, since everyone here has this personal mind which appears to
him to be his mind, we see how in connection with this, we have what
is known under the name of the Genius (_δαιμόνιον_) of Socrates; for
it implies that now man decides in accordance with his perception
and by himself. But in this Genius of Socrates—notorious as a much
discussed _bizarrerie_ of his imagination—we are neither to imagine
the existence of protective spirit, angel, and such-like, nor even of
conscience. For conscience is the idea of universal individuality, of
the mind certain of itself, which is at the same time universal truth.
But the Genius of Socrates is rather all the other and necessary sides
of his universality, that is, the individuality of mind which came to
consciousness in him equally with the former. His pure consciousness
stands over both sides. The deficiency in the universal, which
lies in its indeterminateness, is unsatisfactorily supplied in an
individual way, because Socrates’ judgment, as coming from himself,
was characterized by the form of an unconscious impulse. The Genius
of Socrates is not Socrates himself, not his opinions and conviction,
but an oracle which, however, is not external, but is subjective,
his oracle. It bore the form of a knowledge which was directly
associated with a condition of unconsciousness; it was a knowledge
which may also appear under other conditions as a magnetic state. It
may happen that at death, in illness and catalepsy, men know about
circumstances future or present, which, in the understood relations
of things, are altogether unknown. These are facts which are usually
rudely denied. That in Socrates we should discover what comes to pass
through reflection in the form of the unconscious, makes it appear to
be an exceptional matter, revealed to the individual only, and not as
being what it is in truth. Thereby it certainly receives the stamp
of imagination, but there is nothing more of what is visionary or
superstitious to be seen in it, for it is a necessary manifestation,
though Socrates did not recognize the necessity, this element being
only generally before his imagination.

In connection with what follows, we must yet further consider the
relationship of the Genius to the earlier existent form of decision,
and that into which it led Socrates; regarding both Xenophon expresses
himself in his history most distinctly. Because the standpoint of the
Greek mind was natural morality, in which man did not yet determine
himself, and still less was what we call conscience present, since
laws were, in their fundamental principles, regarded as traditional,
these last now presented an appearance of being sanctioned by the gods.
We know that the Greeks undoubtedly had laws on which to form their
judgments, but on the other hand, both in private and public life,
immediate decisions had to be made. But in them the Greeks, with all
their freedom, did not decide from the subjective will. The general
or the people did not take upon themselves to decide as to what was
best in the State, nor did the individual do so in the family. For in
making these decisions, the Greeks took refuge in oracles, sacrificial
animals, soothsayers, or, like the Romans, asked counsel of birds
in flight. The general who had to fight a battle was guided in his
decision by the entrails of animals, as we often find in Xenophon’s
Anabasis. Pausanias tormented himself thus a whole day long before
he gave the command to fight.[131] This element, the fact that the
people had not the power of decision but were determined from without,
was a real factor in Greek consciousness; and oracles were everywhere
essential where man did not yet know himself inwardly as being
sufficiently free and independent to take upon himself to decide as we
do. This subjective freedom, which was not yet present with the Greeks,
is what we mean in the present day when we speak of freedom; in the
Platonic Republic we shall see more of it. Our responsibility for what
we do is a characteristic of modern times; we wish to decide according
to grounds of common sense, and consider this as ultimate. The Greeks
did not possess the knowledge of this infinitude.

In the first book of Xenophon’s Memorabilia (chap. I, §§ 7-9), on the
occasion of the defence by Socrates of his _δαιμόνιον_, Socrates says
at the very beginning: “The gods have reserved to themselves what is
most important in knowledge. Architecture, agriculture, forging, are
human arts, as also government, the science of law, management of the
household and generalship. In all this man can attain to skill, but
for the other, divination is necessary. He who cultivates a field does
not know who will enjoy the fruit, nor does he who builds a house know
who will inhabit it; the general does not know whether the army should
be brought into the field; he who rules a State whether it is good for
him” (the individual) “or bad. Nor does he who marries a wife know
whether he will experience happiness or whether grief and sorrow will
not come through this to him; neither can he who has powerful relations
in the State, know whether, on account of these, he may not be banished
from the State. Because of this uncertainty, men have to take refuge in
divination.” Regarding it Xenophon expresses himself (ibid. §§ 3, 4) to
the effect that it manifests itself in different ways through oracles,
sacrifices, flight of birds, &c., but to Socrates this oracle is his
Genius. To hold the future, or what is foreseen by the somnambulist or
at death to be a higher kind of insight, is a perversion which easily
arises even in our ideas; but looked at more closely, we find in this
the particular interests of individuals merely, and the knowledge of
what is right and moral is something much higher. If anyone wishes
to marry or to build a house, &c., the result is important to the
individual only. The truly divine and universal is the institution of
agriculture, the state, marriage, &c.; compared to this it is a trivial
matter to know whether, when I go to sea, I shall perish or not. The
Genius of Socrates moreover reveals itself in him through nothing
other than the counsel given respecting these particular issues, such
as when and whether his friends ought to travel. To anything true,
existing in and for itself in art and science, he made no reference,
for this pertains to the universal mind, and these dæmonic revelations
are thus much more unimportant than those of his thinking mind. There
is certainly something universal in them, since a wise man can often
foresee whether anything is advisable or not. But what is truly divine
pertains to all, and though talents and genius are also personal
characteristics, they find their first truth in their works which are
universal.

Now because with Socrates judgment from within first begins to break
free from the external oracle, it was requisite that this return into
itself should, in its first commencement, still appear in physiological
guise (_supra_, pp. 390, 391). The Genius of Socrates stands midway
between the externality of the oracle and the pure inwardness of the
mind; it is inward, but it is also presented as a personal genius,
separate from human will, and not yet as the wisdom and free will of
Socrates himself. The further investigation of this Genius consequently
presents to us a form which passes into somnambulism, into this double
of consciousness; and in Socrates there clearly appears to be something
of the kind, or something which is magnetic, for, as we already
mentioned (p. 390), he is said often to have fallen into trances and
catalepsy. In modern times we have seen this in the form of a rigid
eye, an inward knowledge, perception of this thing and that, of what
is gone, of what is best to do, &c.; but magnetism carries science
no further than this. The Genius of Socrates is thus to be taken as
an actual state, and is remarkable because it is not morbid but was
necessarily called up through a special condition of his consciousness.
For the turning point in the whole world-famed change of views
constituting the principle of Socrates, is that in place of the oracle,
the testimony of the mind of the individual has been brought forward
and that the subject has taken upon itself to decide.

3. _The Fate of Socrates._ With this Genius of Socrates as one of the
chief points of his indictment, we now enter upon the subject of his
fate, which ends with his condemnation. We may find this fate out of
harmony with his professed business of instructing his fellow-citizens
in what is good, but taken in connection with what Socrates and his
people were, we shall recognize the necessity of it. The contemporaries
of Socrates, who came forward as his accusers before the Athenian
people, laid hold on him as the man who made known that what was held
as absolute was not absolute. Socrates, with this new principle, and as
one who was an Athenian citizen whose express business was this form
of instruction, came, through this his personality, into relationship
with the whole Athenian people; and this relationship was not merely
with a certain number or with a commanding number, but it was a living
relationship with the spirit of the Athenian people. The spirit of this
people in itself, its constitution, its whole life, rested, however,
on a moral ground, on religion, and could not exist without this
absolutely secure basis. Thus because Socrates makes the truth rest on
the judgment of inward consciousness, he enters upon a struggle with
the Athenian people as to what is right and true. His accusation was
therefore just, and we have to consider this accusation as also the end
of his career. The attacks which Socrates experienced are well known,
and were from two sources; Aristophanes attacked him in the “Clouds,”
and then he was formally accused before the people.

Aristophanes regarded the Socratic philosophy from the negative side,
maintaining that through the cultivation of reflecting consciousness,
the idea of law had been shaken, and we cannot question the justice
of this conception. Aristophanes’ consciousness of the one-sidedness
of Socrates may be regarded as a prelude to his death; the Athenian
people likewise certainly recognized his negative methods in condemning
him. It is known that Aristophanes brought upon the stage along with
Socrates, not only such men as Aeschylus, and more specially Euripides,
but also the Athenians generally and their generals—the personified
Athenian people and the gods themselves—a freedom which we would not
dream of were it not historically authenticated. We have not here to
consider the real nature of the Comedy of Aristophanes, nor the wanton
way in which he was said to have treated Socrates. As to the first, it
should not startle us, nor do we require to justify Aristophanes or to
excuse him. The Comedy of Aristophanes is in itself as real a part of
the Athenian people, and Aristophanes is as essential a figure, as were
the sublime Pericles, the happy Alcibiades, the divine Sophocles, and
the moral Socrates, for he belongs as much as any other to this circle
of luminaries (Vol. I., p. 322). Thus much can alone be said, that it
certainly goes against our German seriousness to see how Aristophanes
brings on the boards men living in the State, by name, in order to make
a jest of them; and we feel this specially in regard to so upright a
man as Socrates.

By chronological considerations, some have tried hard to refute the
fact that Aristophanes’ representations had no influence on the
condemnation of Socrates. It is seen that, on the one hand, Socrates
was treated quite unjustly; but then we must recognize the merit of
Aristophanes, who in his “Clouds” was perfectly right. This poet, who
exposed Socrates to scorn in the most laughable and bitter way, was
thus no ordinary joker and shallow wag who mocked what is highest and
best, and sacrificed all to wit with a view to making the Athenians
laugh. For everything has to him a much deeper basis, and in all his
jokes there lies a depth of seriousness. He did not wish merely to
mock; and moreover to mock what was worthy of honour would be perfectly
bald and flat. It is a pitiful wit which has no substance, and does not
rest on contradictions lying in the matter itself. But Aristophanes
was no bad jester. It is, generally speaking, not possible to joke
in an external way about what does not contain matter for joking or
irony in itself. For what really is comic is to show a man or a thing
as they disclose themselves in their extent; and if the thing is
not itself its contradiction, the comic element is superficial and
groundless. Hence, when Aristophanes makes merry over the Democracy,
there is a deep political earnestness at heart, and from all his works
it appears what a noble, excellent, true Athenian citizen he was.
We thus have a real patriot before us, who, though it involved the
punishment of death, did not fear in one of his works to counsel peace.
In him, as one who had a patriotism of the most enlightened kind, we
find the blissful self-satisfied enjoyment of a people giving free
rein to itself. There is, in what is humorous, a self-security which,
though with all seriousness it strives after some particular thing,
while the opposite of what it aims at always comes to pass, never has
for that reason any doubts nor any reflection about itself, since it
remains perfectly certain of itself and of what concerns it. We enjoy
in Aristophanes this side of the free Athenian spirit, this perfect
enjoyment of itself in loss, this untroubled certainty of itself in
all miscarriage of the result in real life, and this is the height of
humour.

In the “Clouds” we do not indeed see this natural humour, but a
contradiction with definite intention. Aristophanes indeed depicts
Socrates humorously too, for he brings forth in his moral works the
opposite of that from which he starts, and his scholars derive delight
from the far-extending discoveries reached through him, which they
think are made by their own good luck, but which afterwards turn
hateful to them, and become the very opposite of what they intended.
The wonderful perception which the followers of Socrates are here
represented as having attained, is just a perception of the nullity of
the laws of the determinate good as it is to the natural consciousness.
Aristophanes made fun of the fact that Socrates occupied himself with
elementary researches as to how far fleas spring, and of his putting
wax on their feet in order to discover this. This is not historic,
but it is well known that Socrates had in his philosophy the side
which Aristophanes showed up with such acrimony. Shortly, the fable of
the “Clouds” is this: Strepsiades, an honourable Athenian citizen of
the old school, had great trouble with his new-fashioned extravagant
son, who, spoiled by mother and uncle, kept horses and led a life
out of keeping with his position. The father thus got into trouble
with his creditors, and went in distress to Socrates, and became
his disciple. There the old man learned that not this or that, but
another is the right, or rather he learned the stronger (_κρείττων_)
and weaker reasons (_ἕττων λόγος_). He learned the dialectic of laws,
and how, by reasoning, the payment of debts can be disregarded, and
he then required that his son should go to the School of Socrates;
and the latter likewise profited from his wisdom. But we find the
result ensuing from the universal which has now through the Socratic
dialectic become empty, in the private interest or the wrong spirit
of Strepsiades and his son, which spirit is merely the negative
consciousness of the content of laws. Equipped with this new wisdom of
reasons, and the discovery of reasons, Strepsiades is armed against the
chief evil that presses on him, as regards his threatening creditors.
These now come one after another to obtain payment. But Strepsiades
knows how to put them off with excellent reasons, and to argue them
away, for he pacifies them by all sorts of _titulos_, and shows them
that he does not need to pay them; indeed he even mocks them, and is
very glad that he learned all this from Socrates. But soon the scene
changes, and the whole affair alters. The son comes, behaves in a very
unseemly way to his father, and finally beats him. The father cries
to the supreme power, as if this were the last indignity, but the son
shows him, with equally good reasons, obtained by the method derived
by him from Socrates, that he had a perfect right to strike him.
Strepsiades ends the comedy with execrations on the Socratic dialectic,
with a return to his old ways, and with the burning of Socrates’
house. The exaggeration which may be ascribed to Aristophanes, is that
he drove this dialectic to its bitter end, but it cannot be said that
injustice is done to Socrates by this representation. Indeed we must
admire the depth of Aristophanes in having recognized the dialectic
side in Socrates as being a negative, and—though after his own way—in
having presented it so forcibly. For the power of judging in Socrates’
method is always placed in the subject, in conscience, but where this
is bad, the story of Strepsiades must repeat itself.

With regard to the formal public accusation of Socrates, we must not,
like Tennemann (Vol. II., p. 39 seq.), say of Socrates’ treatment,
that “it is revolting to humanity that this excellent man had to
drink the cup of poison as a sacrifice to cabals—so numerous in
democracies. A man like Socrates, who had made right” (right is not
being discussed, but we may ask what right? The right of moral freedom)
“the sole standard of his action, and did not stray from the straight
path, must necessarily make many enemies” (Why? This is foolish; it
is a moral hypocrisy to pretend to be better than others who are
then called enemies) “who are accustomed to act from quite different
motives. When we think of the corruption, and of the rule of the thirty
tyrants, we must simply wonder that he could have worked on to his
sixtieth year unmolested. But since the Thirty did not venture to lay
hands on him themselves, it is the more to be wondered at that in the
reconstituted and just rule and freedom which followed the overthrow
of despotism”—in that very way the danger in which their principle
was, came to be known—“a man like Socrates could be made a sacrifice
to cabals. This phenomenon is probably explained by the fact that the
enemies of Socrates had first of all to gain time in order to obtain
a following, and that under the rule of the Thirty, they played too
insignificant a part,” and so on.

Now, as regards the trial of Socrates, we have to distinguish two
points, the one the matter of the accusation, the judgment of the
court, and the other the relation of Socrates to the sovereign people.
In the course of justice there are thus these two parts—the relation
of the accused to the matter on account of which he is accused, and
his relation to the competency of the people, or the recognition of
their majesty. Socrates was found guilty by the judges in respect of
the content of his accusation, but was condemned to death because
he refused to recognize the competency and majesty of the people as
regards the accused.

a. The accusation consisted of two points: “That Socrates did not
consider as gods those who were held to be such by the Athenian
people, but introduced new ones; and that he also led young men
astray.”[132] The leading away of youth was his casting doubt on what
was held to be immediate truth. The first accusation has in part the
same foundation, for he made it evident that what was usually so
considered, was not acceptable to the gods; and in part it is to be
taken in connection with his Dæmon, not that he called this his god.
But with the Greeks this was the direction which the individuality of
judgment took; they took it to be a contingency of the individual,
and hence, as contingency of circumstances is an external, they also
made the contingency of judgment into something external, _i.e._ they
consulted their oracles—conscious that the individual will is itself
a contingent. But Socrates, who placed the contingency of judgment
in himself, since he had his Dæmon in his own consciousness, thereby
abolished the external universal Dæmon from which the Greeks obtained
their judgments. This accusation, as also Socrates’ defence, we wish
now to examine further; Xenophon represents both to us, and Plato has
also supplied us with an Apology. Meanwhile we may not rest content
with saying that Socrates was an excellent man who suffered innocently,
&c. (p. 430), for in this accusation it was the popular mind of Athens
that rose against the principle which became fatal to him.

_α_. As regards the first point of the accusation, that Socrates did
not honour the national gods, but introduced new ones, Xenophon[133]
makes him answer that he always brought the same sacrifices as others
to the public altars, as all his fellow-citizens could see—his
accusers likewise. But as to the charge that he introduced new Dæmons,
in that he heard the voice of God showing him what he should do, he
appealed to them whether by soothsayers the cry and flight of birds,
the utterances of men (like the voice of Pythia), the position of
the entrails of sacrificial animals, and even thunder and lightning
were not accepted as divine revelations. That God knows the future
beforehand, and, if He wishes, reveals it in these ways, all believe
with him; but God can also reveal the future otherwise. He could show
that he did not lie in maintaining that he heard the voice of God,
from the testimony of his friends, to whom he often announced what was
said; and in its results this was always found to be true. Xenophon
(Memorab. I. c. 1, § 11) adds, “No one ever saw or heard Socrates do
or say anything godless or impious, for he never tried to find out the
nature of the Universe, like most of the others, when they sought to
understand how what the Sophists called the world began.” That is, from
them came the earlier atheists, who, like Anaxagoras, held that the sun
was a stone.[134]

The effect which the defence against this part of the accusation made
on the judges is expressed thus by Xenophon:[135] “One section of
them was displeased because they did not believe what Socrates said,
and the other part because they were envious that he was more highly
honoured of the gods than they.” This effect is very natural. In our
times this also happens in two ways. Either the individual is not
believed when he boasts of special manifestations, and particularly
of manifestations which have to do with individual action and life;
it is neither believed that such manifestations took place at all, or
that they happened to this subject. Or if anyone does have dealings
with such divinations, rightly enough his proceedings are put an end
to, and he is shut up. By this it is not denied in a general way
that God foreknows everything, or that He can make revelations to
individuals; this may be admitted _in abstracto_, but not in actuality,
and it is believed in no individual cases. Men do not believe that to
him, to this individual, there has been a revelation. For why to him
more than to others? And why just this trifle, some quite personal
circumstances—as to whether someone should have a successful journey,
or whether he should converse with another person, or whether or not he
should in a speech properly defend himself? And why not others amongst
the infinitely many things which may occur to the individual? Why not
much more important things, things concerning the welfare of whole
States? Hence it is not believed of an individual, in spite of the fact
that if it is possible, it must be to the individual that it happens.
This unbelief, which thus does not deny the general fact and general
possibility, but believes it in no particular case, really does not
believe in the actuality and truth of the thing. It does not believe
it because the absolute consciousness—and it must be such—certainly
knows nothing of a positive kind of trivialities such as form the
subject of these divinations and also those of Socrates; in spirit such
things immediately vanish away. The absolute consciousness does not
know about the future as such, any more than about the past; it knows
only about the present. But because in its present, in its thought,
the opposition of future and past to present becomes apparent, it
likewise knows about future and past, but of the past as something
which has taken shape. For the past is the preservation of the present
as reality, but the future is the opposite of this, the Becoming of
the present as possibility, and thus the formless. From out of this
formlessness the universal first comes into form in the present; and
hence in the future no form can be perceived. Men have the dim feeling
that when God acts it is not in a particular way, nor for particular
objects. Such things are held to be too paltry to be revealed by
God in a particular case. It is acknowledged that God determines
the individual, but by this the totality of individuality, or all
individualities, is understood; hence it is said that God’s way of
working is found in universal nature.

Now while with the Greeks judgment had the form of a contingency
externally posited through the flight and cries of birds, in our
culture we decide by an inward contingency, because I myself desire to
be this contingency, and the knowledge of individuality is likewise
a consciousness of this contingency. But if the Greeks, for whom
the category of the contingency of consciousness was an existent, a
knowledge of it as an oracle, had this individuality as a universal
knowledge of which everyone could ask counsel, in Socrates—in whom
what was here externally established had become inward consciousness,
as with us, though not yet fully, being still represented as an actual
voice, and conceived of as something which he separated from his
individuality—the decision of the single individual had the form of
personality as a particular, and it was not a universal individuality.
This his judges could not in justice tolerate, whether they believed it
or not. With the Greeks such revelations had to have a certain nature
and method; there were, so to speak, official oracles (not subjective),
such as Pythia, a tree, etc. Hence when this appeared in any particular
person like a common citizen, it was considered incredible and wrong;
the Dæmon of Socrates was a medium of a different kind to any formerly
respected in the Greek Religion. It is so much the more noteworthy,
that nevertheless the oracle of the Delphian Apollo, Pythia, declared
Socrates to be the wisest Greek.[136] Socrates it was who carried
out the command of the God of knowledge, “Know Thyself,” and made
it the motto of the Greeks, calling it the law of the mind, and not
interpreting it as meaning a mere acquaintanceship with the particular
nature of man. Thus Socrates is the hero who established in the place
of the Delphic oracle, the principle that man must look within himself
to know what is Truth. Now seeing that Pythia herself pronounced that
utterance, we find in it a complete revolution in the Greek mind, and
the fact that in place of the oracle, the personal self-consciousness
of every thinking man has come into play. This inward certainty,
however, is undoubtedly another new god, and not the god of the
Athenians existing hitherto, and thus the accusation of Socrates was
quite just.

_β_. If we now consider the second point of the accusation, that
Socrates led youth astray, we find that he first sets against it the
fact that the oracle of Delphi declared that none could be nobler,
juster or wiser than he.[137] And then he sets against this accusation
his whole manner of life, and asks whether by the example that he
gave, particularly to those with whom he went about, he ever led any
into evil.[138] The general accusation had to be further defined
and witnesses came forward. “Melitus said that he knew some whom he
advised to obey him rather than their parents,”[139] This point of the
accusation principally related to Anytus, and since he made it good by
sufficient testimony, the point was undoubtedly proved, in accordance
with law. Socrates explained himself further on this point when he
left the court. For Xenophon tells us (Apol. Socr. §§ 27, 29—31) that
Anytus was inimical to Socrates, because he said to Anytus, a respected
citizen, that he should not bring up his son to the trade of a tanner,
but in manner befitting a free man. Anytus was himself a tanner, and
although his business was mostly conducted by slaves, it was in itself
not ignominious, and Socrates’ expression was hence wrong, although,
as we have seen (p. 366), quite in the spirit of Greek thought.
Socrates added that he had made acquaintance with this son of Anytus
and discovered no evil in him, but he prophesied that he would not
remain at this servile work to which his father kept him. Nevertheless,
because he had no rational person near to look after him, he would come
to have evil desires and be brought into dissolute ways. Xenophon added
that Socrates’ prophecy had come to pass literally, and that the young
man gave himself up to drink, and drank day and night, becoming totally
depraved. This can be easily understood, for a man who feels himself to
be fit for something better (whether truly so or not) and through this
discord in his mind is discontented with the circumstances in which he
lives, yet capable of attaining to no other, is led out of this disgust
into listlessness, and is thus on the way to the evil courses which
so often ruin men. The prediction of Socrates is thus quite natural.
(_Supra_, p. 424.)

To this definite accusation that he led sons into disobedience to
their parents, Socrates replied by asking the question whether in
selecting men for public offices, such as that of general, parents,
or those experienced in war, were selected. Similarly in all cases
those most skilful in an art or science are picked out. He demanded
whether it was not matter of astonishment that he should be brought
before a judge because he was preferred to parents by the sons in
their aspirations after the highest human good which is to be made
a noble man.[140] This reply of Socrates is, on the one hand, quite
just, but we see at the same time that we cannot call it exhaustive,
for the real point of the accusation is not touched. What his judges
found unjust was the intrusion morally of a third into the absolute
relation between parents and children. On the whole not much can be
said on this point, for all depends on the mode of intervention, and
if it is necessary in certain cases, it need not take place generally,
and least of all when some private individual takes that liberty.
Children must have the feeling of unity with their parents; this is
the first immediately moral relationship; every teacher must respect
it, keep it pure, and cultivate the sense of being thus connected.
Hence when a third person is called into this relation between parents
and children, what happens through the new element introduced, is
that the children are for their own good prevented from confiding in
their parents, and made to think that their parents are bad people
who harm them by their intercourse and training; and hence we find
this revolting. The worst thing which can happen to children in regard
to their morality and their mind, is that the bond which must ever
be held in reverence should become loosened or even severed, thereby
causing hatred, disdain, and ill-will. Whoever does this, does injury
to morality in its truest form. This unity, this confidence, is the
mother’s milk of morality on which man is nurtured; the early loss of
parents is therefore a great misfortune. The son, like the daughter,
must indeed come out of his natural unity with the family and become
independent, but the separation must be one which is natural or
unforced, and not defiant and disdainful. When a pain like this has
found a place in the heart, great strength of mind is required to
overcome it and to heal the wound. If we now speak of the example given
us by Socrates, he seems, through his intervention, to have made the
young man dissatisfied with his position. Anytus’ son might, indeed,
have found his work generally speaking uncongenial, but it is another
thing when such dislike is brought into consciousness and established
by the authority of a man such as Socrates. We may very well conjecture
that if Socrates had to do with him, he strengthened and developed in
him the germ of the feeling of incongruity. Socrates remarked on the
subject of his capacities, saying that he was fit for something better,
and thus established a feeling of dissatisfaction in the young man, and
strengthened his dislike to his father, which thus became the reason of
his ruin. Hence this accusation of having destroyed the relationship of
parents and children may be regarded as not unfounded, but as perfectly
well established. It was also thought very bad in Socrates’ case
particularly, and made a matter of reproach that he had such followers
as Critias and Alcibiades, who brought Athens almost to the brink of
ruin (_supra_, p. 421). For when he mixed himself in the education
which others gave their children, men were justified in the demand that
the result should not belie what he professed to do for the education
of youth.

The only question now is, how the people came to take notice of
this, and in how far such matters can be objects of legislation and
be brought into court. In our law, as regards the first part of the
accusation, divination such as Cagliostro’s is illegal, and it would
be forbidden as it formerly was by the Inquisition. Respecting the
second point, such a moral interference is no doubt more recognized
with us, where there is a particular office having this duty laid
upon it; but this interference must keep itself general, and dare
not go so far as to call forth disobedience to parents, which is the
first immoral principle. But should such questions come before the
court? This first of all brings up the question of what is the right
of the State, and here great laxity is now allowed. Nevertheless,
when some professor or preacher attacks a particular religion, the
legislature would certainly take notice of it, and it would have a
complete right to do so, although there would be an outcry when it
did it. There is undoubtedly a limit which in liberty of thought and
speech is difficult to define and rests on tacit agreement; but there
is a point beyond which we find what is not allowed, such as direct
incitement to insurrection. It is indeed said, that “bad principles
destroy themselves by themselves and find no entrance.” But that is
only true in part, for with the populace the eloquence of sophistry
stirs up their passions. It is also said, “This is only theoretic,
no action follows.” But the State really rests on thought, and its
existence depends on the sentiments of men, for it is a spiritual and
not a physical kingdom. Hence it has in so far maxims and principles
which constitute its support, and if these are attacked, the Government
must intervene. Added to this, it was the case that in Athens quite
a different state of things was present than with us; in order to be
able to judge rightly of Socrates’ case we must first consider the
Athenian State and its customs. According to Athenian laws, _i.e._
according to the spirit of the absolute State, both these things done
by Socrates were destructive of this spirit, while in our constitution
the universal of the states is a stronger universal, which last
undoubtedly permits of individuals having freer play, since they cannot
be so dangerous to this universal. Hence it would undoubtedly in the
first place mean the subversion of the Athenian State, if this public
religion on which everything was built and without which the State
could not subsist, went to pieces; with us the State may be called an
absolute and independent power. The Dæmon is now, in fact, a deity
differing from any known, and because it stood in contradiction to the
public religion, it gave to it a subjective arbitrariness. But since
established religion was identified with public life so closely that it
constituted a part of public law, the introduction of a new god who
formed self-consciousness into a principle and occasioned disobedience,
was necessarily a crime. We may dispute with the Athenians about this,
but we must allow that they are consistent. In the second place, the
moral connection between parents and children is stronger, and much
more the moral foundation of life with the Athenians than with us,
where subjective freedom reigns; for family piety is the substantial
key-note of the Athenian State. Socrates thus attacked and destroyed
Athenian life in two fundamental points; the Athenians felt and became
conscious of it. Is it then to be wondered at that Socrates was found
guilty? We might say that it had to be so. Tennemann (Vol. II., p.
41) says: “Though these charges contained the most palpable untruths,
Socrates was condemned to death because his mind was too lofty for
him to descend to the common unworthy means, by which the judgment of
the court was usually perverted.” But all this is false; he was found
guilty of these deeds, but not for that reason condemned to death.

_b._ We here come to the second occurrence in his history. In
accordance with Athenian laws, the accused had, after the Heliasts
(resembling the English jury) pronounced him guilty, the liberty of
suggesting (_ἀντιτιμᾶσθαι_) a penalty different from the punishment
which the accuser proposed; this implied a mitigation of the punishment
without a formal appeal—an excellent provision in Athenian law,
testifying to its humanity. In this penalty the punishment in itself is
not brought into question, but only the kind of punishment; the judges
had decided that Socrates deserved punishment. But when it was left
to the accused to determine what his punishment should be, it might
not be arbitrary, but must be in conformity with the crime, a money
or bodily punishment (_ὄ, τι χρὴ παθεῖν ἢ ἀποτῖθαι_).[141] But it was
implied in the guilty persons constituting himself his own judge, that
he submitted himself to the decision of the court and acknowledged
himself to be guilty. Now Socrates declined to assign a punishment for
himself consisting either of fine or banishment, and he had the choice
between these and death, which his accusers proposed. He declined
to choose the former punishment because he, according to Xenophon’s
account (Apol. Socr. § 23), in the formality of the exchange-penalty
(_τὸ ὐποτιμᾶσθαι_), as he said, would acknowledge guilt; but there was
no longer any question as to the guilt, but only as to the kind of
punishment.

This silence may indeed be considered as moral greatness, but, on the
other hand, it contradicts in some measure what Socrates says later on
in prison, that he did not wish to flee, but remained there, because
it seemed better to the Athenians and better to him to submit to the
laws (Vol. I., p. 342). But the first submission would have meant that
as the Athenians had found him guilty, he respected this decision, and
acknowledged himself as guilty. Consistently he would thus have held
it better to impose his punishment, since thereby he would not only
have submitted himself to the laws, but also to the judgment. We see in
Sophocles (Antig. verses 925, 926), the heavenly Antigone, that noblest
of figures that ever appeared on earth, going to her death, her last
words merely stating—

  “If this seems good unto the gods,
  Suffering, we may be made to know our error.”

Pericles also submitted himself to the judgment of the people as
sovereign; we saw him (Vol. I., p. 328) going round the citizens
entreating for Aspasia and Anaxagoras. In the Roman Republic we
likewise find the noblest men begging of the citizens. There is nothing
dishonouring to the individual in this, for he must bend before the
general power, and the real and noblest power is the people. This
acknowledgment the people must have direct from those who raise
themselves amongst them. Here, on the contrary, Socrates disclaims the
submission to, and humiliation before the power of the people, for he
did not wish to ask for the remission of his punishment. We admire in
him a moral independence which, conscious of its own right, insists
upon it and does not bend either to act otherwise, or to recognize as
wrong what it itself regards as right. Socrates hence exposed himself
to death, which could not be regarded as the punishment for the fault
of which he was found guilty; for the fact that he would not himself
determine the punishment, and thus disdained the juridical power of
the people, was foremost in leading to his condemnation. In a general
way he certainly recognized the sovereignty of the people, but not in
this individual case; it has, however, to be recognized, not only in
general, but in each separate case. With us the competency of the court
is presupposed, and the criminal judged without further ado; to-day
the whole matter is also open to the light of day and accepted as an
acknowledged fact. But with the Athenians we find the characteristic
request that the prisoner should, through the act of imposing on
himself a penalty, sanction the judge’s sentence of guilt. In England
this is certainly not the case, but there still remains a like form of
asking the accused by what law he wishes to be judged. He then answers,
by the law of the land and by the judges of his country. Here we have
the recognition of legal operations.

Socrates thus set his conscience in opposition to the judges’ sentence,
and acquitted himself before its tribunal. But no people, and least
of all a free people like the Athenians, has by this freedom to
recognize a tribunal of conscience which knows no consciousness of
having fulfilled its duty excepting its own consciousness. To this
government and law, the universal spirit of the people, may reply: “If
you have the consciousness of having done your duty, we must also have
the consciousness that you have so done.” For the first principle of
a State is that there is no reason or conscience or righteousness or
anything else, higher than what the State recognizes as such. Quakers,
Anabaptists, &c., who resist any demands made on them by the State,
such as to defend the Fatherland, cannot be tolerated in a true State.
This miserable freedom of thinking and believing what men will, is not
permitted, nor any such retreat behind personal consciousness of duty.
If this consciousness is no mere hypocrisy, in order that what the
individual does should be recognized as duty, it must be recognized as
such by all. If the people can make mistakes the individual may do so
much more easily, and he must be conscious that he can do this much
more easily than the people. Now law also has a conscience and has to
speak through it; the law-court is the privileged conscience. Now if
the miscarriage of justice in a trial is shown by every conscience
clamouring for something different, the conscience of the court alone
possesses any value as being the universal legalized conscience, which
does not require to recognize the particular conscience of the accused.
Men are too easily convinced of having fulfilled their duty, but the
judge finds out whether duty is in fact fulfilled, even if men have the
consciousness of its being so.

We should expect nothing else of Socrates than that he should go to
meet his death in the most calm and manly fashion. Plato’s account
of the wonderful scene his last hours presented, although containing
nothing very special, forms an elevating picture, and will be to us a
permanent representation of a noble deed. The last dialogue of Plato
is popular philosophy, for the immortality of the soul is here first
brought forward; yet it brings no consolation, for, as Homer makes
Achilles say in the nether world, he would prefer to be a ploughboy on
the earth.

But though the people of Athens asserted through the execution of this
judgment the rights of their law as against the attacks of Socrates,
and had punished the injury caused to their moral life by Socrates,
Socrates was still the hero who possessed for himself the absolute
right of the mind, certain of itself and of the inwardly deciding
consciousness, and thus expressed the higher principle of mind with
consciousness. Now because, as has been said, this new principle by
effecting an entrance into the Greek world, has come into collision
with the substantial spirit and the existing sentiments of the Athenian
people, a reaction had to take place, for the principle of the Greek
world could not yet bear the principle of subjective reflection. The
Athenian people were thus, not only justified, but also bound to react
against it according to their law, for they regarded this principle as
a crime. In general history we find that this is the position of the
heroes through whom a new world commences, and whose principle stands
in contradiction to what has gone before and disintegrates it: they
appear to be violently destroying the laws. Hence individually they
are vanquished, but it is only the individual, and not the principle,
which is negated in punishment, and the spirit of the Athenian people
did not in the removal of the individual, recover its old position.
The false form of individuality is taken away, and that, indeed, in a
violent way, by punishment; but the principle itself will penetrate
later, if in another form, and elevate itself into a form of the
world-spirit. This universal mode in which the principle comes forth
and permeates the present is the true one; what was wrong was the fact
that the principle came forth only as the peculiar possession of one
individual. His own world could not comprehend Socrates, but posterity
can, in as far as it stands above both. It may be conceived that the
life of Socrates had no need to have such an end, for Socrates might
have lived and died a private philosopher, and his teaching might have
been quietly accepted by his disciples, and have spread further still
without receiving any notice from State or people; the accusation thus
would seem to have been contingent. But it must be said that it was
through the manner of that event that this principle became so highly
honoured. The principle is not merely something new and peculiar to
itself, but it is an absolutely essential moment in the self-developing
consciousness of self which is designed to bring to pass as a totality,
a new and higher actuality. The Athenians perceived correctly that this
principle not only meant opinion and doctrine, for its true attitude
was that of a direct and even hostile and destructive relation to
the actuality of the Greek mind; and they proceeded in accordance
with this perception. Hence, what follows in Socrates’ life is not
contingent, but necessarily follows upon his principle. Or the honour
of having recognized that relation, and indeed of having felt that they
themselves were tinged with this principle, is due to the Athenians.

_c._ The Athenians likewise repented of their condemnation of Socrates,
and punished some of his accusers with death itself, and others
with banishment; for according to Athenian laws, the man who made
an accusation, and whose accusation was found to be false, usually
underwent the same punishment that otherwise the criminal would
have borne. This is the last act in this drama. On the one hand the
Athenians recognized through their repentance the individual greatness
of the man; but on the other (and this we find by looking closer)
they also recognized that this principle in Socrates, signifying
the introduction of new gods and disrespect to parents, has—while
destructive and hostile to it—been introduced even into their own
spirit, and that they themselves are in the dilemma of having in
Socrates only condemned their own principle. In that they regretted
the just judgment of Socrates, it seems to be implied that they wished
that it had not occurred. But from the regret it does not follow
that in itself it should not have occurred, but only that it should
not have happened for their consciousness. Both together constitute
the innocence which is guilty and atones for its guilt; it would
only be senseless and despicable if there were no guilt. An innocent
person who comes off badly is a simpleton; hence it is a very flat and
uninteresting matter when tyrants and innocent persons are represented
in tragedies, just because this is an empty contingency. A great man
would be guilty and overcome the great crisis that ensues; Christ thus
gave up his individuality, but what was brought forth by him remained.

The fate of Socrates is hence really tragic, not in the superficial
sense of the word and as every misfortune is called tragic. The death
of an estimable individual must, in such a sense, be specially tragic,
and thus it is said of Socrates, that because he was innocent and
condemned to death, his fate was tragic. But such innocent suffering
would only be sad and not tragic, for it would not be a rational
misfortune. Misfortune is only rational when it is brought about by the
will of the subject, who must be absolutely justified and moral in what
he does, like the power against which he wars—which must therefore not
be a merely natural power, or the power of a tyrannic will. For it is
only in such a case that man himself has any part in his misfortune,
while natural death is only an absolute right which nature exercises
over men. Hence, in what is truly tragic there must be valid moral
powers on both the sides which come into collision; this was so with
Socrates. His is likewise not merely a personal, individually romantic
lot; for we have in it the universally moral and tragic fate, the
tragedy of Athens, the tragedy of Greece. Two opposed rights come into
collision, and the one destroys the other. Thus both suffer loss and
yet both are mutually justified; it is not as though the one alone
were right and the other wrong. The one power is the divine right,
the natural morality whose laws are identical with the will which
dwells therein as in its own essence, freely and nobly; we may call it
abstractly objective freedom. The other principle, on the contrary,
is the right, as really divine, of consciousness or of subjective
freedom; this is the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, _i.e._ of self-creative reason; and it is the universal principle
of Philosophy for all successive times. It is these two principles
which we see coming into opposition in the life and the philosophy of
Socrates.

The Athenian people had come into a period of culture, in which this
individual consciousness made itself independent of the universal
spirit and became for itself. This was perceived by them in Socrates,
but at the same time it was felt that it meant ruin, and thus they
punished an element which was their own. The principle of Socrates is
hence not the transgression of one individual, for all were implicated;
the crime was one that the spirit of the people committed against
itself. Through this perception the condemnation of Socrates was
retracted; Socrates appeared to have committed no crime, for the spirit
of the people has now generally reached the consciousness which turns
back from the universal into itself. This meant the disintegration
of this people, whose mind and spirit consequently soon disappeared
from the world, but yet out of its ashes a higher took its rise,
for the world-spirit had raised itself into a higher consciousness.
The Athenian State, indeed, endured for long, but the bloom of its
character soon faded. It is characteristic of Socrates that he
grasped the principle of the inwardness of knowledge, not practically
merely, as did Critias and Alcibiades (_supra_, pp. 421, 438), but in
thought, making it valid to thought, and this is the higher method.
Knowledge brought about the Fall, but it also contains the principle
of Redemption. Thus what to others was only ruin, to Socrates, because
it was the principle of knowledge, was also a principle of healing.
The development of this principle, which constitutes the content
of all successive history, is explicitly the reason that the later
philosophers withdrew from the affairs of the State, restricted
themselves to cultivating an inner world, separated from themselves
the universal aim of the moral culture of the people, and took up a
position contrary to the spirit of Athens and the Athenians. From this
it came to pass that particularity of ends and interests now became
powerful in Athens. This has, in common with the Socratic principle,
the fact that what seems right and duty, good and useful to the
subject in relation to himself as well as to the State, depends on his
inward determination and choice, and not on the constitution and the
universal. This principle of self-determination for the individual has,
however, become the ruin of the Athenian people, because it was not yet
identified with the constitution of the people; and thus the higher
principle must in every case appear to bring ruin with it where it is
not yet identified with the substantial of the people. The Athenian
life became weak, and the State outwardly powerless, because its
spirit was divided within itself. Hence it was dependent on Lacedæmon,
and we finally see the external subordination of these States to the
Macedonians.

We are done with Socrates. I have been more detailed here because all
the features of the case have been so completely in harmony, and he
constitutes a great historic turning point. Socrates died at sixty-nine
years of age, in Olympiad 95, 1 (399-400 B.C.), an Olympiad after the
end of the Peloponnesian war, twenty-nine years after the death of
Pericles, and forty-four years before the birth of Alexander. He saw
Athens in its greatness and the beginning of its fall; he experienced
the height of its bloom and the beginning of its misfortunes.


C. THE SOCRATICS.

The result of the death of Socrates was, that the little company of
his friends went off from Athens to Megara, where Plato also came.
Euclides had settled there and received them gladly.[142] When
Socrates’ condemnation was retracted and his accusers punished,
certain of the Socratics returned, and all was again brought into
equilibrium. The work of Socrates was far-reaching and effectual in the
kingdom of Thought, and the stimulation of a great amount of interest
is always the principal service of a teacher. Subjectively, Socrates
had the formal effect of bringing about a discord in the individual;
the content was subsequently left to the free-will and liking of each
person, because the principle was subjective consciousness and not
objective thought. Socrates himself only came so far as to express
for consciousness generally the simple existence of one’s own thought
as the Good, but as to whether the particular conceptions of the Good
really properly defined that of which they were intended to express the
essence, he did not inquire. But because Socrates made the Good the
end of the living man, he made the whole world of idea, or objective
existence in general, rest by itself, without seeking to find a
passage from the Good, the real essence of what is known as such, to
the thing, and recognizing real essence as the essence of things. For
when all present speculative philosophy expresses the universal as
essence, this, as it first appears, has the semblance of being a single
determination, beside which there are a number of others. It is the
complete movement of knowledge that first removes this semblance, and
the system of the universe then shows forth its essence as Notion, as a
connected whole.

The most varied schools and principles proceeded from this doctrine of
Socrates, and this was made a reproach against him, but it was really
due to the indefiniteness and abstraction of his principle. And in
this way it is only particular forms of this principle which can at
first be recognized in philosophic systems which we call Socratic.
Under the name of Socratic, I understand, however, those schools
and methods which remained closer to Socrates and in which we find
nothing but the one-sided understanding of Socratic culture. One part
of these kept quite faithfully to the direct methods of Socrates,
without going any further. A number of his friends are mentioned as
being of this description, and these, inasmuch as they were authors,
contented themselves with correctly transcribing dialogues after his
manner, which were partly those he actually had held with them, and
partly those they had heard from others; or else with working out
similar dialogues in his method. But for the rest they abstained from
speculative research, and by directing their attention to what was
practical, adhered firmly and faithfully to the fulfilment of the
duties of their position and circumstances, thereby maintaining calm
and satisfaction. Xenophon is the most celebrated of those mentioned,
but besides him a number of other Socratics wrote dialogues. Æschines,
some of whose dialogues have come down to us, Phædo, Antisthenes and
others are mentioned, and amongst them a shoemaker, Simon, “with whom
Socrates often spoke at his workshop, and who afterwards carefully
wrote out what Socrates said to him.” The title of his dialogues, as
also those of the others which are left to us, are to be found in
Diogenes Laërtius (II. 122, 123; 60, 61; 105; VI. 15-18); they have,
however, only a literary interest, and hence I will pass them by.

But another section of the Socratics went further than Socrates,
inasmuch as they, starting from him, laid hold of and matured one of
the particular aspects of his philosophy and of the standpoint to
which philosophic knowledge was brought through him. This standpoint
maintained the absolute character of self-consciousness within itself,
and the relation of its self-existent universality to the individual.
In Socrates, and from him onward, we thus see knowledge commencing, the
world raising itself into the region of conscious thought, and this
becoming the object. We no longer hear question and answer as to what
Nature is, but as to what Truth is; or real essence has determined
itself not to be the implicit, but to be what it is in knowledge. We
hence have the question of the relationship of self-conscious thought
to real essence coming to the front as what concerns us most. The true
and essence are not the same; the true is essence as thought, but
essence is the simply implicit. This simple is, indeed, thought, and is
in thought, but when it is said that essence is pure Being or Becoming,
as the being-for-self of the atomists, and then that the Notion is
thought generally (the _νοῦς_ of Anaxagoras), or finally measure, this
is asserted directly, and in an objective manner. Or it is the simple
unity of the objective and of thought; it is not purely objective—for
Being cannot be seen, heard, &c.; nor is it pure thought in opposition
to the existent—for this is the explicitly existent self-consciousness
which separates itself from essence. It is finally not the unity
going back into itself from the difference in the two sides, which is
understanding and knowledge. In these self-consciousness on the one
hand presents itself as being-for-self, and on the other, as Being;
it is conscious of this difference, and from this difference turns
back into the unity of both. This unity, the result, is the known, the
true. One element in the true is the certainty of itself; this moment
has attained to reality—in consciousness and for consciousness. It is
through this movement and the investigation of the subject, that the
succeeding period of Philosophy is distinguished, because it does not
contemplate essence as left to itself, and as purely objective, but as
in unity with the certainty of itself. It is not to be understood by
this that such knowledge had itself been made into essence, so that it
is held to be the content and definition of absolute essence, or that
essence had been determined for the consciousness of these philosophers
as the unity of Being and Thought, _i.e._ as if they had thought of it
thus; but they could merely no longer speak of essence and actuality
without this element of self-certainty. And this period is hence, so to
speak, the middle period, which is really the movement of knowledge,
and considers knowledge as the science of essence, which first brings
about that unity.

From what has been said, it can now be seen what philosophic systems
can come before us. That is to say, because in this period the relation
of Thought to Being, or of the universal to the individual, is made
explicit, we see, on the one hand, as the object of Philosophy, the
contradiction of consciousness coming to consciousness—a contradiction
as to which the ordinary modes of thought have no knowledge, for they
are in a state of confusion, seeing that they go on unthinkingly. On
the other hand we have Philosophy as perceiving knowledge itself,
which, however, does not get beyond its Notion, and which, because it
is the unfolding of a more extensive knowledge of a content, cannot
give itself this content, but can only think it, _i.e._ determine it
in a simple manner. Of those Socratics who hold a place of their own,
there are, according to this, three schools worthy of consideration;
first the Megaric School, at whose head stands Euclid of Megara, and
then the Cyrenaic and Cynic Schools; and from the fact that they
all three differ very much from one another, it is clearly shown
that Socrates himself was devoid of any positive system. With these
Socratics the determination of the subject for which the absolute
principle of the true and good likewise appears as end, came into
prominence; this end demands reflection and general mental cultivation,
and also requires that men should be able to tell what the good and
true really are. But though these Socratic schools as a whole rest at
saying that the subject itself is end, and reaches its subjective end
through the cultivation of its knowledge, the form of determination in
them is still the universal, and it is also so that it does not remain
abstract, for the development of the determinations of the universal
gives real knowledge. The Megarics were most abstract, because they
held to the determination of the good which, as simple, was to them
the principle; the unmoved and self-related simplicity of thought
becomes the principle of consciousness as individual, as it is of
conscious knowledge. The Megaric school associated with the assertion
of the simplicity of the good, the dialectic, that all that was defined
and limited is not true. But because with the Megarics the principal
point was to know the universal, and this universal was to them the
Absolute which had to be retained in this form of the universal, this
thought, as Notion which holds a negative position in relation to all
determinateness and thus to that of Notion also, was equally turned
against knowledge and perception.

The Cyrenaics take knowledge in its subjective signification, and
as signifying individuality as certainty of self, or feeling; to
this as to that which is essential, they restrict the exercise
of consciousness, and, generally speaking, make existence for
consciousness consist therein. Now because they thereby sought to
define the Good more closely, they called it simply pleasure or
enjoyment, by which, however, anything can be understood. This
principle of the Cyrenaic school would seem to have been far removed
from that of Socrates, since we at once think of the transient
existence of feeling as directly in opposition to the Good; this,
however, is not the case. The Cyrenaics likewise upheld the universal,
for, if it is asked what the Good is, we find they certainly made
pleasurable feeling, which presents the appearance of a determinate,
to be its content, but seeing that a cultured mind is also requisite,
enjoyment, as it is obtained through thought, is here indicated.

The Cynics also further defined the principle of the Good, but in
another way from the Cyrenaics; its content, they said, lay in man’s
keeping to what is in conformity with nature and to the simple needs of
nature. They similarly call all that is particular and limited in the
aims of men that which is not to be desired. To the Cynics, too, mental
culture through the knowledge of the universal is the principle;
but through this knowledge of the universal the individual end must
be attained, and this is, that the individual should keep himself in
abstract universality, in freedom and independence, and be indifferent
to all he formerly esteemed. Thus we see pure thought recognized in its
movement with the individual, and the manifold transformations of the
universal coming to consciousness. These three schools are not to be
treated at length. The principle of the Cyrenaics became later on more
scientifically worked out in Epicureanism, as that of the Cynics did in
Stoicism.


1. THE MEGARICS.

Because Euclides (who is regarded as the founder of the Megaric way
of thinking) and his school held to the forms of universality, and,
above all, sought, and with success, to show forth the contradictions
contained in all particular conceptions, they were reproached with
having a rage for disputation, and hence the name of Eristics was
given them. The instrument for bringing all that is particular into
confusion and annulling this particular, was supplied by dialectic,
which, indeed, was brought by them to very great perfection, but, as
was privately stated, they did it in a kind of anger, so that others
said that they should not be called a School (_σχολή_) but a gall
(χολή).[143] With a dialectic thus constituted, we find them taking
the place of the Eleatic School and of the Sophists; and it seems as
though the Eleatic School had merely been reproduced,[144] since they
were essentially identical with it. But this was only partly true—in
that the Eleatic dialecticians maintained Being as the one existence
in relation to which nothing particular is a truth, and the Megarics
considered Being as the Good. The Sophists, on the other hand, did not
seek their impulse in simple universality as fixed and as enduring; and
similarly we shall find in the Sceptics, dialecticians who maintain
that the subjective mind rests within itself. Besides Euclides,
Diodorus and Menedemus are mentioned as distinguished Eristics, but
particularly Eubulides, and later on Stilpo, whose dialectic likewise
related to contradictions which appeared in external conception and in
speech, so that it in great measure passed into a mere play upon words.


_a._ EUCLIDES.

Euclides, who is not to be confused with the mathematician, is he
of whom it is said that during the enmity between Athens and his
birthplace, Megara, and in the period of most violent animosity, he
often secretly went to Athens, dressed as a woman, not fearing even
the punishment of death in order to be able to hear Socrates and
be in his company.[145] Euclides is said, in spite of his stubborn
manner of disputing, to have been, even in his disputation, a most
peaceful man. It is told that once in a quarrel his opponent was so
irritated, that he exclaimed, “I will die if I do not revenge myself
upon you!” Euclides replied, “And I will die if I do not soften your
wrath so much by the mildness of my speech that you will love me as
before.”[146] It was Euclides who said that “the Good is one,” and it
alone is, “though passing under many names; sometimes it is called
Understanding, sometimes God; at another time Thought (_νοῦς_), and so
on. But what is opposed to the good does not exist.”[147] This doctrine
Cicero (_ibid._) calls noble, and says that it differs but little
from the Platonic. Since the Megarics make the Good, as the simple
identity of the true, into a principle, it is clearly seen that they
expressed the Good as the absolute existence in a universal sense,
as did Socrates; but they no longer, like him, recognized all the
approximate conceptions, or merely opposed them as being indifferent
to the interests of man, for they asserted definitely that they were
nothing at all. Thus they come into the category of the Eleatics,
since they, like them, showed that only Being is, and that all else,
as negative, does not exist. While the dialectic of Socrates was thus
incidental, in that he merely shook some current moral ideas, or the
very first conceptions of knowledge, the Megarics, on the contrary,
raised their philosophic dialectic into something more universal and
real, for they applied themselves more to what is formal in idea and
speech, though not yet, like the later Sceptics, to the determinations
of pure Notions; for knowledge, thought, was not yet present in
abstract conceptions. Of their own dialectic not much is told, but
more is said of the embarrassment into which they brought ordinary
consciousness, for they were in all kinds of ways alert in involving
others in contradictions. Thus they applied dialectic after the manner
of an ordinary conversation, just as Socrates applied his mind to every
side of ordinary subjects, and as we also, in our conversation, try to
make an assertion interesting and important. A number of anecdotes are
told of their disputations, from which we see that what we call joking
was their express business. Others of their puzzles certainly deal with
a positive category of thought; they take these and show how, if they
are held to be true, they bring about a contradiction.


_b._ EUBULIDES.

Of the innumerable multitude of ways in which they tried to confuse our
knowledge in the categories, many are preserved with their names, and
the principal of these are the Sophisms, whose discovery is ascribed
to Eubulides of Miletus, a pupil of Euclides.[148] The first thing
which strikes us when we hear them is that they are common sophisms
which are not worth contradiction, and scarcely of being heard, least
of all have they a real scientific value. Hence we call them stupid,
and look at them as dreary jokes, but it is in fact easier to set them
aside than to refute them. We let ordinary speech pass, and are content
with it, so long as everyone knows what the other means (when this is
not so—we trust that God understands us), but these sophisms seem in
a way to mislead common speech, for they show the contradictory and
unsatisfactory nature of it when taken strictly as it is spoken. To
confuse ordinary language so that we do not know how to reply, seems
foolish, as leading to formal contradictions, and if it is done we are
blamed for taking mere empty words and playing upon them. Our German
seriousness, therefore, dismisses this play on words as shallow wit,
but the Greeks honoured the word in itself, and the mere treatment
of a proposition as well as the matter. And if word and thing are in
opposition, the word is the higher, for the unexpressed thing is really
irrational, since the rational exists as speech alone.

It is in Aristotle, and in his Sophistical Elenchi that we first find
numerous examples of these contradictions (coming from the old Sophists
equally with the Eristics), and also their solutions. Eubulides,
therefore, likewise wrote against Aristotle,[149] but none of this
has come down to us. In Plato we also find, as we saw before (p.
370), similar jokes and ambiguities mentioned to make the Sophists
ridiculous, and to show with what insignificant matters they took up
their time. The Eristics went yet further, for they, like Diodorus,
became jesters to courts, such as to that of the Ptolemies.[150]
From historic facts we see that this dialectic operation of confusing
others and showing how to extricate them again was a general amusement
of the Greek philosophers, both in public places and at the tables
of kings. Just as the Queen of the East came to Solomon to put
riddles to him, we find at the tables of kings witty conversation and
assemblages of philosophers joking and making merry over one another.
The Greeks were quite enamoured of discovering contradictions met
with in speech and in ordinary ideas. The contradiction does not
make its appearance as a pure contradiction in the conception, but
only as interwoven with concrete ideas; such propositions neither
apply to the concrete content nor to the pure Notion. Subject and
predicate, of which every proposition consists, are different, but in
the ordinary idea we signify their unity; this simple unity, which
does not contradict itself, is to ordinary ideas the truth. But in
fact, the simple self-identical proposition is an unmeaning tautology;
for in any affirmation, differences are present, and because their
diversity comes to consciousness, there is contradiction. But the
ordinary consciousness is then at an end, for only where there is
a contradiction is there the solution, self-abrogation. Ordinary
consciousness has not the conception that only the unity of opposites
is the truth—that in every statement there is truth and falsehood, if
truth is to be taken in the sense of the simple, and falsehood in the
sense of the opposed and contradictory; in it the positive, the first
unity, and the negative, this last opposition, fall asunder.

In Eubulides’ propositions the main point was that because the truth
is simple, a simple answer is required; that thus the answer should
not, as happened in Aristotle (De Sophist. Elench. c. 24), have regard
to certain special considerations; and, after all, this is really
the demand of the understanding. Thus the mistake is to desire an
answer of yes or no, for since no one ventures on either, perplexity
ensues, because it is a fool’s part not to know what to reply. The
simplicity of the truth is thus grasped as the principle. With us
this appears in the form of making such statements as that one of
opposites is true, the other false; that a statement is either true
or not true; that an object cannot have two opposite predicates. That
is the first principle of the understanding, the _principium exclusi
tertii_, which is of great importance in all the sciences. This stands
in close connection with the principle of Socrates and Plato (_supra_,
pp. 455, 456), “The true is the universal;” which is abstractly the
identity of understanding, according to which what is said to be true
cannot contradict itself. This comes more clearly to light in Stilpo
(p. 464). The Megarics thus kept to this principle of our logic of
the understanding, in demanding the form of identity for the Truth.
Now in the cases that they put, they did not keep to the universal,
but sought examples in ordinary conception, by means of which they
perplexed people; and this they formed into a kind of system. We shall
bring forward some examples that are preserved to us; some are more
important, but others are insignificant.

_α_. One Elench was called the Liar (_ψευδόμενος_); in it the question
is put: “If a man acknowledges that he lies, does he lie or speak
the truth?”[151] A simple answer is demanded, for the simple whereby
the other is excluded, is held to be the true. If it is said that he
tells the truth, this contradicts the content of his utterance, for he
confesses that he lies. But if it is asserted that he lies, it may be
objected that his confession is the truth. He thus both lies and does
not lie; but a simple answer cannot be given to the question raised.
For here we have a union of two opposites, lying and truth, and their
immediate contradiction; in different forms this has at all times come
to pass, and has ever occupied the attention of men. Chrysippus, a
celebrated Stoic, wrote six books on the subject,[152] and another,
Philetas of Cos, died in the decline which he contracted through
over-study of these paradoxes.[153] We have the same thing over again
when, in modern times, we see men worn out by absorbing themselves in
the squaring of the circle—a proposition which has well nigh become
immortal. They seek a simple relation from something incommensurable,
_i.e._ they fall into the error of demanding a simple reply where
the content is contradictory. That little history has perpetuated
and reproduced itself later on; in Don Quixote the very same thing
appears. Sancho, governor of the island of Barataria, was tested by
many insidious cases as he sat in judgment, and, amongst others, with
the following: In his domain there was a bridge which a rich man had
erected for the good of passengers—but with a gallows close by. The
crossing of the bridge was restricted by the condition that everyone
must say truly where he was going, and if he lied, he would be hung
upon the gallows. Now one man came to the bridge, and to the question
whither he went, answered that he had come here to be hung on the
gallows. The bridge-keepers were much puzzled by this. For if they
hanged him, he would have spoken the truth and ought to have passed,
but if he crossed he would have spoken an untruth. In this difficulty
they applied to the wisdom of the governor, who uttered the wise saying
that in such dubious cases the mildest measures should be adopted,
and thus the man should be allowed to pass. Sancho did not break his
head over the matter. The result which the statement was to have, is
made its content, with the condition that the opposite of the content
should be the consequence. Hanging, understanding it to be truly
expressed, should not have hanging as result; non-hanging as an event,
should, on the other hand, have hanging as result. Thus death is made
the consequence of suicide, but by suicide death itself is made into
the content of the crime, and cannot thus be the punishment.

I will give another similar example along with the answer. Menedemus
was asked whether he had ceased to beat his father. This was an attempt
to place him in a difficulty, since to answer either yes or no, would
be equally risky. For if he said ‘yes,’ then he once beat him, and if
‘no,’ then he still beats him. Menedemus hence replied that he neither
ceased to beat him, nor had beaten him; and with this his opponents
were not satisfied.[154] Through this answer, which is two-sided, the
one alternative, as well as the other, being set aside, the question
is in fact answered; and this is also so in the former question as to
whether the man spoke truly who said he lied, when the reply is made,
“He speaks the truth and lies at the same time, and the truth is this
contradiction.” But a contradiction is not the true, and cannot enter
into our ordinary conceptions; hence Sancho Panza likewise set it aside
in his judgment. If the consciousness of opposition is present, our
ordinary ideas keep the contradictory sides apart; but in fact the
contradiction appears in sensuous things, such as space, time, &c.,
and has in them only to be demonstrated. These sophisms thus not only
appear to be contradictory, but are so in truth: this choice between
two opposites, which is set before us in the example, is itself a
contradiction.

_β_. The Concealed one (_διαλανθάνων_) and the Electra[155] proceed
from the contradiction of knowing and not knowing someone at the same
time. I ask someone ‘Do you know your father?’ He replies ‘Yes.’ I
then ask ‘Now if I show you someone hidden behind a screen, will you
know him?’ ‘No.’ ‘But it is your father, and thus you do not know your
father.’ It is the same in the Electra. ‘Can it be said that she knows
her brother Orestes who stands before her or not?’ These twists and
turns seem superficial, but it is interesting to consider them further.
(_αα_) To know means, on the one hand, to have someone as ‘this one,’
and not vaguely and in general. The son thus knows his father when he
sees him, _i.e._ when he is a ‘this’ for him; but hidden, he is not a
‘this’ for him, but a ‘this’ abrogated. The hidden one as a ‘this’ in
ordinary conception, becomes a general, and loses his sensuous being,
thereby is in fact not a true ‘this.’ The contradiction that the son
both knows and does not know his father, thus becomes dissolved through
the further qualification that the son knows the father as a sensuous
‘this,’ and not as a ‘this’ of idea. (_ββ_) On the other hand Electra
knows Orestes, not as a sensuous ‘this,’ but in her own idea; the
‘this’ of idea and the ‘this’ here, are not the same to her. In this
way there enters into these histories the higher opposition of the
universal and of the ‘this,’ in as far as to have in the ordinary idea,
means in the element of the universal; the abrogated ‘this’ is not only
an idea, but has its truth in the universal. The universal is thus
found in the unity of opposites, and thus it is in this development
of Philosophy the true existence, in which the sensuous being of the
‘this’ is negated. It is the consciousness of this in particular which,
as we shall soon see (p. 465), is indicated by Stilpo.

_γ_. Other quibbles of the same kind have more meaning, like the
arguments which are called the Sorites (_σωρείτης_) and the Bald
(_φαλακρός_).[156] Both are related to the false infinite, and the
quantitative progression which can reach no qualitative opposite, and
yet at the end finds itself at a qualitative absolute opposite. The
Bald head is the reverse of the problem of the Sorites. It is asked,
“Does one grain of corn make a heap, or does one hair less make a bald
head?” The reply is “No.” “Nor one again?” “No, it does not.” This
question is now always repeated while a grain is always added, or a
hair taken away. When at last it is said that there is a heap or a bald
head, it is found that the last added grain or last abstracted hair has
made the heap or the baldness, and this was at first denied. But how
can a grain form a heap which already consists of so many grains? The
assertion is that one grain does not make a heap; the contradiction,
that one thus added or taken away brings about the change into the
opposite—the many. For to repeat one is just to obtain many, the
repetition causes certain ‘many’ grains to come together. The one thus
becomes its opposite,—a heap, and the taking of one away brings about
baldness. One and a heap are opposed to one another, but yet one; or
the quantitative progression seems not to change but merely to increase
or diminish, yet at last it has passed into its opposite. We always
separate quality and quantity from one another, and only accept in
the many a quantitative difference; but this indifferent distinction
of number or size here turns finally into qualitative distinction,
just as an infinitely small or infinitely great greatness is no longer
greatness at all. This characteristic of veering round is of the
greatest importance, although it does not come directly before our
consciousness. To give one penny or one shilling is said to be nothing,
but with all its insignificance the purse becomes emptied, which is
a very qualitative difference. Or, if water is always more and more
heated, it suddenly, at 80° Reamur, turns into steam. The dialectic
of this passing into one another of quantity and quality is what our
understanding does not recognize; it is certain that qualitative is
not quantitative, and quantitative not qualitative. In those examples
which seem like jokes, there is in this way genuine reflection on the
thought-determinations which are in question.

The examples which Aristotle brings forward in his Elenchi, all show a
very formal contradiction, appearing in speech, since even in it the
individual is taken into the universal. “Who is that? It is Coriscus.
Is Coriscus not masculine? Yes. _That_ is neuter sex, and thus Coriscus
is said to be neuter.”[157] Or else Aristotle (De Sophist. Elench. c.
24) quotes the argument: “To thee a dog is father (_σὸς ὁ κύων πατήρ_).
Thou art thus a dog;” that is what Plato, as we already mentioned (p.
370), made a Sophist say: it is the wit of a journeyman such as we
find in Eulenspiegel. Aristotle is really at great pains to remove the
confusion, for he says the ‘thy’ and the ‘father’ are only accidentally
(_παρὰ τὸ συμβεβηκός_), and not in substance (_κατὰ τὴν οὐσίαν_) joined
to one another. In the invention of such witticisms, the Greeks of that
and of later times were quite indefatigable. With the Sceptics we shall
later on see the dialectic side further developed and brought to a
higher standpoint.


_c._ STILPO.

Stilpo, a native of Megara, is one of the most celebrated of the
Eristics. Diogenes tells us that “he was a very powerful debater, and
excelled all so greatly in readiness of speech that all Greece, in
looking to him, was in danger (μικροῦ δεῆσαι) of becoming Megareans.”
He lived in the time of Alexander the Great, and after his death (Ol.
114, 1; 324 B.C.) in Megara, when Alexander’s generals fought together.
Ptolemy Soter, Demetrius Poliorcetes, Antigonus’ son, when they
conquered Megara, bestowed many honours on him. “In Athens all came out
of their work-places to see him, and when anyone said that they admired
him like a strange animal, he replied, No, but like a true man.”[158]
With Stilpo it was pre-eminently true that the universal was taken
in the sense of the formal abstract identity of the understanding.
The main point in his examples is, however, always the fact of his
having given prominence to the form of universality as opposed to the
particular.

_α_. Diogenes (II. 119) first quotes from him in relation to the
opposition of the ‘this’ and the universal, “Whoever speaks of any
man (_ἄνθρωπον εἶναι_), speaks of no one, for he neither speaks of
this one nor that. For why should it rather be of this one than that?
Hence it is not of this one.” That man is the universal, and that no
one is specially indicated, everyone readily acknowledges, but some
one still remains present to us in our conception. But Stilpo says
that the ‘this’ does not exist at all, and cannot be expressed—that
the universal only exists. Diogenes Laërtius certainly understands
this as though “Stilpo abolished distinction of genera (_ἀνῄρει καὶ
τὰ εἴδη_),” and Tennemann (Vol II., p. 158) supports him. But from
what is quoted from him the opposite may clearly be deduced—that he
upheld the universal and did away with the individual. And the fact
that the form of universality is maintained, is further expressed in a
number of anecdotes which are taken by Stilpo from common life. Thus
he says: “The cabbage is not what is here shown (_τὸ λάχανον οὐκ ἔστι
τὸ δεικνύμενον_). For the cabbage has existed for many thousand years,
and hence this (what is seen) is not cabbage,” _i.e._ the universal
only is, and this cabbage is not. If I say _this_ cabbage, I say
quite another thing from what I mean, for I say all other cabbages.
An anecdote is told in the same reference. “He was conversing with
Crates, a Cynic, and broke off to buy some fish;” Crates said, “What,
you would avoid the question?” (for even in ordinary life anyone is
laughed at or thought stupid who is unable to reply, and here where
the subject was so important and where it would seem better to reply
anything than nothing at all, no answer was forthcoming). Stilpo
replied, “By no means, for I have the conversation, but I leave you,
since the conversation remains but the fish will be sold.” What is
indicated in these simple examples seems trivial, because the matter is
trivial, but in other forms it seems important enough to be the subject
of further inquiry.

That the universal should in Philosophy be given a place of such
importance that only the universal can be expressed, and the ‘this’
which is meant, cannot, indicates a state of consciousness and thought
which the philosophic culture of our time has not yet reached. As
regards the ordinary human understanding, or the scepticism of our
times, or in general the Philosophy which asserts that sensuous
certainty (that which we see, hear, &c.), is the truth, or else that
it is true that there are sensuous things outside of us—as to these,
nothing, so far as the reasons for disbelieving them are concerned,
need be said. For because the direct assertion that the immediate is
the true is made, such statements only require to be taken with respect
to what they say, and they will always be found to say something
different from what they mean. What strikes us most is that they cannot
say what they mean; for if they say the sensuous, this is a universal;
it is all that is sensuous, a negative of the ‘this,’ or ‘this’ is all
‘these.’ Thought contains only the universal, the ‘this’ is only in
thought; if I say ‘this’ it is the most universal of all. For example,
here is that which I show; now I speak; but here and now is all here
and now. Similarly when I say ‘I,’ I mean myself, this individual
separated from all others. But I am even thus that which is thought of
and cannot express the self which I mean at all. ‘I’ is an absolute
expression which excludes every other ‘I,’ but everyone says ‘I’ of
himself, for everyone is an ‘I.’ If we ask who is there, the answer ‘I’
indicates every ‘I.’ The individual also is thus the universal only,
for in the word as an existence born of the mind, the individual, if
it is meant, cannot find a place, since actually only the universal is
expressed. If I would distinguish myself and establish my individuality
by my age, my place of birth, through what I have done and where I have
been or am at a particular time, it is the same thing. I am now so many
years old, but this very now which I say is all now. If I count from a
particular period such as the birth of Christ, this epoch is again only
fixed by the ‘now’ which is ever displaced. I am now thirty-five years
old, and now is 1805 A.D.; each period is fixed only through the other,
but the whole is undetermined. That ‘now’ 1805 years have passed since
Christ’s birth, is a truth which soon will become empty sound, and the
determinateness of the ‘now’ has a before and after of determinations
without beginning or end. Similarly everyone is at a ‘here’—this
here, for everyone is in a ‘here.’ This is the nature of universality,
which makes itself evident in speech. We hence help ourselves through
names with which we define perfectly anything individual, but we allow
that we have not expressed the thing in itself. The name as name, is
no expression which contains what I am; it is a symbol, and indeed a
contingent symbol, of the lively recollection.

_β_. Inasmuch as Stilpo expressed the universal as the independent,
he disintegrated everything. Simplicius says (in Phys. Arist. p. 26),
“Since the so-called Megarics took it as ascertained that what has
different determinations is different (_ὧν οἱλόγοι ἕτεροι, ταῦτα ἕτερα
ἐστιν_), and that the diverse are separated one from the other (_τὰ
ἕτερα κεχώρισται ἀλλήλων_), they seemed to prove that each thing is
separated from itself (_αὐτὸ αὑτοῦ κεχωρισμένον ἔκασον_). Hence since
the musical Socrates is another determination (_λόγος_) from the
wise Socrates, Socrates was separated from himself.” That means that
because the qualities of things are determinations for themselves, each
of these is fixed independently, but yet the thing is an aggregate of
many independent universalities. Stilpo asserted this. Now because,
according to him, universal determinations are in their separation
only the true reality, and the individual is the unseparated unity of
different ideas, to him nothing individual has any truth.

_γ_. It is very remarkable that this form of identity came to be
known in Stilpo, and he in this way only wished to know propositions
identically expressed. Plutarch quotes from him: “A different
predicate may in no case be attributed to any object (_ἕτερον ἑτέρου
μὴ κατηγορεῖσθαι_). Thus we could not say that the man is good or the
man is a general, but simply that man is only man, good is only good,
the general is only the general. Nor could we say ten thousand knights,
but knights are only knights, ten thousand are only ten thousand,
&c. When we speak of a horse running, he says that the predicate is
not identical with the object to which it is attributed. For the
concept-determination man is different (_τοῦ τί ἦν εἶναι τὸν λόγον_)
from the concept-determination good. Similarly horse and running are
distinct: when we are asked for a definition of either, we do not give
the same for both. Hence those who say something different of what is
different are wrong. For if man and good were the same, and likewise
horse and running, how could good be used of bread and physic, and
running of lions and dogs”?[159] Plutarch remarks here that Colotes
attacks Stilpo in a bombastic manner (_τραγῷδίαν ἐπάγει_) as though
he ignored common life (_τὸν βίον ἀναιρεῖσθαι_). “But what man,”
Plutarch reflects, “lived any the worse for this? Is there any man who
hears this said, and who does not know that it is an elaborate joke
(_παῖζοντός ἐστιν εὐμούσως_)?”


2. THE CYRENAIC SCHOOL.

The Cyrenaics took their name from Aristippus of Cyrene in Africa, the
originator and head of the school. Just as Socrates wished to develop
himself as an individual, his disciples, or those of the Cyrenaic
and Cynic Schools, made individual life and practical philosophy
their main object. Now if the Cyrenaics did not rest content with the
determination of good in general, seeing that they inclined to place
it in the enjoyment of the individual, the Cynics appear to be opposed
to the whole doctrine, for they expressed the particular content of
satisfaction as natural desires in a determination of negativity
with regard to what is done by others. But as the Cyrenaics thereby
satisfied their particular subjectivity, so also did the Cynics, and
both schools have hence on the whole the same end—the freedom and
independence of the individual. Because we are accustomed to consider
happiness, which the Cyrenaics made the highest end of man, to be
contentless, because we obtain it in a thousand ways, and it may be
the result of most various causes, this principle appears at first
to us as trivial, and indeed, generally speaking, it is so; we are
likewise accustomed to believe that there is something higher than
pleasure. The philosophic development of this principle which, for the
rest, has not much in it, is mainly ascribed to Aristippus’ follower,
Aristippus the younger. But Theodorus, Hegesias, and Anniceris, of
the later Cyrenaics, are specially mentioned as having scientifically
worked out the Aristippian principle, until it degenerated and merged
into Epicureanism. But the consideration of the further progress of the
Cyrenaic principle is specially interesting because this progression,
in the essential nature of things, is carried quite beyond the
principle, and has really abrogated it. Feeling is the indeterminate
individual. But if thought, reflection, mental culture, are given a
place in this principle, through the principle of the universality
of thought that principle of contingency, individuality, mere
subjectivity, disappears; and the only really remarkable thing in this
school is that this greater consistency in the universal is therefore
an inconsistency as regards the principle.


_a._ ARISTIPPUS.

Aristippus went about with Socrates for a long time, and educated
himself under him, although at the same time he was a strong and
highly cultivated man before he sought out Socrates at all. He heard
of him either in Cyrene or at the Olympian Games, which, as Greeks,
the Cyrenians likewise visited. His father was a merchant, and he
himself came to Athens on a journey which had commerce as its object.
He was first amongst the Socratics to ask money of those whom he
instructed; he also sent money to Socrates, who, however, returned
it.[160] He did not content himself with the general expressions, good
and beautiful, to which Socrates adhered, but took existence reflected
in consciousness in its extreme determinateness as individuality; and
because universal existence, as thought, was to him, from the side of
reality, individual consciousness, he fixed on enjoyment as the only
thing respecting which man had rationally to concern himself. The
character and personality of Aristippus is what is most important,
and what is preserved to us in his regard is his manner and life
rather than his philosophic doctrines. He sought after enjoyment as a
man of culture, who in that very way had raised himself into perfect
indifference to all that is particular, all passions and bonds of every
kind. When pleasure is made the principle, we immediately have the idea
before us that in its enjoyment we are dependent, and that enjoyment
is thus opposed to the principle of freedom. But neither of the
Cyrenaic teaching, nor the Epicurean, whose principle is on the whole
the same, can this be stated. For by itself the end of enjoyment may
well be said to be a principle in opposition to Philosophy; but when it
is considered in such a way that the cultivation of thought is made the
only condition under which enjoyment can be attained, perfect freedom
of spirit is retained, since it is inseparable from culture. Aristippus
certainly esteemed culture at its highest, and proceeded from this
position—that pleasure is only a principle for men of philosophic
culture; his main principle thus was that what is found to be pleasant
is not known immediately but only by reflection.

Aristippus lived in accordance with these principles, and what in him
interests us most is the number of anecdotes told about him, because
they contain traces of a mentally rich and free disposition. Since in
his life he went about to seek enjoyment, not without understanding
(and thereby he was in his way a philosopher), he sought it partly with
the discretion which does not yield itself to a momentary happiness,
because a greater evil springs therefrom; and partly (as if philosophy
were merely preservation from anxiety) without that anxiety which on
every side fears possible evil and bad results; but above all without
any dependence on things, and without resting on anything which is
itself of a changeable nature. He enjoyed, says Diogenes, the pleasures
of the moment, without troubling himself with those which were not
present; he suited himself to every condition, being at home in all;
he remained the same whether he were in regal courts or in the most
miserable conditions. Plato is said to have told him that it was given
to him alone to wear the purple and the rags. He was specially attached
to Dionysius, being very popular with him; he certainly clung to him,
but always retained complete independence. Diogenes, the Cynic, for
this reason called him the royal dog. When he demanded fifty drachms
from someone who wished to hand over to him his son, and the man found
the sum too high, saying that he could buy a slave for it, Aristippus
answered, “Do so, and you will have two.” When Socrates asked him, “How
do you have so much money?” he replied, “How do you have so little?”
When a courtesan said to him that she had a child by him, he replied,
“You know as little whether it is mine as, were you walking through
briars, would you know which thorn pricked you.” A proof of his perfect
indifference is given in the following: When Dionysius once spat at
him, he bore it patiently, and when blamed, said, “The fishermen let
themselves be wet by the sea to catch the little fish, and I, should I
not bear this to catch such a good one?” When Dionysius asked him to
choose one of three courtesans, he took them all with him, observing
that it had been a dangerous thing even to Paris to choose out one;
but after leading them to the vestibule of the house, he let all three
go. He made nothing of the possession of money as contrasted with the
results which appear to follow from pursuing pleasure, and hence he
wasted it on dainties. He once bought a partridge at fifty drachms
(about twenty florins). When someone rebuked him, he asked, “Would
you not buy it for a farthing?” And when this was acknowleged, he
answered, “Now fifty drachms are no more than that to me.” Similarly
in journeying in Africa, the slave thought it hard to be troubled with
a sum of money. When Aristippus knew this he said, “Throw away what is
too much and carry what you can.”

As regards the value of culture, he replied to the question as to how
an educated man differs from an uneducated, that a stone would not
fit in with the other, _i.e._ the difference is as great as that of a
man from the stone. This is not quite wrong, for man is what he ought
to be as man, through culture; it is his second nature through which
he first enters into possession of that which he has by nature, and
thus for the first time he is Mind. We may not, however, think in this
way of our uncultured men, for with us such men through the whole of
their conditions, through customs and religion, partake of a source
of culture which places them far above those who do not live in such
conditions. Those who carry on other sciences and neglect Philosophy,
Aristippus compares to the wooers of Penelope in the Odyssey, who might
easily have Melantho and the other maidens, but who could not obtain
the queen.[161]

The teaching of Aristippus and his followers is very simple, for he
took the relation of consciousness to existence in its most superficial
and its earliest form, and expressed existence as Being as it is
immediately for consciousness, _i.e._ as feeling simply. A distinction
is now made between the true, the valid, what exists in and for itself,
and the practical and good, and what ought to be our end; but in
regard to both the theoretic and practical truth, the Cyrenaics make
sensation what determines. Hence their principle is more accurately
not the objective itself, but the relation of consciousness to the
objective; the truth is not what is in sensation the content, but is
itself sensation, it is not objective, but the objective subsists only
in it. “Thus the Cyrenaics say, sensations form the real criterion;
they alone can be known, and are infallible, but what produces feeling
is neither knowable nor infallible. Thus when we perceive a white and
sweet, we may assert this condition as ours with truth and certainty.
But that the causes of these feelings are themselves a white and sweet
object we cannot with certainty affirm. What these men say about ends
is also in harmony with this, for sensations also extend to ends. The
sensations are either pleasant or unpleasant or neither of the two.
Now they call the unpleasant feelings the bad, the end of which is
pain; the pleasant is the good, whose invariable end is happiness. Thus
feelings are the criteria of knowledge and the ends for action. We
live because we follow them from testimony (_ἐναργείᾳ_) received and
satisfaction (_εὑδοκήσει_) experienced, the former in accordance with
theoretic intuitions (_κατὰ τὰ ἄλλα πάθη_), and the latter with what
gives us pleasure.”[162] That is to say, as end, feeling is no longer
a promiscuous variety of sensuous affections (_τὰ ἄλλα πάθη_), but the
setting up of the Notion as the positive or negative relation to the
object of action, which is just the pleasant or the unpleasant.

Here we enter on a new sphere where two kinds of determinations
constitute the chief points of interest; these are everywhere treated
of in the many Socratic schools which were being formed, and though not
by Plato and Aristotle, they were specially so by the Stoics, the new
Academy, &c. That is to say, the one point is determination itself in
general, the criterion; and the second is what determination for the
subject is. And thus the idea of the wise man results—what the wise
do, who the wise are, &c. The reason that these two expressions are
now so prominent is one which rests on what has gone before. On the
one hand the main interest is to find a content for the good, for else
men may talk about it for years. This further definition of the good
is just the criterion. On the other hand the interest of the subject
appears, and that is the result of the revolution in the Greek mind
made by Socrates. When the religion, constitution, laws of a people,
are held in esteem, and when the individual members of a people are
one with them, the question of what the individual has to do on his
own account, will not be put. In a moralized, religious condition of
things we are likely to find the end of man in what is present, and
these morals, religion and laws are also present in him. When, on
the contrary, the individual exists no longer in the morality of his
people, no longer has his substantial being in the religion, laws,
&c., of his land, he no longer finds what he desires, and no longer
satisfies himself in his present. But if this discord has arisen, the
individual must immerse himself in himself, and there seek his end. Now
this is really the cause that the question of what is the essential
for the individual arises. After what end must he form himself and
after what strive? Thus an ideal for the individual is set up, and
this is the wise man: what was called the ideal of the wise man is
the individuality of self-consciousness which is conceived of as
universal essence. The point of view is the same when we now ask, What
can I know? What should I believe? What ought I to hope? What is the
highest interest of the subject? It is not what is truth, right, the
universal end of the world, for instead of asking about the science
of the implicitly and explicitly objective, the question is what is
true and right in as far as it is the insight and conviction of the
individual, his end and a mode of his existence? This talk about wise
men is universal amongst the Stoics, Epicureans, &c., but is devoid
of meaning. For the wise man is not in question, but the wisdom of
the universe, real reason. A third definition is that the universal
is the good; the real side of things is enjoyment and happiness as a
simple existence and immediate actuality. How then do the two agree?
The philosophic schools which now arise and their successors have set
forth the harmony of both determinations, which are the higher Being
and thought.


_b._ THEODORUS.

Of the later Cyrenaics, Theodorus must be mentioned first; he is
famous for having denied the existence of the gods, and being, for
this reason, banished from Athens. Such a fact can, however, have
no further interest or speculative significance, for the positive
gods which Theodorus denied, are themselves not any object of
speculative reason. He made himself remarkable besides for introducing
the universal more into the idea of that which was existence for
consciousness, for “he made joy and sorrow the end, but in such a
way that the former pertained to the understanding and the latter
to want of understanding. He defined the good as understanding and
justice, and the bad as the opposite; enjoyment and pain, however,
were indifferent.”[163] When we reach the consciousness that the
individual sensuous feeling, as it is immediately, is not to be
considered as real existence, it is then said that it must be accepted
with understanding; _i.e._ feeling, just as it is, is not reality.
For the sensuous generally, as sensation, theoretic or practical, is
something quite indeterminate, this or that unit; a criticism of this
unit is hence required, _i.e._ it must be considered in the form of
universality, and hence this last necessarily reappears. But this
advance on individuality is culture, which, through the limitation of
individual feelings and enjoyments, tries to make these harmonious,
even though it first of all only calculates as to that by which the
greater pleasure is to be found. Now, to the question as to which of
the many enjoyments which I, as a many-sided man, can enjoy, is the
one which is in completest harmony with me, and in which I thus find
the greatest satisfaction, it must be replied that the completest
harmony with me is only found in the accordance of my particular
existence and consciousness with my actual substantial Being. Theodorus
comprehended this as understanding and justice, in which we know where
to seek enjoyment. But when it is said that felicity must be sought
by reflection, we know that these are empty words and thoughtless
utterances. For the feeling in which felicity is contained, is in its
conception the individual, self-changing, without universality and
subsistence. Thus the universal, understanding, as an empty form,
adheres to a content quite incongruous with it; and thus Theodorus
distinguished the Good in its form, from the end as the Good in its
nature and content.


_c._ HEGESIAS.

It is remarkable that another Cyrenaic, Hegesias, recognized this
incongruity between sensation and universality, which last is opposed
to the individual, having what is agreeable as well as disagreeable
within itself. Because, on the whole, he took a firmer grasp of the
universal and gave it a larger place, there passed from him all
determination of individuality, and with it really the Cyrenaic
principle. It came to his knowledge that individual sensation is in
itself nothing; and, as he nevertheless made enjoyment his end, it
became to him the universal. But if enjoyment is the end, we must ask
about the content; if this content is investigated, we find every
content a particular which is not in conformity with the universal, and
thus falls into dialectic. Hegesias followed the Cyrenaic principle
as far as to this consequence of thought. That universal is contained
in an expression of his which we often enough hear echoed, “There is
no perfect happiness. The body is troubled with manifold pains, and
the soul suffers along with it; it is hence a matter of indifference
whether we choose life or death. In itself nothing is pleasant or
unpleasant.” That is to say, the criterion of being pleasant or
unpleasant, because its universality is removed, is thus itself made
quite indeterminate; and because it has no objective determinateness
in itself, it has become unmeaning; before the universal, which is
thus held secure, the sum of all determinations, the individuality of
consciousness as such, disappears, but with it even life itself as
being unreal. “The rarity, novelty, or excess of enjoyment begets in
some cases enjoyment and in others discontent. Poverty and riches have
no meaning for what is pleasant, since we see that the rich do not
enjoy pleasures more than the poor. Similarly, slavery and liberty,
noble and ignoble birth, fame and lack of fame, are equivalent as
regards pleasure. Only to a fool can living be a matter of moment; to
the wise man it is indifferent,” and he is consequently independent.
“The wise man acts only after his own will, and he considers none
other equally worthy. For even if he attain from others the greatest
benefits, this does not equal what he gives himself. Hegesias and
his friends also take away sensation, because it gives no sufficient
knowledge,” which really amounts to scepticism. “They say further that
we ought to do what we have reason to believe is best. The sinner
should be forgiven, for no one willingly sins, but is conquered by a
passion. The wise man does not hate, but instructs; his endeavours go
not so much to the attainment of good, as to the avoidance of evil, for
his aim is to live without trouble and sorrow.”[164] This universality,
which proceeds from the principle of the freedom of the individual
self-consciousness, Hegesias expressed as the condition of the perfect
indifference of the wise men—an indifference to everything into which
we shall see all philosophic systems of the kind going forth, and which
is a surrendering of all reality, the complete withdrawal of life into
itself. It is told that Hegesias, who lived in Alexandria, was not
allowed to teach the Ptolemies of the time, because he inspired many
of his hearers with such indifference to life that they took their
own.[165]


_d._ ANNICERIS.

We also hear of Anniceris and his followers, who, properly speaking,
departed from the distinctive character of the principle of the
Cyrenaic school, and thereby gave philosophic culture quite another
direction. It is said of them that “they acknowledged friendship in
common life, along with gratitude, honour to parents, and service for
one’s country. And although the wise man has, by so doing, to undergo
hardship and work, he can still be happy, even if he therein obtains
few pleasures. Friendships are not to be formed on utilitarian grounds
alone, but because of the good will that develops; and out of love to
friends, even burdens and difficulties are to be undertaken.”[166]
The universal, the theoretically speculative element in the school,
is thus lost; it sinks more into what is popular. This is then the
second direction which the Cyrenaic school has taken; the first was
the overstepping of the principle itself. A method of philosophizing
in morals arises, which later on prevailed with Cicero and the
Peripatetics of his time, but the interest has disappeared, so far as
any consistent system of thought is concerned.


3. THE CYNIC SCHOOL.

There is nothing particular to say of the Cynics, for they possess
but little Philosophy, and they did not bring what they had into a
scientific system; it was only later that their tenets were raised by
the Stoics into a philosophic discipline. With the Cynics, as with the
Cyrenaics, the point was to determine what should be the principle
for consciousness, both as regards its knowledge and its actions.
The Cynics also set up the Good as a universal end, and asked in
what, for individual men, it is to be sought. But if the Cyrenaic,
in accordance with his determinate principle, made the consciousness
of himself as an individual, or feeling, into real existence for
consciousness, the Cynic took this individuality, in as far as it has
the form of universality directly for me, _i.e._ in as far as I am a
free consciousness, indifferent to all individuality. Thus they are
opposed to the Cyrenaics for while to these feeling, which, because
it has to be determined through thought, is undoubtedly extended into
universality and perfect freedom, is made the principle, the former
begin with perfect freedom and independence as the property of man.
But since this is the same indifference of self-consciousness which
Hegesias expressed as real existence, the extremes in the Cynic and
Cyrenaic modes of thought destroy themselves by their own consequences,
and pass into one another. With the Cyrenaics there is the impulse to
turn things back into consciousness, according to which nothing is
real existence for me; the Cynics had also only to do with themselves,
and the individual self-consciousness was likewise principle. But
the Cynic, at least in the beginning, set up for the guidance of men
the principle of freedom and indifference, both in regard to thought
and actual life, as against all external individuality, particular
ends, needs, and enjoyments; so that culture not only sought after
indifference to these and independence within itself, as with the
Cyrenaics, but for express privation, and for the limitation of
needs to what is necessary and what nature demands. The Cynics thus
maintained as the content of the good, the greatest independence of
nature, _i.e._ the slightest possible necessities; this meant a rebound
from enjoyment, and from the pleasures of feeling. The negative is
here the determining; later on this opposition of Cynics and Cyrenaics
likewise appeared between Stoics and Epicureans. But the same negation
which the Cynics made their principle, had already shown itself in the
further development which the Cyrenaic philosophy had taken. The School
of the Cynics had no scientific weight; it only constitutes an element
which must necessarily appear in the knowledge of the universal, and
which is that consciousness must know itself in its individuality, as
free from all dependence on things and on enjoyment. To him who relies
upon riches or enjoyment such dependence is in fact real consciousness,
or his individuality is real existence. But the Cynics so enforced that
negative moment that they placed freedom in actual renunciation of
so-called superfluities; they only recognized this abstract unmoving
independence, which did not concern itself with enjoyment or the
interests of an ordinary life. But true freedom does not consist in
flying from enjoyment and the occupations which have as their concern
other men and other ends in life; but in the fact that consciousness,
though involved in all reality, stands above it and is free from it.


_a._ ANTISTHENES.

Antisthenes, an Athenian and friend of Socrates, was the first who
professed to be a Cynic. He lived at Athens, and taught in a gymnasium,
called Cynosarges, and he was called the “simple dog” (_ἁπλοκύων_).
His mother was Thracian, which was often made a reproach to him—a
reproach which to us would be unmeaning. He replied that the mother of
the gods was a Phrygian, and that the Athenians, who make so much of
their being native born, are in no way nobler than the native fish and
grasshoppers. He educated himself under Gorgias and Socrates, and went
daily from the Piræus to the city to hear Socrates. He wrote several
works, the titles of which Diogenes mentions, and, according to all
accounts, was esteemed a highly cultivated and upright man.[167]

Antisthenes’ principles are simple, because the content of his teaching
remains general; it is hence superfluous to say anything further
about it. He gives general rules, which consist of such excellent
maxims as that “virtue is self-sufficing, and requires nothing more
than a Socratic strength of character. The good is excellent, the bad
discreditable. Virtue consists of works, and does not require many
reasons or theories. The end of man is a virtuous life. The wise man
is contented with himself, for he possesses everything that others
seem to possess. His own virtue satisfies him; he is at home all over
the world. If he lacks fame, this is not to be regarded as an evil,
but as a good,” &c.[168] We here, once more, have the tedious talk
about the wise man, which by the Stoics, as also by the Epicureans,
was even more spun out and made more tedious. In this ideal, where the
determination of the subject is in question, its satisfaction is placed
in simplifying its needs. But when Antisthenes says that virtue does
not require reasons and theories, he forgets that he himself acquired,
through the cultivation of mind, its independence and the power of
renouncing all that men desire. We see directly that virtue has now
obtained another signification; it no longer is unconscious virtue,
like the simple virtue of a citizen of a free people, who fulfils
his duties to fatherland, place, and family, as these relationships
immediately require. The consciousness which has gone beyond itself
must, in order to become Mind, now lay hold of and comprehend all
reality, i.e. be conscious of it as its own. But conditions such as
are called by names like innocence or beauty of soul, are childish
conditions, which are certainly to be praised in their own place, but
from which man, because he is rational, must come forth, in order
to re-create himself from the sublated immediacy. The freedom and
independence of the Cynics, however, which consists only in lessening
to the utmost the burden imposed by wants, is abstract, because it, as
negative in character, has really to be a mere renunciation. Concrete
freedom consists in maintaining an indifferent attitude towards
necessities, not avoiding them, but in their satisfaction remaining
free, and abiding in morality and in participation in the moral life
of man. Abstract freedom, on the contrary, surrenders its morality,
because the individual withdraws into his subjectivity, and is
consequently an element of immorality.

Yet Antisthenes bears a high place in this Cynical philosophy. But
the attitude he adopted comes very near to that of rudeness, vulgarity
of conduct and shamelessness; and later on Cynicism passed into such.
Hence comes the continual mockery of, and the constant jokes against
the Cynics; and it is only their individual manners and individual
strength of character which makes them interesting. It is even told
of Antisthenes that he began to attribute value to external poverty
of life. Cynicism adopted a simple wardrobe—a thick stick of wild
olive, a ragged double mantle without any under garment, which served
as bed by night, a beggar’s sack for the food that was required,
and a cup with which to draw water.[169] This was the costume with
which these Cynics used to distinguish themselves. That on which
they placed highest value was the simplification of their needs; it
seems very plausible to say that this produces freedom. For needs
are certainly dependence upon nature, and this is antagonistic to
freedom of spirit; the reduction of that dependence to a minimum is
thus an idea which commends itself. But at the same time this minimum
is itself undetermined, and if such stress is laid on thus merely
following nature, it follows that too great a value is set on the needs
of nature and on the renunciation of others. This is what is also
evident in the monastic principle. The negative likewise contains an
affirmative bias towards what is renounced; and the renunciation and
the importance of what is renounced is thus made too marked. Socrates
hence declares the clothing of the Cynics to be vanity. For “when
Antisthenes turned outside a hole in his cloak, Socrates said to him,
I see thy vanity through the hole in thy cloak.”[170] Clothing is not
a thing of rational import, but is regulated through needs that arise
of themselves. In the North the clothing must be different from that in
Central Africa; and in winter we do not wear cotton garments. Anything
further is meaningless, and is left to chance and to opinion; in modern
times, for instance, old-fashioned clothing had a meaning in relation
to patriotism. The cut of my coat is decided by fashion, and the tailor
sees to this; it is not my business to invent it, for mercifully others
have done so for me. This dependence on custom and opinion is certainly
better than were it to be on nature. But it is not essential that men
should direct their understanding to this; indifference is the point of
view which must reign, since the thing itself is undoubtedly perfectly
indifferent. Men are proud that they can distinguish themselves in
this, and try to make a fuss about it, but it is folly to set oneself
against the fashion. In this matter I must hence not decide myself, nor
may I draw it within the radius of my interests, but simply do what is
expected of me.


_b._ DIOGENES.

Diogenes of Sinope, the best known Cynic, distinguished himself even
more than Antisthenes by the life he led, as also by his biting and
often clever hits, and bitter and sarcastic retorts; but he likewise
received replies which were often aimed as well. He is called the Dog,
just as Aristippus was called by him the royal Dog, for Diogenes bore
the same relation to idle boys as Aristippus did to kings. Diogenes
is only famed for his manner of life; with him, as with the moderns,
Cynicism came to signify more a mode of living than a philosophy. He
confined himself to the barest necessities, and tried to make fun of
others who did not think as he, and who laughed at his ways. That he
threw away his cup when he saw a boy drinking out of his hands is well
known. To have no wants, said Diogenes, is divine; to have as few as
possible is to come nearest to the divine. He lived in all sorts of
places, in the streets of Athens, in the market in tubs; and he usually
resided and slept in Jupiter’s Stoa in Athens; he hence remarked that
the Athenians had built him a splendid place of residence.[171] Thus
the Cynics thought not only of dress, but also of other wants. But a
mode of life such as that followed by the Cynics, which professed to
be a result of culture, is really conditioned by the culture of the
mind. The Cynics were not anchorites; their consciousness was still
essentially related to other consciousness. Antisthenes and Diogenes
lived in Athens, and could only exist there. But in culture the mind
is also directed to the most manifold needs, and to the methods of
satisfying these. In more recent times the needs have much increased,
and hence a division of the general wants into many particular wants
and modes of satisfaction has arisen; this is the function of the
activity of the understanding, and in its application luxury has a
place. We may declaim against the morality of this, but in a State all
talents, natural inclinations and customs must have free scope and be
brought into exercise, and every individual may take what part he will,
only he must in the main make for the universal. Thus the chief point
is to place no greater value on such matters than what is demanded, or
generally, to place no importance either on possessing or dispensing
with them.

Of Diogenes we have only anecdotes to relate. In a voyage to Ægina he
fell into the hands of sea-robbers, and was to be sold as a slave in
Crete. Being asked what he understood, he replied, “To command men,”
and told the herald to call out, “Who will buy a ruler?” A certain
Xeniades of Corinth bought him, and he instructed his sons.

There are very many stories told of his residence in Athens. There he
presented a contrast in his rudeness and disdainfulness to Aristippus’
fawning philosophy. Aristippus set no value on his enjoyments any more
than on his wants, but Diogenes did so on his poverty. Diogenes was
once washing his greens when Aristippus passed by, and he called out,
“If you knew how to wash your greens yourself, you would not run after
kings.” Aristippus replied very aptly, “If you knew how to associate
with men, you would not wash greens.” In Plato’s house he once walked
on the beautiful carpets with muddy feet, saying, “I tread on the pride
of Plato.” “Yes, but with another pride,” replied Plato, as pointedly.
When Diogenes stood wet through with rain, and the bystanders pitied
him, Plato said, “If you wish to compassionate him, just go away. His
vanity is in showing himself off and exciting surprise; it is what
made him act in this way, and the reason would not exist if he were
left alone.” Once when he got a thrashing, as anecdotes often tell, he
laid a large plaster on his wounds, and wrote on it the names of those
who had struck him in order that they might be blamed of all. When
youths standing by him said, “We are afraid that you will bite us,” he
replied, “Don’t mind, a dog never eats turnips.” At a feast a guest
threw bones to him like a dog, and he went up to him and behaved to him
like a dog. He gave a good answer to a tyrant who asked him from what
metal statues should be cast: “From the metal from which the statues of
Harmodius and Aristogiton were cast.” He tried to eat raw meat, which
did not, however, agree with him; he could not digest it, and died at a
very great age, as he lived—in the streets.[172]


_c._ LATER CYNICS.

Antisthenes and Diogenes, as already mentioned, were men of great
culture. The succeeding Cynics are not any the less conspicuous by
their exceeding shamelessness, but they were, generally speaking,
nothing more than swinish beggars, who found their satisfaction in the
insolence which they showed to others. They are worthy of no further
consideration in Philosophy, and they deserve in its full the name of
dogs, which was early given to them; for the dog is a shameless animal.
Crates, of Thebes, and Hipparchia, a Cynic, celebrated their nuptials
in the public market.[173] This independence of which the Cynics
boasted, is really subjection, for while every other sphere of active
life contains the affirmative element of free intelligence, this means
the denying oneself the sphere in which the element of freedom can be
enjoyed.




                              FOOTNOTES:

[1] Zur Philosophie und Geschichte. Pt. V. pp. 184—186. (Edition of
1828, in 12 vols.)

[2] S. Marheineke: “Lehrbuch des Christlichen Glaubens und Lebens.”
Berlin, 1823. § 133, 134.

[3] “_Meinung ist mein._”

[4] Cf. Hegels Werke, vol. VI. § 13, pp. 21, 22.

[5] Flatt: De Theismo Thaleti Milesio abjudicando. Tub. 1785. 4.

[6] Grundzüge des gegenwärtigen Zeitalters, pp. 211, 212; cf. Anweisung
zum Seligen Leben, pp. 178, 348.

[7] Sanchuniathonis Fragm. ed. Rich. Cumberland, Lond. 1720, 8; German
by J. P. Kassel, Magdeburg, 1755, 8, pp. 1-4.

[8] That is to say in the Lectures preceding these, delivered in the
Winter Session 1825—1826.

[9] Confucius, Sinarum philosophus, s. scientia Sinensis, latine
exposita studio et opera Prosperi Juonetta, Herdtrich, Rougemont,
Couplet, PP. S. J., Paris, 1687, fol.

[10] Mémoires concernant les Chinois (Paris, 1776, sqq.), Vol. II., pp.
1-361. Antiquité des Chinois, par le Père Amiot, pp. 20, 54, &c.

[11] Die Philosophie im Fortgang der Weltgeschichte, Vol. I., p. 157.

[12] Cf. Windischmann, ibid., p. 125.

[13] Mémoire sur la vie et les opinions de Lao-Tseu, par Abel Rémusat
(Paris, 1823), p. 18 sqq.; Extrait d’une lettre de Mr. Amiot, 16
Octobre, 1787, de Peking (Mémoires concernant les Chinois, T. xv.), p.
208, sqq.

[14] Dr. Legge states in “The Religions of China” that Tâo was not
the name of a person, but of a concept or idea. Of the English
terms most suitable for it, he suggests the Way in the sense of
Method.—[Translator’s note.]

[15] Abel Rémusat, l.c. p. 31, seq.; Lettre sur les caractères des
Chinois (Mémoires concernant les Chinois, Tome 1) p. 299, seq.

[16] Rémusat thought that he discovered in these three syllables the
word Jehovah.—[Translator’s note.]

[17] Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland, Vol. I., Part I. London, 1824, pp. 19-43. (II., on the
Philosophy of the Hindus, Part I., by Henry Thomas Colebrooke, read
June 21, 1823).

[18] Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. i., Part I., pp.
92—118. (VII. Essay on the Philosophy of the Hindus, Part II., by Henry
Thomas Colebrooke.)

[19] Brucker, Hist. Phil. T. I. p. 460; Plutarch, De plac. phil. I. 3.

[20] Herod. II. 20; Senec. Quæst. natur. IV. 2; Diog. Laert. I. 37.

[21] Diog. Laert. 1. § 34, et Menag. ad. h. 1.

[22] Cf. Ritter: Geschichte der Ionischen Philosophie, p. 15.

[23] Plutarch, De plac. phil. I. 3; Cicero, De Natura Deorum, I. 10.
Aristot. Phys. III. 4.

[24] Cf. Aristot. Phys. I. 4.

[25] Simplicius ad Arist. Phys. (I. 2), p. 5, 6.

[26] Stobæi Eclog. Physic. c. 11., p. 294, ed. Heeren.

[27] Simplicius ad Phys. Arist. p. 6, b.

[28] Cf. Plutarch Quæst. convival. VIII. 8.

[29] Diog. Laert. I. 119; Menagius ad h. 1.

[30] In irrisione gentilium, c. 12 (citante Fabricio ad Sext. Emp. Hyp.
Pyrrh. III. 4, § 30).

[31] Cf. Porphyr. De vita Pythag., §§ 14, 15; et Ritterhus, ad. h. I.

[32] Cf. Porphyr. De vita Pyth. 6, Iamblich. De vita Pyth. XXIX. 158.

[33] Diog. Laert. I. 12; VIII. 8; Iamblich. VIII. 44; XII. 58.

[34] Porphyr. De vita Pyth. 25, 21, 22; Iamblich. De vita Pyth. 36;
VII. 33, 34; XXXII. 220-222.

[35] Diog. Laert. VIII. 11, Porphyr., 18-20; Iamblich. II. 9, 10, XXIV.
108, 109; Menag. et Casaub. ad Diog. Laert. VIII. 19.

[36] Porphyr. 37; Iamblich. XVII. 71-74; XVIII. 80-82; XXVIII. 150; XX.
94, 95; Diog. Laert. VIII. 10.

[37] Iamblich. XXI. 100; XXIX. 165; Diog. Laert. VIII. 22; Porphyr. 40.

[38] Porphyr. 32-34; Iamblich. XXIX. 163, 164; XX. 96; XXI. 97; XXIV.
107; Diog. Laert. VIII. 19, 21, 39.

[39] Diog. Laert., VIII. 39, 40; Iamblich. XXXV. 248-264; Porphyrius,
54-59; Anonym. De vita Pyth. (apud Photium), 2.

[40] Cf. Platon. Timæum, p. 20, Steph. (p. 8, ed. Bekk.).

[41] Sext. Pyrrh. Hyp. III. 18, § 152; adv. Math. X. § 250, 251.

[42] Mathem. c. 5, p. 30, ed. Bullialdi: cf. Aristoxen. ap. Stob. Ecl.
Phys. 2, p. 16.

[43] Gnomicorum poetarum opera: Vol. I. Pythagoreorum aureum carmen,
ed. Glandorf Fragm. I. v. 45-48; Sext. Empir. adv. Math. IV. § 2, et
Fabric. ad h. 1.

[44] Burney points out the fallacy of this statement in his History of
Music. [Translator’s note.]

[45] Sext. Empiricus Pyrrh. Hyp. III. 18, § 155; adv. Math. IV. §§ 6,
7; VII. §§ 95-97; X. § 283.

[46] Diog. Laert. VIII. §§ 4, 5, 14; Porphyrius, §§ 26, 27; Iamblichus,
c. XIV. § 63. (Homer’s Iliad XVI. v. 806-808; XVII. v. 45, seq.).

[47] Gnomicorum poëtarum opera, Vol. I. Pyth. aureum carmen, ed.
Glandorf. Fragm. I. v. 1-4.

[48] Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. Hyp. I. 33, § 225; Simpl. ad Phys. Arist. pp.
5, 6; Plut. de plac. philos. II. 4.

[49] That Xenophanes is here meant is shown from the titles of the
collected Becker manuscripts, as also from comparing this passage with
the verses remaining to us, which are by Xenophanes, though they were
earlier ascribed to Zeno; this was done by Hegel when he did not, as
in many lectures, take the Eleatic passages together. The editor found
a justification in this for placing the passage in its proper place.
[Note by editor.]

[50] Adv. Math. VII. 47-52; 110, 111; VIII. 326; Pyrrh. Hyp. II. 4, §
18.

[51] Sext. Empir. adv. Math. X. 313, 314; Simplic. in Phys. Arist., p.
41.

[52] Platon. Theaet. p. 183. Steph. (p. 263, ed. Bekk.); Sophist, p.
217 (p. 127).

[53] Diog. Laert. IX. 23; et Casaubonus ad. h. 1.

[54] Plutarch, De plac. phil. II. 7; Euseb. XV. 38; Stob. Ecl. Phys. c.
23, p. 482-484; Simplicius in Arist. Phys. p. 9 a, 7 b; Arist. Met. I.
4; Brandis Comment. Eleat. p. 162.

[55] De Sensu, p. 1, ed. Steph. 1557 (citante Fülleborn, p. 92).

[56] This obscure clause has been differently interpreted. Dr.
Hutchison Stirling, in his annotations on Schwegler’s “History
of Philosophy,” says: “Zeller accepts (and Hegel, by quoting and
translating the whole passage, already countenanced him in advance) the
equivalent of Theophrastus for _τὸ πλέον, τὸ ὑπέρβαλλον_ namely, and
interprets the clause itself thus:—‘The preponderating element of the
two is thought occasions and determines the ideas;’ that is as is the
preponderating element (the warm or the cold) so is the state of mind.
In short, _the more is the thought_ is the linguistic equivalent of the
time for _according to the more is the thought_.” [Translator’s note.]

[57] As a matter of fact, since a comparison of this reasoning with
the fragments of Melissus which Simplicius (in Arist. Physica and De
Cœlo) has retained, places this conjecture beyond doubt, the editor is
constrained to place it here, although Hegel, when he dealt with the
Eleatics separately, put it under the heading of Xenophanes. [Note by
Editor.]

[58] Cf. Plat. Parmenid. pp. 126, 127, Steph. (pp. 3—5 Bekk.).

[59] Diog. Laert. IX. 26, 27, et Menag. ad h. 1. Valer. Max. III. 3
ext. 2, 3.

[60] Diog. Laert. VI. 39, Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. Hyp. III. 8, § 66.

[61] Plat. Cratyl. p. 402, Steph. (p. 42, Bekk.); Aristot. Met. I. 6,
XIII. 4.

[62] Johannes Philoponus ad Aristot. de Anima (I. 2) fol. 4 a.

[63] Clemens Alex.: Stromata V. 14, p. 712, ed. Pott. (cit. Steph.
Poës. phil. p. 131).

[64] Cf. Stobaei Ecl. Phys. 22, p. 454.

[65] Diog. Laërt. IX. 7; Simplic. ad Arist. Phys. p. 6; Stob. Eclog.
Phys. c. 3, p. 58-60.

[66] Plutarch. de plac. phil. I. 28.

[67] Heraclides; Allegoriæ Homericæ, pp. 442, 443, ed. Gale.

[68] In writing of them Hegel very seldom separates these two
philosophers, though he does so in the Jena edition.

[69] See Hegel’s “Werke,” Vol. III. p 181, et seq.

[70] Ib. p. 112.

[71] Plutarch, de plac. phil. I., 26; Stobæi Ecl. Phys. 20, p. 394.
(Tennemann, Vol. I. p. 278.)

[72] Empedocles Agrigentinus. De vita et philosophia ejus exposuit,
carminum reliquias ex antiquis scriptoribus collegit, recensuit,
illustravit, præfationem et indices adjecit Magister Frid. Guil. Sturz,
Lipsiæ, 1805.

[73] Empedoclis et Parmenidis fragmenta, &c., restituta et illustrata
ab Amadeo Peyron.

[74] Cf. Plat. Parmenid. p. 127 (p. 4).

[75] Metaph. I. 3 and 8; De gener. et corrupt. I. 1.

[76] Adv. Math. VII. 120; IX. 10; X. 317.

[77] Arist. De anim. I. 2; Fabricius ad Sext. adv. Math. VII. 92, p.
389, not. T; Sextus adv. Math. I. 303; VII. 121.

[78] Hegel certainly used in his lectures, to follow the usual
order, and treat Empedocles before the Atomists. But since, in the
course of his treatment of them, he always connected the Atomists
with the Eleatics and Heraclitus, and took Empedocles, in so far as
he anticipated design, as the forerunner of Anaxagoras, the present
transposition is sufficiently justified. If we further consider that
Empedocles swayed to and fro between the One of Heraclitus and the
Many of Leucippus, without, like them, adhering to either of these
one-sided determinations, it is clear that both moments are assumptions
through whose variations he opened a way for the Anaxagorean conception
of end, which, by comprehending them, is the essential unity from
which proceeds the manifold of phenomena, as from their immanent
source.—[Note by Editor.]

[79] Anaxagoræ Clazomenii fragmenta, quæ supersunt omnia, edita ab E.
Schaubach, Lipsiæ, 1827.

[80] Plin. Hist. Nat. VII. 53; Brucker, T. I. pp. 493, 494, not.

[81] Diog. Laert. II. 16; Plutarch in Lysandro, 12.

[82] Diog. Laert. II., 12-14; Plutarch, in Pericle, c. 32.

[83] Cf. Aristot. Phys. VIII. 5; Met. XII. 10.

[84] Cf. Sext. Empiric. Hypotyp Pyrrh. III. 4, § 33.

[85] Diog. Laert. II. 6; Sext. Emp. adv. Math. IX. 6; Arist. Phys.
VIII. 1.

[86] Platonis Protagoras, pp. 310-314, Steph. (pp. 151-159, Bekk.).

[87] Plat. Protag., pp. 314-317 (pp. 159-164).

[88] Plat. Protag. pp. 318-320 (pp. 166-170).

[89] Plat. Protag. pp. 320-323 (pp. 170-176).

[90] Ibid. pp. 323, 324 (pp. 176-178).

[91] Plat. Protag. pp. 324-328 (pp. 178-184.)

[92] Plat. Meno., p. 91 (p. 371).

[93] Plat. Gorg. pp. 452 et 457 (pp. 15 et 24).

[94] Plat. Euthydem. pp. 283, 284 (pp. 416-418).

[95] Ibid. p. 298 (p. 446).

[96] Xenoph. Memorab. II. c. 1, § 21 _seq._

[97] Diog. Laert. IX. 50.

[98] Ibid. 54.

[99] Plat. Protag. p. 338 fin. (p. 204).

[100] Plutarch in Pericle, c. 36.

[101] Diog. Laërt. IX. 51, 52; 55, 56 (Sext. Empir. adv. Math. IX. 56).

[102] Plat. Theætet. p. 152 (p. 195); Sext. Emp. Pyrrh. Hyp. I, c. 32,
§ 216.

[103] Sext. Empir. adv. Math. VII. 388, 60; Plat. Theætet. p. 152. (p.
195-197).

[104] Plat. Theætet. p. 154 (p. 201).

[105] Plat. Theæt. pp. 153, 154 (pp. 199, 200); pp. 156, 157 (pp.
204-206); pp. 158-160 (pp. 208-213).

[106] Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. Hyp. I. c. 32, §§ 217-219.

[107] Diodorus Siculus: XII. p. 106 (ed. Wesseling).

[108] Sext. Empir. adv. Math. VII. 66.

[109] Ibid. 67.

[110] Aristotel. de Xenophane, Zenone et Gorgia, c. 5.

[111] Sext. Empir. adv. Math. VII. 68-70.

[112] Ibid. 71.

[113] Sext. Empir. adv. Math. VII. 73, 74.

[114] Ibid. 75, 76.

[115] Sext. Empir. adv. Math. VII. 77-80.

[116] Sext. Empir. adv. Math. VII. 83, 84.

[117] The distinction between these two words is a very important
one. Schwegler, in explaining Hegel’s position in his “History of
Philosophy,” states that Hegel asserts that Socrates set _Moralität_,
the subjective morality of individual conscience, in the place of
_Sittlichkeit_, “the spontaneous, natural, half-unconscious (almost
instinctive) virtue that rests in obedience to established custom
(use and wont, natural objective law, that is at bottom, according to
Hegel, rational, though not yet subjectively cleared, perhaps, into
its rational principles).” As Dr. Stirling says in his Annotations
to the same work (p. 394), “There is a period in the history of the
State when people live in tradition; that is a period of unreflected
_Sittlichkeit_, or natural observance. Then there comes a time when the
observances are questioned, and when the right or truth they involve
is reflected into the subject. This is a period of Aufklärung, and for
_Sittlichkeit_ there is substituted _Moralität_, subjective morality:
the subject will approve nought but what he finds inwardly true to
himself, to his conscience.”—[TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.]

[118] Diog. Laert. II, 44 (cf. Menag. ad h. 1); 18-20, 22.

[119] Diog. Laert. II. 22, 23; Plat. Apol. Socr. p. 28 (p. 113).

[120] Diog. Laert. II. 24; Xenoph. Memorab. I. c. 1, § 18; Plat. Apol.
Socrat. p. 32 (pp. 120-122); Epist. VII. pp. 324, 325 (p. 429).

[121] Plat. Convivium, pp. 212, 176, 213, 214, 223 (pp. 447, 376-378,
449, 450, 468, 469).

[122] Xenoph. Memorab. I. c. 1, § 10.

[123] Xenoph. Memorab. I. c. 1, § 11-16; Aristot. Metaph. I. 6.

[124] Aristot. Metaph. XIII. 4

[125] From the Lectures of the winter 1825-1826.—(NOTE BY EDITOR.)

[126] Platonis Theætetus, p. 210 (p. 322).

[127] Plat. Protag. p. 349 (pp. 224, 225); pp. 360, 361 (pp. 245-247).

[128] Xenoph. Memorab. IV. c. 2, §§ 11-17.

[129] Xenoph. Memorab. IV. c. 1, § 1; c. 2, § 40.

[130] Cf. Xenoph. Memorab. I. c. 2, §§ 12-16, sqq.

[131] Herodot. IX. 33, seq.

[132] Xenoph. Apologia Socrat. § 10; Memorab. I. c. 1, § 1 Plat.
Apologia Socrat. p. 24 (p. 104).

[133] Apologia Socrat. §§ 11—13; Memorab. I. c. 1, §§ 2—6; 19.

[134] Plat. Apol. Socrat. p. 26 (108, 109).

[135] Apologia Socrat. § 14 (cf. Memorab. I. c. 1, § 17).

[136] Plato. Apol. Socrat. p. 21 (p. 97).

[137] Xenoph. Apol. Socrat. § 14.

[138] Xenoph. Apol. Socrat. §§ 16—19; Memorab. I. c. 2, §§ 1—8.

[139] Xenoph. Apol. Socrat. § 20; cf. Memorab. I. c. 2, § 49 seq.

[140] Xenoph. Apol. Socrat. §§ 20, 21; Memorab. I. c. 2, §§ 51—55;
Plat. Apol. Socrat. pp. 24—26 (pp. 103—107).

[141] Meier und Schömann: Der Attische Process, pp. 173-177.

[142] Diog. Laërt. II. 106.

[143] Diog. Laërt. VI. 24.

[144] Cicer. Acad. Quæst. II. 42.

[145] Menag. ad Diog. Laërt. II. 106; Aul. Gellius: Noct. Atticæ, VI.
10.

[146] Plutarch. de fraterno amore, p. 489, D. (ed. Xyl.); Stobæi
Sermones: LXXXIV. 15 (T. III. p. 160, ed. Gaisford); Brucker. Hist.
Crit. Philos. T. I. p. 611.

[147] Diog. Laërt. II. 106.

[148] Diog. Laërt. II. 108.

[149] Diog. Laërt. II. 109.

[150] Diog. Laërt. II. 111, 112.

[151] Diog. Laërt. II. 108; Cicero, Acad. Quæst. IV. 29; De divinat.
II. 4.

[152] Diog. Laërt. VII. 196.

[153] Athenæus IX. p. 401 (ed. Casaubon, 1597); Suidas, s. v. Φιλητᾶς,
T. III. p. 600; Menag. ad Diog. Laërt. II. 108.

[154] Diog. Laërt. II. 135.

[155] Diog. Laërt. II. 108; Bruckeri Hist. Crit. Phil. T. I. p. 613.

[156] Diog. Laërt. II. 108; Cicer. Acad. Quæst. IV. 29; Bruck. Hist.
Crit. Philos. T. I. p. 614, not. s.

[157] Aristoteles: De Soph. Elench. c. 14; Buhle ad h. 1. argumentum,
p. 512.

[158] Diog. Laërt. II. 113, 115, 119.

[159] Plutarch, advers. Coloten. c. 22, 23, pp. 1119, 1120, ed. Xyl.
pp. 174-176, Vol. XIV. ed. Hutten.

[160] Diog. Laërt. II. 65; Tennemann, Vol. II. p. 103: Bruck. Hist.
Crit. Philos. T. I. p. 584, seq.

[161] Diog. Laërt. II. 66, 67, 72, 77 (Horat. Serm. II. 3, v. 101),
79-81.

[162] Sext. Empir. adv. Math. VII. 191, 199, 200.

[163] Diog. Laërt. II. 97, 98 (101, 102).

[164] Diog. Laërt. II. 93-95.

[165] Cic. Tusc. Quest. I. 34; Val. Max. VIII. 9.

[166] Diog. Laërt. II. 96, 97.

[167] Diog. Laërt. VI. 13, 1, 2, 15-18.

[168] Diog. Laërt. VI. 11, 12 (104).

[169] Diog. Laërt. VI. 13, 6, 22, 37; Tennemann, Vol. II. p. 89.

[170] Diog. Laërt. VI. 8; II. 36.

[171] Diog. Laërt. VI. 74, 61, 37, 105, 22.

[172] Diog. Laërt. VI. 29, 30 (74); II. 68; VI. 26, 41, 33, 45, 46, 50,
76, 77 (34).

[173] Diog. Laërt. VI. 85, 96, 97.




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE:

—Obvious print and punctuation errors were corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hegel's Lectures on the History of
Philosophy: Volume One (of 3), by Georg Wilhelm Hegel

