CHAPTER VII.

_SHOWS THE FITNESS OF MY PUNISHMENT._

 "But there will come another era, when it shall be light, and when man
 shall awaken from his lofty dreams and find _his dreams still there,
 and that nothing is gone save his sleep_."--Jean Paul.--_Preface to
 "Hesperus."_


The following paragraph is taken from a diary which I kept before my
decease. I will explain later on my reason for giving the extract
here:--

"It has been said that no man can realize to the full the certainty of
his own dissolution; that each acknowledges the inevitability of death
in regard to others and to the race, but cherishes a secret conviction
that he himself will, through some strange and unforeseen circumstance,
prove the solitary exception.

"Of the truth of this assertion as a general rule, I cannot of
course speak, but I know that I at least have never so thought. On
the contrary, there are moments when death (by which I do not mean
annihilation, but the dying into life) seems the only certainty there
is before me, all else being shadowy and unreal. I am a child of
eternity dreaming the dream of time, and even while I dream I am half
awake and know that I am but dreaming. Life is to me--not poetically
only, but positively--a dream and unsubstantial. The world is a dream,
things and persons are but dreams, and exist for me only in my thoughts
of them. My self-consciousness becomes awake, and I look in and down
upon myself with a wonder as fresh and novel as if the mystery of my
own existence had never caused me wonder or surprise before. I stretch
out my hand, as an infant does, and open and shut the fingers, and ask
myself who I am and what I am doing here. I tell myself my name, and I
see that the hand, the body, and the clothes that I look down upon have
a strangely familiar aspect, but the name conveys no meaning to me, the
familiarity is but the familiarity of an oft-dreamed dream, and is, I
know, but the sign that I am still dreaming.

"I look out each day upon the face of the earth with as much wonder and
surprise as if I were some new-comer thereon, and were opening my eyes
upon it for the first and only time. Upon London and the life of it,
though I passed half my days within the sound of St. Paul's, I gaze and
wonder as upon some dream-pageant, with ever-increasing awe. I look
up upon that ample dome, large-looming, and brooding like a Presence
athwart the skies, until its surroundings and itself and those who come
and go in the streets are to me as unsubstantial as 'a city visioned in
a dream.'

"So supremely conscious am I at such times that

                            'We are such stuff
  As dreams are made of, and our little life
  Is rounded with a sleep,'

that were I, while this mood is on me, to open my eyes one morning and
find that all this present world and its dream-creations had passed
away for ever, there would hardly stir in my heart one momentary
thrill of surprise, for I should but sigh and say, 'Ah, then, at last
it has come, and now I am asleep no longer!'

"What the awakened life for which I am waiting will be like, I know not
consciously, but something there is within me that does know, and that
has a dumb inarticulate knowledge of it, like the memory of a dream
which we have not all forgotten, yet cannot all recall. That it will
be _Life_, I am sure--a life which though orbing in ampler cycle and
vaster sweep than this life, is yet on one and the same plane with it,
and in no way separate and distinct. Nay, even now this dream-world
would seem to be surrounded and insphered by the waking one, even as
'time is but a parenthesis in eternity;' for there are realities in
this unreal existence, flowers and faces, love and poetry, and the
morning and evening skies, which have to me no part in this perishable
world, but which 'torment me ever with invitations to their own
inaccessible home.'"

I have transcribed this extract from my earlier diary, not because I
think there is anything in it worth preservation, but because I believe
it very aptly illustrates the suitability of the punishment meted out
to me in hell to my own peculiar temperament. I was one of those who
lived only in thought. "The world is a dream," I said, "things and
persons are but dreams, and exist for me only in my thought of them."
Hence to make my punishment a _thought_, to confront me with the memory
of my crime and of its consequences, and to leave me thus hell-haunted
by the cry of an awakened conscience, was to inflict a torment upon me
a thousand-fold more terrible than material pain.

To those, however, who think with Heine, that "mental torture is more
easily to be endured than physical pain," I have a word to say. When I
was in hell, I saw there the souls of men and women whom I had known in
life, and I learnt something of the nature of their sufferings. Unlike
my own, that punishment was, in many cases, not mental but physical;
and to those who are incapable of realizing what agony a thought
can bring, let me say that hell has too its bodily punishment, and
punishment from which there is no escape.




[Illustration]




