CHAPTER XIV.

_HOPE._


At last there came a time, even in hell, when the burden of my sin lay
so heavily upon me, that I felt I could bear it no longer, and that if
succour there came none, the very soul of me must wither away and die.
It was not that I wanted to evade the punishment of my crime, for I
was willing and wished to undergo it to the uttermost. No, that which
was so terrible to me was the thought that not all the sufferings of
eternity could avail to wipe away the awful stain upon my spirit, or
to undo the evil which I had brought upon the woman I had ruined. Of
myself and of my future, save for the continual crying-out of my soul
after its lost purity, I scarcely cared now to think. It was of Dorothy
that my heart was full; it was for Dorothy that I never ceased to
sorrow, to lament, and--sinner, though I was--to pray. I saw then the
inevitable consequences of the wrong I had done her pictured forth in
all their horror. I saw her, with the sense of her sin as yet but fresh
upon her, shrinking from every glance, and fancying that she read the
knowledge of her guilt in every eye. I saw her, "not knowing where to
turn for refuge from swiftly-advancing shame, and understanding no more
of this life of ours than a foolish lost lamb wandering farther and
farther in the nightfall," stealing stealthily forth at dusk to hide
herself from her fellow-creatures.

I saw her, when the secret of her shame could no longer be concealed,
recoiling in mute terror from the glance of coarse admiration on the
faces of sensual men, or shrinking in quivering agony from the look
of curious scorn in the eyes of maids and mothers, who drew aside
their skirts as she passed them, as if fearful of being contaminated
by her touch. And then--driven out from their midst by the very
Christian women who should have been the first to have held out a hand
to save her--I saw her turn away with a heart hardened into brazen
indifference, and plunge headlong into a bottomless gulf of ignominy
and sin.

Nor did the vision pass from me until, out of that seething vortex
of lust and infamy, I saw arise the black phantom of an immortal
soul which was lost for ever, crying out unto God and His Christ for
judgment upon the seducer!

       *       *       *       *       *

As these hideous spectres of the past arose again before me, I fell to
the ground, and shrieked out under the burden of my sin, as only he can
shriek who is torn by hell-torture and despair. But even as I shrieked,
I felt that burden lifted and borne away from me, and then I saw, as in
a vision, One kneeling in prayer. And I, who had cried out that I could
bear the burden of my sin no longer, saw that upon Him was laid, not
only my sin, but the sins of the whole world, and that He stooped of
His own accord to receive them. And as I looked upon the Divine dignity
of that agonized form--forsaken of His Father that we might never be
forsaken, and bowed down under a burden, compared to which, all the
horrors of hell were but as the passing phantom of a pain--I saw great
beads of blood break out like sweat upon His brow, and I heard wrung
from Him a cry of such unutterable anguish as never before rose from
human lips. And at that cry the vision passed, and I awoke to find
myself in hell once more, but in my heart there was a stirring as of
the wings of hope--the hope which I had deemed dead to me for ever.

_Could_ it be--O God of mercy! was it possible that even now it might
not be too late?--that there was indeed One who could make my sin as
though it had never been?--who of His great love for Dorothy and for
me, would bear it and its consequences as His own burden? and who by
the cleansing power of the blood which He had shed upon the cross,
could wash her soul and mine whiter than the whiteness of snow?

But to this hope there succeeded a moment when the agonized thought:
"How if there be no Christ?" leapt out at me, like the darkness which
looms but the blacker for the lightning-flash; a moment when hell gat
hold on me again, and a thousand gibbering devils arose to shriek in my
ear: "And though there be a Christ, is it not now too late?"

I reeled at that cry, and the darkness seemed once more to close in
around. A horde of hideous thoughts, the very spawn of hell, swarmed
like vermin in my mind; there was the breath as of a host of contending
fiends upon my face; a hundred hungry hands laid hold on me, and strove
to drag me down and down as to a bottomless pit; but with a great cry
to God, I flung the foul things from me; and battling, beating, like a
drowning man for breath, I fell at the feet of a woman, white-veiled,
and clad in robes like the morning, whose hand it was that had plucked
me from the abyss in which I lay.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV.

_HEAVEN._


It seemed to me then that I fell into a sleep, deep, and sweet, and
restful, in which I dreamt that I was a child lying upon the bosom of
God. I remember that, as I lay, I stirred in my slumber, and, raising
myself, chanced in opening my eyes to look below, but that with a
cry of terror I turned and clung like a frighted babe to my Father's
breast,--for beneath me and afar, there yet yawned the mouth of hell,
from which, ever and anon, rolled dense clouds of hot and hissing
smoke, that seemed to twist and writhe like souls in agony, and which
in colour were like unto the colour of blood.

And I thought that, seeing my fear, my Father stooped to me as a mother
stoops to comfort her frightened babe, and that as He stooped I beheld
His face, and knew it for the face of the Lord Jesus, and that He bade
me be of good cheer, "for underneath thee are the everlasting arms."

As He so spake I awoke, and saw that she whose hand had plucked me out
of the abyss of horror into which I had fallen, yet knelt beside me in
tender ministry and prayer, and that she was singing a hymn softly to
herself whereof I heard only a verse:--

  "I know not where His islands lift
    Their fronded palms in air;
  I only know I cannot drift
    Beyond His love and care."

She ceased, and I arose, but ere I had time to question her, I
was conscious of a sudden stillness, like the hush which follows
benediction after prayer. "Don't you hear it?" she whispered eagerly,
as with upraised hand enjoining silence, she turned her head as if to
catch some far-off murmur, "Don't you hear it? They are praying for you
at home: kneel down!" And as her words died away, there seemed to float
towards me the sound of air-borne music that stayed for one moment
to fold me round with the sweet consolations of loving companionship
and of peace, and in the next stole swiftly and softly away as if
journeying onward and upward to the throne of God.

And with a great cry of anguish I fell to my knees and prayed: "O Lord
Christ! I am foul and selfish and sinful! I do not know that I love
Thee! I do not know that I have repented of my sins even! I only know
that I cannot do the things I would do, and that I can never undo the
evil I have done. But I come to Thee, Lord Jesus, I come to Thee as
Thou biddest me. Send me not away, O Saviour of sinners. Amen."

As I ended, it seemed that my companion turned to leave me, and I fell
to sobbing and sorrowing, until at last for very anguish I could sob
no more. But soon I heard again her returning footsteps, and, looking
up, I saw One who stood beside her, thorn-crowned, and clad in robes of
white. _His features were the features of a man, but His face was the
face of God!_

And as I looked upon that face, I shrank back dazed and breathless
and blinded;--shrank back with a cry like the cry of one smitten of
the lightning; for beneath the wide white brow there shone out eyes,
before the awful purity of which my sin-stained soul seemed to scorch
and shrivel like a scroll in a furnace. But as I lay, lo! there came a
tender touch upon my head, and a voice in my ear that whispered, "Son."

And as the word died away into a silence like the hallowed hush
of listening angels, and I stretched forth my arms with a cry of
unutterable longing and love, I saw that He held one by the hand--even
she who had plucked me out of the abyss into which I had fallen--and I
saw that she was no longer veiled. It was Dorothy--Dorothy whom He had
of His infinite love sought out and saved from the shame to which my
sin had consigned her, and whom He had sent to succour me, that so He
might set upon my soul the seal of His pardon and of His peace. And to
Him be the praise. Amen.

[Illustration: THE END.]




_AN INEXPENSIVE LIBRARY OF INDISPENSABLE BOOKS._

THE

MINERVA LIBRARY OF FAMOUS BOOKS.

Edited by G.T. BETTANY, M.A., B.Sc., F.L.S.

_An Illustrated Series of first-class books, averaging from_ 400 _to_
600 pages, _strongly and attractively bound in cloth_.

PRICE TWO SHILLINGS EACH VOLUME,

WITH CUT OR UNCUT EDGES.

In Half Calf or Half Morocco, Price Five Shillings Each Volume.


The Design and Plan of the MINERVA LIBRARY OF FAMOUS BOOKS have been
amply justified by the remarkable favour with which it has been
received by the press and the public. The design is to provide _at
the lowest possible cost_ books which every intelligent reader will
wish to possess, in a form readable, attractive, and lasting. The
issue at monthly intervals, not so frequent as to distract, not so
intermittent as to lose the advantage of regularity, enables readers to
add to their library at an almost imperceptible cost. Thus for about
one pound a year, every man may form a library which will afford an
ever-increasing source of gratification and cultivation to himself and
his family. There will be no doubt, as in buying the novelties of the
day, as to whether the new volume will prove to be of permanent value
and interest. It will have already stood the test of time and of good
critics, though frequently it may have been unattainable except at a
heavy cost. The Minerva Library will only include works of widespread
popularity, which have proved themselves worthy of a permanent place in
literature.

Variety will be studied in the selection of books, so that all classes
of the best literature of all nations may be represented. The adoption
of the name "Minerva" will be justified by the abundant wisdom,
thought, and imaginative and inventive power which the books will be
found to contain.

Each volume contains an introduction by the Editor, in which a
biography of the author, or critical or explanatory notes, place the
reader in sympathy with the author and his work. In some of the books
additional elucidations and illustrations of the text are given, and in
others side-notes indicate the subjects of the paragraphs.

The number of separate Plates as well as illustrations in the text
forms a marked feature of the series. As far as possible an authentic
portrait of every author will be given. An inspection of the books only
is needed to make their attractiveness evident.

Every Englishman who reads and thinks, and wishes to possess the BEST
BOOKS, should have every book in the Minerva library.

The Youth beginning to form a Library of books for lifelong
companionship cannot do better than subscribe to the Minerva Library.

Schools, Mechanics, and Village Libraries, and literary institutions of
all kinds, should provide themselves with a number of copies of this
inexpensive library of indispensable books.

The Artisan and the Shop-assistant will find their means and
opportunities consulted in this series. They cannot buy the best books
in the English language in a better and cheaper form combined.

Naturally every Englishman wants to possess the choice works of the
greatest Englishmen; and to complete his ideas as a citizen of the
world, he needs a selection of the greatest writings of the geniuses
of other countries. Both these wants it is the object of the Minerva
Library to supply.


VOLUME I.--EIGHTH EDITION.

 CHARLES DARWIN'S JOURNAL During the Voyage of H.M.S. "Beagle" Round
 the World. With a Biographical Introduction by the Editor, Portrait of
 Darwin, and Illustrations.

"'The Minerva Library,' the new venture of Messrs. Ward & Lock, has
made an excellent start.... No better volumes could be chosen for
popular reading of a healthy sort than 'Darwin's Journal of Researches
during the Voyage of the Beagle,' and 'Borrow's Bible in Spain.' The
paper is good, the type is tolerable, the binding is in excellent
taste, and the price is extremely low."--_Athenæum._


VOLUME II.--FOURTH EDITION.

 THE INGOLDSBY LEGENDS. With a Critical Introduction by the Editor,
 Portrait of the Author, and reproductions of the celebrated
 Illustrations by Phiz and Cruikshank.

"This series, which is edited by Mr. G.T. Bettany, is neatly bound,
well illustrated, and nicely printed."--_Graphic._

"The determination of the publishers of the 'Minerva Library' to
render the series attractive and representative of English literature
of all kinds, is strikingly displayed in this volume.... The book is
well printed and bound, and will be eagerly welcomed by all desiring
to obtain at a small cost a good edition of the works of the famous
humourist."--_Liverpool Courier._


VOLUME III.--THIRD EDITION.

 BORROW'S BIBLE IN SPAIN: The Journeys, Adventures, and Imprisonments
 of an Englishman, in an attempt to circulate the Scriptures in the
 Peninsula. By George Borrow, Author of "The Gipsies of Spain." With a
 Biographical Introduction by the Editor, and Illustrations.

"Lovers of good literature and cheap may be commended to the 'Minerva
Library' edition of 'The Bible in Spain,' edited by Mr. G.T. Bettany.
This is an excellent reprint, with neat binding, good type, and fair
woodcuts."--_Saturday Review._


VOLUME IV.--FOURTH EDITION.

 EMERSON'S PROSE WORKS: The complete Prose Works of Ralph Waldo
 Emerson. With a Critical Introduction by the Editor, and Portrait of
 the Author.

"The series, judging by the initial volumes, will be endowed with
everything that makes reading pleasant and agreeable.... The printing
is a marvel of clearness, the slurs that too often characterise
cheap volumes being conspicuous by their absence.... The binding is
both elegant and durable.... If the excellence of the first volumes
is maintained in the future, the series will enjoy a success both
widespread and prolonged."--_City Press._


VOLUME V.--THIRD EDITION.

 GALTON'S SOUTH AFRICA: The Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical
 South Africa: being an Account of a Visit to Damaraland in 1851. By
 Francis Galton, F.R.S. With a New Map and Appendix, together with a
 Biographical Introduction by the Editor, Portrait of Mr. Galton, and
 Illustrations. Containing also Vacation Tours in 1860 and 1861, by Sir
 George Grove, Francis Galton, F.R.S., and W.G. Clark, M.A.

"Be it understood the 'Minerva Library' presents itself in a form
that even the lover of luxurious books could scarcely find fault
with."--_Warrington Guardian._

"The 'Minerva Library' will be hailed with delight, we are sure, by all
readers."--_The Weekly Times._


VOLUME VI.--THIRD EDITION.

 THE BETROTHED LOVERS (I Promessi Sposi). By Alessandro Manzoni. With a
 Biographical Introduction by the Editor, and Portrait of the Author.

Of this great Work Goethe wrote:--"Manzoni's romance transcends all
that we have knowledge of in this kind. I need only say that the
internal part, all that comes from the core of the poet, is thoroughly
perfect, and that the external part, all the notes of localities and
so forth, is not a whit behind its great inner qualities.... The work
gives us the pleasure of an absolutely ripe fruit."


VOLUME VII.--THIRD EDITION.

 GOETHE'S FAUST (Complete). Translated in the Original Metres, with
 copious Critical and Explanatory Notes by Bayard Taylor. With a
 Critical Introduction by the Editor, Portrait of Goethe, and Retzsch's
 Illustrations.

This is a full and complete reprint of Bayard Taylor's unrivalled
rendering of Goethe's masterpiece. It is published by special
arrangement with Mrs. Bayard Taylor, and contains the whole of the
Translator's copious and extremely valuable Notes, Introductions, and
Appendices.


VOLUME VIII.--SECOND EDITION.

 WALLACE'S TRAVELS ON THE AMAZON: Travels on the Amazon and Rio
 Negro. By Alfred Russel Wallace, Author of "The Malay Archipelago,"
 "Darwinism," etc. Giving an account of the Native Tribes, and
 Observations on the Climate, Geology, and Natural History of the
 Amazon Valley. With a Biographical Introduction, Portrait of the
 Author, and Illustrations.

"It would be impossible to overrate the service which Mr. Wallace, the
co-discoverer of Darwinism, has done."--_Times, September 11th, 1889._


VOLUME IX.--THIRD EDITION.

 DEAN STANLEY'S LIFE OF DR. ARNOLD. The Life and Correspondence of
 Thomas Arnold, D.D. (Head-Master of Rugby School). By Arthur Penrhyn
 Stanley, D.D., Dean of Westminster. With a Portrait of Arnold, and
 Full Page Illustrations.

"One of the most remarkable and most instructive books ever
published--a book for which Arnold himself left abundant materials
in his voluminous correspondence, supplemented by a large quantity
of miscellaneous matter added by his friend and former pupil, Dean
Stanley."--_Morning Advertiser._


VOLUME X.--SECOND EDITION.

 POE'S TALES OF ADVENTURE, MYSTERY, AND IMAGINATION. By Edgar Allan
 Poe. With a Biographical Introduction by the Editor, Portrait of the
 Author, and Illustrations.

"Contains over forty of Poe's marvellous stories, certainly among the
most exciting and sensational tales ever written. The volume itself is
a marvel, comprising, as it does, over 560 pages, strongly and neatly
bound, for two shillings."--_Newcastle Chronicle._


VOLUME XI.

 COMEDIES BY MOLIÈRE: Including The Would-Be Gentleman; The Affected
 Young Ladies; The Forced Marriage; The Doctor by Compulsion;
 Scapin's Rogueries; The Blunderer; The School for Husbands; The
 School for Wives; The Miser; The Hypochondriac; The Misanthrope;
 The Blue-Stockings; Tartuffe, or the Hypocrite. Newly Translated by
 Charles Mathew, M.A. The Translation revised by the Editor, with a
 Portrait of the Author, and Biographical Introduction.


VOLUME XII.

 FORSTER'S LIFE OF GOLDSMITH: The Life and Times of Oliver Goldsmith.
 By John Forster, Author of "The Life of Charles Dickens," etc. With
 a Biography of Forster by the Editor, and Numerous Illustrations by
 Maclise, Stanfield, Leech, and Others.


VOLUME XIII.

 LANE'S MODERN EGYPTIANS: The Manners and Customs of the Modern
 Egyptians. By Edward William Lane, Translator of "The Arabian Nights'
 Entertainments." With a Biographical Introduction by the Editor,
 Sixteen Full Page Plates, and Eighty Illustrations in the Text.


VOLUME XIV.

 TORRENS' LIFE OF LORD MELBOURNE: Memoirs of William Lamb, Second
 Viscount Melbourne. By W.M. Torrens. Revised by the Author. With an
 Introduction by the Editor, and Portrait of Melbourne.


VOLUME XV.

 THACKERAY'S VANITY FAIR: A Novel Without a Hero. By William Makepeace
 Thackeray. With a Biographical Introduction by the Editor, Portrait of
 the Author, and Thirteen Full-Page Illustrations.


  WARD, LOCK & CO., London, New York, and Melbourne.
  _And at all Booksellers' and Railway Bookstalls._




STANDARD WORKS BY GREAT WRITERS.

THE WORLD LIBRARY

OF STANDARD BOOKS.

_A Series of Standard Works, including many of the acknowledged
Masterpieces of Historical and Critical Literature, made more
accessible than hitherto to the general reader by publication in a
cheap form and at a moderate price._


Crown 8vo, cloth gilt or buckram, label on back, uncut edges.




 1 Hallam's Constitutional History of England. With Lord Macaulay's
 Essay on the same. 970 pp., _5s._ Library Edition, demy 8vo, _7s.
 6d._; half-calf, _12s._


 2 Hallam's Europe during the Middle Ages. By the Author of "The
 Constitutional History of England." 720 pp., _3s. 6d._ Library
 Edition, 894 pp., demy 8vo, _6s._; half-calf, _10s. 6d._


 3 Hallam's Church and State. By the Author of "The Constitutional
 History of England." 400 pp., _2s. 6d._


 4 The Wealth of Nations (Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of). By
 Adam Smith. 832 pp., _3s. 6d._; half-calf, _7s. 6d._ Library Edition,
 demy 8vo. _6s._; half-calf, _10s. 6d._


 6 M'Culloch's Works: Principles of Political Economy, Notes, &c., to
 "Smith's Wealth of Nations," &c. 700 pp., _3s. 6d._


 7 Adam Smith's Essays: Moral Sentiments, Astronomy, Physics, &c. 476
 pp., _3s. 6d._


 8 Hume's History of England. In Three Vols. 2,240 pp., _10s. 6d._
 Library Edition, demy 8vo, _18s._; half-calf, _31s. 6d._


 9 Hume's Essays: Literary, Moral, and Political. _3s. 6d._

 10 Montaigne's Essays. Complete. 684 pp., _3s. 6d._; half-calf, _7s.
 6d._ Library Edition, 920 pp., _6s._; hf.-calf, _10s. 6d._


 11 Warton's History of English Poetry, from the Eleventh to the
 Seventeenth Century. 1,032 pp., _6s._


 12 The Court and Times of Queen Elizabeth. By Lucy Aikin. 530 pp.,
 _3s. 6d._


 13 Edmund Burke's Choice Pieces. Containing the Speech on the Law
 of Libel, Reflections on Revolution in France, on the Sublime and
 Beautiful, Abridgment of English History. _3s. 6d._


 14 Herbert's Autobiography and History of England under Henry VIII. By
 Lord Herbert of Cherbury. 770 pp., _3s. 6d._


 15 Walpole's Anecdotes of Painting in England. By Horace Walpole. 538
 pp., _3s. 6d._


 17 Locke's Essays: On Toleration, Education, Value of Money. 700 pp.,
 _3s. 6d._


 18 Bolingbroke on the Study and Use of History. _3s. 6d._


 19 Essays on Beauty and Taste: On Beauty, by Francis, Lord Jeffrey; On
 Taste, by Archibald Alison, LL.D. 324 pp., _3s. 6d._


 20 Milton's Early Britain. With More's England under Richard III., and
 Bacon's England under Henry VIII., 430 pp., _3s. 6d._


 21 Marvell's Poems and Satires. With Memoir of the Author. _3s. 6d._


 22 Macaulay: Reviews, Essays, and Poems. 650 pp., _3s. 6d._;
 half-calf, _6s._ Library Edition, demy 8vo, _6s._


 23 Sydney Smith's Essays, Social and Political. _3s. 6d._; Library
 Edition, demy 8vo, _6s._


 24 Lord Bacon. Proficience and Advancement of Learning, Historical
 Sketches and Essays. 530 pp., _3s. 6d._; half-calf, _6s._; Library
 Edition, demy 8vo, _6s._


 25 Essays by Thomas de Quincey. Confessions of an Opium Eater, Letters
 to a Young Man, &c. 550 pp., _3s. 6d._; Library Edition, demy 8vo,
 _6s._


 26 Josephus (The Complete Works of). By Whiston. Life and Marginal
 Notes. 810 pp., _3s. 6d._ Library Edition, _6s._


 27 Paley's Works: "The Evidences of Christianity," "Horæ Paulinæ," and
 "Natural Theology." With Life and Notes. _3s. 6d._


 28 Taylor's Holy Living and Dying. With Life, Introduction, and Notes.
 _2s. 6d._


 29 Dean Milman's History of the Jews. 520 pp., _3s. 6d._


 30 Macaulay: Reviews and Essays. Second Series. _2s. 6d._


 31 Locke on the Human Understanding. 670 pp., _3s. 6d._; half-calf,
 _7s. 6d._


 32 Plutarch's Lives. By Langhorne. 750 pp., _3s. 6d._; half-calf, _7s.
 6d._


 33 Addison's Essays from "Spectator." 600 pp., _3s. 6d._


 34 Shakespere's Complete Works. With Life and Glossary. 1,000 pp.,
 _3s. 6d._ Library Edition, _6s._


 35 Cook's Boston Monday Lectures. 640 pp., _5s._


 36 Todd's Complete Works. Sunday School Teacher, Lectures for Young
 Men, &c. 920 pp., _5s._


 37 D'Aubigne's History of the Reformation. 870 pp., _3s. 6d._;
 half-calf, _7s. 6d._


 38 The Arabian Nights' Entertainments. 430 pp., _3s. 6d._


 39 Heroes for the Faith: Scottish Worthies who suffered during the
 Reformation. _3s. 6d._


 40 Martyrs for the Truth. Last Words and Dying Testimonies of the
 Scottish Worthies. Revised, with Notes. _3s. 6d._


 41 Cook's Boston Monday Lectures. 1st Series. 340 pp., _2s. 6d._


 42 Cook's Boston Monday Lectures. 2nd Series. 300 pp., _2s. 6d._


 43 Newman Smyth's Works. Containing "Old Faiths in New Light," "The
 Religious Feeling," and "Orthodox Theology." _3s. 6d._


 44 Hallam's Literature of Europe during the 15th, 16th, and 17th
 Centuries. Complete. 900 pp., _5s._


 45 Lamb's Essays of Elia and Eliana. 850 pp., _3s. 6d._


 46 History of Rome. By D. Rose. Edited by H.W. Dulcken, Ph.D. 500 pp.,
 _3s. 6d._


 47 History of Greece. By D. Rose. Edited by H.W. Dulcken, Ph.D. 480
 pp., _3s. 6d._


 48 Palgrave's History of the Anglo-Saxons. _2s. 6d._


WARD, LOCK & CO., London, Melbourne, and New York.




