CHAPTER X.

_A LOVE STORY IN HELL._

  "And shall my sense pierce love,--the last relay
  And ultimate outpost of eternity?"--D.G. Rossetti.


Some years ago, a near relative of mine, the editor of a certain paper,
was taken seriously ill, and was told by the doctors that complete
rest was absolutely necessary for his recovery. As I had frequently
assisted him in the preparation of "copy," and was acquainted with the
routine of his office, it was arranged that I should attend on certain
days in each week, and be answerable for the work during his absence.
The journal was one which was made up largely of extracts from other
papers, and my duties consisted less in the selection of original
matter, than in the more prosaic plying of paste-brush and scissors;
but the number of manuscripts received was large, and for a week or two
at least I tried conscientiously to give each separate packet something
like a fair consideration. I remember that the very first manuscript on
which I was called to pronounce judgment was one entitled, "The Strange
Confessions of a Bachelor." It is too lengthy to be printed here in
full, but as the love-story from which my chapter takes its heading
was largely attributable to the publication of this manuscript, I have
transcribed some paragraphs from it, which I think will serve to give
the reader a general idea of its tone.


The Strange Confessions of a Bachelor.

"Yes, I am in love, although as yet I could not tell what the name of
my love is or will be. But in every inspired poem or perfect picture,
in the soaring and sobbing of music, in sunrise and sunset, or in the
sighing of the wind upon my cheek, there is something which speaks to
me of her, and which beckons my spirit forth in search of her, as if by
the leading of an unseen hand. And sometimes, but only in my dreaming,
musing moments, my thoughts, as they wander forth into the blue expanse
around me, take colour and shape, and I see her standing by a tiny cot
in a cosy room where the warm firelight flickers on walls gay with
pictures. I see her bend with eyes that brim with tears of blessing to
fold two dimpled hands together, and to listen to a baby voice which
whispers after hers the hallowed words to 'Our Father in Heaven.' And
as the little voice dies away into the holy hush of the last Amen, and
the little lids droop like the petals of a primrose over the tired
eyes, my dream-picture changes again, and I am rambling among the walks
I love so well, but no longer alone, no longer wrapt in melancholy
musing for--now trudging cheerily along with hand clasped fast in mine
and face upturned to listen, now darting bird-like aside in search of
fly or flower--there journeys ever with me my little son and hers. We
wander merrily through that sunny stretch of meadow--the children's
meadow, as we call it--where the grass grows lush and long, and where
the blithe day through the skylark ever sings and soars; we cross the
stile and enter the shady shelter of the 'Lover's Lane,' dark, as it
always is, with the dense green of overarching ash and hazel, and then
we reach that sunny, wind-swept and sloping hillside, where he and I
love to linger, watching the slow sailing of stately clouds above, or
listening to the tinkle and purl of the brooklet which ripples over
the pebbles in the valley far below. In the joyous wonder of the child
heart beside me at all that is beautiful in this beautiful world, I
forget the books and the making of books with which my brain is busied;
and when the first flush of rapture is over and the little brain has
sobered into calm, I tell my boy of the Brother-Lord who loves him, and
who was once such a little child as he, and of the dear Lord-Father by
whom all that is beautiful was made."

The writer of the "Confessions" then goes on to speak of love, and of
the woman he loves; but as his concluding paragraph will sufficiently
serve to give an idea of his thoughts on the subject, it is hardly
necessary to quote the passage in full. "Yes, I love her, I love her
truly, and she too loves me, or will. It is not blind love, or foolish
idolatry. She knows all my faults--the pitiful paltriness of my life,
the selfish acts and foolish words, the vanity and the vice--she knows
them all, and yet she loves me, me, not them, but the true me which
these faults cannot altogether conceal from her, for she knows that
they are not my life, but the trouble of it. So also is my love for
her. I love her not only for her present self, but for the sake of the
self she is seeking to be--the self which in some measure indeed she
now is; for that which in our truer moments we have striven to be; the
Ideal upon which our eyes are ever fixed, to which (no matter how
sorely we may have sinned against it in the struggle of the day) our
thoughts return at night with but the more unutterable if despairing
longing and love--_that_ in some manner we are, and shall be,
notwithstanding our ever-recurrent failure and sin.

"I do not ask or expect that she shall be always true to her high
ideal, for I know that to none of us is it given to walk with
unfaltering feet. I remember, too, that she is no angel, but a woman
with womanly weakness and human faults, for all of which I am touched
with true and tender sympathy, to love her not the less, but the more.
But that she should _have_ such an ideal, and be capable of such an
aim--for that reason, if for no other, I must love and honour her with
the deepest love and honour of my soul. I am not so blind as to suppose
it will be all summer and sunshine in the life which she and I will, I
hope, one day lead together. I know my own evil nature too well not to
be aware that there will be times when she will find it hard to prevent
love being turned into loathing and confidence into contempt; and I
think, with sinking of spirit, of the sore disappointment she will feel
when she finds what a shabby-souled common-place creature her husband
is, compared with the being into whom her love had idealized him. At
such times of despondency, however, I try to remember what Miss Muloch
has said about wedded life--and who has written more helpful words than
she? 'I would have every woman marry,' she says, 'not merely liking a
man well enough to accept him as a husband, but loving him so wholly
that, wedded or not, she feels she is at heart his wife, and none
other's, to the end of her life. So faithful that she can see all his
little faults (though she takes care no one else shall see them), yet
would as soon think of loving him the less for these, as of ceasing to
look up to heaven because there are a few clouds in the sky. So true
and so fond that she needs neither to vex him with her constancy nor
burden him with her love, since both are self-existent and entirely
independent of anything he gives or takes away. Thus she will marry
neither from liking nor esteem, nor gratitude for his love, but from
the fulness of her own. If they never marry, as sometimes happens ...
God will cause them to meet in the next existence. They cannot be
parted; they belong to one another.'

"These are helpful words, and true; but there is a passage by poor
George Eliot (alas for that adjective!), which to me is still more
beautiful, and with which I cannot do better than conclude. 'What
greater thing is there,' she says, 'for two human souls, than to feel
that they are joined for life, to strengthen each other in all labour,
to rest on each other in all sorrow, to minister to each other in all
pain,' and, 'to be one with each other in silent, unspeakable memories
at the moment of the last parting?'"

       *       *       *       *       *

I was interested in this article as well as in the writer, and asked
him for further contributions. He responded by sending a couple of
sonnets, and although the "swing of his arm" was, to quote Rossetti,
"freer in prose than in verse," I accepted, and printed them in the
journal of which I had charge. When I came to know him afterwards, I
found that he was young, and of that highly-strung nervous and poetic
temperament which often proves little less than a calamity to its
possessor. A more morbidly sensitive being I never met. The emotional
part of his nature seemed in excess, and he felt all--the small as
well as the great, the pleasant as well as the painful--intensely. His
nervous vitality was too near the surface. He was easily "worked-up,"
and took life, or rather its incidents, too seriously. The one
intellectual thing which men of such a temperament would be wise to
refrain from doing, is not seldom the very thing they do--abandon
themselves passionately to the pursuit of poetry. After that there is
little hope for them. The world may be the richer by many a work of
art, but from thenceforth and for ever Sorrow will have them for her
own. "Poetry strikes as nothing else does, deep into the roots of
things," says Elizabeth Stuart Phelps, and "one finds everywhere some
strain at the roots of one's heart." Moreover, the pursuit of poetry
is a practice which as surely grows upon one as does the use of drug
or opiate, and my advice to the men and women of a highly-strung and
supersensitive temperament--if they wish to make comfort their first
consideration--is, "Avoid poetry as you would poison, making instead
a study of that which is animal and coarse. Music and all other
'softening' influences you will, in accordance with the contention
of Plato in 'The Republic,' deliberately eschew, striving rather
to acquire that delightful pachydermatous condition of feeling and
enviable indifference to the susceptibilities of others, which add so
immeasurably to the comfort of life."

However, to return to the writer of "The Strange Confessions." The
number of the journal containing his article had not been published
more than a couple of days, before I received a letter signed by a
lady who was unknown to me, asking that I would favour her with the
address of the contributor. I replied, of course, that I could not
do so without his permission, but that if she wished to be put into
communication with him, and would send a letter addressed to the office
of the paper, it should be duly forwarded. She did so, and when, as
was natural enough, he wrote a cordial reply, she found something
else in his letter about which to question him, and a correspondence
consequently ensued. Whether she was or was not a heartless and
accomplished flirt I never knew; but if ever a woman deliberately
set herself to win, and--as subsequent events showed--to break a
man's heart, it was this lady. I learned afterwards that she was very
beautiful, and as she herself wrote occasional tales and verses for
the magazines, it was not to be wondered at that my contributor should
be greatly interested in her epistles. She succeeded before long in
making his acquaintance, and set herself to carry on in earnest the
work which her insinuating letters had begun. She did not, however,
find him quite the easy prey which she had perhaps expected; for though
it is certain that he loved her from the moment of meeting, he was shy
and self-depreciatory, and sought persistently to avoid her. But she
paused at nothing to effect her purpose. She had set her heart upon "a
scalp," and by looks, words, and deeds, she strove to convince him that
she loved him, and strove at last successfully. I remember meeting him
one morning, and thinking, as I watched the light which came into his
face when he spoke of her, of the graceful lines in Mr. Austin Dobson's
"Story of Rosina." In the poem, however, it is the woman, and not the
man, who is heart-broken:--

  "As for the girl, she turned to her new being,
    Came, as a bird that hears its fellow call;
  Blessed as the blind that blesses God for seeing;
    Grew as a flower on which the sun-rays fall,
  Loved if you will; she never named it so;
    Love comes unseen, we only see it go."

When I saw him again all was over. I had sought him out in his
chambers, not having heard from him for a month, and he did not hear
me enter. Her portrait (the one she had given him) was before him, and
he had fallen by the table, half-kneeling, half-lying, with his head
on his arm. It is a fearful thing to hear a strong man sob as he was
sobbing then! God grant that I may never hear another, or see a face of
such hopeless haggard misery as was his when he raised it!

It is not of him, however, that I wish now to speak, but of her. Of
all the faces which I saw in hell, there was one which had for me a
fascination beyond any other. It was the face of a beautiful woman,
queenly of manner and fair of figure as a full-blown lily, and with
those deep dark eyes that _seem_ to shine out from soul-depths, deep as
the distant heaven, and yet _may_ mean no more than does the shallow
facing of quicksilver behind a milliner's mirror. I recognised her
instantly by the portrait, and never out of hell have I seen such
misery on any woman's face as I saw on hers. The sentence in punishment
of her sin was a strange one. It was that she should now love him
whose heart she had broken, with the same passionately intense but
hopeless love with which he had loved her. It was a just but awful
retribution. As some death-stricken and hunted creature presses
frantically on as if to escape the arrow that it carries in its breast,
so, heedless of all that was passing around her, heedless of shadow or
shine, she pressed on and on through the realms of hell, her eyes fixed
and wide-distended in agony, and her hands clutching ceaselessly at
her bosom, as if the heart of her were being riven in twain. "O God!"
I heard her cry, as she passed me, "my heart is broken! my heart is
broken! and, alas, one cannot die of a broken heart in hell."

I saw her once again. She had fallen to the ground, and with hopeless
hands pressed against burning brows was writhing as if in physical
pain, and with her very soul consumed of passion. One whom I knew--it
was his sister--was kneeling beside her, and with gentle words
besought her to calm herself, but she pushed the ministering hand away
despairingly, crying out: "A heart cannot break as mine is breaking
without a shriek. If I had loved him, and he me, and he had died," she
said, "I could have borne it, knowing that I should meet him hereafter,
but to live loveless through a loveless Eternity, _that_ is the thought
which kills me;" and then with a great cry of, "Oh! why should a
merciful God let any of His creatures suffer as I am suffering now?"
she rose up, and fled away before me.

I never saw her again, nor do I know whether or not it was given her
to win back the love she had lost; but, after she had gone, I turned
to his sister--the woman who had striven to comfort her brother's
betrayer--saying that I thought the punishment greater than the sin.

"Greater than the sin!" was the reply. "It may be that, being his
sister, I judge her harshly; but if yours is the most awful crime which
your sex can commit against womanhood, then it seems to me that hers--a
like breach of trust--is the blackest sin which a woman can commit
against a man. Nor can it be said of hers that it was the deed of a
moment--a moment of over-mastering passion, for it was deliberate and
cruel. I say that that woman killed my brother!" she cried fiercely;
"killed him body and soul, and sent him away heart-broken, and bereft
of faith in womanhood and in God. And to gratify what? her vanity--a
passion as selfish and hateful, if less brutal, than your own. You
have recognised the loathsomeness of your act; but she, God help her!
thinks of nothing but herself, and while she so thinks, heaven itself
would be but hell to her, and in all hell there is as yet for her no
hope of heaven."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




