CHAPTER I


SUSAN'S impulse was toward the stage.  It had become a
definite ambition with her, the stronger because Spenser's
jealousy and suspicion had forced her to keep it a secret, to
pretend to herself that she had no thought but going on
indefinitely as his obedient and devoted mistress.  The
hardiest and best growths are the growths inward--where they
have sun and air from without.  She had been at the theater
several times every week, and had studied the performances at
a point of view very different from that of the audience.  It
was there to be amused; she was there to learn.  Spenser and
such of his friends as he would let meet her talked plays and
acting most of the time.  He had forbidden her to have women
friends.  "Men don't demoralize women; women demoralize each
other," was one of his axioms.  But such women as she had a
bowing acquaintance with were all on the stage--in comic
operas or musical farces.  She was much alone; that meant many
hours every day which could not but be spent by a mind like
hers in reading and in thinking.  Only those who have observed
the difference aloneness makes in mental development, where
there is a good mind, can appreciate how rapidly, how broadly,
Susan expanded.  She read plays more than any other kind of
literature. She did not read them casually but was always
thinking how they would act.  She was soon making in
imagination stage scenes out of dramatic chapters in novels as
she read.  More and more clearly the characters of play and
novel took shape and substance before the eyes of her fancy.
But the stage was clearly out of the question.

While the idea of a stage career had been dominant, she had
thought in other directions, also.  Every Sunday, indeed almost
every day, she found in the newspapers articles on the subject
of work for women.

"Why do you waste time on that stuff?" said Drumley, when he
discovered her taste for it.

"Oh, a woman never can tell what may happen," replied she.

"She'll never learn anything from those fool articles,"
answered he.  "You ought to hear the people who get them up
laughing about them.  I see now why they are printed.  It's good
for circulation, catches the women--even women like you."
However, she persisted in reading.  But never did she find an
article that contained a really practical suggestion--that is,
one applying to the case of a woman who had to live on what
she made at the start, who was without experience and without
a family to help her.  All around her had been women who were
making their way; but few indeed of them--even of those
regarded as successful--were getting along without outside aid
of some kind.  So when she read or thought or inquired about
work for women, she was sometimes amused and oftener made
unhappy by the truth as to the conditions, that when a common
worker rises it is almost always by the helping hand of a man,
and rarely indeed a generous hand--a painful and shameful
truth which a society resolved at any cost to think well of
itself fiercely conceals from itself and hypocritically lies about.

She felt now that there was hope in only one direction--hope
of occupation that would enable her to live in physical, moral
and mental decency.  She must find some employment where she
could as decently as might be realize upon her physical
assets.  The stage would be best--but the stage was impossible,
at least for the time.  Later on she would try for it; there
was in her mind not a doubt of that, for unsuspected of any
who knew her there lay, beneath her sweet and gentle exterior,
beneath her appearance of having been created especially for
love and laughter and sympathy, tenacity of purpose and daring
of ambition that were--rarely--hinted at the surface in her
moments of abstraction.  However, just now the stage was
impossible.  Spenser would find her immediately.  She must go
into another part of town, must work at something that touched
his life at no point.

She had often been told that her figure would be one of her
chief assets as a player.  And ready-made clothes fitted her
with very slight alterations--showing that she had a model
figure.  The advertisements she had cut out were for cloak
models.  Within an hour after she left Forty-fourth Street, she
found at Jeffries and Jonas, in Broadway a few doors below
Houston, a vacancy that had not yet been filled--though as a
rule all the help needed was got from the throng of applicants
waiting when the store opened.

"Come up to my office," said Jeffries, who happened to be near
the door as she entered.  "We'll see how you shape up.  We want
something extra--something dainty and catchy."

He was a short thick man, with flat feet, a flat face and an
almost bald head.  In his flat nostrils, in the hollows of his
great forward bent ears and on the lobes were bunches of
coarse, stiff gray hairs.  His eyebrows bristled; his small,
sly brown eyes twinkled with good nature and with sensuality.
His skin had the pallor that suggests kidney trouble.  His
words issued from his thick mouth as if he were tasting each
beforehand--and liked the flavor.  He led Susan into his private
office, closed the door, took a tape measure from his desk.
"Now, my dear," said he, eyeing her form gluttonously, "we'll
size you up--eh?  You're exactly the build I like."

And under the pretense of taking her measurements, he fumbled
and felt, pinched and stroked every part of her person,
laughing and chuckling the while.  "My, but you are sweet!  And
so firm!  What flesh!  Solid--solid!  Mighty healthy!  You are a
good girl--eh?"

"I am a married woman."

"But you've got no ring."

"I've never worn a ring."

"Well--well!  I believe that is one of the new wrinkles, but I
don't approve.  I'm an old-fashioned family man.  Let me see
again.  Now, don't mind a poor old man like me, my dear.  I've
got a wife--the best woman in the world, and I've never been
untrue to her.  A look over the fence occasionally--but not an
inch out of the pasture.  Don't stiffen yourself like that.  I
can't judge, when you do.  Not too much hips--neither sides nor
back.  Fine!  Fine!  And the thigh slender--yes--quite lovely, my
dear.  Thick thighs spoil the hang of garments.  Yes--yes--a
splendid figure.  I'll bet the bosom is a corker--fine skin and
nice ladylike size.  You can have the place."

"What does it pay?" she asked.

"Ten dollars, to start with.  Splendid wages.  _I_ started on
two fifty.  But I forgot--you don't know the business?"

"No--nothing about it," was her innocent, honest answer.

"Ah--well, then--nine dollars--eh?"

Susan hesitated.

"You can make quite a neat little bunch on the outside--_you_
can.  We cater only to the best trade, and the buyers who come
to us are big easy spenders.  But I'm supposed to know nothing
about that.  You'll find out from the other girls."  He
chuckled.  "Oh, it's a nice soft life except for a few weeks
along at this part of the year--and again in winter.  Well--ten
dollars, then."

Susan accepted. It was more than she had expected to get; it
was less than she could hope to live on in New York in
anything approaching the manner a person of any refinement or
tastes or customs of comfort regards as merely decent.  She
must descend again to the tenements, must resume the fight
against that physical degradation which sooner or later
imposes--upon those _descending_ to it--a degradation of mind
and heart deeper, more saturating, more putrefying than any
that ever originated from within.  Not so long as her figure
lasted was she the worse off for not knowing a trade.  Jeffries
was telling the truth; she would be getting splendid wages,
not merely for a beginner but for any woman of the working
class.  Except in rare occasional instances wages and salaries
for women were kept down below the standard of decency by
woman's peculiar position--by such conditions as that most
women took up work as a temporary makeshift or to piece out a
family's earnings, and that almost any woman could
supplement--and so many did supplement--their earnings at
labor with as large or larger earnings in the stealthy
shameful way.  Where was there a trade that would bring a girl
ten dollars a week at the start?  Even if she were a
semi-professional, a stenographer and typewriter, it would
take expertness and long service to lift her up to such wages.
Thanks to her figure--to its chancing to please old Jeffries'
taste--she was better off than all but a few working women,
than all but a few workingmen. She was of the labor aristocracy;
and if she had been one of a family of  workers she would
have been counted an enviable favorite of fortune.  Unfortunately,
she was alone unfortunately for herself, not at all from the
standpoint of the tenement class she was now joining.  Among them
she would be a person who could afford the luxuries of life as
life reveals itself to the tenements.

"Tomorrow morning at seven o'clock," said Jeffries.  "You have
lost your husband?"

"Yes."

"I saw you'd had great grief.  No insurance, I judge?  Well--you
will find another--maybe a rich one.  No--you'll not have to
sleep alone long, my dear."  And he patted her on the shoulder,
gave her a parting fumble of shoulders and arms.

She was able to muster a grateful smile; for she felt a rare
kindness of heart under the familiar animalism to which
good-looking, well-formed women who go about much unescorted
soon grow accustomed.  Also, experience had taught her that, as
things go with girls of the working class, his treatment was
courteous, considerate, chivalrous almost.  With men in
absolute control of all kinds of work, with women stimulating
the sex appetite by openly or covertly using their charms as
female to assist them in the cruel struggle for
existence--what was to be expected?

Her way to the elevator took her along aisles lined with
tables, hidden under masses of cloaks, jackets, dresses and
materials for making them.  They exuded the odors of the
factory--faint yet pungent odors that brought up before her
visions of huge, badly ventilated rooms, where women aged or
ageing swiftly were toiling hour after hour
monotonously--spending half of each day in buying the right to
eat and sleep unhealthily.  The odors--or, rather, the visions
they evoked--made her sick at heart.  For the moment she came
from under the spell of her peculiar trait--her power to do
without whimper or vain gesture of revolt the inevitable
thing, whatever it was.  She paused to steady herself, half
leaning against a lofty up-piling of winter cloaks.  A girl,
young at first glance, not nearly so young thereafter,
suddenly appeared before her--a girl whose hair had the sheen
of burnished brass and whose soft smooth skin was of that
frog-belly whiteness which suggests an inheritance of some
bleaching and blistering disease.  She had small regular
features, eyes that at once suggested looseness, good-natured
yet mercenary too.  She was dressed in the sleek tight-fitting
trying-on robe of the professional model, and her figure was
superb in its firm luxuriousness.

"Sick?" asked the girl with real kindliness.

"No--only dizzy for the moment."

"I suppose you've had a hard day."

"It might have been easier," Susan replied, attempting a smile.

"It's no fun, looking for a job.  But you've caught on?"

"Yes.  He took me."

"I made a bet with myself that he would when I saw you go in."
The girl laughed agreeably.  "He picked you for Gideon."

"What department is that?"

The girl laughed again, with a cynical squinting of the eyes.
"Oh, Gideon's our biggest customer.  He buys for the largest
house in Chicago."

"I'm looking for a place to live," said Susan. "Some place in
this part of town."

"How much do you want to spend?"

"I'm to have ten a week.  So I can't afford more than twelve or
fourteen a month for rent, can I?"

"If you happen to have to live on the ten," was the reply with
a sly, merry smile.

"It's all I've got."

Again the girl laughed, the good-humored mercenary eyes twinkling
rakishly.  "Well--you can't get much for fourteen a month."

"I don't care, so long as it's clean."

"Gee, you're reasonable, ain't you?" cried the girl.  "Clean!
I pay fourteen a week, and all kinds of things come through
the cracks from the other apartments.  You must be a stranger
to little old New York--bugtown, a lady friend of mine calls
it.  Alone?"

"Yes."

"Um--"  The girl shook her head dubiously.  "Rents are mighty
steep in New York, and going up all the time.  You see, the
rich people that own the lands and houses here need a lot of
money in their business.  You've got either to take a room or
part of one in with some tenement family, respectable but
noisy and dirty and not at all refined, or else you've got to
live in a house where everything goes.  You want to live
respectable, I judge?"

"Yes."

"That's the way with me.  Do what you please, _I_ say, but for
_God's sake_, don't make yourself _common!_  You'll want to be
free to have your gentlemen friends come--and at the same time
a room you'll not be ashamed for 'em to see on account of dirt
and smells and common people around."

"I shan't want to see anyone in my room."

The young woman winced, then went on with hasty enthusiasm.

"I knew you were refined the minute I looked at you.  I think
you might get a room in the house of a lady friend of mine--Mrs.
Tucker, up in Clinton Place near University Place--an
elegant neighborhood--that is, the north side of the street.
The south side's kind o' low, on account of dagoes having
moved in there.  They live like vermin--but then all tenement
people do."

"They've got to," said Susan.

"Yes, that's a fact.  Ain't it awful?  I'll write down the name
and address of my lady friend.  I'm Miss Mary Hinkle."

"My name is Lorna Sackville," said Susan, in response to the
expectant look of Miss Hinkle.

"My, what a swell name!  You've been sick, haven't you?"

"No, I'm never sick."

"Me too.  My mother taught me to stop eating as soon as I felt
bad, and not to eat again till I was all right."

"I do that, too," said Susan.  "Is it good for the health?"

"It starves the doctors.  You've never worked before?"

"Oh, yes--I've worked in a factory."

Miss Hinkle looked disappointed.  Then she gave Susan a side
glance of incredulity.  "I'd never, a' thought it.  But I can
see you weren't brought up to that.  I'll write the address."
And she went back through the showroom, presently to reappear
with a card which she gave Susan.  "You'll find Mrs. Tucker a
perfect lady--too much a lady to get on.  I tell her she'll go
to ruin--and she will."

Susan thanked Miss Hinkle and departed.  A few minutes' walk
brought her to the old, high-stooped, brown-stone where Mrs.
Tucker lived.  The dents, scratches and old paint scales on the
door, the dust-streaked windows, the slovenly hang of the
imitation lace window curtains proclaimed the cheap
middle-class lodging or boarding house of the humblest grade.
Respectable undoubtedly; for the fitfully prosperous
offenders against laws and morals insist upon better
accommodations.  Susan's heart sank.  She saw that once more she
was clinging at the edge of the precipice.  And what hope was
there that she would get back to firm ground?  Certainly not by
"honest labor."  Back to the tenement!  "Yes, I'm on the way
back," she said to herself.  However, she pulled the loose
bell-knob and was admitted to a dingy, dusty hallway by a maid
so redolent of stale perspiration that it was noticeable even
in the hall's strong saturation of smells of cheap cookery.
The parlor furniture was rapidly going to pieces; the chromos
and prints hung crazily awry; dust lay thick upon the center
table, upon the chimney-piece, upon the picture frames, upon
the carving in the rickety old chairs.  Only by standing did
Susan avoid service as a dust rag.  It was typical of the
profound discouragement that blights or blasts all but a small
area of our modern civilization--a discouragement due in part
to ignorance--but not at all to the cause usually assigned--to
"natural shiftlessness."  It is chiefly due to an unconscious
instinctive feeling of the hopelessness of the average lot.

While Susan explained to Mrs. Tucker how she had come and what
she could afford, she examined her with results far from
disagreeable.  One glance into that homely wrinkled face was
enough to convince anyone of her goodness of heart--and to
Susan in those days of aloneness, of uncertainty, of the
feeling of hopelessness, goodness of heart seemed the supreme
charm.  Such a woman as a landlady, and a landlady in New York,
was pathetically absurd.  Even to still rather simple-minded
Susan she seemed an invitation to the swindler, to the sponger
with the hard-luck story, to the sinking who clutch about
desperately and drag down with them everyone who permits them
to get a hold.

"I've only got one room," said Mrs. Tucker.  "That's not any
too nice.  I did rather calculate to get five a week for it,
but you are the kind I like to have in the house.  So if you
want it I'll let it to you for fourteen a month.  And I do hope
you'll pay as steady as you can.  There's so many in such hard
lines that I have a tough time with my rent.  I've got to pay
my rent, you know."

"I'll go as soon as I can't pay," replied Susan.  The
landlady's apologetic tone made her sick at heart, as a
sensitive human being must ever feel in the presence of a
fellow-being doomed to disaster.

"Thank you," said Mrs. Tucker gratefully.  "I do wish----"  She
checked herself.  "No, I don't mean that.  They do the best they
can--and I'll botch along somehow.  I look at the bright side
of things."

The incurable optimism of the smile accompanying these words
moved Susan, abnormally bruised and tender of heart that
morning, almost to tears.  A woman with her own way to make,
and always looking at the bright side!

"How long have you had this house?"

"Only five months.  My husband died a year ago.  I had to give
up our little business six months after his death.  Such a nice
little stationery store, but I couldn't seem to refuse credit
or to collect bills.  Then I came here.  This looks like losing,
too.  But I'm sure I'll come out all right.  The Lord will
provide, as the Good Book says.  I don't have no trouble
keeping the house full.  Only they don't seem to pay.  You want
to see your room?"

She and Susan ascended three flights to the top story--to a
closet of a room at the back.  The walls were newly and
brightly papered.  The sloping roof of the house made one wall
a ceiling also, and in this two small windows were set.  The
furniture was a tiny bed, white and clean as to its linen, a
table, two chairs, a small washstand with a little bowl and a
less pitcher, a soap dish and a mug.  Along one wall ran a row
of hooks.  On the floor was an old and incredibly dirty carpet,
mitigated by a strip of clean matting which ran from the door,
between washstand and bed, to one of the windows.

Susan glanced round--a glance was enough to enable her to see
all--all that was there, all that the things there implied.
Back to the tenement life!  She shuddered.

"It ain't much," said Mrs. Tucker.  "But usually rooms like
these rents for five a week."

The sun had heated the roof scorching hot; the air of this
room, immediately underneath, was like that of a cellar where
a furnace is in full blast.  But Susan knew she was indeed in
luck.  "It's clean and nice here," said she to Mrs. Tucker,
"and I'm much obliged to you for being so reasonable with me."
And to clinch the bargain she then and there paid half a
month's rent.  "I'll give you the rest when my week at the
store's up."

"No hurry," said Mrs. Tucker who was handling the money and
looking at it with glistening grateful eyes.  "Us poor folks
oughtn't to be hard on each other--though, Lord knows, if we
was, I reckon we'd not be quite so poor.  It's them that has
the streak of hard in 'em what gets on.  But the Bible teaches
us that's what to expect in a world of sin.  I suppose you want
to go now and have your trunk sent?"

"This is all I've got," said Susan, indicating her bag on the table.

Into Mrs. Tucker's face came a look of terror that made Susan
realize in an instant how hard-pressed she must be.  It was the
kind of look that comes into the eyes of the deer brought down
by the dogs when it sees the hunter coming up.

"But I've a good place," Susan hastened to say.  "I get ten a week.
And as I told you before, when I can't pay I'll go right away."

"I've lost so much in bad debts," explained the landlady
humbly.  "I don't seem to see which way to turn."  Then she
brightened.  "It'll all come out for the best.  I work hard
and I try to do right by everybody."

"I'm sure it will," said Susan believingly.

Often her confidence in the moral ideals trained into her from
childhood had been sorely tried.  But never had she permitted
herself more than a hasty, ashamed doubt that the only way to
get on was to work and to practice the Golden Rule.  Everyone
who was prosperous attributed his prosperity to the steadfast
following of that way; as for those who were not prosperous,
they were either lazy or bad-hearted, or would have been even
worse off had they been less faithful to the creed that was
best policy as well as best for peace of mind and heart.

In trying to be as inexpensive to Spenser as she could
contrive, and also because of her passion for improving
herself, Susan had explored far into the almost unknown art of
living, on its shamefully neglected material side.  She had
cultivated the habit of spending much time about her purchases
of every kind--had spent time intelligently in saving money
intelligently.  She had gone from shop to shop, comparing
values and prices.  She had studied quality in food and in
clothing, and thus she had discovered what enormous sums are
wasted through ignorance--wasted by poor even more lavishly
than by rich or well-to-do, because the shops where the poor
dealt had absolutely no check on their rapacity through the
occasional canny customer.  She had learned the fundamental
truth of the material art of living; only when a good thing
happens to be cheap is a cheap thing good.  Spenser,
cross-examining her as to how she passed the days, found out
about this education she was acquiring.  It amused him.  "A
waste of time!" he used to say.  "Pay what they ask, and don't
bother your head with such petty matters."  He might have
suspected and accused her of being stingy had not her
generosity been about the most obvious and incessant trait of
her character.

She was now reduced to an income below what life can be
decently maintained upon--the life of a city-dweller with
normal tastes for cleanliness and healthfulness.  She proceeded
without delay to put her invaluable education into use.  She
must fill her mind with the present and with the future.  She
must not glance back.  She must ignore her wounds--their aches,
their clamorous throbs.  She took off her clothes, as soon as
Mrs. Tucker left her alone, brushed them and hung them up, put
on the thin wrapper she had brought in her bag.  The fierce
heat of the little packing-case of a room became less
unendurable; also, she was saving the clothes from useless
wear.  She sat down at the table and with pencil and paper
planned her budget.

Of the ten dollars a week, three dollars and thirty cents must
be subtracted for rent--for shelter.  This left six dollars and
seventy cents for the other two necessaries, food and
clothing--there must be no incidental expenses since there was
no money to meet them.  She could not afford to provide for
carfare on stormy days; a rain coat, overshoes and umbrella,
more expensive at the outset, were incomparably cheaper in the
long run.  Her washing and ironing she would of course do for
herself in the evenings and on Sundays.  Of the two items which
the six dollars and seventy cents must cover, food came first
in importance.  How little could she live on?

That stifling hot room!  She was as wet as if she had come undried
from a bath.  She had thought she could never feel anything but
love for the sun of her City of the Sun.  But this undreamed-of
heat--like the cruel caresses of a too impetuous lover--

How little could she live on?

Dividing her total of six dollars and seventy cents by seven,
she found that she had ninety-five cents a day.  She would soon
have to buy clothes, however scrupulous care she might take of
those she possessed.  It was modest indeed to estimate fifteen
dollars for clothes before October.  That meant she must save
fifteen dollars in the remaining three weeks of June, in July,
August and September--in one hundred and ten days.  She must
save about fifteen cents a day.  And out of that she must buy
soap and tooth powder, outer and under clothes, perhaps a hat
and a pair of shoes.  Thus she could spend for food not more
than eighty cents a day, as much less as was consistent with
buying the best quality--for she had learned by bitter
experience the ravages poor quality food makes in health and
looks, had learned why girls of the working class go to pieces
swiftly after eighteen.  She must fight to keep health--sick
she did not dare be.  She must fight to keep looks--her figure
was her income.

Eighty cents a day. The outlook was not so gloomy.  A cup of
cocoa in the morning--made at home of the best cocoa, the kind
that did not overheat the blood and disorder the skin--it
would cost her less than ten cents.  She would carry lunch with
her to the store.  In the evening she would cook a chop or
something of that kind on the gas stove she would buy.  Some
days she would be able to save twenty or even twenty-five
cents toward clothing and the like.  Whatever else happened,
she was resolved never again to sink to dirt and rags.  Never
again!--never!  She had passed through that experience once
without loss of self-respect only because it was by way of
education.  To go through it again would be yielding ground in
the fight--the fight for a destiny worth while which some latent
but mighty instinct within her never permitted her to forget.

She sat at the table, with the shutters closed against the
fiery light of the summer afternoon sun.  That hideous
unacceptable heat!  With eyelids drooped--deep and dark were the
circles round them--she listened to the roar of the city, a
savage sound like the clamor of a multitude of famished wild
beasts.  A city like the City of Destruction in "Pilgrim's
Progress"--a city where of all the millions, but a few
thousands were moving toward or keeping in the sunlight of
civilization.  The rest, the swarms of the cheap boarding
houses, cheap lodging houses, tenements--these myriads were
squirming in darkness and squalor, ignorant and never to be
less ignorant, ill fed and never to be better fed, clothed in
pitiful absurd rags or shoddy vulgar attempts at finery, and
never to be better clothed.  She would not be of those!  She
would struggle on, would sink only to mount.  She would work;
she would try to do as nearly right as she could.  And in the
end she must triumph.  She would get at least a good part of
what her soul craved, of what her mind craved, of what her
heart craved.

The heat of this tenement room!  The heat to which poverty was
exposed naked and bound!  Would not anyone be justified in
doing anything--yes, _anything_--to escape from this fiend?




