CHAPTER XVII


AT the hotel again; she went to Burlingham's room, gathered his
belongings--his suit, his well-worn, twice-tapped shoes, his one
extra suit of underclothes, a soiled shirt, two dickeys and
cuffs, his whisk broom, toothbrush, a box of blacking, the
blacking brush.  She made the package as compact as she could--it
was still a formidable bundle both for size and weight--and
carried it into her room.  Then she rolled into a small parcel
her own possessions--two blouses, an undervest, a pair of
stockings, a nightgown--reminder of Bethlehem and her brief sip
at the cup of success--a few toilet articles.  With the two
bundles she descended to the office.

"I came to say," she said calmly to the clerk, "that we have no
money to pay what we owe.  Mr. Burlingham is at the
hospital--very sick with typhoid.  Here is a dollar and eighty
cents.  You can have that, but I'd like to keep it, as it's all
we've got."

The clerk called the manager, and to him Susan repeated.  She
used almost the same words; she spoke in the same calm,
monotonous way.  When she finished, the manager, a small, brisk
man with a large brisk beard, said:

"No.  Keep the money.  I'd like to ask you to stay on.  But we run
this place for a class of people who haven't much at best and
keep wobbling back and forth across the line.  If I broke my
rule----"

He made a furious gesture, looked at the girl angrily--holding
her responsible for his being in a position where he must do
violence to every decent instinct--"My God, miss, I've got a
wife and children to look after.  If I ran my hotel on sympathy,
what'd become of them?"

"I wouldn't take anything I couldn't pay for," said Susan.  "As
soon as I earn some money----"

"Don't worry about that," interrupted the manager.  He saw now
that he was dealing with one who would in no circumstances
become troublesome; he went on in an easier tone:  "You can stay
till the house fills up."

"Could you give me a place to wait on table and clean up
rooms--or help cook?"

"No, I don't need anybody.  The town's full of people out of
work.  You can't ask me to turn away----"

"Please--I didn't know," cried the girl.

"Anyhow, I couldn't give but twelve a month and board,"
continued the manager.  "And the work--for a lady like you----"

A lady!  She dropped her gaze in confusion.  If he knew about her birth!

"I'll do anything.  I'm not a lady," said she.  "But I've got to
have at least ten a week in cash."

"No such place here." The manager was glad to find the fault of
uppish ideas in this girl who was making it hard for him to be
business-like.  "No such place anywhere for a beginner."

"I must have it," said the girl.

"I don't want to discourage you, but----"  He was speaking less
curtly, for her expression made him suspect why she was bent
upon that particular amount.  "I hope you'll succeed.  Only--don't
be depressed if you're disappointed."

She smiled gravely at him; he bowed, avoiding her eyes.  She took
up her bundles and went out into Walnut Street.  He moved a few
steps in obedience to an impulse to follow her, to give her
counsel and warning, to offer to help her about the larger
bundle.  But he checked himself with the frown of his own not too
prosperous affairs.

It was the hottest part of the day, and her way lay along
unshaded streets.  As she had eaten nothing since the night
before, she felt faint.  Her face was ghastly when she entered
the office of the hospital and left Burlingham's parcel.  The
clerk at the desk told her that Burlingham was in the same
condition--"and there'll be probably no change one way or the
other for several days."

She returned to the street, wandered aimlessly about.  She knew
she ought to eat something, but the idea of food revolted her.
She was fighting the temptation to go to the _Commercial_ office,
Roderick Spenser's office.  She had not a suspicion that his
kindness might have been impulse, long since repented of,
perhaps repented of as soon as he was away from her.  She felt
that if she went to him he would help her.  "But I mustn't do
it," she said to herself.  "Not after what I did." No, she must
not see him until she could pay him back.  Also, and deeper,
there was a feeling that there was a curse upon her; had not
everyone who befriended her come to grief?  She must not draw
anyone else into trouble, must not tangle others in the meshes
of her misfortunes.  She did not reason this out, of course; but
the feeling was not the less strong because the reasons for it
were vague in her mind.  And there was nothing vague about the
resolve to which she finally came--that she would fight her
battle herself.

Her unheeding wanderings led her after an hour or so to a big
department store.  Crowds of shoppers, mussy, hot, and cross,
were pushing rudely in and out of the doors.  She entered,
approached a well-dressed, bareheaded old gentleman, whom she
rightly placed as floorwalker, inquired of him:

"Where do they ask for work?"

She had been attracted to him because his was the one face
within view not suggesting temper or at least bad humor.  It was
more than pleasant, it was benign.  He inclined toward Susan with
an air that invited confidence and application for balm for a
wounded spirit.  The instant the nature of her inquiry penetrated
through his pose to the man himself, there was a swift change to
lofty disdain--the familiar attitude of workers toward
fellow-workers of what they regard as a lower class.  Evidently
he resented her having beguiled him by the false air of young
lady into wasting upon her, mere servility like himself, a
display reserved exclusively for patrons.  It was Susan's first
experience of this snobbishness; it at once humbled her into the
dust.  She had been put in her place, and that place was not
among people worthy of civil treatment.  A girl of his own class
would have flashed at him, probably would have "jawed" him.
Susan meekly submitted; she was once more reminded that she was
an outcast, one for whom the respectable world had no place.  He
made some sort of reply to her question, in the tone the usher
of a fashionable church would use to a stranger obviously not in
the same set as the habitués.  She heard the tone, but not the
words; she turned away to seek the street again.  She wandered
on--through the labyrinth of streets, through the crowds on
crowds of strangers.

Ten dollars a week!  She knew little about wages, but enough to
realize the hopelessness of her quest.  Ten dollars a week--and
her own keep beside.  The faces of the crowds pushing past her
and jostling her made her heartsick.  So much sickness, and
harassment, and discontent--so much unhappiness!  Surely all
these sad hearts ought to be kind to each other.  Yet they were
not; each soul went selfishly alone, thinking only of its own burden.

She walked on and on, thinking, in this disconnected way
characteristic of a good intelligence that has not yet developed
order and sequence, a theory of life and a purpose.  It had
always been her habit to walk about rather than to sit, whether
indoors or out.  She could think better when in motion
physically.  When she was so tired that she began to feel weak,
she saw a shaded square, with benches under the trees.  She
entered, sat down to rest.  She might apply to the young doctor.
But, no.  He was poor--and what chance was there of her ever
making the money to pay back?  No, she could not take alms; than
alms there was no lower way of getting money.  She might return
to Mr. Blynn and accept his offer.  The man in all his physical
horror rose before her.  No, she could not do that.  At least, not
yet.  She could entertain the idea as a possibility now.  She
remembered her wedding--the afternoon, the night.  Yes, Blynn's
offer involved nothing so horrible as that--and she had lived
through that.  It would be cowardice, treachery, to shrink from
anything that should prove necessary in doing the square thing
by the man who had done so much for her.  She had said she would
die for Burlingham; she owed even that to him, if her death
would help him.  Had she then meant nothing but mere lying words
of pretended gratitude?  But Blynn was always there; something
else might turn up, and her dollar and eighty cents would last
another day or so, and the ten dollars were not due for six
days.  No, she would not go to Blynn; she would wait, would take
his advice--"think it over."

A man was walking up and down the shaded alley, passing and
repassing the bench where she sat.  She observed him, saw that he
was watching her.  He was a young man--a very young man--of
middle height, strongly built.  He had crisp, short dark hair, a
darkish skin, amiable blue-gray eyes, pleasing features.  She
decided that he was of good family, was home from some college
on vacation.  He was wearing a silk shirt, striped flannel
trousers, a thin serge coat of an attractive shade of blue.  She
liked his looks, liked the way he dressed.  It pleased her that
such a man should be interested in her; he had a frank and
friendly air, and her sad young heart was horribly lonely.  She
pretended not to notice him; but after a while he walked up to
her, lifting his straw hat.

"Good afternoon," said he.  When he showed his strong sharp teeth
in an amiable smile, she thought of Sam Wright--only this man
was not weak and mean looking, like her last and truest memory
picture of Sam--indeed, the only one she had not lost.
"Good afternoon," replied she politely.  For in spite of
Burlingham's explanations and cautionings she was still the
small-town girl, unsuspicious toward courtesy from strange men.
Also, she longed for someone to talk with.  It had been weeks
since she had talked with anyone nearer than Burlingham to her
own age and breeding.

"Won't you have lunch with me?" he asked.  "I hate to eat alone."

She, faint from hunger, simply could not help obvious hesitation
before saying, "I don't think I care for any."

"You haven't had yours--have you?"

"No."

"May I sit down?"

She moved along the bench to indicate that he might, without
definitely committing herself.

He sat, took off his hat.  He had a clean, fresh look about the
neck that pleased her.  She was weary of seeing grimy, sweaty
people, and of smelling them.  Also, except the young doctor,
since Roderick Spenser left her at Carrolltown she had talked
with no one of her own age and class--the class in which she had
been brought up, the class that, after making her one of itself,
had cast her out forever with its mark of shame upon her.  Its
mark of shame--burning and stinging again as she sat beside this
young man!

"You're sad about something?" suggested he, himself nearly as
embarrassed as she.

"My friend's ill.  He's got typhoid."

"That is bad.  But he'll get all right.  They always cure typhoid,
nowadays--if it's taken in time and the nursing's good.
Everything depends on the nursing.  I had it a couple of years
ago, and pulled through easily."

Susan brightened.  He spoke so confidently that the appeal to her
young credulity toward good news and the hopeful, cheerful thing
was irresistible.  "Oh, yes--he'll be over it soon," the young
man went on, "especially if he's in a hospital where they've got
the facilities for taking care of sick people.  Where is he?"

"In the hospital--up that way." She moved her head vaguely in
the direction of the northwest.

"Oh, yes.  It's a good one--for the pay patients.  I suppose for
the poor devils that can't pay"--he glanced with careless
sympathy at the dozen or so tramps on benches nearby--"it's like
all the rest of 'em--like the whole world, for that matter.  It
must be awful not to have money enough to get on with, I mean.
I'm talking about men." He smiled cheerfully.  "With a woman--if
she's pretty--it's different, of course."

The girl was so agitated that she did not notice the sly, if
shy, hint in the remark and its accompanying glance.  Said she:

"But it's a good hospital if you pay?"

"None better.  Maybe it's good straight through.  I've only heard
the servants' talk--and servants are such liars.  Still--I'd not
want to trust myself to a hospital unless I could pay.  I guess
the common people have good reason for their horror of free
wards.  Nothing free is ever good."

The girl's face suddenly and startlingly grew almost hard, so
fierce was the resolve that formed within her.  The money must be
got--_must!_--and would.  She would try every way she could think
of between now and to-morrow; then--if she failed she would go
to Blynn.

The young man was saying:  "You're a stranger in town?"

"I was with a theatrical company on a show boat.  It sank."

His embarrassment vanished.  She saw, but she did not understand
that it was because he thought he had "placed" her--and that her
place was where he had hoped.

"You _are_ up against it!" said he.  "Come have some lunch.  You'll
feel better."

The good sense of this was unanswerable.  Susan hesitated no
longer, wondered why she had hesitated at first.  "Well--I guess
I will." And she rose with a frank, childlike alacrity that
amused him immensely.

"You don't look it, but you've been about some--haven't you?"

"Rather," replied she.

"I somehow thought you knew a thing or two."

They walked west to Race Street.  They were about the same
height.  Her costume might have been fresher, might have
suggested to an expert eye the passed-on clothes of a richer
relative; but her carriage and the fine look of skin and hair
and features made the defects of dress unimportant.  She seemed
of his class--of the class comfortable, well educated, and
well-bred.  If she had been more experienced, she would have seen
that he was satisfied with her appearance despite the curious
looking little package, and would have been flattered.  As it
was, her interest was absorbed in things apart from herself.  He
talked about the town--the amusements, the good times to be had
at the over-the-Rhine beer halls, at the hilltop gardens, at the
dances in the pavilion out at the Zoo.  He drew a lively and
charming picture, one that appealed to her healthy youth, to her
unsatisfied curiosity, to her passionate desire to live the gay,
free city life of which the small town reads and dreams.

"You and I can go round together, can't we?  I haven't got much,
but I'll not try to take your time for nothing, of course.  That
wouldn't be square.  I'm sure you'll have no cause to complain.
What do you say?"

"Maybe," replied the girl, all at once absent-minded.  Her brain
was wildly busy with some ideas started there by his significant
words, by his flirtatious glances at her, by his way of touching
her whenever he could make opportunity.  Evidently there was an
alternative to Blynn.

"You like a good time, don't you?" said he.

"Rather!" exclaimed she, the violet eyes suddenly very violet
indeed and sparkling.  Her spirits had suddenly soared.  She was
acting like one of her age.  With that blessed happy hopefulness
of healthy youth, she had put aside her sorrows--not because she
was frivolous but for the best of all reasons, because she was
young and superbly vital.  Said she:  "I'm crazy about
dancing--and music."

"I only needed to look at your feet--and ankles--to know that,"
ventured he the "ankles" being especially audacious.

She was pleased, and in youth's foolish way tried to hide her
pleasure by saying, "My feet aren't exactly small."

"I should say not!" protested he with energy.  "Little feet would
look like the mischief on a girl as tall as you are.  Yes, we can
have a lot of fun."

They went into a large restaurant with fly fans speeding.  Susan
thought it very grand--and it was the grandest restaurant she
had ever been in.  They sat down--in a delightfully cool place by
a window looking out on a little plot of green with a colladium,
a fountain, some oleanders in full and fragrant bloom; the young
man ordered, with an ease that fascinated her, an elaborate
lunch--soup, a chicken, with salad, ice cream, and fresh
peaches.  Susan had a menu in her hand and as he ordered she
noted the prices.  She was dazzled by his extravagance--dazzled
and frightened--and, in a curious, vague, unnerving way,
fascinated.  Money--the thing she must have for Burlingham in
whose case "everything depended on the nursing." In the brief
time this boy and she had been together, he, without making an
effort to impress, had given her the feeling that he was of the
best city class, that he knew the world--the high world.  Thus,
she felt that she must be careful not to show her "greenness."
She would have liked to protest against his extravagance, but she
ventured only the timid remonstrance, "Oh, I'm not a bit hungry."

She thought she was speaking the truth, for the ideas whirling
so fast that they were dim quite took away the sense of hunger.
But when the food came she discovered that she was, on the
contrary, ravenous--and she ate with rising spirits, with a
feeling of content and hope.  He had urged her to drink wine or
beer, but she refused to take anything but a glass of milk; and
he ended by taking milk himself.  He was looking more and more
boldly and ardently into her eyes, and she received his glances
smilingly.  She felt thoroughly at ease and at home, as if she
were back once more among her own sort of people--with some
element of disagreeable constraint left out.

Since she was an outcast, she need not bother about the small
restraints the girls felt compelled to put upon themselves in
the company of boys.  Nobody respected a "bastard," as they
called her when they spoke frankly.  So with nothing to lose she
could at least get what pleasure there was in freedom.  She liked
it, having this handsome, well-dressed young man making love to
her in this grand restaurant where things were so good to eat
and so excitingly expensive.  He would not regard her as fit to
associate with his respectable mother and sisters.  In the casts
of respectability, her place was with Jeb Ferguson!  She was
better off, clear of the whole unjust and horrible business of
respectable life, clear of it and free, frankly in the outcast
class.  She had not realized--and she did not realize--that
association with the players of the show boat had made any
especial change in her; in fact, it had loosened to the
sloughing point the whole skin of her conventional
training--that surface skin which seems part of the very essence
of our being until something happens to force us to shed it.
Crises, catastrophes, may scratch that skin, or cut clear
through it; but only the gentle, steady, everywhere-acting
prying-loose of day and night association can change it from a
skin to a loose envelope ready to be shed at any moment.

"What are you going to do?" asked the young man, when the
acquaintance had become a friendship--which was before the
peaches and ice cream were served.

"I don't know," said the girl, with the secretive instinct of
self-reliance hiding the unhappiness his abrupt question set to
throbbing again.

"Honestly, I've never met anyone that was so congenial.  But
maybe you don't feel that way?"

"Then again maybe I do," rejoined she, forcing a merry smile.

His face flushed with embarrassment, but his eyes grew more
ardent as he said:  "What were you looking for, when I saw you
in Garfield Place?"

"Was that Garfield Place?" she asked, in evasion.

"Yes." And he insisted, "What were you looking for?"

"What were _you_ looking for?"

"For a pretty girl." They both laughed.  "And I've found her.  I'm
suited if you are. . . .  Don't look so serious.  You haven't
answered my question."

"I'm looking for work."

He smiled as if it were a joke.  "You mean for a place on the stage.
That isn't work.  _You_ couldn't work.  I can see that at a glance."

"Why not?"

"Oh, you haven't been brought up to that kind of life.  You'd
hate it in every way.  And they don't pay women anything for
work.  My father employs a lot of them.  Most of his girls live at
home.  That keeps the wages down, and the others have to piece
out with"--he smiled--"one thing and another."

Susan sat gazing straight before her.  "I've not had much
experience," she finally said, thoughtfully.  "I guess I don't
know what I'm about."

The young man leaned toward her, his face flushing with
earnestness.  "You don't know how pretty you are.  I wish my
father wasn't so close with me.  I'd not let you ever speak of
work again--even on the stage.  What good times we could have!"

"I must be going," said she, rising.  Her whole body was
alternately hot and cold.  In her brain, less vague now, were the
ideas Mabel Connemora had opened up for her.

"Oh, bother!" exclaimed he.  "Sit down a minute.  You
misunderstood me.  I don't mean I'm flat broke."

Susan hastily reseated herself, showing her confusion.  "I wasn't
thinking of that."

"Then--what were you thinking of?"

"I don't know," she replied--truthfully, for she could not have
put into words anything definite about the struggle raging in
her like a battle in a fog.  "I often don't exactly know what I'm
thinking about.  I somehow can't--can't fit it together--yet."

"Do you suppose," he went on, as if she had not spoken, "do you
suppose I don't understand?  I know you can't afford to let me
take your time for nothing. . . .  Don't you like me a little?"

She looked at him with grave friendliness.  "Yes." Then, seized
with a terror which her habitual manner of calm concealed from
him, she rose again.

"Why shouldn't it be me as well as another?. . .  At least sit
down till I pay the bill."

She seated herself, stared at her plate.

"Now what are you thinking about?" he asked.

"I don't know exactly.  Nothing much."

The waiter brought the bill.  The young man merely glanced at the
total, drew a small roll of money from his trousers pocket, put
a five-dollar note on the tray with the bill.  Susan's eyes
opened wide when the waiter returned with only two quarters and
a dime.  She glanced furtively at the young man, to see if he, too,
was not disconcerted.  He waved the tray carelessly aside; the
waiter said "Thank you," in a matter-of-course way, dropped the
sixty cents into his pocket.  The waiter's tip was by itself almost
as much as she had ever seen paid out for a meal for two persons.

"Now, where shall we go?" asked the young man.

Susan did not lift her eyes.  He leaned toward her, took her
hand.  "You're different from the sort a fellow usually finds,"
said he.  "And I'm--I'm crazy about you.  Let's go," said he.

Susan took her bundle, followed him.  She glanced up the street
and down.  She had an impulse to say she must go away alone; it
was not strong enough to frame a sentence, much less express her
thought.  She was seeing queer, vivid, apparently disconnected
visions--Burlingham, sick unto death, on the stretcher in the
hospital reception room--Blynn of the hideous face and loose,
repulsive body--the contemptuous old gentleman in the shop--odds
and ends of the things Mabel Connemora had told her--the roll of
bills the young man had taken from his pocket when he paid--Jeb
Ferguson in the climax of the horrors of that wedding day and
night.  They went to Garfield Place, turned west, paused after a
block or so at a little frame house set somewhat back from the
street.  The young man, who had been as silent as she--but
nervous instead of preoccupied--opened the gate in the picket fence.

"This is a first-class quiet place," said he, embarrassed but
trying to appear at ease.

Susan hesitated.  She must somehow nerve herself to speak of
money, to say to him that she needed ten dollars--that she must
have it.  If she did not speak--if she got nothing for Mr.
Burlingham--or almost nothing--and probably men didn't give
women much--if she were going with him--to endure again the
horrors and the degradation she had suffered from Mr.
Ferguson--if it should be in vain!  This nice young man didn't
suggest Mr. Ferguson in any way.  But there was such a mystery
about men--they had a way of changing so--Sam Wright--Uncle
George even Mr. Ferguson hadn't seemed capable of torturing a
helpless girl for no reason at all----

"We can't stand here," the young man was saying.

She tried to speak about the ten dollars.  She simply could not
force out the words.  With brain in a whirl, with blood beating
suffocatingly into her throat and lungs, but giving no outward
sign of agitation, she entered the gate.  There was a low,
old-fashioned porch along the side of the house, with an awning
curiously placed at the end toward the street.  When they
ascended the steps under the awning, they were screened from the
street.  The young man pulled a knob.  A bell within tinkled
faintly; Susan started, shivered.  But the young man, looking
straight at the door, did not see.  A colored girl with a
pleasant, welcoming face opened, stood aside for them to enter.
He went straight up the stairs directly ahead, and Susan
followed.  At the threshold the trembling girl looked round in
terror.  She expected to see a place like that foul, close little
farm bedroom--for it seemed to her that at such times men must
seek some dreadful place--vile, dim, fitting.  She was in a
small, attractively furnished room, with a bow window looking
upon the yard and the street.  The furniture reminded her of her
own room at her uncle's in Sutherland, except that the brass bed
was far finer.  He closed the door and locked it.

As he advanced toward her he said:  "_What_ are you seeing?  Please
don't look like that." Persuasively, "You weren't thinking of
me--were you?"

"No--Oh, no," replied she, passing her hand over her eyes to try
to drive away the vision of Ferguson.

"You look as if you expected to be murdered.  Do you want to go?"

She forced herself to seem calm.  "What a coward I am!" she said
to herself.  "If I could only die for him, instead of this.  But
I can't.  And I _must_ get money for him."

To the young man she said:  "No.  I--I--want to stay."


Late in the afternoon, when they were once more in the street,
he said.  "I'd ask you to go to dinner with me, but I haven't
enough money."

She stopped short.  An awful look came into her face.

"Don't be alarmed," cried he, hurried and nervous, and blushing
furiously.  "I put the--the present for you in that funny little
bundle of yours, under one of the folds of the nightgown or
whatever it is you've got wrapped on the outside.  I didn't like
to hand it to you.  I've a feeling somehow that you're not
regularly--that kind."

"Was it--ten dollars?" she said, and for all he could see she
was absolutely calm.

"Yes," replied he, with a look of relief followed by a smile of
amused tenderness.

"I can't make you out," he went on.  "You're a queer one.  You've
had a look in your eyes all afternoon--well, if I hadn't been
sure you were experienced, you'd almost have frightened me away."

"Yes, I've had experience.  The--the worst," said the girl.

"You--you attract me awfully; you've got--well, everything
that's nice about a woman--and at the same time, there's
something in your eyes---- Are you very fond of your friend?"

"He's all I've got in the world."

"I suppose it's his being sick that makes you look and act so queer?"

"I don't know what's the matter with me," she said slowly.
"I--don't know."

"I want to see you again--soon.  What's your address?"

"I haven't any.  I've got to look for a place to live."

"Well, you can give me the place you did live.  I'll write you
there, Lorna.  You didn't ask me my name when I asked you yours.
You've hardly said anything.  Are you always quiet like this?"

"No--not always.  At Least, I haven't been."

"No.  You weren't, part of the time this afternoon--at the
restaurant.  Tell me, what are you thinking about all the time?
You're very secretive.  Why don't you tell me?  Don't you know I
like you?"

"I don't know," said the girl in a slow dazed way.  "I--don't--know."

"I wouldn't take your time for nothing," he went on, after a
pause.  "My father doesn't give me much money, but I think I'll
have some more day after tomorrow.  Can I see you then?"

"I don't know."

He laughed.  "You said that before.  Day after tomorrow
afternoon--in the same place.  No matter if it's raining.  I'll be
there first--at three.  Will you come?"

"If I can."

She made a movement to go.  But still he detained her.  He colored
high again, in the struggle between the impulses of his generous
youth and the fear of being absurd with a girl he had picked up
in the street.  He looked at her searchingly, wistfully.  "I know
it's your life, but--I hate to think of it," he went on.  "You're
far too nice.  I don't see how you happened to be in--in this
line.  Still, what else is there for a girl, when she's up
against it?  I've often thought of those things--and I don't feel
about them as most people do. . . .  I'm curious about you.
You'll pardon me, won't you?  I'm afraid I'll fall in love with
you, if I see you often.  You won't fail to come day after tomorrow?"

"If I can."

"Don't you want to see me again?"

She did not speak or lift her eyes.

"You like me, don't you?"

Still no answer.

"You don't want to be questioned?"

"No," said the girl.

"Where are you going now?"

"To the hospital."

"May I walk up there with you?  I live in Clifton.  I can go home
that way."

"I'd rather you didn't."

"Then--good-by--till day after tomorrow at three." He put out
his hand; he had to reach for hers and take it.  "You're not--not
angry with me?"

"No."

His eyes lingered tenderly upon her.  "You are _so_ sweet!  You
don't know how I want to kiss you.  Are you sorry to go--sorry to
leave me--just a little?. . .  I forgot.  You don't like to be
questioned.  Well, good-by, dear."

"Good-by," she said; and still without lifting her gaze from the
ground she turned away, walked slowly westward.

She had not reached the next street to the north when she
suddenly felt that if she did not sit she would drop.  She lifted
her eyes for an instant to glance furtively round.  She saw a
house with stone steps leading up to the front doors; there was
a "for rent" sign in one of the close-shuttered parlor windows.
She seated herself, supported the upper part of her weary body
by resting her elbows on her knees.  Her bundle had rolled to the
sidewalk at her feet.  A passing man picked it up, handed it to
her, with a polite bow.  She looked at him vaguely, took the
bundle as if she were not sure it was hers.

"Heat been too much for you, miss?" asked the man.

She shook her head.  He lingered, talking volubly--about the
weather--then about how cool it was on the hilltops.  "We might
go up to the Bellevue," he finally suggested, "if you've nothing
better to do."

"No, thank you," she said.

"I'll go anywhere you like.  I've got a little money that I don't
care to keep."

She shook her head.

"I don't mean anything bad," he hastened to suggest--because
that would bring up the subject in discussable form.

"I can't go with you," said the girl drearily.  "Don't bother me, please."

"Oh--excuse me." And the man went on.

Susan turned the bundle over in her lap, thrust her fingers
slowly and deliberately into the fold of the soiled blouse which
was on the outside.  She drew out the money.  A ten and two fives.
Enough to keep his room at the hospital for two weeks.  No, for
she must live, herself.  Enough to give him a room one week
longer and to enable her to live two weeks at least. . . .  And
day after tomorrow--more.  Perhaps, soon--enough to see him
through the typhoid.  She put the money in her bosom, rose and
went on toward the hospital.  She no longer felt weary, and the
sensation of a wound that might ache if she were not so numb
passed away.

A clerk she had not seen before was at the barrier desk.  "I came
to ask how Mr. Burlingham is," said she.

The clerk yawned, drew a large book toward him.
"Burlingham--B--Bu--Bur----" he said half to himself, turning
over the leaves.  "Yes--here he is." He looked at her.  "You his
daughter?"

"No, I'm a friend."

"Oh--then--he died at five o'clock--an hour ago."

He looked up--saw her eyes--only her eyes.  They were a deep
violet now, large, shining with tragic softness--like the eyes
of an angel that has lost its birthright through no fault of its
own.  He turned hastily away, awed, terrified, ashamed of himself.




