CHAPTER XXV


AT the hotel they had been Mr. and Mrs. Spenser.  When they
moved, he tried to devise some way round this; but it was
necessary that they have his address at the office, and Mrs.
Pershall with the glistening old-fashioned false teeth who kept
the furnished-room house was not one in whose withered bosom it
would be wise to raise a suspicion as to respectability.  Only in
a strenuously respectable house would he live; in the other
sort, what might not untrustworthy Susan be up to?  So Mr. and
Mrs. Spenser they remained, and the truth was suspected by only
a few of their acquaintances, was known by two or three of his
intimates whom he told in those bursts of confidence to which
voluble, careless men are given--and for which they in resolute
self-excuse unjustly blame strong drink.

One of his favorite remarks to her--sometimes made laughingly,
again ironically, again angrily, again insultingly, was in this strain:

"Your face is demure enough.  But you look too damned attractive
about those beautiful feet of yours to be respectable at
heart--and trustable."

That matter of her untrustworthiness had become a fixed idea
with him.  The more he concentrated upon her physical loveliness,
the more he revolved the dangers, the possibilities of
unfaithfulness; for a physical infatuation is always jealous.
His work on the _Herald_ made close guarding out of the question.
The best he could do was to pop in unexpectedly upon her from
time to time, to rummage through her belongings, to check up her
statements as to her goings and comings by questioning the
servants and, most important of all, each day to put her through
searching and skillfully planned cross-examination.  She had to
tell him everything she did--every little thing--and he
calculated the time, to make sure she had not found half an hour
or so in which to deceive him.  If she had sewed, he must look at
the sewing; if she had read, he must know how many pages and
must hear a summary of what those pages contained.  As she would
not and could not deceive him in any matter, however small, she
was compelled to give over a plan quietly to look for work and
to fit herself for some occupation that would pay a living
wage--if there were such for a beginning woman worker.

At first he was covert in this detective work, being ashamed of
his own suspicions.  But as he drank, as he associated again with
the same sort of people who had wasted his time in Cincinnati,
he rapidly became franker and more inquisitorial.  And she
dreaded to see the look she knew would come into his eyes, the
cruel tightening of his mouth, if in her confusion and eagerness
she should happen not instantly to satisfy the doubt behind each
question.  He tormented her; he tormented himself.  She suffered
from humiliation; but she suffered more because she saw how his
suspicions were torturing him.  And in her humility and
helplessness and inexperience, she felt no sense of right to
resist, no impulse to resist.

And she forced herself to look on his spasms of jealousy as the
occasional storms which occur even in the best climates.  She
reminded herself that she was secure of his love, secure in his
love; and in her sad mood she reproached herself for not being
content when at bottom everything was all right.  After what she
had been through, to be sad because the man she loved loved her
too well!  It was absurd, ungrateful.

He pried into every nook and corner of her being with that
ingenious and tireless persistence human beings reserve for
searches for what they do not wish to find.  At last he contrived
to find, or to imagine he had found, something that justified
his labors and vindicated his disbelief in her.

They were walking in Fifth Avenue one afternoon, at the hour
when there is the greatest press of equipages whose expensively
and showily dressed occupants are industriously engaged in the
occupation of imagining they are doing something when in fact
they are doing nothing.  What a world!  What a grotesque confusing
of motion and progress!  What fantastic delusions that one is
busy when one is merely occupied!  They were between Forty-sixth
Street and Forty-seventh, on the west side, when a small
victoria drew up at the curb and a woman descended and crossed
the sidewalk before them to look at the display in a milliner's
window.  Susan gave her the swift, seeing glance which one woman
always gives another--the glance of competitors at each other's
offerings.  Instead of glancing away, Susan stopped short and
gazed.  Forgetting Rod, she herself went up to the millinery
display that she might have a fuller view of the woman who had
fascinated her.

"What's the matter?" cried Spenser.  "Come on.  You don't want any
of those hats."

But Susan insisted that she must see, made him linger until the
woman returned to her carriage and drove away.  She said to Rod:

"Did you see her?"

"Yes.  Rather pretty--nothing to scream about."

"But her _style!_" cried Susan.

"Oh, she was nicely dressed--in a quiet way.  You'll see
thousands a lot more exciting after you've been about in this
town a while."

"I've seen scores of beautifully dressed women here--and in
Cincinnati, too," replied Susan.  "But that woman--she was
_perfect_.  And that's a thing I've never seen before."
"I'm glad you have such quiet tastes--quiet and inexpensive."

"Inexpensive!" exclaimed Susan.  "I don't dare think how much
that woman's clothes cost.  You only glanced at her, Rod, you
didn't _look_.  If you had, you'd have seen.  Everything she wore
was just right." Susan's eyes were brilliant.  "Oh, it was
wonderful!  The colors--the fit--the style--the making--every big
and little thing.  She was a work of art, Rod!  That's the first
woman I've seen in my life that I through and through envied."

Rod's look was interested now.  "You like that sort of thing a
lot?" he inquired with affected carelessness.

"Every woman does," replied she, unsuspicious.  "But I
care--well, not for merely fine clothes.  But for the--the kind
that show what sort of person is in them." She sighed.  "I wonder
if I'll ever learn--and have money enough to carry out.  It'll
take so much--so much!" She laughed.  "I've got terribly
extravagant ideas.  But don't be alarmed--I keep them chained up."

He was eying her unpleasantly.  Suddenly she became confused.  He
thought it was because she was seeing and understanding his look
and was frightened at his having caught her at last.  In fact, it
was because it all at once struck her that what she had
innocently and carelessly said sounded like a hint or a reproach
to him.  He sneered:

"So you're crazy about finery--eh?"

"Oh, Rod!" she cried.  "You know I didn't mean it that way.  I
long for and dream about a whole lot of beautiful things, but
nothing else in the world's in the same class with--with what
we've got."

"You needn't try to excuse yourself," said he in a tone that
silenced her.

She wished she had not seen the woman who had thus put a cloud
over their afternoon's happiness.  But long after she had
forgotten his queerness about what she said, she continued to
remember that "perfect" woman--to see every detail of her
exquisite toilet, so rare in a world where expensive-looking
finery is regarded as the chief factor in the art of dress.  How
much she would have to learn before she could hope to dress like
that!--learn not merely about dress but about the whole artistic
side of life.  For that woman had happened to cross Susan's
vision at just the right moment--in development and in mood--to
reveal to her clearly a world into which she had never
penetrated--a world of which she had vaguely dreamed as she read
novels of life in the lands beyond the seas, the life of palaces
and pictures and statuary, of opera and theater, of equipages
and servants and food and clothing of rare quality.  She had
rather thought such a life did not exist outside of novels and
dreams.  What she had seen of New York--the profuse, the gigantic
but also the undiscriminating--had tended to strengthen the
suspicion.  But this woman proved her mistaken.

Our great forward strides are made unconsciously, are the
results of apparently trivial, often unnoted impulses.  Susan,
like all our race, had always had vague secret dreams of
ambition--so vague thus far that she never thought of them as
impelling purposes in her life.  Her first long forward stride
toward changing these dreams from the vague to the definite was
when Rod, before her on the horse on the way to Brooksburg,
talked over his shoulder to her of the stage and made her feel
that it was the life for her, the only life open to her where a
woman could hope to be judged as human being instead of as mere
instrument of sex.  Her second long forward movement toward
sharply defined ambition dated from the sight of the woman of
the milliner's window--the woman who epitomized to Susan the
whole art side of life that always gives its highest expression
in some personal achievement--the perfect toilet, the perfect
painting or sculpture, the perfect novel or play.

But Rod saw in her enthusiasm only evidence of a concealed
longing for the money to indulge extravagant whims.  With his
narrowing interest in women--narrowed now almost to sex--his
contempt for them as to their minds and their hearts was so far
advancing that he hardly took the trouble to veil it with
remnants of courtesy.  If Susan had clearly understood--even if
she had let herself understand what her increasing knowledge
might have enabled her to understand--she would have hated him
in spite of the hold gratitude and habit had given him upon her
loyal nature--and despite the fact that she had, as far as she
could see, no alternative to living with him but the tenements
or the streets.

One day in midsummer she chanced to go into the Hotel Astor to
buy a magazine.  As she had not been there before she made a
wrong turning and was forced to cross one of the restaurants.  In
a far corner, half hidden by a group of palms, she saw Rod at a
small table with a strikingly pretty woman whose expression and
dress and manner most energetically proclaimed the actress.  The
woman was leaning toward him, was touching his hand and looking
into his eyes with that show of enthusiasm which raises doubts
of sincerity in an experienced man and sets him to keeping an
eye or a hand--or both--upon his money.  Real emotion, even a
professional expert at display of emotion, is rarely so adept at
exhibiting itself.

It may have been jealousy that guided her to this swift judgment
upon the character of the emotion correctly and charmingly
expressing itself.  If so, jealousy was for once a trustworthy
guide.  She turned swiftly and escaped unseen.  The idea of
trapping him, of confronting him, never occurred to her.  She
felt ashamed and self-reproachful that she had seen.  Instead of
the anger that fires a vain woman, whether she cares about a man
or not, there came a profound humiliation.  She had in some way
fallen short; she had not given him all he needed; it must be
that she hadn't it to give, since she had given him all she had.
He must not know--he must not!  For if he knew he might dislike
her, might leave her--and she dared not think what life would be
without him, her only source of companionship and affection, her
only means of support.  She was puzzled that her discovery, not
of his treachery--he had so broken her spirit with his
suspicions and his insulting questions that she did not regard
herself as of the rank and dignity that has the right to exact
fidelity--but of his no longer caring enough to be content with
her alone, had not stunned her with amazement.  She did not
realize how completely the instinct that he was estranged from
her had prepared her for the thing that always accompanies
estrangement.  Between the perfect accord, that is, the never
realized ideal for a man and a woman living together, and the
intolerable discord that means complete repulse there is a vast
range of states of feeling imperceptibly shading into each
other.  Most couples constantly move along this range, now toward
the one extreme, now toward the other.  As human kings are not
given to self-analysis, and usually wander into grotesque error
whenever they attempt it, no couple knows precisely where it is
upon the range, until something crucial happens to compel them
to know.  Susan and Rod had begun as all couples begin--with an
imaginary ideal accord based upon their ignorance of each other
and their misunderstanding of what qualities they thought they
understood in each other.  The delusion of accord vanished that
first evening in New York.  What remained?  What came in the
place?  They knew no more about that than does the next couple.
They were simply "living along." A crisis, drawing them close
together or flinging them forever apart or forcing them to live
together, he frankly as keeper and she frankly as kept, might
come any day, any hour.  Again it might never come.

After a few weeks the matter that had been out of her mind
accidentally and indirectly came to the surface in a chance
remark.  She said:

"Sometimes I half believe a man could be untrue to a woman, even
though he loved her."

She did not appreciate the bearings of her remark until it was
spoken.  With a sensation of terror lest the dreaded crisis might
be about to burst, she felt his quick, nervous glance.  She
breathed freely again when she felt his reassurance and relief
as she successfully withstood.

"Certainly," he said with elaborate carelessness.  "Men are a
rotten, promiscuous lot.  That's why it's necessary for a woman
to be good and straight."

All this time his cross-examination had grown in severity.
Evidently he was fearing that she might be having a recurrence
of the moral disease which was fatal in womankind, though only
mild indiscretion in a man, if not positively a virtue, an
evidence of possessing a normal masculine nature.  Her mind began
curiously--sadly--to revolve the occasional presents--of money,
of books, of things to wear--which he gave, always quite
unexpectedly.  At first unconsciously, but soon consciously, she
began to associate these gifts, given always in an embarrassed,
shamefaced way, with certain small but significant indications
of his having strayed.  And it was not long before she
understood; she was receiving his expiations for his
indiscretions.  Like an honest man and a loyal--masculinely
loyal--lover he was squaring accounts.  She never read the books
she owed to these twinges; it was thus that she got her aversion
to Thackeray--one of his "expiations" was a set of Thackeray.
The things to wear she contrived never to use.  The conscience
money she either spent upon him or put back into his pocket a
little at a time, sure that he, the most careless of men about
money, would never detect her.

His work forced him to keep irregular hours; thus she could
pretend to herself that his absences were certainly because of
office duty.  Still, whenever he was gone overnight, she became
unhappy--not the crying kind of unhappiness; to that she was
little given--but the kind that lies awake and aches and with
morbid vivid fancy paints the scenes suspicion suggests, and
stares at them not in anger but in despair.  She was always
urging herself to content herself with what she was getting.  She
recalled and lived again the things she had forgotten while
Roderick was wholly hers--the penalties of the birth brand of
shame--her wedding night--the miseries of the last period of her
wanderings with Burlingham--her tenement days--the dirt, the
nakedness, the brutal degradation, the vermin, the savage cold.
And the instant he returned, no matter how low-spirited she had
been, she was at once gay, often deliriously gay--until soon his
awakened suspicion as to what she had been up to in his absence
quieted her.  There was little forcing or pretense in this
gayety; it bubbled and sparkled from the strong swift current of
her healthy passionate young life which, suspended in the icy
clutch of fear when he was away from her, flowed as freely as the
brooks in spring as soon as she realized that she still had him.

Did she really love him?  She believed she did.  Was she right?
Love is of many degrees--and kinds.  And strange and confused
beyond untangling is the mixture of motives and ideas in the
mind of any human being as to any other being with whom his or
her relations are many sided.

Anyone who had not been roughly seized by destiny and forced to
fight desperately weaponless might have found it difficult to
understand how this intelligent, high-spirited girl could be so
reasonable--coarsely practical, many people would have said.  A
brave soul--truly brave with the unconscious courage that lives
heroically without any taint of heroics--such a soul learns to
accept the facts of life, to make the best of things, to be
grateful for whatever sunshine may be and not to shriek and
gesticulate at storm.  Suffering had given this sapling of a girl
the strong fiber that enables a tree to push majestically up
toward the open sky.  Because she did not cry out was no sign
that she was not hurt; and because she did not wither and die of
her wounds was only proof of her strength of soul.  The weak wail
and the weak succumb; the strong persist--and a world of wailers
and weaklings calls them hard, insensible, coarse.

Spenser was fond of exhibiting to his men friends--to some of
them--this treasure to which he always returned the more
enamoured for his vagary and its opportunity of comparison.
Women he would not permit.  In general, he held that all women,
the respectable no less than the other kind, put mischief in
each other's heads and egged each other on to carry out the
mischief already there in embryo.  In particular, he would have
felt that he was committing a gross breach of the proprieties,
not to say the decencies, had he introduced a woman of Susan's
origin, history and present status to the wives and sisters of
his friends; and, for reasons which it was not necessary even to
pretend to conceal from her, he forbade her having anything to
do with the kinds of woman who would not have minded, had they
known all about her.  Thus, her only acquaintances, her only
associates, were certain carefully selected men.  He asked to
dinner or to the theater or to supper at Jack's or Rector's only
such men as he could trust.  And trustworthy meant physically
unattractive.  Having small and dwindling belief in the mentality
of women, and no belief whatever in mentality as a force in the
relations of the sexes, he was satisfied to have about her any
man, however clever, provided he was absolutely devoid of
physical charm.

The friend who came oftenest was Drumley, an editorial writer
who had been his chum at college and had got him the place on
the _Herald_.  Drumley he would have trusted alone with her on a
desert island; for several reasons, all of his personal
convenience, it pleased him that Susan liked Drumley and was
glad of his company, no matter how often he came or how long he
stayed.  Drumley was an emaciated Kentucky giant with grotesquely
sloping shoulders which not all the ingenious padding of his
tailor could appreciably mitigate.  His spare legs were bowed in
the calves.  His skin looked rough and tough, like sandpaper and
emery board.  The thought of touching his face gave one the same
sensation as a too deeply cut nail.  His neck was thin and long,
and he wore a low collar--through that interesting passion of the
vain for seeing a defect in themselves as a charm and calling
attention to it.  The lower part of his sallow face suggested
weakness--the weakness so often seen in the faces of
professional men, and explaining why they chose passive instead of
active careers.  His forehead was really fine, but the development
of the rest of the cranium above the protuberant little ears was
not altogether satisfying to a claim of mental powers.

Drumley was a good sort--not so much through positive virtue as
through the timidity which too often accounts for goodness, that
is, for the meek conformity which passes as goodness.  He was an
insatiable reader, had incredible stores of knowledge; and as he
had a large vocabulary and a ready speech he could dole out of
those reservoirs an agreeable treacle of commonplace philosophy
or comment--thus he had an ideal equipment for editorial
writing.  He was absolutely without physical magnetism.  The most
he could ever expect from any woman was respect; and that woman
would have had to be foolish enough not to realize that there is
as abysmal a difference between knowledge and mentality as there
is between reputation and character.  Susan liked him because he
knew so much.  She had developed still further her innate passion
for educating herself.  She now wanted to know all about
everything.  He told her what to read, set her in the way to
discovering and acquiring the art of reading--an art he was
himself capable of acquiring only in its rudiments--an art the
existence of which is entirely unsuspected by most persons who
regard themselves and are regarded as readers.  He knew the
histories and biographies that are most amusing and least
shallow and mendacious.  He instructed her in the great
playwrights and novelists and poets, and gave--as his own--the
reasons for their greatness assigned by the world's foremost
critical writers.  He showed her what scientific books to
read--those that do not bore and do not hide the simple
fascinating facts about the universe under pretentious,
college-professor phraseology.

He was a pedant, but his pedantry was disguised, therefore
mitigated by his having associated with men of the world instead
of with the pale and pompous capons of the student's closet.  His
favorite topic was beauty and ugliness--and his abhorrence for
anyone who was not good to look at.  As he talked this subject,
his hearers were nervous and embarrassed.  He was a drastic cure
for physical vanity.  If this man could so far deceive himself
that he thought himself handsome, who in all the world could be
sure he or she was not the victim of the same incredible
delusion?  It was this hallucination of physical beauty that
caused Rod to regard him as the safest of the safe.  For it made
him pitiful and ridiculous.

At first he came only with Spenser.  Afterward, Spenser used to
send him to dine with Susan and to spend the evenings with her
when he himself had to be--or wished to be elsewhere.  When she
was with Drumley he knew she was not "up to any of her old
tricks." Drumley fell in love with her; but, as in his
experience the female sex was coldly chaste, he never developed
even the slight hope necessary to start in a man's mind the idea
of treachery to his friend about a woman.  Whenever Drumley heard
that a woman other than the brazenly out and out disreputables
was "loose" or was inclined that way, he indignantly denied it
as a libel upon the empedestaled sex.  If proofs beyond dispute
were furnished, he raved against the man with all the venom of
the unsuccessful hating the successful for their success.  He had
been sought of women, of course, for he had a comfortable and
secure position and money put by.  But the serious women who had
set snares for him for the sake of a home had not attracted him;
as for the better looking and livelier women who had come
a-courting with alimony in view, they had unwisely chosen the
method of approach that caused him to set them down as nothing
but professional loose characters.  Thus his high ideal of
feminine beauty and his lofty notion of his own deserts, on the
one hand, and his reverence for womanly propriety, on the other
hand, had kept his charms and his income unshared.

Toward the end of Spenser's first year on the _Herald_--it was
early summer--he fell into a melancholy so profound and so
prolonged that Susan became alarmed.  She was used to his having
those fits of the blues that are a part of the nervous, morbidly
sensitive nature and in the unhealthfulness of an irregular and
dissipated life recur at brief intervals.  He spent more and more
time with her, became as ardent as in their first days together,
with an added desperation of passionate clinging that touched
her to the depths.  She had early learned to ignore his moods, to
avoid sympathy which aggravates, and to meet his blues with a
vigorous counterirritant of liveliness.  After watching the
course of this acute attack for more than a month, she decided
that at the first opportunity she would try to find out from
Drumley what the cause was.  Perhaps she could cure him if she
were not working in the dark.

One June evening Drumley came to take her to dinner at the
Casino in Central Park.  She hesitated.  She still liked Drumley's
mind; but latterly he had fallen into the way of gazing
furtively, with a repulsive tremulousness of his loose eyelids,
at her form and at her ankles--especially at her
ankles--especially at her ankles.  This furtive debauch gave her
a shivery sense of intrusion.  She distinctly liked the candid,
even the not too coarse, glances of the usual man.  But not this
shy peeping.  However, as there were books she particularly
wished to talk about with him, she accepted.

It was an excursion of which she was fond.  They strolled along
Seventh Avenue to the Park, entered and followed the lovely
walk, quiet and green and odorous, to the Mall.  They sauntered
in the fading light up the broad Mall, with its roof of boughs
of majestic trees, with its pale blue vistas of well-kept lawns.
At the steps leading to the Casino they paused to delight in the
profusely blooming wistaria and to gaze away northward into and
over what seemed an endless forest with towers and cupolas of
castle and fortress and cathedral rising serene and graceful
here and there above the sea of green.  There was the sound of
tinkling fountains, the musical chink-chink of harness chains of
elegant equipages; on the Mall hundreds of children were playing
furiously, to enjoy to the uttermost the last few moments before
being snatched away to bed--and the birds were in the same
hysterical state as they got ready for their evening song.  The
air was saturated with the fresh odors of spring and early
summer flowers.  Susan, walking beside the homely Drumley, was a
charming and stylish figure of girlish womanhood.  The year and
three months in New York had wrought the same transformations in
her that are so noticeable whenever an intelligent and observant
woman with taste for the luxuries is dipped in the magic of city
life.  She had grown, was now perhaps a shade above the medium
height for women, looked even taller because of the slenderness
of her arms, of her neck, of the lines of her figure.  There was
a deeper melancholy in her violet-gray eyes.  Experience had
increased the allure of her wide, beautifully curved mouth.

They took a table under the trees, with beds of blooming flowers
on either hand.  Drumley ordered the sort of dinner she liked,
and a bottle of champagne and a bottle of fine burgundy to make
his favorite drink--champagne and burgundy, half and half.  He
was running to poetry that evening--Keats and Swinburne.
Finally, after some hesitation, he produced a poem by Dowson--"I
ran across it today.  It's the only thing of his worth while, I
believe--and it's so fine that Swinburne must have been sore
when he read it because he hadn't thought to write it himself.
Its moral tone is not high, but it's so beautiful, Mrs. Susan,
that I'll venture to show it to you.  It comes nearer to
expressing what men mean by the man sort of constancy than
anything I ever read.  Listen to this:


  "I cried for madder music and for stronger wine,
  But when the feast is finished, and the lamps expire,
  Then falls thy shadow, Cynara!--the night is thine;
  And I am desolate and sick of an old passion,
  Yea, hungry for the lips of my desire;
  I have been faithful to thee, Cynara, in my fashion."


Susan took the paper, read the four stanzas several times,
handed it back to him without a word.  "Don't you think it fine?"
asked he, a little uneasily--he was always uneasy with a woman
when the conversation touched the relations of the sexes--uneasy
lest he might say or might have said something to send a shiver
through her delicate modesty.

"Fine," Susan echoed absently.  "And true. . . .  I suppose it is
the best a woman can expect--to be the one he returns to.
And--isn't that enough?"

"You are very different from any woman I ever met," said
Drumley.  "Very different from what you were last
fall--wonderfully different.  But you were different then, too."

"I'd have been a strange sort of person if it weren't so.  I've
led a different life.  I've learned--because I've had to learn."

"You've been through a great deal--suffered a great deal for one
of your age?"

Susan shrugged her shoulders slightly.  She had her impulses to
confide, but she had yet to meet the person who seriously
tempted her to yield to them.  Not even Rod; no, least of all Rod.

"You are--happy?"

"Happy--and more.  I'm content."

The reply was the truth, as she saw the truth.  Perhaps it was
also the absolute truth; for when a woman has the best she has
ever actually possessed, and when she knows there is nowhere
else on earth for her, she is likely to be content.  Their
destiny of subordination has made philosophers of women.

Drumley seemed to be debating how to disclose something he had
in mind.  But after several glances at the sweet, delicate face
of the girl, he gave it over.  In the subdued light from the
shaded candles on their table, she looked more child-like than
he had ever seen.  Perhaps her big pale-blue hat and graceful
pale-blue summer dress had something to do with it, also.  "How
old are you?" he asked abruptly.

"Nearly nineteen."

"I feel like saying, 'So much!'--and also 'So little!' How long
have you been married?"

"Why all these questions?" demanded she, smiling.

He colored with embarrassment.  "I didn't mean to be
impertinent," said he.

"It isn't impertinence--is it?--to ask a woman how long she's
been married."

But she did not go on to tell him; instead, she pretended to
have her attention distracted by a very old man and a very young
girl behaving in most lover-like fashion, the girl outdoing the
man in enthusiastic determination to convince.  She was elegantly
and badly dressed in new clothes--and she seemed as new to that
kind of clothes as those particular clothes were new to her.
After dinner they walked down through the Park by the way they
had come; it did not look like the same scene now, with the
moonlight upon it, with soft shadows everywhere and in every
shadow a pair of lovers.  They had nearly reached the entrance
when Drumley said:  "Let's sit on this bench here.  I want to have
a serious talk with you."

Susan seated herself and waited.  He lit a cigar with the
deliberation of one who is striving to gain time.  The bench
happened to be one of those that are divided by iron arms into
individual seats.  He sat with a compartment between them.  The
moonbeams struck across his profile as he turned it toward her;
they shone full upon her face.  He looked, hastily glanced away.
With a gruffness as if the evening mist had got into his throat
he said:

"Let's take another bench."

"Why?" objected she.  "I like this beautiful light."

He rose.  "Please let me have my way." And he led her to a bench
across which a tree threw a deep shadow; as they sat there,
neither could see the other's face except in dimmest outline.
After a brief silence he began:

"You love Rod--don't you?"

She laughed happily.

"Above everything on earth?"

"Or in heaven."

"You'd do anything to have him succeed?"

"No one could prevent his succeeding.  He's got it in him.  It's
bound to come out."

"So I'd have said--until a year ago--that is, about a year ago."

As her face turned quickly toward him, he turned profile to her.
"What do you mean?" said she, quickly, almost imperiously.

"Yes--I mean _you_," replied he.

"You mean you think I'm hindering him?"

When Drumley's voice finally came, it was funereally solemn.
"You are dragging him down.  You are killing his ambition."

"You don't understand," she protested with painful expression.
"If you did, you wouldn't say that."

"You mean because he is not true to you?"

"Isn't he?" said she, loyally trying to pretend surprise.  "If
that's so, you've no right to tell me--you, his friend.  If it
isn't, you----"

"In either case I'd be beneath contempt--unless I knew that you
knew already.  Oh, I've known a long time that you knew--ever
since the night you looked away when he absent-mindedly pulled a
woman's veil and gloves out of his pocket.  I've watched you
since then, and I know."

"You are a very dear friend, Mr. Drumley," said she.  "But you
must not talk of him to me."

"I must," he replied.  And he hastened to make the self-fooled
hypocrite's familiar move to the safety of duty's skirts.  "It
would be a crime to keep silent."

She rose.  "I can't listen.  It may be your duty to speak.  It's my
duty to refuse to hear."

"He is overwhelmed with debt.  He is about to lose his position.
It is all because he is degraded--because he feels he is
entangled in an intrigue with a woman he is ashamed to love--a
woman he has struggled in vain to put out of his heart."

Susan, suddenly weak, had seated herself again.  From his first
words she had been prey to an internal struggle--her heart
fighting against understanding things about her relations with
Rod, about his feeling toward her, which she had long been
contriving to hide from herself.  When Drumley began she knew
that the end of self-deception was at hand--if she let him
speak.  But the instant he had spoken, the struggle ended.  If he
had tried to stop she would have compelled him to go on.

"That woman is you," he continued in the same solemn measured
way.  "Rod will not marry you.  He cannot leave you.  And you are
dragging him down.  You are young.  You don't know that passionate
love is a man's worst enemy.  It satisfies his ambition--why
struggle when one already has attained the climax of desire?  It
saps his strength, takes from him the energy without which
achievement is impossible.  Passion dies poisoned of its own
sweets.  But passionate love kills--at least, it kills the man.  If
you did not love him, I'd not be talking to you now.  But you do
love him.  So I say, you are killing him. . . .  Don't think he
has told me----"

"I know he didn't," she interrupted curtly.  "He does not whine."

She hadn't a doubt of the truth of her loyal defense.  And
Drumley could not have raised a doubt, even if she had been
seeing the expression of his face.  His long practice of the
modern editorial art of clearness and brevity and compact
statement had enabled him to put into those few sentences more
than another might have been unable to express in hours of
explanation and appeal.  And the ideas were not new to her.  Rod
had often talked them in a general way and she had thought much
about them.  Until now she had never seen how they applied to Rod
and herself.  But she was seeing and feeling it now so acutely
that if she had tried to speak or to move she could not have
done so.

After a long pause, Drumley said:  "Do you comprehend what I mean?"

She was silent--so it was certain that she comprehended.
"But you don't believe?. . .  He began to borrow money almost
immediately on his arrival here last summer.  He has been
borrowing ever since--from everybody and anybody.  He owes now,
as nearly as I can find out, upwards of three thousand dollars."

Susan made a slight but sharp movement.

"You don't believe me?"

"Yes.  Go on."

"He has it in him, I'm confident, to write plays--strong plays.
Does he ever write except ephemeral space stuff for the paper?"

"No."

"And he never will so long as he has you to go home to.  He lives
beyond his means because he will have you in comfortable
surroundings and dressed to stimulate his passion.  If he would
marry you, it might be a little better--though still he would
never amount to anything as long as his love lasted--the kind of
love you inspire.  But he will never marry you.  I learned that
from what I know of his ideas and from what I've observed as to
your relations--not from anything he ever said about you."

If Susan had been of the suspicious temperament, or if she had
been a few years older, the manner of this second protest might
have set her to thinking how unlike Drumley, the inexpert in
matters of love and passion, it was to analyze thus and to form
such judgments.  And thence she might have gone on to consider
that Drumley's speeches sounded strangely like paraphrases of
Spenser's eloquent outbursts when he "got going." But she had
not a suspicion.  Besides, her whole being was concentrated upon
the idea Drumley was trying to put into words.  She asked:

"Why are you telling me?"

"Because I love him," replied Drumley with feeling.  "We're about
the same age, but he's been like my son ever since we struck up
a friendship in the first term of Freshman year."

"Is that your only reason?"

"On my honor." And so firmly did he believe it, he bore her
scrutiny as she peered into his face through the dimness.

She drew back.  "Yes," she said in a low voice, half to herself.
"Yes, I believe it is." There was silence for a long time, then
she asked quietly:

"What do you think I ought to do?"

"Leave him--if you love him," replied Drumley.

"What else can you do?. . .  Stay on and complete his ruin?"

"And if I go--what?"

"Oh, you can do any one of many things.  You can----"

"I mean--what about him?"

"He will be like a crazy man for a while.  He'll make that a
fresh excuse for keeping on as he's going now.  Then he'll brace
up, and I'll be watching over him, and I'll put him to work in
the right direction.  He can't be saved, he can't even be kept
afloat as long as you are with him, or within reach.  With you
gone out of his life--his strength will return, his self-respect
can be roused.  I've seen the same thing in other cases again and
again.  I could tell you any number of stories of----"

"He does not care for me?"

"In _one_ way, a great deal.  But you're like drink, like a drug
to him.  It is strange that a woman such as you, devoted,
single-hearted, utterly loving, should be an influence for bad.
But it's true of wives also.  The best wives are often the worst.
The philosophers are right.  A man needs tranquillity at home."

"I understand," said she.  "I understand--perfectly."  And her
voice was unemotional, as always when she was so deeply moved
that she dared not release anything lest all should be released.

She was like a seated statue.  The moon had moved so that it
shone upon her face.  He was astonished by its placid calm.  He
had expected her to rave and weep, to protest and plead--before
denouncing him and bidding him mind his own business.  Instead,
she was making it clear that after all she did not care about
Roderick; probably she was wondering what would become of her,
now that her love was ruined.  Well, wasn't it natural?  Wasn't it
altogether to her credit--wasn't it additional proof that she was
a fine pure woman?  How could she have continued deeply to care
for a man scandalously untrue, and drunk much of the time?
Certainly, it was in no way her fault that Rod made her the
object and the victim of the only kind of so-called love of
which he was capable.  No doubt one reason he was untrue to her
was that she was too pure for his debauched fancy.  Thus reasoned
Drumley with that mingling of truth and error characteristic of
those who speculate about matters of which they have small and
unfixed experience.

"About yourself," he proceeded.  "I have a choice of professions
for you--one with a company on the road--on the southern
circuit--with good prospects of advancement.  I know, from what
I have seen of you, and from talks we have had, that you would
do well on the stage.  But the life might offend your
sensibilities.  I should hesitate to recommend it to a delicate,
fine-fibered woman like you.  The other position is a clerkship
in a business office in Philadelphia--with an increase as soon
as you learn stenography and typewriting.  It is respectable.  It
is sheltered.  It doesn't offer anything brilliant.  But except
the stage and literature, nothing brilliant offers for a woman.
Literature is out of the question, I think--certainly for the
present.  The stage isn't really a place for a woman of lady-like
instincts.  So I should recommend the office position."

She remained silent.

"While my main purpose in talking to you," he continued, "was to
try to save him, I can honestly say that it was hardly less my
intention to save you.  But for that, I'd not have had the
courage to speak.  He is on the way down.  He's dragging you with
him.  What future have you with him?  You would go on down and
down, as low as he should sink and lower.  You've completely
merged yourself in him--which might do very well if you were his
wife and a good influence in his life or a mere negation like
most wives.  But in the circumstances it means ruin to you.  Don't
you see that?"

"What did you say?"

"I was talking about you--your future your----"

"Oh, I shall do well enough." She rose.  "I must be going."

Her short, indifferent dismissal of what was his real object in
speaking--though he did not permit himself to know it--cut him
to the quick.  He felt a sickening and to him inexplicable sense
of defeat and disgrace.  Because he must talk to distract his
mind from himself, he began afresh by saying:

"You'll think it over?"

"I am thinking it over. . . .  I wonder that----"

With the fingers of one hand she smoothed her glove on the
fingers of the other--"I wonder that I didn't think of it long
ago.  I ought to have thought of it.  I ought to have seen."

"I can't tell you how I hate to have been the----"

"Please don't say any more," she requested in a tone that made
it impossible for a man so timid as he to disobey.

Neither spoke until they were in Fifty-ninth Street; then he,
unable to stand the strain of a silent walk of fifteen blocks,
suggested that they take the car down.  She assented.  In the car
the stronger light enabled him to see that she was pale in a way
quite different from her usual clear, healthy pallor, that
there was an unfamiliar look about her mouth and her eyes--a
look of strain, of repression, of resolve.  These signs and the
contrast of her mute motionlessness with her usual vivacity of
speech and expression and gesture made him uneasy.

"I'd advise," said he, "that you reflect on it all carefully and
consult with me before you do anything--if you think you ought
to do anything."

She made no reply.  At the door of the house he had to reach for
her hand, and her answer to his good night was a vague absent
echo of the word.  "I've only done what I saw was my duty," said
he, appealingly.

"Yes, I suppose so.  I must go in."

"And you'll talk with me before you----"

The door had closed behind her; she had not known he was speaking.

When Spenser came, about two hours later, and turned on the
light in their bedroom, she was in the bed, apparently asleep.
He stood staring with theatric self-consciousness at himself in
the glass for several minutes, then sat down before the bureau
and pulled out the third drawer--where he kept collars, ties,
handkerchiefs, gloves and a pistol concealed under the
handkerchiefs.  With the awful solemnity of the youth who takes
himself--and the theater--seriously he lifted the pistol, eyed
it critically, turning it this way and that as if interested in
the reflections of light from the bright cylinder and barrel at
different angles.  He laid it noiselessly back, covered it over
with the handkerchiefs, sat with his fingers resting on the edge
of the drawer.  Presently he moved uneasily, as a man--on the
stage or in its amusing imitation called civilized life among
the self-conscious classes--moves when he feels that someone is
behind him in a "crucial moment."

He slowly turned round.  She had shifted her position so that her
face was now toward him.  But her eyes were closed and her face
was tranquil.  Still, he hoped she had seen the little episode of
the pistol, which he thought fine and impressive.  With his arm
on the back of the chair and supporting that resolute-looking
chin of his, he stared at her face from under his thick
eyebrows, so thick that although they were almost as fair as his
hair they seemed dark.  After a while her eyelids fluttered and
lifted to disclose eyes that startled him, so intense, so
sleepless were they.

"Kiss me," she said, in her usual sweet, tender way--a little
shyness, much of passion's sparkle and allure.  "Kiss me."

"I've often thought," said he, "what would I do if I should go
smash, reach the end of my string?  Would I kill you before
taking myself off?  Or would that be cowardly?"

She had not a doubt that he meant this melodramatic twaddle.  It
did not seem twaddle or melodramatic to her--or, for that
matter, to him.  She clasped him more closely.  "What's the
matter, dear?" she asked, her head on his breast.

"Oh, I've had a row at the _Herald_, and have quit.  But I'll get
another place tomorrow."

"Of course.  I wish you'd fix up that play the way Drumley suggested."

"Maybe I shall.  We'll see."

"Anything else wrong?"

"Only the same old trouble.  I love you too much.  Too damn much,"
he added in a tone not intended for her ears.  "Weak fool--that's
what I am.  Weak fool.  I've got _you_, anyhow.  Haven't I?"

"Yes," she said.  "I'd do anything for you--anything."

"As long as I keep my eyes on you," said he, half mockingly.
"I'm weak, but you're weaker.  Aren't you?"

"I guess so.  I don't know." And she drew a long breath, nestled
into his arms, and upon his breast, with her perfumed hair
drowsing his senses.

He soon slept; when he awoke, toward noon, he did not disturb
her.  He shaved and bathed and dressed, and was about to go out
when she called him.  "Oh, I thought you were asleep," said he.
"I can't wait for you to get breakfast.  I must get a move on."

"Still blue?"

"No, indeed." But his face was not convincing.  "So long, pet."

"Aren't you going to kiss me good-by?"

He laughed tenderly, yet in bitter self-mockery too.  "And waste
an hour or so?  Not much.  What a siren you are!"

She put her hand over her face quickly.

"Now, perhaps I can risk one kiss." He bent over her; his lips
touched her hair.  She stretched out her hand, laid it against
his cheek.  "Dearest," she murmured.

"I must go."

"Just a minute.  No, don't look at me.  Turn your face so that I
can see your profile--so!" She had turned his head with a hand
that gently caressed as it pushed.  "I like that view best.  Yes,
you are strong and brave.  You will succeed!  No--I'll not keep
you a minute." She kissed his hand, rested her head for an
instant on his lap as he sat on the edge of the bed, suddenly
flung herself to the far side of the bed, with her face toward
the wall.

"Go to sleep again, lazy!" cried he.  "I'll try to be home about
dinner-time.  See that you behave today!  Good lord, how hard it
is to leave you!  Having you makes nothing else seem worth while.
Good-by!"

And he was off.  She started to a sitting posture, listened to
the faint sound of his descending footsteps.  She darted to the
window, leaned out, watched him until he rounded the corner into
Broadway.  Then she dropped down with elbows on the window sill
and hands pressing her cheeks; she stared unseeingly at the
opposite house, at a gilt cage with a canary hopping and
chirping within.  And once more she thought all the thoughts that
had filled her mind in the sleepless hours of that night and
morning.  Her eyes shifted in color from pure gray to pure
violet--back and forth, as emotion or thought dominated her
mind.  She made herself coffee in the French machine, heated the
milk she brought every day from the dairy, drank her _café au
lait_ slowly, reading the newspaper advertisements for "help
wanted--female"--a habit she had formed when she first came to
New York and had never altogether dropped.  When she finished
her coffee she took the scissors and cut out several of the
demands for help.

She bathed and dressed.  She moved through the routine of
life--precisely as we all do, whatever may be in our minds and
hearts.  She went out, crossed Long Acre and entered the shop of
a dealer in women's cast-off clothes.  She reappeared in the
street presently with a fat, sloppy looking woman in black.  She
took her to the rooms, offered for sale her entire wardrobe
except the dress she had on and one other, the simply trimmed
sailor upon her head, the ties on her feet and one pair of boots
and a few small articles.  After long haggling the woman made a
final price--ninety-five dollars for things, most of them almost
new, which had cost upwards of seven hundred.  Susan accepted the
offer; she knew she could do no better.  The woman departed,
returned with a porter and several huge sweets of wrapping
paper.  The two made three bundles of the purchases; the money
was paid over; they and Susan's wardrobe departed.

Next, Susan packed in the traveling bag she had brought from
Cincinnati the between seasons dress of brown serge she had
withheld, and some such collection of bare necessities as she
had taken with her when she left George Warham's.  Into the bag
she put the pistol from under Spenser's handkerchiefs in the
third bureau drawer.  When all was ready, she sent for the maid
to straighten the rooms.  While the maid was at work, she wrote
this note:


DEAREST--Mr. Drumley will tell you why I have gone.  You will
find some money under your handkerchiefs in the bureau.  When you
are on your feet again, I may come--if you want me.  It won't be
any use for you to look for me.  I ought to have gone before, but
I was selfish and blind.  Good-by, dear love--I wasn't so bad as
you always suspected.  I was true to you, and for the sake of
what you have been to me and done for me I couldn't be so
ungrateful as not to go.  Don't worry about me.  I shall get on.
And so will you.  It's best for us both.  Good-by, dear heart--I
was true to you.  Good-by.


She sealed this note, addressed it, fastened it over the mantel
in the sitting-room where they always put notes for each other.
And after she had looked in each drawer and in the closet at all
his clothing, and had kissed the pillow on which his head had
lain, she took her bag and went.  She had left for him the
ninety-five dollars and also eleven dollars of the money she had
in her purse.  She took with her two five-dollar bills and a
dollar and forty cents in change.

The violet waned in her eyes, and in its stead came the gray of
thought and action.


********THE END OF VOLUME I*******



SUSAN LENOX: HER FALL AND RISE

by
David Graham Phillips

Volume II

WITH A PORTRAIT
OF THE AUTHOR

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
NEW YORK        LONDON
1917




