CHAPTER XX


ON Monday at the lunch hour--or, rather, half-hour--Susan
ventured in to see the boss.

Matson had too recently sprung from the working class and was
too ignorant of everything outside his business to have made
radical changes in his habits.  He smoked five-cent cigars
instead of "twofurs"; he ate larger quantities of food, did not
stint himself in beer or in treating his friends in the evenings
down at Wielert's beer garden.  Also he wore a somewhat better
quality of clothing; but he looked precisely what he was.  Like
all the working class above the pauper line, he made a Sunday
toilet, the chief features of which were the weekly bath and the
weekly clean white shirt.  Thus, it being only Monday morning, he
was looking notably clean when Susan entered--and was morally
wound up to a higher key than he would be as the week wore on.
At sight of her his feet on the leaf of the desk wavered, then
became inert; it would not do to put on manners with any of the
"hands." Thanks to the bath, he was not exuding his usual odor
that comes from bolting much strong, cheap food.

"Well, Lorny--what's the kick?" inquired he with his amiable
grin.  His rise in the world never for an instant ceased to be a
source of delight to him; it--and a perfect digestion--kept him
in a good humor all the time.

"I want to know," stammered Susan, "if you can't give me a
little more money."

He laughed, eyeing her approvingly.  Her clothing was that of the
working girl; but in her face was the look never found in those
born to the modern form of slavery-wage servitude.  If he had
been "cultured" he might have compared her to an enslaved
princess, though in fact that expression of her courageous
violet-gray eyes and sensitive mouth could never have been in
the face of princess bred to the enslaving routine of the most
conventional of conventional lives; it could come only from
sheer erectness of spirit, the exclusive birthright of the sons
and daughters of democracy.

"More money!" he chuckled.  "You _have_ got a nerve!--when
factories are shutting down everywhere and working people are
tramping the streets in droves."

"I do about one-fourth more than the best hands you've got,"
replied Susan, made audacious by necessity.  "And I'll agree to
throw in my lunch time."

"Let me see, how much do you get?"

"Three dollars."

"And you aren't living at home.  You must have a hard time.  Not
much over for diamonds, eh?  You want to hustle round and get
married, Lorny.  Looks don't last long when a gal works.  But
you're holdin' out better'n them that gads and dances all night."

"I help at the restaurant in the evening to piece out my board.
I'm pretty tired when I get a chance to go to bed."

"I'll bet!. . .  So, you want more money.  I've been watchin'
you.  I watch all my gals--I have to, to keep weedin' out the
fast ones.  I won't have no bad examples in _my_ place!  As soon as
I ketch a gal livin' beyond her wages I give her the bounce."

Susan lowered her eyes and her cheeks burned--not because Matson
was frankly discussing the frivolous subject of sex.  Another
girl might have affected the air of distressed modesty, but it
would have been affectation, pure and simple, as in those
regions all were used to hearing the frankest, vilest
things--and we do not blush at what we are used to hearing.
Still, the tenement female sex is as full of affectation as is
the sex elsewhere.  But, Susan, the curiously self-unconscious,
was incapable of affectation.  Her indignation arose from her
sense of the hideous injustice of Matson's discharging girls for
doing what his meager wages all but compelled.

"Yes, I've been watching you," he went on, "with a kind of a
sort of a notion of makin' you a forelady.  That'd mean six
dollars a week.  But you ain't fit.  You've got the brains--plenty
of 'em.  But you wouldn't be of no use to me as forelady."

"Why not?" asked Susan.  Six dollars a week!  Affluence!  Wealth!

Matson took his feet down, relit his cigar and swung himself
into an oracular attitude.

"I'll show you.  What's manufacturin'?  Right down at the bottom,
I mean." He looked hard at the girl.  She looked receptively at him.

"Why, it's gettin' work out of the hands.  New ideas is nothin'.
You can steal 'em the minute the other fellow uses 'em.  No, it's
all in gettin' work out of the hands."

Susan's expression suggested one who sees light and wishes to
see more of it.  He proceeded:

"You work for me--for instance, now, if every day you make stuff
there's a profit of five dollars on, I get five dollars out of
you.  If I can push you to make stuff there's a profit of six
dollars on, I get six dollars--a dollar more.  Clear extra gain,
isn't it?  Now multiply a dollar by the number of hands, and
you'll see what it amounts to."

"I see," said Susan, nodding thoughtfully.

"Well!  How did I get up?  Because as a foreman I knew how to work
the hands.  I knew how to get those extra dollars.  And how do I
keep up?  Because I hire forepeople that get work out of the hands."

Susan understood.  But her expression was a comment that was not
missed by the shrewd Matson.

"Now, listen to me, Lorny.  I want to give you a plain straight
talk because I'd like to see you climb.  Ever since you've been
here I've been laughin' to myself over the way your
forelady--she's a fox, she is!--makes you the pacemaker for the
other girls.  She squeezes at least twenty-five cents a day over
what she used to out of each hand in your room because you're
above the rest of them dirty, shiftless muttonheads."

Susan flushed at this fling at her fellow-workers.

"Dirty, shiftless muttonheads," repeated Matson.  "Ain't I right?
Ain't they dirty?  Ain't they shiftless--so no-account that if
they wasn't watched every minute they'd lay down--and let me and
the factory that supports 'em go to rack and ruin?  And ain't
they muttonheads?  Do you ever find any of 'em saying or doing a
sensible thing?"

Susan could not deny.  She could think of excuses--perfect
excuses.  But the facts were about as he brutally put it.

"Oh, I know 'em.  I've dealt with 'em all my life," pursued the
box manufacturer.  "Now, Lorny, you ought to be a forelady.
You've got to toughen up and stop bein' so polite and helpful
and all that.  You'll _never_ get on if you don't toughen up.
Business is business.  Be as sentimental as you like away from
business, and after you've clum to the top.  But not _in_ business
or while you're kickin' and scratchin' and clawin' your way up."

Susan shook her head slowly.  She felt painfully young and
inexperienced and unfit for the ferocious struggle called
life.  She felt deathly sick.

"Of course it's a hard world," said Matson with a wave of his
cigar.  "But did I make it?"

"No," admitted Susan, as his eyes demanded a reply.

"Sure not," said he.  "And how's anybody to get up in it?  Is
there any other way but by kickin' and stampin', eh?"

"None that I see," conceded Susan reluctantly.

"None that is," declared he.  "Them that says there's other ways
either lies or don't know nothin' about the practical game.
Well, then!" Matson puffed triumphantly at the cigar.  "Such
bein' the case--and as long as the crowd down below's got to be
kicked in the face by them that's on the way up, why shouldn't
I do the kickin'--which is goin' to be done anyhow--instead of
gettin' kicked?  Ain't that sense?"

"Yes," admitted Susan.  She sighed.  "Yes," she repeated.

"Well--toughen up.  Meanwhile, I'll raise you, to spur the others
on.  I'll give you four a week." And he cut short her thanks with
an "Oh, don't mention it.  I'm only doin' what's square--what
helps me as well as you.  I want to encourage you.  You don't
belong down among them cattle.  Toughen up, Lorny.  A girl with
a bank account gets the pick of the beaux." And he nodded a
dismissal.

Matson, and his hands, bosses and workers, brutal, brutalizing
each other more and more as they acted and reacted upon each
other.  Where would it end?

She was in dire need of underclothes.  Her undershirts were full
of holes from the rubbing of her cheap, rough corset; her
drawers and stockings were patched in several places--in fact,
she could not have worn the stockings had not her skirt now been
well below her shoetops.  Also, her shoes, in spite of the money
she had spent upon them, were about to burst round the edges of
the soles.  But she would not longer accept from the Brashears
what she regarded as charity.

"You more than pay your share, what with the work you do,"
protested Mrs. Brashear.  "I'll not refuse the extra dollar
because I've simply got to take it.  But I don't want to pertend."

The restaurant receipts began to fall with the increasing
hardness of the times among the working people.  Soon it was down
to practically no profit at all--that is, nothing toward the
rent.  Tom Brashear was forced to abandon his policy of honesty,
to do as all the other purveyors were doing--to buy cheap stuff
and to cheapen it still further.  He broke abruptly with his
tradition and his past.  It aged him horribly all in a few
weeks--but, at least, ruin was put off.  Mrs. Brashear had to
draw twenty of the sixty-three dollars which were in the savings
bank against sickness.  Funerals would be taken care of by the
burial insurance; each member of the family, including Susan,
had a policy.  But sickness had to have its special fund; and it
was frequently drawn upon, as the Brashears knew no more than
their neighbors about hygiene, and were constantly catching the
colds of foolish exposure or indigestion and letting them
develop into fevers, bad attacks of rheumatism, stomach trouble,
backache all regarded by them as by their neighbors as a
necessary part of the routine of life.  Those tenement people had
no more notion of self-restraint than had the "better classes"
whose self-indulgences maintain the vast army of doctors and
druggists.  The only thing that saved Susan from all but an
occasional cold or sore throat from wet feet was eating little
through being unable to accustom herself to the fare that was
the best the Brashears could now afford--cheap food in cheap
lard, coarse and poisonous sugar, vilely adulterated coffee,
doctored meat and vegetables--the food which the poor in their
ignorance buy--and for which they in their helplessness pay
actually higher prices than do intelligent well-to-do people for
the better qualities.  And not only were the times hard, but the
winter also.  Snow--sleet--rain--thaw--slush--noisome,
disease-laden vapor--and, of course, sickness everywhere--with
occasional relief in death, relief for the one who died, relief
for the living freed from just so much of the burden.  The
sickness on every hand appalled Susan.  Surely, she said to old
Brashear, the like had never been before; on the contrary, said
he, the amount of illness and death was, if anything, less than
usual because the hard times gave people less for eating and
drinking.  These ghastly creatures crawling toward the hospital
or borne out on stretchers to the ambulance--these yet ghastlier
creatures tottering feebly homeward, discharged as cured--these
corpses of men, of women, of boys and girls, of babies--oh, how
many corpses of babies!--these corpses borne away for burial,
usually to the public burying ground--all these stricken ones in
the battle ever waging, with curses, with hoarse loud laughter,
with shrieks and moans, with dull, drawn faces and jaws set--all
these stricken ones were but the ordinary losses of the battle!

"And in the churches," said old Tom Brashear, "they preach the
goodness and mercy of God.  And in the papers they talk about how
rich and prosperous we are."

"I don't care to live!  It is too horrible," cried the girl.

"Oh, you mustn't take things so to heart," counseled he.  "Us
that live this life can't afford to take it to heart.  Leave that
to them who come down here from the good houses and look on us
for a minute and enjoy themselves with a little weepin' and
sighin' as if it was in the theater."

"It seems worse every, day," she said.  "I try to fool myself,
because I've got to stay and----"

"Oh, no, you haven't," interrupted he.

Susan looked at him with a startled expression.  It seemed to her
that the old man had seen into her secret heart where was daily
raging the struggle against taking the only way out open to a
girl in her circumstances.  It seemed to her he was hinting that
she ought to take that way.

If any such idea was in his mind, he did not dare put it into
words.  He simply repeated:

"You won't stay.  You'll pull out."

"How?" she asked.

"Somehow.  When the way opens you'll see it, and take it."

There had long since sprung up between these two a sympathy, a
mutual understanding beyond any necessity of expression in words
or looks.  She had never had this feeling for anyone, not even
for Burlingham.  This feeling for each other had been like that
of a father and daughter who love each other without either
understanding the other very well or feeling the need of a
sympathetic understanding.  There was a strong resemblance
between Burlingham and old Tom.  Both belonged to the familiar
philosopher type.  But, unlike the actor-manager, the old
cabinetmaker had lived his philosophy, and a very gentle and
tolerant philosophy it was.

After she had looked her request for light upon what way she was
to take, they sat silent, neither looking at the other, yet each
seeing the other with the eye of the mind.  She said:

"I may not dare take it."

"You won't have no choice," replied he.  "You'll have to take it.
And you'll get away from here.  And you mustn't ever come
back--or look back.  Forget all this misery.  Rememberin' won't do
us no good.  It'd only weaken you."

"I shan't ever forget," cried the girl.

"You must," said the old man firmly.  He added, "And you will.
You'll have too much else to think about--too much that has to
be attended to."

As the first of the year approached and the small shopkeepers of
the tenements, like the big ones elsewhere, were casting up the
year's balances and learning how far toward or beyond the verge
of ruin the hard times had brought them, the sound of the fire
engines--and of the ambulances--became a familiar part of the
daily and nightly noises of the district.  Desperate shopkeepers,
careless of their neighbors' lives and property in fiercely
striving for themselves and their families--workingmen out of a
job and deep in debt--landlords with too heavy interest falling
due--all these were trying to save themselves or to lengthen the
time the fact of ruin could be kept secret by setting fire to
their shops or their flats.  The Brashears had been burned out
twice in their wandering tenement house life; so old Tom was
sleeping little; was constantly prowling about the halls of all
the tenements in that row and into the cellars.

He told Susan the open secret of the meaning of most of these
fires.  And after he had cursed the fire fiends, he apologized
for them.  "It's the curse of the system," explained he.  "It's
all the curse of the system.  These here storekeepers and the
farmers the same way--they think they're independent, but really
they're nothin' but fooled slaves of the big blood suckers for
the upper class.  But these here little storekeepers, they're
tryin' to escape.  How does a man escape?  Why, by gettin' some
hands together to work for him so that he can take it out of their
wages.  When you get together enough to hire help--that's when you
pass out of slavery into the master class--master of slaves."

Susan nodded understandingly.

"Now, how can these little storekeepers like me get together
enough to begin to hire slaves?  By a hundred tricks, every one
of them wicked and mean.  By skimpin' and slavin' themselves and
their families, by sellin' short weight, by sellin' rotten food,
by sellin' poison, by burnin' to get the insurance.  And, at
last, if they don't die or get caught and jailed, they get
together the money to branch out and hire help, and begin to get
prosperous out of the blood of their help.  These here arson
fellows--they're on the first rung of the ladder of success.  You
heard about that beautiful ladder in Sunday school, didn't you?"

"Yes," said Susan, "that and a great many other lies about God
and man."

Susan had all along had great difficulty in getting sleep
because of the incessant and discordant noises of the district.
The unhappy people added to their own misery by disturbing each
other's rest--and no small part of the bad health everywhere
prevailing was due to this inability of anybody to get proper
sleep because somebody was always singing or quarreling,
shouting or stamping about.  But Susan, being young and as yet
untroubled by the indigestion that openly or secretly preyed
upon everyone else, did at last grow somewhat used to noise, did
contrive to get five or six hours of broken sleep.  With the
epidemic of fires she was once more restless and wakeful.  Every
day came news of fire somewhere in the tenement districts of the
city, with one or more, perhaps a dozen, roasted to death, or
horribly burned.  A few weeks, however, and even that peril
became so familiar that she slept like the rest.  There were too
many actualities of discomfort, of misery, to harass her all day
long every time her mind wandered from her work.

One night she was awakened by a scream.  She leaped from bed to
find the room filling with smoke and the street bright as day,
but with a flickering evil light.  Etta was screaming, Ashbel was
bawling and roaring like a tortured bull.  Susan, completely
dazed by the uproar, seized Etta and dragged her into the hall.
There were Mr. and Mrs. Brashear, he in his nightdress of
drawers and undershirt, she in the short flannel petticoat and
sacque in which she always slept.  Ashbel burst out of his room,
kicking the door down instead of turning the knob.

"Lorny," cried old Tom, "you take mother and Etta to the
escape." And he rushed at his powerful, stupid son and began to
strike him in the face with his one good fist, shrieking, "Shut
up, you damn fool!  Shut up!"

Dragging Etta and pushing Mrs. Brashear, Susan moved toward the
end of the hall where the fire escape passed their windows.  All
the way down, the landings were littered with bedding, pots,
pans, drying clothes, fire wood, boxes, all manner of rubbish,
the overflow of the crowded little flats.  Over these
obstructions and down the ladders were falling and stumbling
men, women, children, babies, in all degrees of nudity--for many
of the big families that slept in one room with windows tight
shut so that the stove heat would not escape and be wasted when
fuel was so dear, slept stark naked.  Susan contrived to get
Etta and the old woman to the street; not far behind them came
Tom and Ashbel, the son's face bleeding from the blows his
father had struck to quiet him.

It was a penetrating cold night, with an icy drizzle falling.
The street was filled with engines, hose, all manner of ruined
household effects, firemen shouting, the tenement people
huddling this way and that, barefooted, nearly or quite naked,
silent, stupefied.  Nobody had saved anything worth while.  The
entire block was ablaze, was burning as if it had been saturated
with coal oil.

"The owner's done this," said old Tom.  "I heard he was in
trouble.  But though he's a church member and what they call a
philanthropist, I hardly thought he'd stoop to hirin' this
done.  If anybody's caught, it'll be some fellow that don't know
who he did it for."

About a hundred families were homeless in the street.  Half a
dozen patrol wagons and five ambulances were taking the people
away to shelter, women and babies first.  It was an hour--an hour
of standing in the street, with bare feet on the ice, under the
ankle-deep slush--before old Tom and his wife got their turn to
be taken.  Then Susan and Etta and Ashbel, escorted by a
policeman, set out for the station house.  As they walked along,
someone called out to the policeman:

"Anybody killed at the fire, officer?"

"Six jumped and was smashed," replied the policeman.  "I seen
three dead babies.  But they won't know for several days how many
it'll total."

And all her life long, whenever Susan Lenox heard the clang of
a fire engine, there arose before her the memory picture of that
fire, in all the horror of detail.  A fire bell to her meant
wretched families flung into the night, shrieks of mangled and
dying, moans of babies with life oozing from their blue lips,
columns of smoke ascending through icy, soaking air, and a vast
glare of wicked light with flame demons leaping for joy in the
measureless woe over which they were presiding.  As the little
party was passing the fire lines, Ashbel's foot slipped on a
freezing ooze of blood and slush, and he fell sprawling upon a
human body battered and trampled until it was like an overturned
basket of butcher's odds and ends.

The station house was eleven long squares away.  But before they
started for it they were already at the lowest depth of physical
wretchedness which human nerves can register; thus, they
arrived simply a little more numb.  The big room, heated by a
huge, red-hot stove to the point where the sweat starts, was
crowded with abject and pitiful human specimens.  Even Susan, the
most sensitive person there, gazed about with stolid eyes.  The
nakedness of unsightly bodies, gross with fat or wasted to
emaciation, the dirtiness of limbs and torsos long, long
unwashed, the foul steam from it all and from the water-soaked
rags, the groans of some, the silent, staring misery of others,
and, most horrible of all, the laughter of those who yielded
like animals to the momentary sense of physical well-being as
the heat thawed them out--these sights and sounds together made
up a truly infernal picture.  And, like all the tragedies of
abject poverty, it was wholly devoid of that dignity which is
necessary to excite the deep pity of respect, was sordid and
squalid, moved the sensitive to turn away in loathing rather
than to advance with brotherly sympathy and love.

Ashbel, his animal instinct roused by the sight of the stove,
thrust the throng aside rudely as he pushed straight for the
radiating center.  Etta and Susan followed in his wake.  The
fierce heat soon roused them to the sense of their plight.
Ashbel began to curse, Etta to weep.  Susan's mind was staring,
without hope but also without despair, at the walls of the trap
in which they were all caught--was seeking the spot where they
could begin to burrow through and escape.

Beds and covers were gathered in by the police from everywhere
in that district, were ranged upon the floor of the four rooms.
The men were put in the cells downstairs; the women and the
children got the cots.  Susan and Etta lay upon the same
mattress, a horse blanket over them.  Etta slept; Susan, wide
awake, lived in brain and nerves the heart-breaking scenes
through which she had passed numb and stolid.

About six o'clock a breakfast of coffee, milk and bread was
served.  It was evident that the police did not know what to do
with these outcasts who had nothing and no place to go--for
practically all were out of work when the blow came.  Ashbel
demanded shoes, pants and a coat.

"I've got to get to my job," shouted he, "or else I'll lose it.
Then where in the hell'd we be!"

His blustering angered the sergeant, who finally told him if he
did not quiet down he would be locked in a cell.  Susan
interrupted, explained the situation, got Ashbel the necessary
clothes and freed Etta and herself of his worse than useless
presence.  At Susan's suggestion such other men as had jobs were
also fitted out after a fashion and sent away.  "You can take the
addresses of their families if you send them anywhere during the
day, and these men can come back here and find out where they've
gone----" this was the plan she proposed to the captain, and he
adopted it.  As soon as the morning papers were about the city,
aid of every kind began to pour in, with the result that before
noon many of the families were better established than they had
been before the fire.

Susan and Etta got some clothing, enough to keep them warm on
their way through the streets to the hospital to which Brashear
and his wife had been taken.  Mrs. Brashear had died in the
ambulance--of heart disease, the doctors said, but Susan felt it
was really of the sense that to go on living was impossible.  And
fond of her though she was, she could not but be relieved that
there was one less factor in the unsolvable problem.

"She's better, off" she said to Etta in the effort to console.

But Etta needed no consolation.  "Ever so much better off," she
promptly assented.  "Mother hasn't cared about living since we
had to give up our little home and become tenement house people.
And she was right."

As to Brashear, they learned that he was ill; but they did not
learn until evening that he was dying of pneumonia.  The two
girls and Ashbel were admitted to the ward where he lay--one of
a long line of sufferers in bare, clean little beds.  Screens
were drawn round his bed because he was dying.  He had been
suffering torments from the savage assaults of the pneumonia;
but the pain had passed away now, so he said, though the
dreadful sound of his breathing made Susan's heart flutter and
her whole body quiver.

"Do you want a preacher or a priest?" asked the nurse.

"Neither," replied the old man in gasps and whispers.  "If there
is a God he'll never let anybody from this hell of a world into
his presence.  They might tell him the truth about himself."

"Oh, father, father!" pleaded Etta, and Ashbel burst into a fit
of hysterical and terrified crying.

The old man turned his dying eyes on Susan.  He rested a few
minutes, fixing her gaze upon his with a hypnotic stare.  Then he
began again:

"You've got somethin' more'n a turnip on your shoulders.  Listen
to me.  There was a man named Jesus once"--gasp--gasp--"You've
heard about him, but you don't know about
him"--gasp--gasp--"I'll tell you--listen.  He was a low fellow--a
workin' man--same trade as mine--born without a father--born in
a horse trough--in a stable"--gasp--gasp--

Susan leaned forward.  "Born without a father," she murmured, her
eyes suddenly bright.

"That's him.  Listen"--gasp--gasp--gasp--"He was a big
feller--big brain--big heart--the biggest man that ever
lived"--gasp--gasp--gasp--gas--"And he looked at this here hell
of a world from the outside, he being an outcast and a low-down
common workingman.  And he _saw_--he did----

"Yes, he saw!"--gasp--gasp--gasp--"And he said all men were
brothers--and that they'd find it out some day.  He saw that this
world was put together for the strong and the cruel--that they
could win out--and make the rest of us work for 'em for what they
chose to give--like they work a poor ignorant horse for his feed
and stall in a dirty stable----"gasp--gasp--gasp--

"For the strong and the cruel," said Susan.

"And this feller Jesus--he set round the saloons and such
places--publicans, they called 'em"--gasp--gasp--gasp--"And he
says to all the poor ignorant slaves and such cattle, he says,
'You're all brothers.  Love one another'"--gasp--gasp--gasp--"
'Love one another,' he says, 'and learn to help each other and
stand up for each other,' he says, 'and hate war and fightin'
and money grabbin'----'"gasp--gasp--gasp--"'Peace on earth,' he
says, 'Know the truth, and the truth shall make you free'--and
he saw there'd be a time"--the old man raised himself on one
elbow--"Yes, by God--there _will_ be!--a time when men'll learn
not to be beasts and'll be men--_men_, little gal!"

"Men," echoed Susan, her eyes shining, her bosom heaving.

"It ain't sense and it ain't right that everything should be for
the few--for them with brains--and that the rest--the
millions--should be tramped down just because they ain't so
cruel or so 'cute'--they and their children tramped down in the
dirt.  And that feller Jesus saw it."

"Yes--yes," cried Susan.  "He saw it."

"I'll tell you what he was," said old Tom in a hoarse whisper.
"He wasn't no god.  He was bigger'n that--bigger'n that, little
gal!  He was the first _man_ that ever lived.  He said, 'Give the
weak a chance so as they kin git strong.' He says----"

The dying man fell back exhausted.  His eyes rolled wildly,
closed; his mouth twitched, fell wide open; there came from his
throat a sound Susan had never heard before, but she knew what
it was, what it meant.

Etta and Ashbel were overwhelmed afresh by the disgrace of
having their parents buried in Potter's Field--for the insurance
money went for debts.  They did not understand when Susan said,
"I think your father'd have liked to feel that he was going to
be buried there--because then he'll be with--with his Friend.
You know, _He_ was buried in Potter's Field." However, their
grief was shortlived; there is no time in the lives of working
people for such luxuries as grief--no more time than there is at
sea when all are toiling to keep afloat the storm-racked sinking
ship and one sailor is swept overboard.  In comfortable lives a
bereavement is a contrast; in the lives of the wretched it is
but one more in the assailing army of woes.

Etta took a job at the box factory at three dollars a week; she
and Susan and Ashbel moved into two small rooms in a flat in a
tenement opposite the factory--a cheaper and therefore lower
house than the one that had burned.  They bought on the
installment plan nine dollars' worth of furniture--the scant
minimum of necessities.  They calculated that, by careful saving,
they could pay off the debt in a year or so--unless one or the
other fell ill or lost work.  "That means," said Etta, eyeing
their flimsy and all but downright worthless purchases, "that
means we'll still be paying when this furniture'll be gone to
pieces and fit only for kindling."

"It's the best we can do," replied Susan.  "Maybe one of us'll
get a better job."

"_You_ could, I'm sure, if you had the clothes," said Etta.  "But
not in those rags."

"If I had the clothes?  Where?"

"At Shillito's or one of the other department stores.  They'd
give us both places in one of the men's departments.  They like
pretty girls for those places--if they're not giddy and don't
waste time flirting but use flirtation to sell goods.  But what's
the sense in talking about it?  You haven't got the clothes.  A
saleslady's got to be counter-dressed.  She can look as bad as
she pleases round the skirt and the feet.  But from the waist up
she has to look natty, if she wants wages."

Susan had seen these girls; she understood now why they looked
as if they were the put together upper and lower halves of two
different persons.  She recalled that, even though they went into
other business, they still retained the habit, wore toilets that
were counterbuilt.  She revolved the problem of getting one of
these toilets and of securing a store job.  But she soon saw it
was hopeless, for the time.  Every cent the three had was needed
to keep from starving and freezing.  Also--though she did not
realize it--her young enthusiasm was steadily being sapped by
the life she was leading.  It may have been this rather than
natural gentleness--or perhaps it was as much the one as the
other--that kept Susan from taking Matson's advice and hardening
herself into a forelady.  The ruddy glow under her skin had given
place to, the roundness of her form had gone, and its pallor;
beauty remained only because she had a figure which not even
emaciation could have deprived of lines of alluring grace.  But
she was no longer quite so straight, and her hair, which it was
a sheer impossibility to care for, was losing its soft vitality.
She was still pretty, but not the beauty she had been when she
was ejected from the class in which she was bred.  However, she
gave the change in herself little thought; it was the rapid
decline of Etta's prettiness and freshness that worried her most.

Not many weeks after the fire and the deeper plunge, she began
to be annoyed by Ashbel.  In his clumsy, clownish way he was
making advances to her.  Several times he tried to kiss her.
Once, when Etta was out, he opened the door of the room where
she was taking a bath in a washtub she had borrowed of the
janitress, leered in at her and very reluctantly obeyed her
sharp order to close the door.  She had long known that he was in
reality very different from the silent restrained person fear
of his father made him seem to be.  But she thought even the
reality was far above the rest of the young men growing up among
those degrading influences.

The intrusion into her room was on a Sunday; on the following
Sunday he came back as soon as Etta went out.  "Look here,
Lorny," said he, with blustering tone and gesture, "I want to
have a plain talk with you.  I'm sick and tired of this.  There's
got to be a change."

"Sick of what?" asked Susan.

"Of the way you stand me off." He plumped himself sullenly down
on the edge of hers and Etta's bed.  "I can't afford to get
married.  I've got to stick by you two."

"It strikes me, Ashbel, we all need each other.  Who'd marry you
on seven a week?" She laughed good-humoredly.  "Anyhow, _you_
wouldn't support a wife.  It takes the hardest kind of work to
get your share of the expenses out of you.  You always try to
beat us down to letting you off with two fifty a week."

"That's about all Etta pays."

"It's about all she gets.  And _I_ pay three fifty--and she and I
do all the work--and give you two meals and a lunch to take with
you--and you've got a room alone--and your mending done.  I guess
you know when you're well off."

"But I ain't well off," he cried.  "I'm a grown-up man--and I've
got to have a woman."

Susan had become used to tenement conditions.  She said,
practically, "Well--there's your left over four dollars a week."

"Huh!" retorted he.  "Think I'm goin' to run any risks?  I'm no
fool.  I take care of my health."

"Well--don't bother me with your troubles--at least, troubles of
that sort."

"Yes, but I will!" shouted he, in one of those sudden furies
that seize upon the stupid ignorant.  "You needn't act so nifty
with me.  I'm as good as you are.  I'm willing to marry you."

"No, thanks," said Susan.  "I'm not free to marry--even if I would."

"Oh--you ain't?" For an instant his curiosity, as she thus laid
a hand upon the curtain over her past, distracted his uncertain
attention.  But her expression, reserved, cold, maddeningly
reminding him of a class distinction of which he was as
sensitively conscious as she was unconscious--her expression
brought him back with a jerk.  "Then you'll have to live with me,
anyhow.  I can't stand it, and I'm not goin' to.

If you want me to stay on here, and help out, you've got to
treat me right.  Other fellows that do as I'm doing get treated
right.  And I've got to be, too--or I'll clear out." And he
squirmed, and waggled his head and slapped and rubbed his heavy,
powerful legs.

"Why, Ashbel," said Susan, patting him on the shoulder.  "You and
I are like brother and sister.  You might as well talk this way
to Etta."

He gave her a brazen look, uttered a laugh that was like the
flinging out of a bucket of filth.  "Why not?  Other fellows that
have to support the family and can't afford to marry gets took
care of." Susan shrank away.  But Ashbel did not notice it.  "It
ain't a question of Etta," he went on.  "There's you--and I don't
need to look nowhere else."

Susan had long since lost power to be shocked by any revelation
of the doings of people lashed out of all civilized feelings by
the incessant brutal whips of poverty and driven back to the
state of nature.  She had never happened to hear definitely of
this habit--even custom--of incestuous relations; now that she
heard, she instantly accepted it as something of which she had
really known for some time.  At any rate, she had no sense of
shock.  She felt no horror, no deep disgust, simply the distaste
into which her original sense of horror had been thinned down by
constant contact with poverty's conditions--just as filth no
longer made her shudder, so long as it did not touch her own person.

"You'd better go and chase yourself round the square a few
times," said she, turning away and taking up some mending.

"You see, there ain't no way out of it," pursued he, with an
insinuating grin.

Susan gave him a steady, straight look.  "Don't ever speak of it
again," said she quietly.  "You ought to be ashamed--and you will
be when you think it over."

He laughed loudly.  "I've thought it over.  I mean what I say.  If
you don't do the square thing by me, you drive me out."

He came hulking up to her, tried to catch her in his big
powerful arms.  She put the table between him and her.  He kicked
it aside and came on.  She saw that her move had given him a
false impression--a notion that she was afraid of him, was
coquetting with him.  She opened the door leading into the front
part of the flat where the Quinlan family lived.  "If you don't
behave yourself, I'll call Mr. Quinlan," said she, not the least
bluster or fear or nervousness in her tone.

"What'd be the use?  He'd only laugh.  Why, the same thing's going
on in their family."

"Still, he'd lynch you if I told him what _you_ were trying to do."

Even Ashbel saw this familiar truth of human nature.  The fact
that Quinlan was guilty himself, far from staying him from
meting out savage justice to another, would make him the more
relentless and eager.  "All right," said he.  "Then you want me to
git out?"

"I want you to behave yourself and stay on.  Go take a walk, Ashbel."

And Ashbel went.  But his expression was not reassuring; Susan
feared he had no intention of accepting his defeat.  However, she
reasoned that numbskull though he was, he yet had wit enough to
realize how greatly to his disadvantage any change he could make
would be.  She did not speak of the matter to Etta, who was
therefore taken completely by surprise when Ashbel, after a
silent supper that evening, burst out with his grievance:

"I'm going to pack up," said he.  "I've found a place where I'll
be treated right." He looked haughtily at Susan.  "And the
daughter's a good looker, too.  She's got some weight on her.  She
ain't like a washed out string."

Etta understood at once.  "What a low-down thing you are!" she
cried.  "Just like the rest of these filthy tenement house
animals.  I thought _you_ had some pride."

"Oh, shut up!" bawled Ashbel.  "You're not such a much.  What're
we, anyhow, to put on airs?  We're as common as dirt--yes, and
that sniffy lady friend of yours, too.  Where'd she come from,
anyhow?  Some dung pile, I'll bet."

He went into his room, reappeared with his few belongings done
into a bundle.  "So long," said he, stalking toward the hall door.

Etta burst into tears, caught him by the arm.  "You ain't goin',
are you, Ashy?" cried she.

"Bet your life.  Let me loose." And he shook her off.  "I'm not
goin' to be saddled with two women that ain't got no gratitude."

"My God, Lorna!" wailed Etta.  "Talk to him.  Make him stay."

Susan shook her head, went to the window and gazed into the
snowy dreary prospect of tenement house yards.  Ashbel, who had
been hesitating through hope, vented a jeering laugh.  "Ain't she
the insultin'est, airiest lady!" sneered he.  "Well, so long."

"But, Ashy, you haven't paid for last week yet," pleaded Etta,
clinging to his arm.

"You kin have my share of the furniture for that."

"The furniture!  Oh, my God!" shrieked Etta, releasing him to
throw out her arms in despair.  "How'll we pay for the furniture
if you go?"

"Ask your high and mighty lady friend," said her brother.  And he
opened the door, passed into the hall, slammed it behind him.
Susan waited a moment for Etta to speak, then turned to see what
she was doing.  She had dropped into one of the flimsy chairs,
was staring into vacancy.

"We'll have to give up these rooms right away," said Susan.

Etta roused herself, looked at her friend.  And Susan saw what
Etta had not the courage to express--that she blamed her for not
having "made the best of it" and kept Ashbel.  And Susan was by
no means sure that the reproach in Etta's eyes and heart were
not justified.  "I couldn't do it, Etta," she said with a faint
suggestion of apology.

"Men are that way," said Etta sullenly.

"Oh, I don't blame him," protested Susan.  "I understand.  But--I
can't do it, Etta--I simply can't!"

"No," said Etta.  "You couldn't.  I could, but you couldn't.  I'm
not as far down as Ashbel.  I'm betwixt and between; so I can
understand you both."

"You go and make up with him and let me look after myself.  I'll
get along."

Etta shook her head.  "No," said she without any show of
sentiment, but like one stating an unalterable fact.  "I've got
to stay on with you.  I can't live without you.  I don't want to
go down.  I want to go up."

"Up!" Susan smiled bitterly.

Silence fell between them, and Susan planned for the new
conditions.  She did not speak until Etta said, "What ever
will we do?"

"We've got to give up the furniture.  Thank goodness, we've paid
only two-fifty on it."

"Yes, _it's_ got to go," said Etta.

"And we've got to pay Mrs. Quinlan the six we owe her and get
out tonight.  We'll go up to the top floor--up to Mrs. Cassatt.
She takes sleepers.  Then--we'll see."

An hour later they had moved; for Mrs. Quinlan was able to find
two lodgers to take the rooms at once.  They were established
with Mrs. Cassatt, had a foul and foul-smelling bed and one-half
of her back room; the other half barely contained two even
dirtier and more malodorous cots, in one of which slept Mrs.
Cassatt's sixteen-year-old daughter Kate, in the other her
fourteen-year-old son Dan.  For these new quarters and the right
to cook their food on the Cassatt stove the girls agreed to pay
three dollars and a half a week--which left them three dollars
and a half a week for food and clothing--and for recreation and
for the exercise of the virtue of thrift which the comfortable
so assiduously urge upon the poor.




