CHAPTER X


LATE that afternoon Jeb returned to the house after several
hours of uneasy, aimless pottering about at barn and woodshed.
He stumped and stamped around the kitchen, then in the
sitting-room, finally he mustered the courage to look into the
bedroom, from which he had slunk like a criminal three hours
before.  There she lay, apparently in the same position.  Her
waxen color and her absolute stillness added fear to his sense
of guilt--a guilt against which he protested, because he felt he
had simply done what God and man expected of him.  He stood in
the low doorway for some time, stood there peering and craning
until his fear grew so great that he could no longer put off
ending or confirming it.

"Sleepin'?" said he in a hoarse undertone.

She did not reply; she did not move.  He could not see that she
was breathing.

"It'll soon be time to git supper," he went on--not because he
was thinking of supper but because he was desperately clutching
for something that must draw a reply from her--if she could reply.
"Want me to clean up the dinner and put the supper things on?"

She made a feeble effort to rise, sank back again.  He drew an
audible sigh of relief; at least she was not what her color
had suggested.

In fact, she was morbidly conscious.  The instant she had heard
him at the outer door she had begun to shiver and shake, and not
until he moved toward the bedroom door did she become quiet.
Then a calm had come into her nerves and her flesh--the calm
that descends upon the brave when the peril actually faces.  As
he stood there her eyes were closed, but the smell of
him--beneath the earthy odor of his clothing the odor of the
bodies of those who eat strong, coarse food--stole into her
nostrils, into her nerves.  Her whole body sickened and
shrank--for to her now that odor meant marriage--and she would
not have believed Hell contained or Heaven permitted such a
thing as was marriage.  She understood now why the Bible always
talked of man as a vile creature born in sin.

Jeb was stealthily watching her ghastly face, her limp body.
"Feelin' sickish?" he asked.

A slight movement of the head in assent.

"I kin ride over to Beecamp and fetch Doc Christie."

Another and negative shake of the head, more determined.  The
pale lips murmured, "No--no, thank you." She was not hating him.
He existed for her only as a symbol, in this hideous dream
called life, that was coiled like a snake about her and was
befouling her and stinging her to death.

"Don't you bother 'bout supper," said he with gruff, shamefaced
generosity.  "I'll look out for myself, this onct."

He withdrew to the kitchen, where she heard him clattering
dishes and pans.  Daylight waned to twilight, twilight to dusk,
to darkness.  She did not think; she did not feel, except an
occasional dull pang from some bodily bruise.  Her soul, her
mind, were absolutely numb.  Suddenly a radiance beat upon her
eyes.  All in an instant, before the lifting of her eyelids, soul
and body became exquisitely acute; for she thought it was he
come again, with a lamp.  She looked; it was the moon whose beams
struck full in at the uncurtained window and bathed her face in
their mild brightness.  She closed her eyes again and presently
fell asleep--the utter relaxed sleep of a child that is worn out
with pain, when nature turns gentle nurse and sets about healing
and soothing as only nature can.  When she awoke it was with a
scream.  No, she was not dreaming; there was an odor in the
room--his odor, with that of a saloon added to it.

After cooking and eating supper he had taken the jug from its
concealment behind the woodbox and had proceeded to cheer his
drooped spirits.  The more he drank the better content he was
with himself, with his conduct, and the clearer became his
conviction that the girl was simply playing woman's familiar
game of dainty modesty.  A proper game it was too; only a man
must not pay attention to it unless he wished his woman to
despise him.  When this conviction reached the point of action he
put away the jug, washed the glass, ate a liberal mouthful of
the left-over stewed onions, as he would not for worlds have his
bride catch him tippling.  He put out the lamp and went to the
bedroom, chuckling to himself like a man about to play a
particularly clever and extremely good-humored practical joke.
His preparations for the night were, as always, extremely simple
merely a flinging off of his outer clothes and, in summer, his
socks.  From time to time he cast an admiring amorous glance at
the lovely childlike face in the full moonlight.  As he was about
to stretch himself on the bed beside her he happened to note
that she was dressed as when she came.  That stylish, Sundayish
dress was already too much mussed and wrinkled.  He leaned over to
wake her with a kiss.  It was then that she started up with a scream.

"Oh--oh--my God!" she exclaimed, passing her hand over her brow
and staring at him with crazed, anguished eyes.

"It's jest me," said he.  "Thought you'd want to git ready fur
bed, like as not."

"No, thank you, no," she stammered, drawing away toward the
inner side of the bed.  "Please I want to be as I am."

"Now, don't put on, sweetness," he wheedled.  "You know you're
married and 'ave got to git used to it."

He laid his hand on her arm.  She had intended to obey, since
that was the law of God and man and since in all the world there
was no other place for her, nameless and outcast.  But at his
touch she clenched her teeth, cried:

"No--Mr. Ferguson--please--_please_ let me be."

"Now, hon," he pleaded, seizing her with strong gentleness.
"There ain't no call to be skittish.  We're married, you know."

She wrenched herself free.  He seized her again.  "What's the use
of puttin' on?  I know all about you.  You little no-name," he
cursed, when her teeth sank into his hand.  For an instant, at
that reminder of her degradation, her indelible shame that made
her of the low and the vile, she collapsed in weakness.  Then
with new and fierce strength she fought again.  When she had
exhausted herself utterly she relaxed, fell to sobbing and
moaning, feebly trying to shelter her face from his gluttonous
and odorous kisses.  And upon the scene the moon shone in all
that beauty which from time immemorial has filled the hearts of
lovers with ecstasy and of devotees with prayer.


They lay quietly side by side; he fell into a profound sleep.  He
was full upon his back, his broad chest heaving in the gray
cotton undershirt, his mouth wide open with its upper fringe of
hair in disarray and agitated by his breath.  Soon he began to
snore, a deafening clamor that set some loose object in the dark
part of the room to vibrating with a tapping sound.  Susan
stealthily raised herself upon her elbow, looked at him.  There
was neither horror nor fear in her haggard face but only
eagerness to be sure he would not awaken.  She, inch by inch,
more softly than a cat, climbed over the low footboard, was
standing on the floor.  One silent step at a time, with eyes
never from his face so clear in the moonlight, she made her way
toward the door.  The snoring stopped--and her heart stopped with
it.  He gasped, gurgled, gave a snort, and sat up.

"What--which----" he ejaculated.  Then he saw her near the door.
"Hello--whar ye goin'?"

"I thought I'd undress," she lied, calmly and smoothly.

"Oh--that's right." And he lay down.

She stood in the darkness, making now and then a faint sound
suggestive of undressing.  The snoring began again--soft, then
deep, then the steady, uproarious intake with the fierce
whistling exhalation.  She went into the sitting-room, felt round
in the darkness, swift and noiseless.  On the sofa she found her
bundle, tore it open.  By feeling alone she snatched her sailor
hat, a few handkerchiefs, two stockings, a collar her fingers
chanced upon and a toothbrush.  She darted to the front door, was
outside, was gliding down the path, out through the gate into
the road.

To the left would be the way she had come.  She ran to the right,
with never a backward glance--ran with all the speed in her
lithe young body, ran with all the energy of her fear and horror
and resolve to die rather than be taken.  For a few hundred yards
the road lay between open fields.  But after that it entered a
wood.  And in that dimness she felt the first beginnings of a
sense of freedom.  Half a mile and open fields again, with a
small house on the right, a road southeastward on the left.  That
would be away from her Uncle Zeke's and also away from
Sutherland, which lay twenty miles to the southwest.  When she
would be followed Jeb would not think of this direction until he
had exhausted the other two.

She walked, she ran, she rested; she walked and ran and walked
again.  The moon ascended to the zenith, crossed the levels of
the upper sky, went down in the west; a long bar of dusky gray
outlined a cloud low upon the horizon in the northeast.  She was
on the verge of collapse.  Her skin, the inside of her mouth,
were hot and dry.  She had to walk along at snail's pace or her
heart would begin to beat as if it were about to burst and the
blood would choke up into the veins of her throat to suffocate
her.  A terrible pain came in her side--came and went--came and
stayed.  She had passed turning after turning, to the right, to
the left--crossroads leading away in all directions.  She had
kept to the main road because she did not wish to lose time,
perhaps return upon her path, in the confusion of the darkness.
Now she began to look about her at the country.  It was still the
hills as round Zeke Warham's--the hills of southeastern Indiana.
But they were steeper and higher, for she was moving toward the
river.  There was less open ground, more and denser undergrowth
and forest.  She felt that she was in a wilderness, was safe.
Night still lay too thick upon the landscape for her to
distinguish anything but outlines.  She sat down on the ruined
and crumbling panel of a zigzag fence to rest and to wait for
light.  She listened; a profound hush.  She was alone, all alone.
How far had she come?  She could not guess; but she knew that she
had done well.  She would have been amazed if she had known how
well.  All the years of her life, thanks to Mrs. Warham's good
sense about health, she had been steadily adding to the vitality
and strength that were hers by inheritance.  Thus, the response
to this first demand upon them had been almost inevitable.  It
augured well for the future, if the future should draw her into
hardships.  She knew she had gone far and in what was left of the
night and with what was left of her strength she would put such
a distance between her and them that they would never believe
she had got so far, even should they seek in this direction.  She
was supporting her head upon her hands, her elbows upon her
knees.  Her eyes closed, her head nodded; she fought against the
impulse, but she slept.

When she straightened up with a start it was broad day.  The
birds must have finished their morning song, for there was only
happy, comfortable chirping in the branches above her.  She rose
stiffly.  Her legs, her whole body, ached; and her feet were
burning and blistered.  But she struck out resolutely.

After she had gone halfway down a long steep hill, she had to
turn back because she had left her only possessions.  It was a
weary climb, and her heart quaked with terror.  But no one
appeared, and at last she was once more at the ruins of the
fence panel.  There lay her sailor hat, the handkerchiefs,
wrapped round the toothbrush, the collar--and two stockings, one
black, the other brown.  And where was her purse?  Not there,
certainly.  She glanced round in swift alarm.  No one.  Yet she had
been absolutely sure she had taken her purse from the
sitting-room table when she came upon it, feeling about in the
dark.  She had forgotten it; she was without a cent!

But she had no time to waste in self-reproaches or forebodings.
Though the stockings would be of no use to her, she took them
along because to leave them was to leave a trail.  She hastened
down the hill.  At the bottom ran a deep creek--without a bridge.
The road was now a mere cowpath which only the stoutest vehicles
or a horseman would adventure.  To her left ran an even wilder
trail, following the downward course of the creek.  She turned
out of the road, entered the trail.  She came to a place where
the bowlders over which the creek foamed and splashed as it
hurried southeastward were big and numerous enough to make a
crossing.  She took it, went slowly on down the other bank.

There was no sign of human intrusion.  Steeply on either side
rose a hill, strewn with huge bowlders, many of them large as
large houses.  The sun filtered through the foliage to make a
bright pattern upon the carpet of last year's leaves.  The birds
twittered and chirped; the creek hummed its drowsy, soothing
melody.  She was wretchedly weary, and Oh, so hungry!  A little
further, and two of the great bowlders, tumbled down from the
steeps, had cut off part of the creek, had formed a pool which
their seamed and pitted and fern-adorned walls hid from all
observation except that of the birds and the squirrels in the boughs.

At once she thought how refreshed she would be if she could
bathe in those cool waters.  She looked round, stepped in between
the bowlders.  She peered out; she listened.  She was safe; she
drew back into her little inclosure.  There was a small dry shelf
of rock.  She hurried off her clothes, stood a moment in the
delicious warmth of the sunshine, stepped into the pool.  She
would have liked to splash about; but she dared make no sound
that could be heard above the noise of the water.  Luckily the
creek was just there rather loud, as it was expressing its
extreme annoyance over the stolid impudence of the interrupting
bowlders.  While she was waiting for the sun to dry her she
looked at her underclothes.  She simply could not put them on as
they were.  She knelt at the edge of the shelf and rinsed them
out as well as she could.  Then she spread them on the thick
tufts of overhanging fern where the hot sun would get full swing
at them.  The brown stocking of the two mismates she had brought
along almost matched the pair she was wearing.  As there was a
hole in the toe of one of them, she discarded it, and so had one
fresh stocking.  She dried her feet thoroughly with the stocking
she was discarding.  Then she put her corsets and her dress
directly upon her body.  She could not afford to wait until the
underclothes dried; she would carry them until she found for
herself a more remote and better hiding place where she could
await nightfall.  She stuffed the stocking with the hole deep
into a cleft in the rock and laid a small stone upon it so that
it was concealed.  Here where there were no traces, no reminders
of the human race which had cast her out and pursued her with
torture of body and soul, here in the wilderness her spirits
were going up, and her young eyes were looking hopefully round
and forward.  The up-piling horrors of those two days and their
hideous climax seemed a dream which the sun had scattered.
Hopefully!  That blessed inexperience and sheer imagination of
youth enabling it to hope in a large, vague way when to hope for
any definite and real thing would be impossible.

She cleaned her tan low shoes with branches of fern and grass,
put them on.  It is impossible to account for the peculiarities
of physical vanity.  Probably no one was ever born who had not
physical vanity of some kind; Susan's was her feet and ankles.
Not her eyes, nor her hair, nor her contour, nor her skin, nor
her figure, though any or all of these might well have been her
pleasure.  Of them she never thought in the way of pride or
vanity.  But of her feet and ankles she was both proud and
vain--in a reserved, wholly unobtrusive way, be it said, so
quietly that she had passed unsuspected.  There was reason for
this shy, secret self-satisfaction, so amusing in one otherwise
self-unconscious.  Her feet were beautifully formed and the
curves of her instep and ankle were beautiful.  She gave more
attention now to the look of her shoes and of her stockings than
to all the rest of this difficult woodland toilet.  She then put
on the sailor hat, fastened the collar to her garter, slipped
the handkerchiefs into the legs of her stockings.  Carrying her
underclothes, ready to roll them into a ball should she meet
anyone, she resumed her journey into that rocky wilderness.  She
was sore, she had pains that were the memories of the worst
horrors of her hideous dream, but up in her strong, healthy
body, up through her strong young soul, surged joy of freedom
and joy of hope.  Compared with what her lot had been until such
a few brief days before, this lot of friendless wanderer in the
wilderness was dark indeed.  But she was comparing it with the
monstrous dream from which it was the awakening.  She was almost
happy--and madly hungry.

An enormous bowlder, high above her and firmly fixed in the
spine of the hill, invited as a place where she could see
without being seen, could hide securely until darkness came
again.  She climbed to the base of it, found that she might reach
the top by stepping from ledge to ledge with the aid of the
trees growing so close around it that some of their boughs
seemed rooted in its weather-dented cliffs.  She dragged herself
upward the fifty or sixty feet, glad of the difficulties because
they would make any pursuer feel certain she had not gone that
way.  After perhaps an hour she came upon a flat surface where
soil had formed, where grass and wild flowers and several little
trees gave shade and a place to sleep.  And from her eyrie she
commanded a vast sweep of country--hills and valleys, fields,
creeks, here and there lonely farmhouses, and far away to the
east the glint of the river!

To the river!  That was her destination.  And somehow it would be
kind, would take her where she would never, never dream those
frightful dreams again!

She went to the side of the bowlder opposite that which she had
climbed.  She drew back hastily, ready to cry with vexation.  It
was not nearly so high or so steep; and on the slope of the hill
a short distance away was set a little farmhouse, with smoke
curling up from its rough stone chimney.  She dropped to all
fours in the tall grass and moved cautiously toward the edge.
Flat upon her breast, she worked her way to the edge and looked
down.  A faintly lined path led from the house through a gate in
a zigzag fence and up to the base of her fortress.  The rock had
so crumbled on that side that a sort of path extended clear up
to the top.  But her alarm quieted somewhat when she noted how
the path was grass-grown.

As nearly as she could judge it was about five o'clock.  So that
smoke meant breakfast!  Her eyes fixed hungrily upon the thin
column of violet vapor mounting straight into the still morning
air.  When smoke rose in that fashion, she remembered, it was
sure sign of clear weather.  And then the thought came, "What if
it had been raining!" She simply could not have got away.

As she interestedly watched the little house and its yard she
saw hurrying through the burdock and dog fennel toward the base
of her rock a determined looking hen.  Susan laughed silently, it
was so obvious that the hen was on a pressing and secret
business errand.  But almost immediately her attention was
distracted to observing the movements of a human being she could
obscurely make out through one of the windows just back of the
chimney.  Soon she saw that it was a woman, cleaning up a kitchen
after breakfast--the early breakfast of the farmhouse in summer.

What had they had for breakfast?  She sniffed the air.  "I think
I can smell ham and cornbread," she said aloud, and laughed,
partly at the absurdity of her fancy, chiefly at the idea of
such attractive food.  She aggravated her hunger by letting her
imagination loose upon the glorious possibilities.  A stealthy
fluttering brought her glance back to the point where the hen
had disappeared.  The hen reappeared, hastened down the path and
through the weeds, and rejoined the flock in the yard with an
air which seemed to say, "No, indeed, I've been right here all
the time."

"Now, what was she up to?" wondered Susan, and the answer came to
her.  Eggs!  A nest hidden somewhere near or in the base of the rock!

Could she get down to that nest without being seen from the
house or from any other part of the region below?  She drew back
from the edge, crawled through the grass to the place where the
path, if path it could be called, reached the top.  She was
delighted to find that it made the ascent through a wide cleft
and not along the outside.  She let herself down cautiously as
the footway was crumbling and rotten and slippery with grass.  At
the lower end of the cleft she peered out.  Trees and
bushes--plenty of them, a thick shield between her and the
valleys.  She moved slowly downward; a misstep might send her
through the boughs to the hillside forty feet below.  She had
gone up and down several times before her hunger-sharpened eyes
caught the gleam of white through the ferns growing thickly out
of the moist mossy cracks which everywhere seamed the wall.  She
pushed the ferns aside.  There was the nest, the length of her
forearm into the dim seclusion of a deep hole.  She felt round,
found the egg that was warm.  And as she drew it out she laughed
softly and said half aloud:  "Breakfast is ready!"

No, not quite ready.  Hooking one arm round the bough of a tree
that shot up from the hillside to the height of the rock and
beyond, she pressed her foot firmly against the protecting root
of an ancient vine of poison ivy.  Thus ensconced, she had free
hands; and she proceeded to remove the thin shell of the egg
piece by piece.  She had difficulty in restraining herself until
the end.  At last she put the whole egg into her mouth.  And never
had she tasted anything so good.

But one egg was only an appetizer.  She reached in again.  She did
not wish to despoil the meritorious hen unnecessarily, so she
held the egg up in her inclosing fingers and looked through it,
as she had often seen the cook do at home.  She was not sure, but
the inside seemed muddy.  She laid it to one side, tried another.
It was clear and she ate it as she had eaten the first.  She laid
aside the third, the fourth, and the fifth.  The sixth seemed all
right--but was not.  Fortunately she had not been certain enough
to feel justified in putting the whole egg into her mouth before
tasting it.  The taste, however, was enough to make her reflect
that perhaps on the whole two eggs were sufficient for
breakfast, especially as there would be at least dinner and
supper before she could go further.  As she did not wish to risk
another descent, she continued to sort out the eggs.  She found
four that were, or seemed to be, all right.  The thirteen that
looked doubtful or worse when tested by the light she restored
with the greatest care.  It was an interesting illustration of
the rare quality of consideration which at that period of her
life dominated her character.

She put the four eggs in the bosom of her blouse and climbed up
to her eyrie.  All at once she felt the delicious languor of body
and mind which is Nature's forewarning that she is about to put
us to sleep, whether we will or no.  She lost all anxiety about
safety, looked hastily around for a bed.  She found just the
place in a corner of the little tableland where the grass grew
tall and thick.  She took from her bosom the four eggs--her
dinner and supper--and put them between the roots of a tree with
a cover of broad leaves over them to keep them cool.  She pulled
grass to make a pillow, took off her collar and laid herself
down to sleep.  And that day's sun did not shine upon a prettier
sight than this soundly and sweetly sleeping girl, with her oval
face suffused by a gentle flush, with her rounded young
shoulders just moving the bosom of her gray silk blouse, with
her slim, graceful legs curled up to the edge of her carefully
smoothed blue serge skirt.  You would have said never a care,
much less a sorrow, had shadowed her dawning life.  And that is
what it means to be young--and free from the curse of self-pity,
and ignorant of life's saddest truth, that future and past are
not two contrasts; one is surely bright and the other is sober,
but they are parts of a continuous fabric woven of the same
threads and into the same patterns from beginning to end.

When she awoke, beautifully rested, her eyes clear and soft, the
shadows which had been long toward the southwest were long,
though not so long, toward the southeast.  She sat up and smiled;
it was so fine to be free!  And her woes had not in the least
shaken that serene optimism which is youth's most delightful if
most dangerous possession.  She crawled through the grass to the
edge of the rock and looked out through the screening leaves of
the dense undergrowth.  There was no smoke from the chimney of
the house.  The woman, in a blue calico, was sitting on the back
doorstep knitting.  Farther away, in fields here and there, a few
men--not a dozen in all--were at work.  From a barnyard at the
far edge of the western horizon came the faint sound of a steam
thresher, and she thought she could see the men at work around
it, but this might have been illusion.  It was a serene and
lovely panorama of summer and country.  Last of all her eyes
sought the glimpse of distant river.

She ate two of her four eggs, put on the underclothes which were
now thoroughly sun-dried, shook out and rebraided her hair.  Then
she cast about for some way to pass the time.

She explored the whole top of the rock, but that did not use up
more than fifteen minutes, as it was so small that every part
was visible from every other part.  However, she found a great
many wild flowers and gathered a huge bouquet of the audacious
colors of nature's gardens, so common yet so effective.  She did
a little botanizing--anything to occupy her mind and keep it
from the ugly visions and fears.  But all too soon she had
exhausted the resources of her hiding place.  She looked down
into the valley to the north--the valley through which she had
come.  She might go down there and roam; it would be something to
do, and her young impatience of restraint was making her so
restless that she felt she could not endure the confines of that
little rock.  It had seemed huge; a brief experience of freedom,
a few hours between her and the night's horrors and terrors, and
it had shrunk to a tiny prison cell.  Surely she would run no
risk in journeying through that trackless wilderness; she need
not be idle, she could hasten her destiny by following the creek
in its lonely wanderings, which must sooner or later bring it to
the river.  The river!

She was about to get the two remaining eggs and abandon her
stronghold when it occurred to her that she would do well to
take a last look all around.  She went back to the side of the
rock facing the house.

The woman had suspended knitting and was gazing intently across
the hollow to the west, where the road from the north entered
the landscape.  Susan turned her eyes in that direction.  Two
horsemen at a gallop were moving southward.  The girl was well
screened, but instinctively she drew still further back behind
the bushes--but not so far that the two on horseback, riding so
eagerly, were out of her view.  The road dipped into the hollow.
the galloping horsemen disappeared with it.  Susan shifted her
gaze to the point on the brow of the hill where the road
reappeared.  She was quivering in every nerve.  When they came
into view again she would know.

The place she was watching swam before her eyes.  Suddenly the
two, still at a gallop, rose upon the crest of the hill.  Jeb and
her Uncle Zeke!  Her vision cleared, her nerve steadied.

They did not draw rein until they were at the road gate of the
little house.  The woman rose, put down her knitting in the seat
of her stiff, rush-bottomed rocker, advanced to the fence.  The
air was still, but Susan could not hear a sound, though she
craned forward and strained her ears to the uttermost.  She
shrank as if she had been struck when the three began to gaze up
at the rock--to gaze, it seemed to her, at the very spot where
she was standing.  Was her screen less thick than she thought?
Had they seen--if not her, perhaps part of her dress?

Wildly her heart beat as Jeb dismounted from his horse the mare
behind which she had made her wedding journey--and stood in the
gateway, talking with the woman and looking toward the top of
the rock.  Zeke Warham turned his horse and began to ride slowly
away.  He got as far as the brow of the hill, with Jeb still in
the gateway, hesitating.  Then Susan heard:

"Hold on, Mr. Warham.  I reckon you're right."

Warham halted his horse, Jeb remounted and joined him.  As the
woman returned toward the back doorstep, the two men rode at a
walk down into the hollow.  When they reappeared it was on the
road by which they had come.  And the girl knew the pursuit in
that direction--the right direction--was over.  Trembling and
with a fluttering in her breast like the flapping of a bird's
wings, she sank to the ground.  Presently she burst into a
passion of tears.  Without knowing why, she tore off the wedding
ring which until then she had forgotten, and flung it out among
the treetops.  A few minutes, and she dried her eyes and stood
up.  The two horsemen were leaving the landscape at the point at
which they had entered it.  The girl would not have known, would
have been frightened by, her own face had she seen it as she
watched them go out of her sight--out of her life.  She did not
understand herself, for she was at that age when one is no more
conscious of the forces locked up within his unexplored and
untested character than the dynamite cartridge is of its secrets
of power and terror.




