CHAPTER XIII

SOCIAL AND PRESUMPTIVE JUSTIFICATIONS OF INTEREST


As we saw in the last chapter, interest cannot be conclusively
justified on the ground of either productivity or service. It is
impossible to demonstrate that the capitalist has a strict right to
interest because his capital produces interest, or because it renders
a service to the labourer or the consumer. A part, probably a small
part, of the interest now received can be fairly justified by the
title of sacrifice. Some present owners of capital would not have
saved had they not expected to receive interest. In their case
interest may be regarded as a just compensation for the sacrifice that
they underwent when they decided to save instead of consuming.


_Limitations of the Sacrifice Principle_

Nevertheless these men would suffer no injustice if interest were now
to be abolished. Up to the moment of the change, they would have been
in receipt of adequate compensation; thereafter, they would be in
exactly the same position as when they originally chose to save rather
than consume. They would still be able to sell their capital, and
convert the proceeds to their immediate uses and pleasures. In this
case they would obviously have no further claim upon the community for
interest. On the other hand, they could retain the ownership of their
capital, and postpone its consumption to some future time. In making
this choice they would regard future as more important than present
consumption, and the superiority of future enjoyment as sufficiently
great to compensate them for the sacrifice of postponement. Hence
they would have no moral claim to interest on the ground of
abstinence. In general, then, the sacrifice-justification of interest
continues only so long as the interest continues. It extends only to
the interest received by certain capitalists in certain circumstances,
not to all interest in all circumstances. Therefore, it presents no
moral obstacle to the complete abolition of interest.

Since probably the greater part of the interest now received cannot be
justified on intrinsic grounds, and since that part of it which is
thus justified could be abolished consistently with the rights of the
recipients, let us see whether it is capable of justification for
reasons of social welfare. Would its suppression be socially
beneficial or socially detrimental?


_The Value of Capital in a No-Interest Régime_

The interest that we have in mind is pure interest, not undertaker's
profit, nor insurance against risk, nor gross interest. Even if all
pure interest were abolished the capitalist who loaned his money would
still receive something from the borrower in addition to the repayment
of the principal, while the active capitalist would get from the
consumer more than the expenses of production. The former would
require a premium of, say, one or two per cent. to protect him against
the loss of his loan. The latter would demand the same kind of
insurance, and an additional sum to repay him for his labour and
enterprise. None of these payments could be avoided in any system of
privately directed production. The return whose suppression is
considered here is that which the capitalist receives over and above
these payments, and which in this country seems to be about three or
four per cent.

Would capital still have value in a no-interest régime, and if so how
would its value be determined? At present the lower limit of the value
of productive capital, as of all other artificial goods, is fixed in
the long run by the cost of production. Capital instruments that do
not bring this price will not continue to be made. In other words,
cost of production is the governing factor of the value of capital
from the side of supply. It would likewise fix the lower limit of
value in a no-interest régime; only, the cost of producing capital
instruments would then be somewhat lower than to-day, owing to the
absence of an interest charge for the working capital during the
productive process.

But the cost of production is not a constant and accurate measure of
the value of artificial capital. The true measure is found in the
revenue or interest that a given piece of capital yields to its
owners. If the current rate of interest is five per cent., a factory
that brings in ten thousand dollars net return will have a value of
about two hundred thousand dollars. This is the governing factor of
value from the side of demand. In a no-interest economy the demand
factor would be quite different. Capital instruments would be in
demand, not as revenue producers, but as the concrete embodiments, the
indispensable requisites of saving and accumulation. For it is
impossible that saving should in any considerable amount take the form
of cash hoards. In the words of Sir Robert Giffen: "The accumulations
of a single year, even taking it at one hundred and fifty millions
only, ... would absorb more than the entire metallic currency of the
country [Great Britain]. They cannot, therefore, be made in
cash."[142] The instruments of production would be sought and valued
by savers for the same reason that safes and safety deposit boxes are
in demand now. They would be the only means of carrying savings into
the future, and they would necessarily bring a price sufficiently high
to cover the cost of producing them. One man might deposit his savings
in a bank, whence they would be borrowed without interest by some
director of industry. When the owner of the savings desired to recover
them he could obtain from the bank the fund of some other depositor,
or get the proceeds of the sale of the concrete capital in which his
own savings had been embodied. Another man might prefer to invest his
savings directly in a building, a machine, or a mercantile business,
whence he could recover them later from the sale of the property.
Hence the absence of interest would not change essentially the
processes of saving or investment. Capital would still have value, but
its valuation from the demand side would rest on a different basis. It
would be valued not in proportion to its power to yield interest, but
because of its capacity to become a receptacle for savings, and to
carry into the future the consuming power of the present.

The question whether the abolition of interest by the State would be
socially helpful or socially harmful is mainly, though not entirely, a
question of the supply of capital. If the community would not have
sufficient capital to provide for all its needs, actual and
progressive, the suppression of interest would obviously be a bad
policy. Most economists seem inclined to think that this condition
would be realised; that, without the inducement of interest, men would
neither make new savings nor conserve existing capital in sufficient
quantity to supply the wants of society. Very few of them, however,
pretend to be able to prove this proposition. So many complex factors
with regard to the possibilities of saving and the motives of savers,
enter into the situation that no opinion on the subject can have any
stronger basis than probability. As a preliminary to our consideration
of the question of abolition, let us inquire whether there exists any
definite relation between the present supply of capital and the
current rate of interest.


_Whether the Present Rate of Interest Is Necessary_

It is sometimes contended that the interest rate must be kept up to
the present level if the existing supply of capital is to be
maintained. The underlying assumption is that some of the present
savers would discontinue that function at any lower rate, with the
consequence that the supply of capital would fall below the demand.
Owing to this excess of demand over supply, the rate of interest would
rise, or tend to rise, to the former level. Therefore, the rate
existing at any given time is the socially necessary rate. The rate of
interest is said to be analogous to the rate of wages. For example; of
ten thousand men receiving five dollars a day, nine thousand may be
willing to work for four dollars rather than quit their present jobs.
But the other thousand set their minimum price at five dollars. If the
wage is reduced to four dollars these men will get employment
elsewhere, thus causing such an excess of demand over supply as to
force the wage rate back to five dollars. The same thing, it is
contended, will happen when the high-priced section of the savers,
"the marginal savers," discontinue saving on account of the artificial
lowering of the rate of interest.

The analogy, however, is misleading. The "marginal" one thousand wage
earners refuse to work for four dollars a day because they can get
better compensation in some other occupation. This phenomenon has been
proved over and over again by observation and experience. On the other
hand, there is no experience, no positive evidence, which shows or
tends to show that any _necessary_ group of present savers would
discontinue or materially reduce their accumulations if they were no
longer able to secure the present rate of interest. If the rate were
lowered simultaneously in all civilised countries the dissatisfied
savers, unlike the dissatisfied labourers, would not be able to get a
better price for their capital elsewhere. Their only alternative
would be to spend their actual or potential savings for present
enjoyment. Now we have no empirical data to justify the assumption
that any considerable number of savers would choose this alternative
in preference to, say, three or two per cent. interest. The fact that
any group of savers at present gets and insists on getting a higher
rate, merely proves that they can get it, and that they are selfish
enough to take advantage of the possibility. We know that some men who
now obtain six per cent. interest would accept two rather than cease
to save; yet they do not hesitate to demand six per cent. So far as we
know, all present savers might take the same attitude. At any rate, we
can not conclude that they would not take less from the fact that they
now get more. Why then does not the rate of interest fall? If all
present savers are getting a higher rate than is necessary to induce
them to save, why do they not increase their savings to such an extent
that the supply of capital will exceed the present volume of demand,
and thus lead to a decline in the rate of interest? This is what
happens when the price of consumption-goods rises appreciably above
the minimum level that satisfies the most high-priced or "marginal"
producers. There is, however, an important difference between the two
cases. The capacity to produce more goods is practically unlimited,
and the corresponding desire is also unlimited, so long as the price
of the product exceeds the cost of production. The capacity to save is
not unlimited, and the desire to save is neutralised and sharply
restricted by other and more powerful desires. Hence it is quite
possible that the price of capital, i.e., interest, is determined to
only a slight degree by the "cost" of saving, being mainly dominated
and regulated from the side of demand.

Even though many of the present savers and owners of capital should
diminish or discontinue their functions on account of a fall in the
rate of interest, a reduction would not necessarily take place in the
supply of capital. The function of these "marginal savers" would in
all probability be performed by other persons, who would be compelled
to increase their accumulations in order to provide as well for the
future as they had previously been able to provide with a smaller
capital at a higher rate of interest.[143]


_Whether at Least Two Per Cent. Is Necessary_

While admitting that the present rate is unnecessarily high, Professor
Cassel maintains that a certain important class of savers would
diminish very considerably their accumulations if the interest rate
should fall much below two per cent. This class comprises those
persons whose main object in saving is a fund which will some day
support them from its interest. At six per cent. a person can
accumulate in about twelve years a sum sufficient to provide him with
an interest-income equal to the amount annually saved. For example;
two thousand dollars put aside every year, and subjected to compound
interest, will aggregate in twelve years a principal capable of
yielding an annual income of two thousand dollars. At two per cent.
the same amount of yearly saving will not lead to the same income in
less than thirty-five years. If the rate be one and one-half per
cent., forty-seven years will be required to produce the desired
income. Hence, concludes Cassel, if the rate falls below two per cent.
the average man will decide that life is too short to provide for the
future by means of an interest-income, and will expect to draw upon
his principal. This means that he will not need to save as much as
when he sought to accumulate a capital large enough to support him out
of its interest alone.

The argument is plausible but not conclusive. If the rate of interest
is so low that a man must save for forty-seven years in order to
obtain a sufficient interest-income to support him in his declining
years, he will rarely attain that end. In the great majority of
instances men who are unable to save more annually than the amount
that they will need each year in old age, will expect and be compelled
to use up a part or all of their capital in the period following the
cessation of their economic usefulness. Nevertheless, it does not
follow that they will save less at one and one-half per cent. than at
six per cent. The determining factor in the situation is the attitude
of the saver toward the _capital sum accumulated_. He either desires
or does not desire to leave this behind him. In the latter case he
will save only as much as is necessary to provide an annual income
composed partly of interest and partly of the principal. If this
contemplated income is two thousand dollars, and the rate of interest
is six per cent., he will not need to save that much annually for as
long a period as ten years. He can diminish either the yearly amount
saved or the length of time devoted to saving. On the other hand, if
the rate is only one and one-half per cent. he will be compelled to
save a larger total in order to secure an equal accumulation and an
equal provision for the future. In all cases, therefore, in which the
saving is carried on merely for the saver's own lifetime it will be
increased instead of decreased by a low rate of interest.

If the saver does desire to bequeath his capital he will not always be
deterred from this purpose merely because he is compelled to use some
of the capital for the satisfaction of his own wants. Take the man who
can save two thousand dollars a year, and with the rate of interest at
six per cent. assure himself an interest-income of the same amount,
and who intends to leave the principal (some thirty-three thousand
dollars) to his children. Should the rate fall to one and one-half per
cent. he would be unable to accumulate and bequeath nearly such a
large sum. Surely this fact, discouraging as it is, will not determine
him to save nothing. He will not, as Cassel's argument assumes, decide
to leave nothing to his children, and content himself with that amount
of saving which will suffice to provide for his own future. In all
probability he will try to accumulate a sum which, even when
diminished by future deductions for his own wants, will approximate as
closely as possible the amount that he could have bequeathed had the
rate remained at six per cent. This means that he will save more at
the low than at the high rate of interest.

The relative insignificance of the sum which would be saved at a low
rate might sometimes, indeed, deter a person from saving for
testamentary purposes. With the rate at six per cent., a man might be
willing to save six hundred dollars a year for a sufficiently long
period to provide a legacy of twenty thousand dollars to an
educational institution. With the rate at one and one-half per cent.,
the amount that he could hope to accumulate would be so much smaller
that it might seem to him not worth while, and he would decline to
save the six hundred dollars annually. Cases of this kind, however,
always involve the secondary objects of saving, the luxuries rather
than the necessaries of testamentary transmission. They do not include
such primary objects as provision for one's family. When the average
man finds that he cannot leave to his family as much as he would
desire, as much as he would have bequeathed to them at a higher rate
of interest, he will strive to increase rather than decrease his
efforts to save for this purpose.

Speaking generally, then, we conclude that the assumption underlying
Professor Cassel's theory is contradicted by our experience of human
motives and practices. Men who save mainly for a future
interest-income, at the same time wishing to keep the principal intact
until death, and who could have fully realised this desire under a
high interest régime, will not become entirely indifferent to it when
they find that they cannot attain it completely. They will ordinarily
try to leave behind them as large a capital or principal as they can.
Hence they will save more rather than less.


_Whether Any Interest Is Necessary_

Perhaps the best known recent statement of the opinion that interest
is inevitable, appears in Professor Irving Fisher's "The Rate of
Interest."[144] While he does not assert explicitly that sufficient
capital would not be provided without interest, and even admits that
in certain circumstances interest might disappear, the general logic
and implications of his argument are decidedly against the supposition
that society could ever get along without interest. He lays such
stress upon the factor of "impatience," i.e., man's unwillingness to
wait for future goods, as to suggest strongly that other causes of
interest, and the number of savers free from "impatience," are quite
insignificant. Now, if "impatience" were the only cause of interest
the latter must continue as long as "impatience" continues; and if
practically all savers, actual and possible, are completely dominated
by "impatience" the abolition of interest would be socially
disastrous. However, neither of these assumptions is demonstrable. We
have just seen that the present rate of interest has other causes than
"impatience"; that a large proportion of savers insist upon getting
the present rate, not because they require it to offset their
"impatience," but simply because they can obtain it, and because they
prefer it to the lower rate. Therefore, the mere existence of the
present rate does not prove it to be necessary. By the same argument
it is evident that the existence of any interest does not demonstrate
the necessity of some interest. In the second place, the number of
savers, present and prospective, whose "impatience" is so weak as to
permit them to save without interest, is probably greater than the
average reader of Professor Fisher's pages is led to assume. The
question whether interest is necessary cannot be answered by reference
to the general fact of human "impatience"; it demands a preliminary
analysis of the extent to which "impatience" affects the different
classes of savers.

With interest abolished, those persons who were willing to subordinate
present secondary satisfactions to the primary future needs of
themselves and their families, would save at least as much for these
purposes as when they could have obtained interest. Most of them would
probably save more in order to render their future provision as nearly
as possible equal to what it would have been had interest accrued on
their annual savings. Whether a person intended to leave all his
accumulations, or part of them, or none of them to posterity, he would
still desire them to be as large as they might have been in a régime
of interest. In order to realise this desire, he would be compelled to
increase his savings. And it is reasonable to expect that this is
precisely the course that would be followed by men of average thrift
and foresight. Such men regard future necessaries and comforts,
whether for themselves or their children, as more important than
present non-essentials and luxuries. Interest or no interest, prudent
men will subordinate the latter goods to the former, and will save
money accordingly.

When, however, both future and present goods are of the same order and
importance, the future is no longer preferred to the present. In that
case the preference is reversed. The luxuries of to-day are more
keenly prized than the luxuries of to-morrow. If the latter are to be
preferred they must possess some advantage over the luxuries that
might be obtained here and now. Such advantage may arise in various
ways; for example, when a man decides that he will have more leisure
for a foreign journey two years hence than this year, or when he
prefers a large amount of future enjoyment at one time to present
satisfactions taken in small doses. But the most general method of
conferring advantage upon the secondary satisfactions of the future as
compared with those of the present, is to increase the quantity. The
majority of foreseeing persons are willing to pass by one hundred
dollars' worth of enjoyment now for the sake of one hundred and five
dollars' worth one year hence. This advantage of quantity is provided
through the receipt of interest. It affects all those persons whose
saving, as noted in the last chapter, involves a sacrifice for which
the only adequate compensation is interest, and likewise all those
persons who are in a position to choose between present and future
luxuries. Were interest suppressed these classes of persons would
cease to save for this kind of future goods.

According to Professor Taussig, "most saving is done by the well-to-do
and the rich."[145] On this hypothesis it seems probable that the
abolition of interest would diminish the savings and capital of the
community very considerably; for the accumulations of the wealthy are
derived mainly from interest rather than from salaries. On the other
hand, the suppression of interest should bring about a much wider
diffusion of wealth. The sums formerly paid out as interest, would be
distributed among the masses of the population as increased wages and
reduced costs of living. Hence the masses would possess an immensely
increased capacity for saving, which might offset or even exceed the
loss of saving-power among those who now receive interest-incomes.[146]

To sum up the results of our inquiry concerning the necessity of
interest: The fact that men now receive interest does not prove that
they would not save without interest. The fact that many men would
certainly save without interest does not prove that a sufficient
amount would be saved to provide the community with the necessary
supply of capital. Whether the savings of those classes that increased
their accumulations would counteract the decreases in the saving of
the richer classes, is a question that admits of no definite or
confident answer.


_The State Is Justified in Permitting Interest_

If we assume that the suppression of interest would cause a
considerable decline in saving and capital, we must conclude that the
community would be worse off than under the present system. To
diminish greatly the instruments of production, and consequently the
supply of goods for consumption, would create far more hardship than
it would relieve. While "workless" incomes would be suppressed, and
personal incomes more nearly equalised, the total amount available for
distribution would probably be so much smaller as to cause a
deterioration in the condition of every class. In this hypothesis the
State would do wrong to abolish the system of interest.

If, however, we assume that no considerable amount of evil would
follow, or that the balance of results would be favourable, the
question of the proper action of the State becomes somewhat complex.
In the first place, interest could not rightfully be suppressed while
the private taking of rent remained. To adopt such a course would be
to treat the receivers of property incomes inequitably. Landowners
would continue to receive an income from their property, while capital
owners would not; yet the moral claims of the former to income are no
better than those of the latter. In the second place, the State would
be obliged to compensate the owners of existing capital instruments
for the decline in value which, as we have already seen, would occur
when the item of interest was eliminated from the cost of reproducing
such capital instruments. It would likewise be under moral obligation
to compensate landowners for whatever decrease in value befell their
property as a result of the abolition of rent.

Nevertheless, the practical difficulties confronting the legal
abolition of interest are apparently so great as to render the attempt
socially unwise and futile. In order to be effective the prohibition
would have to be international. Were it enforced in only one or in a
few countries, these would suffer far more through the flight of
capital than they would gain through the abolition of interest. The
technical obstacles in any case would be well nigh insuperable. If the
attempt were made to suppress interest on producing capital, as well
as on loans, the civil authorities would be unable to determine with
any degree of precision what part of the gross returns of a business
was pure interest, and what part was a necessary compensation for risk
and the labour of management. Should the State try to solve this
problem by allowing the directors of industry varying salaries to
correspond with their comparative degrees of efficiency, and different
rates of insurance-payments to represent the different risks, it would
inevitably make some allowances so low as to discourage labour and
enterprise, and others so high as to give the recipients a
considerable amount of pure interest in the guise of profits and
salaries. Should it fix a flat rate of salaries and profits, the more
efficient undertakers would refuse to put forth their best efforts,
and the more perilous enterprises would not be undertaken. The
supervision of expenses, receipts, and other details of business that
would be required to prevent evasion of the law, would not improbably
cost more than the total amount now paid in the form of interest. On
the other hand, if the method of suppression were confined to loans it
would probably prove only a little less futile than the effort to
abolish interest on productive capital. The great majority of those
who were prevented from lending at interest would invest their money
in stocks, land, buildings, and other forms of productive property.
Moreover, it is probable that a large volume of loans would be made
despite the prohibition. In the Middle Ages, when the amount of money
available for lending was comparatively small, and when State and
Church and public opinion were unanimous in favour of the policy, the
legal prohibition of loans was only partially effective. Now that the
supply of and the demand for loans have enormously increased, and
interest is not definitely disapproved by the Church or the public, a
similar effort by the State would undoubtedly prove a failure. Even if
it were entirely successful it would only decrease, not abolish,
interest on productive capital.[147]

In view of the manifold and grave uncertainties of the situation, it
is practically certain that modern States are justified in permitting
interest.


_Civil Authorisation not Sufficient for Individual Justification_

This justification of the attitude of the State does not of itself
demonstrate that the capitalist has a right to accept interest. The
civil law tolerates many actions which are morally wrong in the
individual; for example, the payment of starvation wages, the
extortion of unjust prices, and the traffic in immorality. Obviously
legal toleration does not _per se_ nor always exonerate the individual
offender. How, then, shall we justify the individual receiver of
interest?

As already pointed out more than once, those persons who would not
save without interest are justified on the ground of sacrifice. So
long as the community desires their savings, and is willing to pay
interest on them, the savers may take interest as the fair equivalent
of the inconvenience that they undergo in performing this social
service. The precise problem before us, then, is the justification of
those savers and capitalists who do not need the inducement of
interest, and whose functions of saving and conserving capital are
sufficiently compensated without interest.

It is a fact that the civil law can sometimes create moral rights and
obligations. For example; the statute requiring a person to repair
losses that he has unintentionally inflicted upon his neighbour is
held by the moral theologians to be binding _in conscience_, as soon
as the matter has been adjudicated by the court. In other words, this
civil regulation confers on the injured man property rights, and
imposes on the morally inculpable injurer property obligations. The
civil statutes also give moral validity to the title of prescription,
or adverse possession. When the alien possessor has complied with the
legal provisions that apply, he has a moral right to the property,
even though the original owner should assert his claim at a later
time. Some moral theologians maintain that a legal discharge in
bankruptcy liberates the bankrupt from the moral obligation of
satisfying his unpaid debts. Several other situations might be cited
in which the State admittedly creates moral rights of individual
ownership which would have no definite existence in the absence of
such legal action and authorisation.[148]

This principle would seem to have received a particularly pertinent
application for our inquiry in the doctrine of _præmium_ legale as a
title of interest on loans. In the "Opus Morale" of Ballerini-Palmieri
can be found a long list of moral theologians living in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries who maintained that the mere
legal sanction of a certain rate of interest was a sufficient moral
justification for the lender.[149] While holding to the traditional
doctrine that interest was not capable of being justified on intrinsic
grounds, these writers contended that by virtue of its power of
eminent domain the State could transfer from the borrower to the
lender the right to the interest paid on a loan. They did not mean
that the State could arbitrarily take one man's property and hand it
over to another, but only that, when it sanctioned interest for the
public welfare, this extrinsic circumstance (like the other "extrinsic
titles" approved by moralists) annulled the claim of the borrower in
favour of the lender. In other words, they maintained that the money
paid in loan-interest did not belong to either borrower or lender with
certainty or definiteness until the matter was determined by economic
conditions and extrinsic circumstances. Hence legal authorisation for
the common good was morally sufficient to award it to the lender. More
than one of them declared that the State had the same right to
determine this indeterminate property, to assign the ownership to the
lender, that it had to transfer property titles by the device of
prescription. And their general position seems to have been confirmed
by the response of the Congregation of the Poenitentiaria, Feb., 1832,
to the Bishop of Verona, the substance of which was that a confessor
might adopt and act upon this position.[150]

And yet, neither this nor any of the other precedents cited above, are
sufficient to give certain moral sanction to the practice of
interest-taking by those persons who would continue to save if
interest were abolished. All the acts of legal authorisation that we
have been considering relate to practices which are beneficial and
necessary to society. Only in such cases has the State the moral
authority to create or annul property rights. In the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries the legal authorisation of a certain rate of
interest made that rate morally lawful simply because this legal act
gave formal and authoritative testimony to the social utility of
interest-taking. The State merely declared the reasonableness, and
fixed the proper limits of the practice. The beneficent effect of
interest-taking upon society was its underlying justification, was the
ultimate fact which made it reasonable, and which gave to the action
of the State moral value. Had the taking of interest on loans not been
allowed the bulk of possible savings would either not have been saved
at all, or would have been hoarded instead of converted into capital.
And that money was badly needed in the commercial and industrial
operations of the time. Hence the owners of it were in the position of
persons who regarded saving and investing as a sacrifice for which
interest was a necessary and proper compensation. To-day, however,
there are millions of persons who would continue to perform both these
functions without the inducement of interest. Therefore, the public
good does not require that they should receive interest, nor that the
State should have the power to clothe their interest-incomes with
moral lawfulness. Inasmuch as the State is not certain that the
abolition of interest would be socially expedient or practically
possible, it is justified in permitting the institution to continue;
but it has no power to affect the morality of interest-taking as an
individual action.


_How the Interest-Taker Is Justified_

Although the interest received by the non-sacrifice savers is not
clearly justifiable on either intrinsic or social grounds, it is not
utterly lacking in moral sanctions. In the first place, we have not
contended that the intrinsic factors of productivity and service are
_certainly_ invalid morally. We have merely insisted that the moral
worth of these titles has never been satisfactorily demonstrated.
Possibly they have a greater and more definite efficacy than has yet
been shown by their advocates. In more concrete terms, we admit that
the productivity of capital and the service of the capitalist to the
community, are possible and doubtful titles to interest. A doubtful
title to property is, indeed, insufficient by itself. In the case of
the interest receiver, however, the doubtful titles of productivity
and service are reinforced by the fact of possession. Thus
supplemented, they are sufficient to justify the non-sacrifice saver
in giving himself the benefit of the doubt as regards the validity of
his right to take interest. To be sure, this indefinite and uncertain
claim would be overthrown by a more definite and positive title. But
no such antagonistic title exists. Neither the consumer nor the
labourer can show any conclusive reason why interest should go to him
rather than to the capitalist. Hence the latter has at least a
presumptive title. In the circumstances this is morally sufficient.

To this justification by presumption must be added a justification by
analogy. The non-sacrifice savers seem to be in about the same
position as those other agents of production whose rewards are out of
proportion to their sacrifices. For example; the labourer of superior
native ability gets as much compensation for the same quality and
quantity of work as his companion who has only ordinary ability; and
the exceptionally intelligent business man stands in the same relation
to his less efficient competitor; yet the sacrifices undergone by the
former of each pair is less than that suffered by the latter. It would
seem that if the more efficient men may properly take the same rewards
as those who make larger sacrifices, the non-sacrifice capitalist
might lawfully accept the same interest as the man whose saving
involves some sacrifice. On this principle the lenders who would not
have invested their money in a productive enterprise were nevertheless
permitted by the moralists of the post-mediæval period to take
advantage of the title of _lucrum cessans_. Although they had
relinquished no opportunity of gain, nor made any sacrifice, they were
put on the same moral level as sacrificing lenders, and were allowed
to take the same interest.

As a determinant of ownership, possession is the feeblest of all
factors, and yet it is of considerable importance for a large
proportion of incomes and property. In the distribution of the
national product, as well as in the division of the original heritage
of the earth, a large part is played by the title of first occupancy.
Much of the product of industry is assigned to the agents of
production mainly on the basis of inculpable possession. That is; it
goes to its receivers automatically, in exchange for benefits to those
who hand it over, and without excessive exploitation of their needs.
Just as the first arrival on a piece of land may regard it as a
no-man's territory, and make it his own by the mere device of
appropriation, so the capitalist may get morally valid possession of
interest. Sometimes, indeed, this debatable share, this no-man's share
of the product of industry, is secured in some part by the consumer of
the labourer. In such cases their title to it is just as valid as the
title of the capitalist, notwithstanding the doubtful titles of
productivity and service which the latter has in his favour. First
occupancy and possession are the more decisive factors. In the great
majority of instances, however, the capitalist is the first occupant,
and therefore the lawful possessor of the interest-share.

The general justification of interest set forth in the immediately
preceding paragraphs is supplemented in the case of the great majority
of capital owners by the fact that their income from this source is
relatively insignificant. The average income of the farmers of the
United States is only 724 dollars per year, and of this 322 dollars is
interest on the capital invested in the farm.[151] Even when we make
due allowance for the high purchasing power of farm incomes, due to
the lower cost of foodstuffs and house rent, the total amount of 724
dollars provides only a very moderate living. Consequently the great
majority of farmers can regard the interest that they receive as a
necessary part of the remuneration that is fairly due them on account
of their labour, sacrifices, and risks. So far as they are concerned,
the justification of interest, as interest, is not a practical
question. The same observation applies to the majority of urban
business men, such as small merchants and manufacturers. Their
interest can be justified as not more than fair wages and profits.

Again, there is a large number of interest receivers who are entirely
dependent upon this kind of income, and who obtain therefrom only a
moderate livelihood. They are mainly children, aged persons, and
invalids. Unlike the classes just described, they cannot justify their
interest as a fair supplement to wages; however, they may reasonably
claim it as their equitable or charitable share of the common heritage
of the earth. If they did not receive this interest-income they would
have to be supported by their relatives or by the State. For many
reasons this would be a much less desirable arrangement. Consequently
their general claim to interest is supplemented by considerations of
human welfare.

The difference between the ethical character of the interest discussed
in the last two paragraphs and of that received by persons who possess
large incomes, is too often overlooked in technical treatises. Every
man owning any productive goods is reckoned as a capitalist, and
assumed to receive interest. If, however, a man's total
interest-income is so small that when combined with all his other
revenues it merely completes the equivalent of a decent living, it is
surely of very little significance as interest. It stands in no such
need of justification as the interest obtained by men whose incomes
amount to, say, ten thousand dollars a year and upwards.

Still another confirmatory title of interest is suggested by the
following well known declaration of St. Thomas Aquinas: "The
possession of riches is not in itself unlawful if the order of reason
be observed: that a man should possess justly what he owns, and _use_
it in a proper manner for himself and others."[152] Neither just
acquisition nor proper use is alone sufficient to render private
possessions morally good. Both must be present. As we have seen above,
the capitalist can appeal to certain presumptive and analogous titles
which justify practically his acquisition of interest; but there can
be no doubt that his claim and his moral power of disposal are
considerably strengthened when he puts his interest-income to a proper
use. One way of so using it is for a reasonable livelihood, as
exemplified in the case of the farmers, business men, and non-workers
whom we considered above. Those persons who receive incomes in excess
of their reasonable needs could devote the surplus to religion,
charity, education, and a great variety of altruistic purposes. We
shall deal with this matter specifically in the chapter on the "Duty
of Distributing Superfluous Wealth." In the meantime it is sufficient
to note that the rich man who makes a benevolent use of his
interest-income has a special reason for believing that his receipt of
interest is justified.

The decisive value attributed to presumption, analogy, possession, and
doubtful titles in our vindication of the capitalist's claim to
interest, is no doubt disappointing to those persons who desire
clear-cut mathematical rules and principles. Nevertheless, they are
the only factors that seem to be available. While the title that they
confer upon the interest receiver is not as definite nor as noble as
that by which the labourer claims his wages or the business man his
profits, it is morally sufficient. It will remain logically and
ethically unshaken until more cogent arguments have been brought
against it than have yet appeared in the denunciations of the income
of the capitalist. And what is true of him is likewise true of the
rent receiver, and of the person who profits by the "unearned
increment" of land values. In all three cases the presumptive
justification of "workless" incomes will probably remain valid as long
as the present industrial system endures.

FOOTNOTES:

[142] "Growth of Capital," p. 152.

[143] Cf. Gonner, "Interest and Saving," p. 73; Cassel, "The Nature
and Necessity of Interest," ch. iv.

[144] New York, 1907.

[145] "Principles of Economics," II, 42.

[146] Cf. Hobson, "The Economics of Distribution," pp. 259-265.

[147] Cf. Fisher, "Elementary Principles of Economics," pp. 396, 397.
However, he does not discuss in this passage the possibility of
suppressing interest on productive capital by a direct method.

[148] Cf. Lehmkuhl, "Theologia Moralis," I, nos. 917, 965, 1035.

[149] Vol. 3, pp. 617-629; 2d ed.

[150] Ballerini-Palmieri, loc. cit.; cf. Van Roey, op. cit., pp.
73-75.

[151] Cf. _American Economic Review_, March, 1916; p. 46.

[152] "Contra Gentiles," lib. 3, c. 123.




