CHAPTER XIV

CO-OPERATION AS A PARTIAL SOLVENT OF CAPITALISM


Interest is not a return for labour. The majority of interest
receivers are, indeed, regularly engaged at some active task, whether
as day labourers, salaried employés, directors of industry, or members
of the professions; but for these services they obtain specific and
distinct compensation. The interest that they get comes to them solely
in their capacity as owners of capital, independently of any personal
activity. From the viewpoint of economic distribution, interest is a
"workless" income. As such, it seems to challenge that ethical
intuition which connects reward with effort and which inclines to
regard income from any other source as not quite normal. Moreover,
interest absorbs a large part of the national income, and perpetuates
grave economic inequalities.[153]

Nevertheless, interest cannot be wholly abolished. As long as capital
remains in private hands, its owners will demand and obtain interest.
The only way of escape is by the road of Socialism, and this would
prove a blind alley. As we have seen in a preceding chapter, Socialism
is ethically and economically impossible.

May not the burdens and disadvantages of interest be mitigated or
minimised? Such a result could conceivably be reached in two ways: the
sum total of interest might be reduced, and the incomes derived from
interest might be more widely distributed.


_Reducing the Rate of Interest_

No considerable diminution of the interest-volume can be expected
through a decline in the interest rate. As far back as the middle of
the eighteenth century, England and Holland were able to borrow money
at three per cent. During the period that has since intervened, the
rate has varied from three to six per cent. on this class of loans.
Between 1870 and 1890, the general rate of interest declined about two
per cent., but it has risen since the latter date about one per cent.
The Great War now (1916) in action is destroying an enormous amount of
capital, and it will, as in the case of all previous military
conflicts of importance, undoubtedly be followed by a marked rise in
the rate of interest.

On the other hand, the only definite grounds upon which a decline in
the rate can be hoped for are either uncertain or unimportant. They
are the rapid increase of capital, and the extension of government
ownership and operation of natural monopolies.

The first is uncertain in its effects upon the rate of interest
because the increased supply of capital is often neutralised by the
process of substitution. That is, a large part of the new capital does
not compete with and bring down the price of the old capital. Instead,
it is absorbed in new inventions, new types of machinery, and new
processes of production, all of which take the place of labour, thus
tending to increase rather than diminish the demand for capital and
the rate of interest. To be sure, the demand for capital thus arising
has not always been sufficient to offset the enlarged supply. Since
the Industrial Revolution capital has at certain periods and in
certain regions increased so rapidly that it could not all find
employment in new forms and in old forms at the old rate. In some
instances a decline in the rate of interest can be clearly traced to
the disproportionately quick growth of capital. But this phenomenon
has been far from uniform, and there is no indication that it will
become so in the future. The possibilities of the process of
substitution have been by no means exhausted.

The effects of government ownership are even more problematical.
States and cities are, indeed, able to obtain capital more cheaply
than private corporations for such public utilities as railways,
telegraphs, tramways, and street lighting; and public ownership of all
such concerns will probably become general in the not remote future.
Nevertheless the social gain is not likely to be proportionate to the
reduction of interest on this section of capital. A part, possibly a
considerable part, of the saving in interest will be neutralised by
the lower efficiency and greater cost of operation; for in this
respect publicly managed are inferior to privately managed
enterprises. Consequently, the charges to the public for the services
rendered by these utilities cannot be reduced to the same degree as
the rate of interest on the capital. On the other hand, the exclusion
of private operating capital from this very large field of public
utilities should increase competition among the various units of
capital, and thus bring down its rewards. To what extent this would
happen cannot be estimated even approximately. The only safe statement
is that the decline in the general rate of interest would probably be
slight.


_Need for a Wider Distribution of Capital_

The main hope of lightening the social burden of interest lies in the
possible reduction in the necessary volume of capital, and especially
in a wider distribution of interest-incomes. In many parts of the
industrial field there is a considerable waste of capital through
unnecessary duplication. This means that a large amount of unnecessary
interest is paid by the consumer in the form of unnecessarily high
prices. Again, the owners of capital and receivers of interest
constitute only a minority of the population of all countries, with
the possible exception of the United States. The great majority of the
wage earners in all lands possess no capital, and obtain no interest.
Not only are their incomes small, often pitiably small, but their lack
of capital deprives them of the security, confidence, and independence
which are required for comfortable existence and efficient
citizenship. They have no income from productive property to protect
them against the cessation of wages. During periods of unemployment
they are frequently compelled to have recourse to charity, and to
forego many of the necessary comforts of life. So long as the bulk of
the means of production remains in the hands of a distinct capitalist
class, this demoralising insecurity of the workers must continue as an
essential part of our industrial system. While it might conceivably be
eliminated through a comprehensive scheme of State insurance, this
arrangement would substitute dependence upon the State for dependence
upon the capitalist, and be much less desirable than ownership of
income-bearing property.

The workers who possess no capital do not enjoy a normal and
reasonable degree of independence, self respect, or self confidence.
They have not sufficient control over the wage contract and the other
conditions of employment, and they have nothing at all to say
concerning the goods that they shall produce, or the persons to whom
their product shall be sold. They lack the incentive to put forth
their best efforts in production. They cannot satisfy adequately the
instinct of property, the desire to control some of the determining
forms of material possession. They are deprived of that consciousness
of power which is generated exclusively by property, and which
contributes so powerfully toward the making of a contended and
efficient life. They do not possess a normal amount of freedom in
politics, nor in those civic and social relations which lie outside
the spheres of industry and politics. In a word, the worker without
capital has not sufficient power over the ordering of his own life.


_The Essence of Co-operative Enterprise_

The most effective means of lessening the volume of interest, and
bringing about a wider distribution of capital, is to be found in
co-operative enterprise. Co-operation in general denotes the unified
action of a group of persons for a common end. A church, a debating
club, a joint stock company, exemplifies co-operation in this sense.
In the strict and technical sense, it has received various
definitions. Professor Taussig declares that it "consists essentially
in getting rid of the managing employer"; but this description is
applicable only to co-operatives of production. "A combination of
individuals to economise by buying in common, or increase their
profits by selling in common" (Encyclopedia Britannica) is likewise
too narrow, since it fits only distributive and agricultural
co-operation. According to C. R. Fay, a co-operative society is "an
association for the purpose of joint trading, originating among the
weak, and conducted always in an unselfish spirit." If the word,
"trading" be stretched to comprehend manufacturing as well as
commercial activities, Fay's definition is fairly satisfactory. The
distinguishing circumstance, "originating among the weak," is also
emphasised by Father Pesch in his statement that the essence, aim, and
meaning of co-operation are to be found in "a combination of the
economically weak in common efforts for the security and betterment of
their condition."[154] In order to give the proper connotation for our
purpose, we shall define co-operation as, that joint economic action
which seeks to obtain for a relatively weak group all or part of the
profits and interest which in the ordinary capitalist enterprise are
taken by a smaller and different group. This formula puts in the
foreground the important fact that in every form of co-operative
effort, some interest or profits, or both, are diverted from those who
would have received them under purely capitalistic arrangements, and
distributed among a larger number of persons. Thus it indicates the
bearing of co-operation upon the problem of lightening the social
burden of interest.

From the viewpoint of economic function, co-operation may be divided
into two general kinds, producers' and consumers'. The best example of
the former is a wage earners' productive society; of the latter, a
co-operative store. Credit co-operatives and agricultural
co-operatives fall mainly under the former head, inasmuch as their
principal object is to assist production, and to benefit men as
producers rather than as consumers. Hence from the viewpoint of type,
co-operation may be classified as credit, agricultural, distributive,
and productive.


_Co-operative Credit Societies_

A co-operative credit society is a bank controlled by the persons who
patronise it, and lending on personal rather than material security.
Such banks are intended almost exclusively for the relatively helpless
borrower, as, the small farmer, artisan, shopkeeper, and the small man
generally. Fundamentally they are associations of neighbours who
combine their resources and their credit in order to obtain loans on
better terms than are accorded by the ordinary commercial banks. The
capital is derived partly from the sale of shares of stock, partly
from deposits, and partly from borrowed money. In Germany, where
credit associations have been more widely extended and more highly
developed than in any other country, they are of two kinds, named
after their respective founders, Schulze-Delitzsch and Raiffeisen. The
former operates chiefly in the cities, serves the middle classes
rather than the very poor, requires all its members to subscribe for
capital stock, commits them to a long course of saving, and thus
develops their interest as lenders. The Raiffeisen societies have, as
a rule, very little share capital, exist chiefly in the country
districts, especially among the poorest of the peasantry, are based
mostly on personal credit, and do not profess to encourage greatly the
saving and lending activities of their members. Both forms of
association loan money to their members at lower rates of interest
than these persons could obtain elsewhere. Hence credit co-operation
directly reduces the burden of interest.

The Schulze-Delitzsch societies have more than half a million members
in the cities and towns of Germany, sixty per cent. of whom take
advantage of the borrowing facilities. The Raiffeisen banks comprise
about one-half of all the independent German agriculturists. Some form
of co-operative banking is well established in every important country
of Europe, except Denmark and Great Britain. In the former country
its place seems to be satisfactorily filled by the ordinary commercial
banks. Its absence from Great Britain is apparently due to the credit
system provided by the large landholders, to the scarcity of peasant
proprietors, and to general lack of initiative. It is especially
strong in Italy, Belgium, and Austria, and it has made a promising
beginning in Ireland. In every country in which it has obtained a
foothold, it gives indication of steady and continuous progress.
Nevertheless it is subject to definite limits. It can never make much
headway among that class of persons whose material resources are
sufficiently large and palpable to command loans on the usual terms
offered by the commercial banks. As a rule, these terms are quite as
favourable as those available through the co-operative credit
associations. It is only because the poorer men cannot obtain loans
from the commercial banks on the prevailing conditions that they are
impelled to have recourse to the co-operative associations.


_Co-operative Agricultural Societies_

The chief operations of agricultural co-operative societies are
manufacturing, marketing, and purchasing. In the first named field the
most important example is the co-operative dairy. The owners of cows
hold the stock or shares of the concern, and in addition to dividends
receive profits in proportion to the amount of milk that they supply.
In Ireland and some other countries, a portion of the profits goes to
the employés of the dairy as a dividend on wages. Other productive
co-operatives of agriculture are found in cheese making, bacon curing,
distilling, and wine making. All are conducted on the same general
principles as the co-operative dairy.

Through the marketing societies and purchasing societies, the farmers
are enabled to sell their products to better advantage, and to obtain
materials needed for carrying on agricultural operations more cheaply
than would be possible by isolated individual action. Some of the
products marketed by the selling societies are eggs, milk, poultry,
fruit, vegetables, live stock, and various kinds of grain. The
purchasing societies supply for the most part manures, seeds, and
machinery. Occasionally they buy the most costly machinery in such a
way that the association becomes the corporate owner of the
implements. In these cases the individual members have only the use of
the machines, but they would be unable to enjoy even that advantage
were it not for the intervention of the co-operative society. Where
such arrangements exist, the society exemplifies not only co-operative
buying but co-operative ownership.

Agricultural co-operation has become most widely extended in Denmark,
and has displayed its most striking possibilities in Ireland.
Relatively to its population, the former country has more farmers in
co-operative societies, and has derived more profit therefrom, than
any other nation. The rapid growth and achievements of agricultural
co-operation in the peculiarly unfavourable circumstances of Ireland
constitute the most convincing proof to be found anywhere of the
essential soundness and efficacy of the movement. Various forms of
rural co-operative societies are solidly established in Germany,
France, Belgium, Italy, and Switzerland. In recent years the movement
has made some progress in the United States, especially in relation to
dairies, grain elevators, the marketing of live stock and fruit, and
various forms of rural insurance. The co-operative insurance companies
effect a saving to the Minnesota farmers of $700,000 annually, and the
co-operative elevators handle about 30 per cent. of the grain marketed
in that state. In 1915 the business transacted by the co-operative
marketing and purchasing organisations of the farmers of the United
States amounted to $1,400,000,000.

The transformation in the rural life of more than one European
community through co-operation has amounted to little less than a
revolution. Higher standards of agricultural products and production
have been set up and maintained, better methods of farming have been
inculcated and enforced, and the whole social, moral, and civic life
of the people has been raised to a higher level. From the viewpoint of
material gain, the chief benefits of agricultural co-operation have
been the elimination of unnecessary middlemen, and the economies of
buying in large quantities, selling in the best markets, and employing
the most efficient implements. As compared with farming conducted on a
large scale, the small farm possesses certain advantages, and is
subject to certain disadvantages. It is less wasteful, permits greater
attention to details, and makes a greater appeal to the self interest
of the cultivator; but the small farmer cannot afford to buy the best
machinery, nor is he in a position to carry on to the best advantage
the commercial features of his occupation, such as borrowing, buying,
and marketing. Co-operation frees him from all these handicaps. "The
co-operative community ... is one in which groups of humble men
combine their efforts, and to some extent their resources, in order to
secure for themselves those advantages in industry which the masters
of capital derive from the organisation of labour, from the use of
costly machinery, and from the economies of business when done on a
large scale. They apply in their industry the methods by which the
fortunes of the magnates in commerce and manufacture are made." These
words, uttered by a prominent member of the Irish co-operative
movement, summarise the aims and achievements of agricultural
co-operation in every country of Europe in which it has obtained a
strong foothold. In every such community the small farm has gained at
the expense of the large farm system. Finally, agricultural
co-operation reduces the burden of interest by eliminating some
unnecessary capital, stimulates saving among the tillers of the soil
by providing a ready and safe means of investment, and in manifold
ways contributes materially toward a better distribution of wealth.


_Co-operative Mercantile Societies_

Co-operative stores are organised by and for consumers. In every
country they follow rather closely the Rochdale system, so called from
the English town in which the first store of this kind was established
in 1844. The members of the co-operative society furnish the capital,
and receive thereon interest at the prevailing rate, usually five per
cent. The stores sell goods at about the same prices as their
privately owned competitors, but return a dividend on the purchases of
all those customers who are members of the society. The dividends are
provided from the surplus which remains after wages, interest on the
capital stock, and all other expenses have been paid. In some
co-operative stores non-members receive a dividend on their purchases
at half the rate accorded to members of the society, but only on
condition that these payments shall be invested in the capital stock
of the enterprise. And the members themselves are strongly urged to
make this disposition of their purchase-dividends. Since the latter
are paid only quarterly, the co-operative store exercises a
considerable influence toward inducing its patrons to save and to
become small capitalists.

In Great Britain the vast majority of the retail stores have been
federated into two great wholesale societies, one in England and the
other in Scotland. The retail stores provide the capital, and
participate in the profits according to the amounts purchased, just as
the individual consumers furnish the capital and share the profits of
the retail establishments. The Scottish Wholesale Society divides a
part of the profits among its employés. Besides their operations as
jobbers, the wholesale societies are bankers for the retail stores,
and own and operate factories, farms, warehouses, and steamships.
Many of the retail co-operatives likewise carry on productive
enterprises, such as milling, tailoring, bread making, and the
manufacture of boots, shoes, and other commodities, and some of them
build, sell, and rent cottages, and lend money to members who desire
to obtain homes.

The co-operative store movement has made greatest progress in its
original home, Great Britain. In 1913 about one person in every three
was to some degree interested in or a beneficiary of these
institutions. The profits of the stores amounted to about $71,302,070,
which was about 35 per cent. on the capital. The employés numbered
about 145,000, and the sales for the year aggregated $650,000,000. The
English Wholesale Society was the largest flour miller and shoe
manufacturer in Great Britain, and its total business amounted to
$150,000,000. Outside of Great Britain, co-operative distribution has
been most successful in Germany, Belgium, and Switzerland. It has had
a fair measure of development in Italy, but has failed to assume any
importance in France. "There is every sign that within the near
future--except in France--the stores will come to include the great
majority of the wage earning class, which is a constantly growing
percentage of the total population."[155] Within recent years a
respectable number of stores have been established on a sound basis in
Canada and the United States. Owing, however, to the marked
individualism and the better economic conditions of these two
countries, the co-operative movement will continue for some time to be
relatively slow.

As in the case of agricultural co-operation, the money benefits
accruing to the members of the co-operative stores consist mainly of
profits rather than interest. In the absence of the store societies,
these profits would have gone for the most part to middlemen as
payments for the risks and labour of conducting privately owned
establishments. Forty-seven of the sixty million dollars profits of
the British co-operative stores in 1910 were divided among more than
two and one-half million members of these institutions, instead of
going to a comparatively small number of private merchants. The other
thirteen million dollars were interest on the capital stock. Had the
members invested an equal amount in other enterprises they could,
indeed, have obtained about the same rate and amount of interest, but
in the absence of the co-operative stores their inducements and
opportunities to save would have been much smaller. For it must be
kept in mind that a very large part of the capital stock in the
co-operative stores is derived from the members' dividends on their
purchases at such stores, and would not have come into existence at
all without these establishments. The gains of the co-operative
stores, whether classified as profits or as interest, are evidently a
not inconsiderable indication of a better distribution of wealth.


_Co-operation in Production_

Co-operative production has occasionally been pronounced a failure.
This judgment is too sweeping and too severe. "As a matter of fact,"
says a prominent London weekly, "the co-operators' success has been
even more remarkable in production than in distribution. The
co-operative movement runs five of the largest of our flour mills; it
has, amongst others, the very largest of our boot factories; it makes
cotton cloth and woollens, and all sorts of clothing; it has even a
corset factory of its own; it turns out huge quantities of soap; it
makes every article of household furniture; it produces cocoa and
confectionery; it grows its own fruit and makes its own jams; it has
one of the largest tobacco factories, and so on." Obviously this
passage refers to that kind of productive co-operation which is
carried on by the stores, not to productive concerns owned and
managed by the workers therein employed. Nevertheless the enterprises
in question are co-operatively managed, and hence exemplify
co-operation rather than private and competitive industry. They ought
not to be left out of any statement of the field occupied by
co-operative production. The limitations and possibilities of
co-operation in production can best be set forth by considering its
three different forms separately.

The "perfect" form occurs when all the workers engaged in a concern
own all the share capital, control the entire management, and receive
the whole of the wages, profits, and interest. In this field the
failures have been much more numerous and conspicuous than the
successes. Godin's stove works at Guise, France, is the only important
enterprise of this kind that is now in existence. Great Britain has
several establishments in which the workers own a large part of the
capital, but apparently none in which they are the sole proprietors
and managers. The "labour societies" of Italy, consisting mostly of
diggers, masons, and bricklayers, co-operatively enter into contracts
for the performance of public works, and share in the profits of the
undertaking in addition to their wages; but the only capital that they
provide consists of comparatively simple and inexpensive tools. The
raw material and other capital is furnished by the public authority
which gives the contract.

A second kind of productive co-operation is found in the arrangement
known as co-partnership. This is "the system under which, in the first
place, a substantial and known share of the profit of a business
belongs to the workers in it, not by right of any shares they may
hold, or any other title, but simply by right of the labour they have
contributed to make the profit; and, in the second place, every worker
is at liberty to invest his profit, or any other savings, in shares of
the society or company, and so become a member entitled to vote on the
affairs of the body which employs him."[156] So far as its first, or
profit sharing, feature is concerned, co-partnership is not genuine
co-operation, for it includes neither ownership of capital nor
management of the business. Co-operative action begins only with the
adoption of the second element. In most of the existing co-partnership
concerns, all the employés are urged, and many of them required to
invest at least a part of their profits in the capital stock. The most
notable and successful of these experiments is that carried on by the
South Metropolitan Gas Company of London. Practically all the
company's 6,000 employés are now among its stockholders. Although
their combined holdings are only about one-twenty-eighth of the total,
they are empowered to select two of the ten members of the board of
directors. Essentially the same co-partnership arrangements have been
adopted by about one-half the privately owned gas companies of Great
Britain. In none of them, however, have the workers obtained as yet
such a large percentage of either ownership or control as in the South
Metropolitan. Co-partnership exists in several other enterprises in
Great Britain, and is found in a considerable number of French
concerns. There are a few instances in the United States, the most
thoroughgoing being that of N. O. Nelson & Co. at Le Claire, Ill.

As already noted, the co-operative stores exemplify a third type of
co-operative production. In some cases the productive concern is under
the management of a local retail establishment, but the great majority
of them are conducted by the English and Scottish Wholesale Societies.
As regards the employés of these enterprises, the arrangement is not
true co-operation, since they have no part in the ownership of the
capital. The Scottish Wholesale Society, as we have seen, permits the
employés of its productive works to share in the profits thereof;
nevertheless it does not admit them as stockholders, nor give them any
voice in the management. In all cases the workers may, indeed, become
owners of stock in their local retail stores. Since the latter are
stockholders in the wholesale societies, which in turn own the
productive enterprises, the workers have a certain indirect and
attenuated proprietorship in the productive concerns. But they derive
therefrom no dividends. All the interest and most of the profits of
the productive establishments are taken by the wholesale and retail
stores. For it is the theory of the wholesale societies that the
employés in the works of production should share in the gains thereof
only as consumers. They are to profit only in the same way and to the
same extent as other consumer-members of the local retail
establishments.

The most effective and beneficial form of co-operative production is
evidently that which has been described as the "perfect" type. Were
all production organised on this plan, the social burden of interest
would be insignificant, industrial despotism would be ended, and
industrial democracy realised. As things are, however, the
establishments exemplifying this type are of small importance. Their
increase and expansion are impeded by lack of directive ability and of
capital, and the risk to the workers' savings. Yet none of these
obstacles is necessarily insuperable. Directive ability can be
developed in the course of time, just as it was in the co-operative
stores. Capital can be obtained fast enough perhaps to keep pace with
the supply of directive ability and the spirit of co-operation. The
risk undertaken by workers who put their savings into productive
concerns owned and managed by themselves need not be greater than that
now borne by investors in private enterprises of the same kind. There
is no essential reason why the former should not provide the same
profits and insurance against business risks as the latter. While the
employés assume none of the risks of capitalistic industry, neither do
they receive any of the profits. If the co-operative factory exhibits
the same degree of business efficiency as the private enterprise it
will necessarily afford the workers adequate protection for their
savings and capital. Indeed, if "perfect" co-operative production is
to be successful at all its profits will be larger than those of the
capitalistic concern, owing to the greater interest taken by the
workers in their tasks, and in the management of the business.

For a long time to come, however, it is probable that "perfect"
co-operative production will be confined to relatively small and local
industries. The difficulty of finding sufficient workers' capital and
ability to carry on, for example, a transcontinental railroad or a
nationwide steel business, is not likely to be overcome for one or two
generations.[157]

The labour co-partnership form of co-operation is susceptible of much
wider and more rapid extension. It can be adapted readily to the very
large as well as to the small and medium sized concerns. Since it
requires the workers to own but a part of the capital, it can be
established in any enterprise in which the capitalists show themselves
willing and sympathetic. In every industrial corporation there are
some employés who possess savings, and these can be considerably
increased through the profit sharing feature of co-partnership. A very
long time must, indeed, elapse before the workers in any of the larger
enterprises could get possession of all, or even of a controlling
share of the capital, and a considerable time would be needed to
educate and fit them for successful management.

Production under the direction of the co-operative stores can be
extended faster than either of the other two forms, and it has before
it a very wide even though definitely limited field. The British
wholesale societies have already shown themselves able to conduct with
great success large manufacturing concerns, have trained and attracted
an adequate number of competent leaders, and have accumulated so much
capital that they have been obliged to invest several million pounds
in other enterprises. The possible scope of the stores and their
co-operative production has been well described by C. R. Fay:
"distribution of goods for personal consumption, first, among the
working class population, secondly, among the salaried classes who
feel a homogeneity of professional interest; production by working
class organisations alone (with rare exceptions in Italy) of all the
goods which they distribute to their members. But this is its limit.
Distribution among the remaining sections of the industrial
population; production for distribution to these members; production
of the instruments of production, and production for international
trade; the services of transport and exchange: all these industrial
departments are, so far as can be seen, permanently outside the domain
of a store movement."[158]

The theory by which the stores attempt to justify the exclusion of the
employés of their productive concerns from a share of the profits
thereof is that all profits come ultimately from the pockets of the
consumer, and should all return to that source. The defect in this
theory is that it ignores the question whether the consumers ought not
to be required to pay a sufficiently high price for their goods to
provide the producers with profits in addition to wages. While the
wholesale stores are the owners and managers of the capital in the
productive enterprises, and on the capitalistic principle should
obtain the profits, the question remains whether this is necessarily a
sound principle, and whether it is in harmony with the theory and
ideals of co-operation. In those concerns which have adopted the
labour co-partnership scheme, the workers, even when they own none of
the capital, are accorded a part of the profits. It is assumed that
this is a fairer and wiser method of distribution than that which
gives the labourer only wages, leaving all the profits to the
manager-capitalist. This feature of co-partnership rests on the theory
that the workers can, if they will, increase their efficiency and
reduce the friction between themselves and their employer to such an
extent as to make the profit sharing arrangement a good thing for both
parties. Consequently the profits obtained by the workers are a
payment for this specific contribution to the prosperity of the
business. Why should not this theory find recognition in productive
enterprises conducted by the co-operative stores?

In the second place, the workers in these concerns ought to be
permitted to participate in the capital ownership and management. They
would thus be strongly encouraged to become better workers, to save
more money, and to increase their capacity for initiative and self
government. Moreover, this arrangement would go farther than any other
system toward reconciling the interests of producer and consumer. As
producer, the worker would obtain, besides his wages, interest and
profits up to the limit set by the competition of private productive
concerns. As consumer, he would share in the profits and interest
which would otherwise have gone to the private distributive
enterprises. In this way the producer and consumer would each get the
gains that were due specifically and respectively to his activity and
efficiency.


_Advantages and Prospects of Co-operation_

At this point it will perhaps be well to sum up the advantages and to
estimate the prospects of the co-operative movement. In all its forms
co-operation eliminates some waste of capital and energy, and
therefore transfers some interest and profits from a special
capitalist and undertaking class to a larger and economically weaker
group of persons. For it must be borne in mind that all co-operative
enterprises are conducted mainly by and for labourers or small
farmers. Hence the system always makes directly for a better
distribution of wealth. To a considerable extent it transfers capital
ownership from those who do not themselves work with or upon capital
to those who are so engaged; namely, the labourers and the farmers;
thus it diminishes the unhealthy separation now existing between the
owners and the users of the instruments of production. Co-operation
has, in the second place, a very great educational value. It enables
and induces the weaker members of economic society to combine and
utilise energies and resources that would otherwise remain unused and
undeveloped; and it greatly stimulates and fosters initiative, self
confidence, self restraint, self government, and the capacity for
democracy. In other words, it vastly increases the development and
efficiency of the individual. It likewise induces him to practise
thrift, and frequently provides better fields for investment than
would be open to him outside the co-operative movement. It diminishes
selfishness and inculcates altruism; for no co-operative enterprise
can succeed in which the individual members are not willing to make
greater sacrifices for the common good than are ordinarily evoked by
private enterprise. Precisely because co-operation makes such heavy
demands upon the capacity for altruism, its progress always has been
and must always continue to be relatively slow. Its fundamental and
perhaps chief merit is that it does provide the mechanism and the
atmosphere for a greater development of the altruistic spirit than is
possible under any other economic system that has ever been tried or
devised.

By putting productive property into the hands of those who now possess
little or nothing, co-operation promotes social stability and social
progress. This statement is true in some degree of all forms of
co-operation, but it applies with particular force to those forms
which are carried on by the working classes. A steadily growing number
of keen-sighted social students are coming to realise that an
industrial system which permits a comparatively small section of
society to own the means of production and the instrumentalities of
distribution, leaving to the great majority of the workers nothing but
their labour power, is fundamentally unstable, and contains within
itself the germs of inevitable dissolution. No mere adequacy of wages
and other working conditions, and no mere security of the workers'
livelihood, can permanently avert this danger, nor compensate the
individual for the lack of power to determine those activities of life
which depend upon the possession of property. Through co-operation
this unnatural divorce of the users from the owners of capital can be
minimised. The worker is converted from a mere wage earner to a wage
earner plus a property owner, thus becoming a safer and more useful
member of society. In a word, co-operation produces all the well
recognised individual and social benefits which have in all ages been
evoked by the "magic of property."

Finally, co-operation is a golden mean between individualism and
Socialism. It includes all the good features and excludes all the evil
features of both. On the one hand, it demands and develops individual
initiative and self reliance, makes the rewards of the individual
depend upon his own efforts and efficiency, and gives him full
ownership of specific pieces of property. On the other hand, it
compels him to submerge much of the selfishness and indifference to
the welfare of his fellows which characterise our individual economy.
It embraces all the good that is claimed for Socialism because it
induces men to consider and to work earnestly for the common good,
eliminates much of the waste of competitive industry, reduces and
redistributes the burdens of profits and interest, and puts the
workers in control of capital and industry. At the same time, it
avoids the evils of an industrial despotism, of bureaucratic
inefficiency, of individual indifference, and of an all pervading
collective ownership. The resemblances that Socialists sometimes
profess to see between their system and co-operation are superficial
and far less important than the differences. Under both arrangements
the workers would, we are told, own and control the means of
production; but the members of a co-operative society directly own and
immediately control a _definite amount of specific capital_, which is
essentially _private_ property. In a Socialist régime the workers'
ownership of capital would be collective not private, general not
specific, while their control of the productive instruments with which
they worked would be shared with other citizens. The latter would
vastly outnumber the workers in any particular industry, and would be
interested therein not as producers but as consumers. No less obvious
and fundamental are the differences in favour of co-operation as
regards the vital matters of freedom, opportunity, and efficiency.

In so far as the future of co-operation can be predicted from its
past, the outlook is distinctly encouraging. The success attained in
credit, agriculture, and distribution, is a sufficient guarantee for
these departments. While productive co-operation has experienced more
failures than successes, it has finally shown itself to be sound in
principle, and feasible in practice. Its extension will necessarily be
slow, but this is exactly what should be expected by any one who is
acquainted with the limitations of human nature, and the history of
human progress. If a movement that is capable of modifying so
profoundly the condition of the workers as is co-operative production,
gave indications of increasing rapidly, we should be inclined to
question its soundness and permanence. Experience has given us
abundant proof that no mere system or machinery can effect a
revolutionary improvement in economic conditions. No social system can
do more than provide a favourable environment for the development of
those individual capacities and energies which are the true and the
only causal forces of betterment.

Nor is it to be expected that any of the other three forms of
co-operation will ever cover the entire field to which it might,
absolutely speaking, be extended; or that co-operation as a whole will
become the one industrial system of the future. Even if the latter
contingency were possible it would not be desirable. The elements of
our economic life, and the capacities of human nature, are too varied
and too complex to be forced with advantage into any one system,
whether capitalism, Socialism, or co-operation. Any single system or
form of socio-economic organisation would prove an intolerable
obstacle to individual opportunity and social progress. Multiplicity
and variety in social and industrial orders are required for an
effective range of choices, and an adequate scope for human effort. In
a general way the limits of co-operation in relation to the other
forms of economic organisation have been satisfactorily stated by Mr.
Aneurin Williams: "I suggest, therefore, that where there are great
monopolies, either natural or created by the combination of
businesses, there you have a presumption in favour of State and
municipal ownership. In those forms of industry where individuality is
everything; where there are new inventions to make, or to develop or
put on the market, or merely to adopt in some rapidly transformed
industry; where the eye of the master is everything; where reference
to a committee, or appeals from one official to another, would cause
fatal delay: there is the natural sphere of individual enterprise pure
and simple. Between these two extremes there is surely a great sphere
for voluntary association to carry on commerce, manufacture, and
retail trade, in circumstances where there is no natural monopoly, and
where the routine of work is not rapidly changing, but on the whole
fairly well established and constant."[159]

The province open to co-operation is, indeed, very large. If it were
fully occupied the danger of a social revolution would be
non-existent, and what remained of the socio-industrial problem would
be relatively undisturbing and unimportant. The "specialisation of
function" in industrial organisation, as outlined by Mr. Williams,
would give a balanced economy in which the three great socio-economic
systems and principles would have full play, and each would be
required to do its best in fair competition with the other two.
Economic life would exhibit a diversity making strongly for social
satisfaction and stability, inasmuch as no very large section of the
industrial population would desire to overthrow the existing order.
Finally, the choice of three great systems of industry would offer the
utmost opportunity and scope for the energies and the development of
the individual. And this, when all is said, remains the supreme end of
a just and efficient socio-industrial organisation.


REFERENCES ON SECTION II

     FISHER: The Rate of Interest. New York; 1907.

     CASSEL: Nature and Necessity of Interest. London; 1903.

     GONNER: Interest and Saving. London; 1906.

     LANDRY: L'Intérêt du Capital. Paris; 1904.

     MENGER: The Right to the Whole Produce of Labour. London;
     1899.

     CATHREIN-GETTELMAN: Socialism. St. Louis; 1904.

     SKELTON: Socialism: A Critical Analysis. New York; 1911.

     SPARGO: Socialism. Macmillan; 1906.

     WALLING: Socialism As It Is. New York; 1912.

     HILLQUIT-RYAN: Socialism: Promise or Menace? Macmillan; 1914.

     SAVATIER: La Théorie Moderne du Capital et la Justice. Paris;
     1898.

     GARRIGUET: Régime du Travail. Paris; 1908.

     FUNK: Zins und Wucher. Tübingen; 1868.

     HOLYOAKE: The History of Co-operation. London; 1906.

     FAY: Co-operation at Home and Abroad. London; 1908.

     WILLIAMS: Copartnership and Profit-Sharing. Henry Holt & Co.;
     1913.

     MANN, SIEVERS, COX: The Real Democracy. London; 1913.

     Also the works of Taussig, Devas, Antoine, Hobson, Nearing,
     Willoughby, and Hitze, which were given at the end of the
     introductory chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[153] Professor Scott Nearing estimates the annual income derived from
the ownership of property in the United States; that is, land and all
forms of capital, at from six to nine billion dollars. Professor W. I.
King gives the combined shares of the national income received by the
landowners and the capitalists at more than six and three-quarter
billions in 1910. According to the Census Bulletin on the "Estimated
Valuation of National Wealth," the capital goods of the country were
in 1912 approximately $175,000,000,000.00. At four per cent. this
would mean an annual income of seven billion dollars. The lowest of
the three estimates, six billion dollars, is equivalent to more than
sixty dollars a year for every man, woman, and child in the United
States. If that sum were equally distributed among the whole
population, it would mean an increase of between forty and sixty per
cent. in the income of the majority of workingmen's families! Nor do
present tendencies hold out any hope of an automatic reduction of the
interest-burden in the future. In the opinion of Professor Scott
Nearing, "the present economic tendencies will greatly increase the
amount of property income paid with each passing decade." "Income," p.
199; New York, 1915. See especially ch. vii. According to Professor
Taussig, "the absolute amount of income going to this [the capitalist]
class tends to increase, and its share of the total income tends also
to increase; whereas for the labourers, though their total income may
increase, their share of income of society as a whole tends to
decline." "Principles of Economics," II, 205.

[154] "Lehrbuch der Nationaloekonomie," III, 517.

[155] Fay, "Co-operation at Home and Abroad," p. 340.

[156] Schloss, "Methods of Industrial Remuneration," pp. 353, 354.

[157] Cf., however, Mr. A. R. Orage's work, "National Guilds," London,
1914.

[158] Op. cit., p. 341.

[159] "Copartnership and Profit-Sharing," p. 235.




SECTION III

THE MORAL ASPECT OF PROFITS




