CHAPTER XI

THE SOCIALIST SCHEME OF INDUSTRY


"Never has our party told the workingman about a 'State of the
future,' never in any way than as a mere utopia. If anybody says: 'I
picture to myself society after our programme has been realised, after
wage labour has been abolished, and the exploitation of men has
ceased, in such and such a manner,--' well and good; ideas are free,
and everybody may conceive the Socialist State as he pleases. Whoever
believes in it may do so; whoever does not, need not. These pictures
are but dreams, and Social Democracy has never understood them
otherwise."[121]

Such is the official attitude of Socialism toward descriptions of its
contemplated industrial organisation. The party has never drawn up nor
approved any of the various outlines of this sort which have been
defended by individual Socialists. It maintains that it cannot
anticipate even the essential factors in the operation of a social and
industrial system which will differ so widely from the one that we
have to-day, and which will be so profoundly determined by events that
are in the nature of the case impossible to prognosticate.


_Socialist Inconsistency_

From the viewpoint of all but convinced Socialists, this position is
indefensible. We are asked to believe that the collective ownership
and operation of the means of production would be more just and
beneficial than the present plan of private ownership and operation.
Yet the Socialist party refuses to tell us how the scheme would bring
about these results; refuses to give us, even in outline, a picture of
the machine at work. As reasonably might we be expected to turn the
direction of industry over to a Rockefeller or a Morgan, making an act
of faith in their efficiency and fairness. We are in the position of a
man who should be advised to demolish an unsatisfactory house, without
receiving any solid assurance that the proposed new one would be as
good. To our requests for specific information about the working of
the new industrial order the Socialists, as a rule, answer in terms of
prophesied results. They leave us in the dark concerning the causes by
which these wonderful results are to be produced.

From the viewpoint of the confirmed Socialist, however, this failure
to be specific is not at all unreasonable. He can have faith in the
Socialist system without knowing beforehand how it will work. He
believes in its efficacy because he believes that it is inevitable. In
the words of Kautsky, "what is proved to be inevitable is proved not
only to be possible, but to be the only possible outcome."[122] The
Socialist believes that his scheme is inevitable because he thinks
that it is necessarily included in the outcome of economic and social
evolution.

Neither the premises nor the conclusion of this reasoning is valid.
The doctrines of economic determinism, the class struggle, the
concentration of capital, the disappearance of the middle classes, the
progressive pauperisation of the working classes, and all the other
tenets of the Socialist philosophy, have been thoroughly discredited
by the facts of psychology, the experience of the last half century,
and the present trend of industrial and social forces.[123] Even if
the Socialist outcome were inevitable, it would not necessarily be an
improvement on the present system. It might illustrate the principle
of retrogression.

Since we cannot make an act of faith in either the inevitableness or
the efficacy of the Socialist industrial scheme, we are compelled to
submit it to the ordinary tests of examination and criticism. We must
try to see what would be the essential structure, elements, and
operation of a system in which the means of production were owned and
managed collectively, and the product socially distributed. In
attempting to describe the system, we shall be guided by what seems to
be inherently necessary to it, and by the prevalent conception of it
among present day Socialists. In this connection we have to observe
that some of the criticisms of the Socialist order attribute to it
elements that are not essential, nor any longer demanded by the
authoritative spokesmen of the movement; for example, complete
confiscation of capital, compulsory assignment of men to the different
industrial tasks, equality of remuneration, the use of labour checks
instead of money, the socialisation of all capital down to the
smallest tool, and collective ownership of homes.


_Expropriating the Capitalists_

The first problem confronting a Socialist administration would be the
method of getting possession of the instruments of production. In the
early years of the Socialist movement, most of its adherents seemed to
favour a policy of outright confiscation. Professor Nearing estimates
the total property income now paid in the United States as, "well
above the six-billion-dollar mark."[124] Were the Socialist State to
seize all land and capital without compensation, it could conceivably
transfer more than six billion dollars annually from landowners and
capitalists to the community. Not all of it, however, would be
available for diversion to the labourers. According to the
computations of Professor King, about two billion dollars were in 1910
saved and converted into capital.[125] A progressive Socialist régime
would want to appropriate at least that sum for the renewal and
increase of the instruments of production. Consequently, it would have
only four billion dollars to add to the present total income of
labour. This would be equivalent to $43.50 for every person in the
United States.

Desirable as would be such an addition to the remuneration of labour,
it could never be realised through the process of confiscation. The
owners of land and capital would be sufficiently powerful to defeat
any such simple scheme of setting up the collectivist commonwealth.
They constitute probably a majority of the adults of our population,
and their economic advantages would make them much stronger relatively
than their numbers.[126] Ethically the policy of confiscation would
be, on the whole, sheer robbery. To be sure, not all owners of land
and capital have a valid claim to all their possessions, but
practically all of them hold the greater part of their wealth by some
kind of just title. Much land and capital that was originally acquired
by unjust means has become morally legitimatised by the title of
prescription.

The majority of present day Socialists seem to advocate at least
partial compensation.[127] But this plan does not seem to offer any
considerable advantage over complete confiscation. As regards
morality, it would differ only in the degree of its injustice; as
regards expediency, it would be at best of doubtful efficacy. If the
capitalists were given only a small fraction of the value of their
holdings they would oppose the change with quite as much
determination as though they were offered nothing; if they were paid
almost the full value of their possessions there would be no
substantial gain to the community from the transfer; if they were
compensated at a figure somewhere between these two extremes their
resistance would still be more costly to the State than the extra
amount required to make full compensation.

Finally, if full compensation were offered it would have to take the
form of government obligations, securities, or bonds. If these did not
bear interest the great majority of capital owners would regard the
scheme as partial and considerable confiscation, and would fight it
with determination and effectiveness. If the State bound itself to pay
interest on the bonds it would probably find itself giving the
dispossessed capitalists as high a rate of return on their capital, as
large a share of the national product, as they receive under the
present system. Consequently, the expropriation of the capitalists
would bring no direct and pecuniary gain to the labouring classes.
Indeed, the latter would suffer positive loss by the change, owing to
the fact that the State would be required to withdraw from the
national product a considerable amount for the maintenance, renewal,
and expansion of the instruments of production. At present the
capitalist class performs the greater part of this function through
the reinvestment of the incomes that it receives in the form of
interest and rent. The average Socialist entirely ignores this
capitalistic service, when he draws his pessimistic picture of the
vast share of the national product which now goes to "idle
capitalists." So far as the larger capitalist incomes are concerned;
that is, those in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars annually, it
is probable that the greater part is not consumed by the receivers,
but is converted into socially necessary capital instruments. Since
this would not be permitted in a Socialist order, the capitalists
would strive to consume the whole of the incomes received from the
public securities, and the State would be compelled to provide the
required new capital out of the current national product. In a word,
society would have to give the capitalists as much as it does at
present, and to withhold from the labourers for new capital an immense
sum which is now furnished by the capitalists.

It is undoubtedly true that the richest capitalists would be unable to
expend the whole of their incomes upon themselves and their families.
If they turned a considerable part of it over to the State, the
surrendered sum would be available as capital, thereby reducing the
amount that the State would need to take out of the national product
for this purpose. Were all those possessing incomes in excess of fifty
thousand dollars per family to give up all above that amount, the
total thus accruing to the State would be a little more than one
billion dollars.[128] But this would be only one-half the required new
capital. A part of the additional one billion is now provided out of
wages and salaries, but the greater part probably comes out of rent
and interest. Under Socialism this latter portion would have to be
deducted from that part of the national product which at present goes
to the workers and is consumed by them. Hence they would undergo a
loss of several hundred million dollars.

One reply to this difficulty is that the total product of industry
would be much increased under Socialism. Undoubtedly an _efficient_
organisation of industry on collectivist lines would be able to effect
economies by combining manufacturing plants, distributive concerns,
and transportation systems, and by reducing unemployment to a minimum;
but it could not possibly make the enormous economies that are
promised by the Socialists. The assertion that under Socialism men
would be able to provide abundantly for all their wants on a basis of
a working day of four, or even two, hours is seductive and
interesting, but it has no support in the ascertainable facts of
industrial resources. Even if the Socialist organisation were
operating with a fair degree of efficiency, the gains that it could
effect over the present system would probably not more than offset the
social losses resulting from increased consumption by the compensated
capitalists.

But the proposed industrial organisation would not operate with a fair
degree of efficiency. According to present Socialist thought,
industries that are national in scope, such as the manufacture of
petroleum, steel, and tobacco, would be carried on under national
direction, while those that supplied only a local market, such as
laundries, bakeries, and retail stores, would be managed by the
municipalities. This division of control would be undoubtedly wise and
necessary. Moreover, the majority of Socialists no longer demand that
_all_ tools and all industries should be brought under collective or
governmental direction. Very small concerns which employed no hired
labour, or at most one or two persons, could remain under private
ownership and operation, while even larger enterprises might be
carried on by co-operative associations.[129] Nevertheless the attempt
to organise and operate collectively the industries of the country,
even with these limitations, would encounter certain insuperable
obstacles. These will be considered under the general heads of
inefficient industrial leadership, inefficient labour, and
interference with individual liberty.


_Inefficient Industrial Leadership_

Under Socialism the boards of directors or commissions which exercised
supreme control in the various industries, would have to be chosen
either by the general popular vote, by the government, or by the
workers in each particular industry. The first method may be at once
excluded from consideration. Even now the number of officials chosen
directly by the people is far too large; hence the widespread
agitation for the "short ballot." Public opinion is coming to realise
that the voters should be required to select only a few important
officials, whose qualifications should be general rather than
technical, and therefore easily recognised by the masses. These
supreme functionaries should have the power of filling all
administrative offices, and all positions demanding expert or
technical ability. If the task of choosing administrative experts
cannot be safely left to the mass of the voters at present, it
certainly ought not to be assigned to them under Socialism, when the
number and qualifications of these functionaries would be indefinitely
increased.

If the boards of industrial directors were selected by the government,
that is, by the national and municipal authorities, the result would
be industrial inefficiency and an intolerable bureaucracy. No body of
officials, whether legislative or executive, would possess the varied,
extensive, and specific knowledge required to pick out efficient
administrative commissions for all the industries of the country or
the city. And no group of political persons could safely be entrusted
with such tremendous power. It would enable them to dominate the
industrial as well as the political life of the nation or the
municipality, to establish a bureaucracy that would be impregnable for
a long period of years, and to revive all the conceivable evils of
governmental absolutism.

The third method is apparently the one now favoured by most
Socialists. "The workers in each industry may periodically select the
managing authority," says Morris Hillquit.[130] Even if the workers
were as able as the stockholders of a corporation to select an
efficient governing board, they would be much less likely to choose
men who would insist on hard and efficient work from all subordinates.
The members of a private corporation have a strong pecuniary interest
in selecting directors who will secure the maximum of product at the
minimum of cost, while the employés in a Socialist industry would want
managing authorities who were willing to make working conditions as
easy as possible.

The dependence of the boards of directors upon the mass of the
workers, and the lack of adequate pecuniary motives, would render
their management much less efficient and progressive than that of
private enterprises. In the rules that they would make for the
administration of the industry and the government of the labour force,
in their selection of subordinate officers, such as superintendents,
general managers, and foremen, and in all the other details of
management, they would have always before them the abiding fact that
their authority was derived from and dependent upon the votes of the
majority of the employés. Their supreme consideration would be to
conduct the industry in such a way as to satisfy the men who elected
them. Hence they would strive to maintain an administration which
would permit the mass of the labour force to work leisurely, to be
provided with the most expensive conditions of employment, and to be
immune from discharge except in rare and flagrant cases. Even if the
members of the directing boards were sufficiently courageous or
sufficiently conscientious to exact reasonable and efficient service
from all their subordinates and all the workers, they would not have
the necessary pecuniary motives. Their salaries would be fixed by the
government, and in the nature of things could not be promptly adjusted
to reward efficient and to punish inefficient management. So long as
their administration of industry maintained a certain routine level of
mediocrity, they would have no fear of being removed; since they would
be supervised and paid by public officials who would have neither the
extraordinary capacity nor the necessary incentive to recognise and
reward promptly efficient management, they would lack the powerful
stimulus which is provided by the hope of gain. In the large private
corporations, the tenure of the boards of directors depends not upon
the workers but upon the stockholders, whose main interest is to
obtain a maximum of product at a minimum of cost, and who will employ
and discharge, reward and punish, according as this end is attained.
Moreover, the members of the boards, and the executive officers
generally, are themselves financially interested in the business and
in the maintenance of the policy demanded by the other stockholders.

All the subordinate officers, such as department managers,
superintendents, foremen, etc., would exemplify the same absence of
efficiency. Knowing that they must carry out the prudent policy of the
board of directors, they would be slow to punish shirking or to
discharge incompetents. Realising that the board of directors lacked
the incentive to make promotions promptly for efficient service, or to
discharge promptly for inefficient service, they would devote their
main energies to the task of holding their positions through a policy
of indifferent and routine administration.

Invention and progress would likewise suffer. Men who were capable of
devising new machines, new processes, new methods of combining capital
and labour, would be slow to convert their potencies into action. They
would be painfully aware that the spirit of inertia and routine
prevailing throughout the industrial and political organisation would
prevent their efforts from receiving quick recognition and adequate
rewards. Inventors of mechanical devices particularly would be
deprived of the stimulus which they now find in the hope of
indefinitely large gains. Boards of directors, general managers, and
other persons exercising industrial authority would be very slow to
introduce new and more efficient financial or technical methods when
they had no certainty that they would receive adequate reward in the
form of either promotion or money compensation. They would see no
sufficient reason for abandoning the established and pleasant policy
of routine methods and unprogressive management.


_Inefficient Labour_

The same spirit of inefficiency and mediocrity would permeate the rank
and file of the workers. Indeed, it would operate even more strongly
among them than among the officers and superiors; for their
intellectual limitations and the nature of their tasks would make them
less responsive to other than material and pecuniary motives. They
would desire to follow the line of least resistance, to labour in the
most pleasant conditions, to reduce irksome toil to a minimum. Since
the great bulk of their tasks would necessarily be mechanical and
monotonous, they would demand the shortest possible working day, and
the most leisurely rate of working speed. And because of their
numerical strength they would have the power to enforce this policy
throughout the field of industry. They would have the necessary and
sufficient votes. In a general way they might, indeed, realise that
the practice of universal shirking and laziness must sooner or later
result in such a diminution of the national product as to cause them
great hardship, but the workers in each industry would hope that those
in all the others would be more efficient; or doubt that a better
example set by themselves would be imitated by the workers in other
industries. They would not be keen to give up the certainty of easy
working conditions for the remote possibility of a larger national
product.


_Attempted Replies to Objections_

All the attempts made by Socialists to answer or explain away the
foregoing difficulties may be reduced to two: the achievements of
government enterprises in our present system; and the assumed efficacy
of altruism and public honour in a régime of Socialism.

Under the first head appeal is made to such publicly owned and managed
concerns as the post office, railroads, telegraphs, telephones, street
railways, water works, and lighting plants. It is probably true that
all these enterprises are on the whole carried on with better results
to the public than if they were in private hands. It is likewise
probable that these and all other public utility monopolies will
sooner or later be taken over by the State in all advanced countries.
Even if this should prove in all cases to be a better arrangement from
the viewpoint of the general public welfare than private ownership and
management, the fact would constitute no argument for a Socialist
organisation of all industry. In the first place, the efficiency of
labour, management, and technical organisation is generally lower in
public than in private enterprises, and the cost of operation higher.
Despite these defects, government ownership of public utilities, such
as street railways and lighting concerns, may be socially preferable
because these industries are monopolies. Inasmuch as their charges and
services cannot be regulated by the automatic action of competition,
the only alternative to public ownership is public supervision.
Inasmuch as the latter is often incapable of securing satisfactory
service at fair prices, public ownership and management becomes on the
whole more conducive to social welfare. In other words, the losses
through inefficient operation are more than offset by the gains from
better service and lower charges. Three cent fares and adequate
service on an inefficiently managed municipal street railway are
preferable to five cent fares on a privately owned street railway
whose management is superior. On the other hand, all those industries
which are not natural monopolies can be prevented from practising
extortion upon the public through regulated competition. In them,
therefore, the advantages of private operation, of which competition
itself is not the least, should be retained.

In the second place, practically all the public service monopolies are
simpler in structure, more routine in operation, and more mature in
organisation and efficiency than the other industries. The degree of
managerial ability required, the necessity of experimenting with new
methods and processes, and the opportunity of introducing further
improvements in organisation are relatively less. Now, it is precisely
in these respects that private has shown itself superior to public
operation. Initiative, inventiveness, and eagerness to effect
economies and increase profits are the qualities in which private
management excels. When the nature and maturity of the concern have
rendered these qualities relatively unimportant, public management can
exemplify a fair degree of efficiency.

In the third place, the ability of the State to operate a few
enterprises, does not prove that it could repeat the performance with
an equal degree of success in all industries. I can drive two horses,
but I could not drive twenty-two. No matter how scientific the
organisation and departmentalisation of industries under Socialism,
the final control of and responsibility for all of them would rest
with one organ, one authority, namely, the city in municipal
industries, and the nation in industries having national scope. This
would prove too great a task, too heavy a burden, for any body of
officials, for any group of human beings.

Finally, it must be kept in mind that the publicly operated utilities
are subject continuously to the indirect competition of private
management. By far the greater part of industry is now under private
control, which sets the pace for efficient operation in a hundred
particulars. As a consequence, comparisons are steadily provoked
between public and private management, and the former is subject to
constant criticism. The managers of the State concerns are stimulated
and practically compelled to emulate the success of private
management. This factor is probably more effective in securing
efficiency in public industries than all other causes put together. In
the words of Professor Skelton: "A limited degree of public ownership
succeeds simply because it is a limited degree, succeeds because
private industry, in individual forms or in the socialised joint stock
form, dominates the field as a whole. It is private industry that
provides the capital, private industry that trains the men and tries
out the methods, private industry that sets the pace, and--not the
least of its services--private industry that provides the
ever-possible outlet of escape."[131]

The Socialist expectation that altruistic sentiments and public honour
would induce all industrial leaders and all ordinary workers to exert
themselves as effectively as they now do for the sake of money, is
based upon the very shallow fallacy that what is true of a few men may
very readily become true of all men. There are, indeed, persons in
every walk of life who work faithfully under the influence of the
higher motives, but they are and always have been the exceptions in
their respective classes. The great majority have been affected only
feebly, intermittently, and on the whole ineffectively by either love
of their kind or the hope of public approval.

A Socialist order could generate no forces which would be as
productive of unselfish conduct as the motives that are drawn from
religion. History shows nothing comparable either in extent or
intensity to the record of self surrender and service to the neighbour
which are due to the latter influence. Yet religion has never been
able, even in the periods and places most thoroughly dominated by
Christianity, to induce more than a small minority of the population
to adopt that life of altruism which would be required of the great
majority under Socialism.

Moreover, the efficacy of the higher motives is much greater among men
devoted to scientific, intellectual, and religious pursuits than in
either the leaders or the rank and file engaged in industrial
occupations. The cause of this difference is to be sought in the
varying nature of the two classes of activity: the first necessarily
develops an appreciation of the higher goods, the things of the mind
and the soul; the second compels the attention of men to rest upon
matter, upon the things that appeal to the senses, upon the things
that are measurable in terms of money.

There is a special fallacy underlying the emphasis placed by
Socialists on the power of public honour. It consists in the failure
to perceive that this good declines in efficacy according as the
number of its recipients increases. Even if all the industrial
population were willing to work as hard for public approval as they
now do for money, the results expected by Socialists would not be
forthcoming. Public recognition of unselfish service is now available
in relatively great measure because the persons qualifying for it are
relatively few. They easily stand out conspicuous among their fellows.
Let their numbers vastly increase, and unselfishness would become
commonplace. It would no longer command popular recognition, save in
those who displayed it in exceptional or heroic measure. The public
would not have the time nor take the trouble to notice and honour
adequately every floor walker, retail clerk, factory operative, street
cleaner, agricultural labourer, ditch digger, etc., who might become a
candidate for such recognition.

When the Socialists point to such examples of disinterested public
service as that of Colonel Goethals in building the Panama Canal, they
confound the exceptional with the average. They assume that, since an
exceptional man performs an exceptional task from high motives, all
men can be got to act likewise in all kinds of operations. They
forget that the Panama Canal presented opportunities of self
satisfying achievement and fame which do not occur once in a thousand
years; that the traditions and training of the army have during many
centuries deliberately and consistently aimed and tended to produce an
exceptionally high standard of honour and disinterestedness; that,
even so, the majority of army officers have not in their civil
assignments shown the same degree of faithfulness to the public
welfare as Colonel Goethals; that the Canal was built under a régime
of "benevolent despotism," which placed no reliance upon the "social
mindedness" of the subordinate workers; and that the latter, far from
showing any desire to qualify as altruists or public benefactors,
demanded and received material recognition in the form of wages,
perquisites, and gratuities which greatly surpassed the remuneration
received by any other labour force in history.[132] In a word,
wherever in the construction of the Canal notable disinterestedness or
appreciation of public honour was shown, the circumstances were
exceptional; where the situation was ordinary, the Canal builders were
unable to rise above the ordinary motives of selfish advantage.

Beneath all the Socialist argument on this subject lies the assumption
that the attitude of the _average man_ toward the higher motives can
by some mysterious process be completely _revolutionised_. This is
contrary to all experience, and to all reasonable probability. Only a
small minority of men have ever, in any society or environment, been
dominated mainly by altruism or the desire of public honour. What
reason is there to expect that men will act differently in the future?
Neither legislation nor education can make men love their neighbours
more than themselves, or love the applause of their neighbours more
than their own material welfare.


_Restricting Individual Liberty_

Even though human nature should undergo the degree of miraculous
transformation necessary to maintain an efficient industrial system on
Socialist lines, such a social organisation must soon collapse because
of its injurious effect upon individual liberty. Freedom of choice
would be abolished in the most vital economic transactions; for there
would be but one buyer of labour, and one seller of commodities. And
these two would be identical, namely, the State. With the exception of
the small minority that might be engaged in purely individual
avocations, and in co-operative enterprises, men would be compelled to
sell their labour to either the municipality or the national
government. As competition between these two political agencies in the
matter of wages and other conditions of labour could not be permitted,
there would be virtually only one employer. Practically all material
goods would have to be purchased from either the municipal or the
national shops and stores. Since the city and the nation would produce
different kinds of goods, the purchaser of any given article would be
compelled to deal with one seller. His freedom of choice would be
further restricted by the fact that he would have to be content with
those kinds and grades of commodities which the seller saw fit to
produce. He could not create an effective demand for new forms and
varieties of goods, as he now does, by stimulating the ingenuity and
acquisitiveness of competing producers and dealers.

Prices and wages would, of course, be fixed beforehand by the
government. The supposition that this function might be left to the
workers in each industry is utterly impracticable. Such an arrangement
would involve a grand scramble among the different industries to see
which could pay its own members the highest wages, and charge its
neighbours' members the highest prices. The final result would be a
level of prices so high that only an alert and vigorous section of the
workers in each industry could find employment. Not only wages and
prices but hours, safety requirements, and all the other general
conditions of employment, would be regulated by the government. The
individuals in each industry could not be permitted to determine these
matters any more than they could be permitted to determine wages.
Moreover, all these regulations would from the nature of the case
continue unchanged for a considerable period of time.

The restriction of choice enforced upon the sellers of labour and the
buyers of goods, the utter dependence of the population upon one
agency in all the affairs of their economic as well as their political
life, the tremendous social power concentrated in the State, would
produce a diminution of individual liberty and a perfection of
political despotism surpassing anything that the world has ever seen.
It would not long be tolerated by any self respecting people.

To reply that the Socialist order would be a democracy, and that the
people could vote out of existence any distasteful regulation, is to
play with words. No matter how responsive the governing and managing
authorities might be to the popular will, the dependence of the
individual would prove intolerable. Not the manner in which this
tremendous social power is constituted, nor the personnel of those
exercising it, but the fact that so much power is lodged in one
agency, and so little immediate control of his affairs left to the
individual,--is the heart of the evil situation. In a word, it is a
question of the liberty of the individual versus the all pervading
control of his actions by an agency other than himself. Moreover, the
people in a democracy means a majority, or a compact minority. Under
Socialism the controlling section of the voting population would
possess so much power, political and economic, that it could impose
whatever conditions it pleased upon the non-controlling section for
an almost indefinite period of time. The members of the latter part of
the population would not only be deprived of that immediate liberty
which consists in the power to determine the details of their economic
life, but of that remote liberty which consists in the power to affect
general conditions by their votes.

In the last chapter we saw that the claim to the full product of
industry, made on behalf of labour by the Socialists, cannot be
established on intrinsic grounds. Like all other claims to material
goods, it is valid only if it can be realised consistently with human
welfare. Its validity depends upon its feasibility, upon the
possibility of constructing some social system that will enable it to
work. The present chapter has shown that the requirements of such a
system are not met by Socialism. A Socialist organisation of industry
would make all sections of the population, including the wage earning
class, worse off than they are in the existing industrial order.
Consequently, neither the private ownership of capital nor the
individual receipt of interest can be proved to be immoral by the
Socialist argument.

Since private ownership and management of capital are superior to
Socialism, the State is obliged to maintain, protect, and improve the
existing industrial system. This is precisely the conclusion that we
reached in chapter iv with reference to private ownership of land. In
chapter v we found, moreover, that individual ownership of land is a
natural right. The fundamental considerations there examined lead to
the parallel conclusion that the individual has a natural right to own
capital. But we could not immediately deduce from the right to own
land the right to take rent. Neither can we immediately deduce from
the right to own capital the right to take interest. The positive
establishment of the latter right will occupy us in the two following
chapters.

FOOTNOTES:

[121] Wilhelm Liebknecht, cited in Hillquit's "Socialism in Theory and
Practice," p. 107.

[122] "Das Erfurter Program," cited by Skelton, op. cit., p. 178.

[123] Cf. Skelton, op. cit., ch. vii; Bernstein, "Evolutionary
Socialism," pp. 1-94; Simkhovitch, "Marxism vs. Socialism," _passim_;
Walling, "Progressivism and After," _passim_; Hillquit-Ryan, op. cit.,
ch. iv.

[124] "Income," p. 152.

[125] "The Wealth and Income of the People of the United States," p.
132.

[126] Cf. Hillquit-Ryan, op. cit., pp. 107, 136.

[127] Cf. Hillquit-Ryan, op. cit., pp. 73-77; Skelton, op. cit, p.
183; Walling, "Socialism as It Is," p. 429.

[128] Cf. King, op. cit., pp. 224-226.

[129] Cf. Kautsky, "The Social Revolution," pp. 166, 167;
Hillquit-Ryan, op. cit., p. 72.

[130] Hillquit-Ryan, op. cit., p. 80; cf. Spargo, "Socialism," pp.
225-227.

[131] "Socialism: A Critical Analysis," p. 219.

[132] Cf. "The Panama Gateway," by Joseph Bucklin Bishop, p. 263.




