CHAPTER XXI

THE DUTY OF DISTRIBUTING SUPERFLUOUS WEALTH


The correctives of the present distribution that were proposed before
the beginning of the last chapter related mainly to the apportionment
of the product among the agents of production. They would affect that
distribution which takes place as an integral element of the
productive process, not any disposition which the productive agents
might desire or be required to make of the shares that they had
acquired from the productive process. Such were many of the proposals
regarding land tenure, and all of those concerning co-operative
enterprises and monopoly. In the last chapter we considered the
possibility of neutralising to some extent the abuses of the primary
distribution by the action of government through the taxation of large
fortunes. These were proposals directly affecting the secondary
distribution. And they involved the method of compulsion. In the
present chapter we shall inquire whether desirable changes in the
secondary distribution may not be effected by voluntary action. The
specific questions confronting us here are, whether and how far
proprietors are morally bound to distribute their superfluous wealth
among their less fortunate fellows.


_The Question of Distributing Some_

The authority of revealed religion returns to the first of these
questions a clear and emphatic answer in the affirmative. The Old and
the New Testaments abound in declarations that possessors are under
very strict obligation to give of their surplus to the indigent.
Perhaps the most striking expression of this teaching is that found
in the Gospel according to St. Matthew, ch. 25, verses 32-46, where
eternal happiness is awarded to those who have fed the hungry, given
drink to the thirsty, received the stranger, covered the naked,
visited the sick, and called upon the imprisoned; and eternal
damnation is meted out to those who have failed in these respects. The
principle that ownership is stewardship, that the man who possesses
superfluous goods must regard himself as a trustee for the needy, is
fundamental and all-pervasive in the teaching of Christianity. No more
clear or concise statement of it has ever been given than that of St.
Thomas Aquinas: "As regards the power of acquiring and dispensing
material goods, man may lawfully possess them as his own; as regards
their use, however, a man ought not to look upon them as his own, but
as common, so that he may readily minister to the needs of
others."[201]

Reason likewise enjoins the benevolent distribution of surplus wealth.
It reminds the proprietor that his needy neighbours have the same
nature, the same faculties, capacities, wants, and destiny as himself.
They are his equals and his brothers. Reason, therefore, requires that
he should esteem them as such, love them as such, and treat them as
such; that he should love them not merely by well wishing, but by well
doing. Since the goods of the earth were intended by the Creator for
the common benefit of all mankind, the possessor of a surplus is
reasonably required to use it in such a way that this original purpose
of all created goods will be fulfilled. To refuse is to treat one's
less fortunate neighbour as something different from and less than
oneself, as a creature whose claim upon the common bounty of nature is
something less than one's own. Multiplying words will not make these
truths plainer. The man who does not admit that the welfare of his
neighbour is of equal moral worth and importance with his own
welfare, will logically refuse to admit that he is under any
obligation of distributing his superfluous goods. The man who does
acknowledge this essential equality will be unable to find any logical
basis for such refusal.

Is this obligation one of charity or one of justice? At the outset a
distinction must be made between wealth that has been honestly
acquired and wealth that has come into one's possession through some
violation of rights. The latter kind must, of course, be restored to
those persons who have been wronged. If they cannot be found or
identified the ill-gotten gains must be turned over to charitable or
other worthy objects. Since the goods do not belong to the present
holder by any valid moral title, they should be given to those persons
who are qualified by at least the claim and title of needs.

Some of the Fathers of the Church maintained that all superfluous
wealth, whether well or ill gotten, ought to be distributed to those
in want. St. Basil of Cæsarea: "Will not the man who robs another of
his clothing be called a thief? Is the man who is able and refuses to
clothe the naked deserving of any other appellation? The bread that
you withhold belongs to the hungry; the cloak that you retain in your
chest belongs to the naked; the shoes that are decaying in your
possession belong to the shoeless; the gold that you have hidden in
the ground belongs to the indigent. Wherefore, as often as you were
able to help men and refused, so often you did them wrong."[202] St.
Augustine of Hippo: "The superfluities of the rich are the necessities
of the poor. They who possess superfluities possess the goods of
others."[203] St. Ambrose of Milan: "The earth belongs to all; not to
the rich; but those who possess their shares are fewer than those who
do not. Therefore, you are paying a debt, not bestowing a gift."[204]
Pope Gregory the Great: "When we give necessaries to the needy, we do
not bestow upon them our goods; we return to them their own; we pay a
debt of justice rather than of mercy."[205]

The great systematiser of theology in the thirteenth century, St.
Thomas Aquinas, who is universally recognised as the most
authoritative private teacher in the Church, stated the obligation of
distribution in less extreme and more scientific terms: "According to
the order of nature instituted by Divine Providence, the goods of the
earth are designed to supply the needs of men. The division of goods
and their appropriation through human law do not thwart this purpose.
Therefore, the goods which a man has in superfluity are due by the
natural law to the sustenance of the poor."[206]

That this is the official teaching of the Church to-day is evident
from the words of Pope Leo XIII: "When one has provided sufficiently
for one's necessities and the demands of one's state of life, there is
a duty to give to the indigent out of what remains. It is a duty not
of strict justice, save in case of extreme necessity, but of Christian
charity."[207] Nearly thirteen years earlier, the same Pope had
written: "The Church lays the rich under strict command to give their
superfluity to the poor."[208]

The only difference between the Fathers and Pope Leo XIII and St.
Thomas on this question has reference to the precise nature of the
obligation. According to the Fathers, the duty of distribution would
seem to be a duty of justice. In the passage quoted above from St.
Thomas, superfluities are said to "belong," or to be "due" ("debetur")
to the needy; but the particular moral precept that applies is not
specified. In another place, however, the Angelic Doctor declares that
almsgiving is an act of charity.[209] Pope Leo XIII explicitly says
that the obligation of giving is one of charity, "except in extreme
cases." The latter phrase refers to the traditional doctrine that a
person who is in extreme need; that is, in immediate danger of losing
life, limb, or some equivalent personal good, is justified in the
absence of any other means of succour in taking from his neighbour
what is absolutely necessary. Such appropriation, says St. Thomas, is
not properly speaking theft; for the goods seized belong to the needy
person, "inasmuch as he must sustain life."[210] In a word, the
mediæval and the modern Catholic teaching would make distribution of
superfluous goods a duty of justice only in extreme situations, while
the Fathers laid down no such specific limitation. Nevertheless, the
difference is less important than it appears to be on the surface.
When the Fathers lived, theology had not been systematised nor given a
precise terminology; consequently, they did not always make exact
distinctions between the different classes of virtues and obligations.
In the second place, the Patristic passages that we have quoted, and
others of like import, were mostly contained in sermons addressed to
the rich, and consequently were expressed in hortatory rather than
scientific terms. Moreover, the needs of the time which the rich were
exhorted to relieve were probably so urgent that they could correctly
be classed as extreme, and therefore would give rise to an obligation
of justice on the part of those who possessed superfluous wealth.

The truly important fact of the whole situation is that both the
Fathers and the later authorities of the Church regard the task of
distributing superfluous goods as one of strict moral obligation,
which in serious cases is binding under pain of grievous sin. Whether
it falls under the head of justice or under that of charity, is of no
great practical consequence.


_The Question of Distributing All_

Is a man obliged to distribute _all_ his superfluous wealth? As
regards the support of human life, Catholic moral theologians
distinguish three classes of goods: first, the necessaries of life,
those utilities which are essential to a healthy and humane existence
for a man and his family, regardless of the social position that he
may occupy, or the standard of life to which he may have been
accustomed; second, the conventional necessities and comforts, which
correspond to the social plane upon which the individual or family
moves; third, those goods which are not required to support either
existence or social position. Goods of the second class are said to be
necessary as regards conventional purposes, but superfluous as regards
the maintenance of life, while those of the third class are
superfluous without qualification.

No obligation exists to distribute the first class of goods; for the
possessor is justified in preferring his own primary and fundamental
needs to the equal or less important needs of his neighbours. The
owner of goods of the second class is under obligation to dispense
them to persons who are in extreme need, since the preservation of the
neighbour's life is more important morally than the maintenance of the
owner's conventional standard of living. On the other hand, there is
no obligation of giving any of these goods to meet those needs of the
neighbour which are social or conventional. Here, again, it is
reasonable that the possessor should prefer his own interests to the
equal interests of his fellows. Still less is he obliged to expend any
of the second class of goods for the relief of ordinary or common
distress. As regards the third class of goods, those which are
absolutely superfluous, the proportion to be distributed is
indefinite, depending upon the volume of need. The doctrine of the
moral theologians on the subject is summed up in the following
paragraph.

When the needs to be supplied are "ordinary," or "common"; that is,
when they merely expose a person to considerable and constant
inconvenience, without inflicting serious physical, mental, or moral
injury, they do not impose upon any man the obligation of giving up
all his superfluous goods. According to some moral theologians, the
possessor fulfils his duty in such cases if he contributes that
proportion of his surplus which would suffice for the removal of all
such distress, provided that all other possessors were equally
generous; according to others, if he gives two per cent. of his
superfluity; according to others, if he contributes two per cent. of
his annual income. These estimates are intended not so much to define
the exact measure of obligation as to emphasise the fact that there
exists some degree of obligation; for all the moral theologians agree
that some portion of a man's superfluous goods ought to be given for
the relief of ordinary or common needs. When, however, the distress is
grave; that is, when it is seriously detrimental to welfare; for
example, when a man or a family is in danger of falling to a lower
social plane; when health, morality, or the intellectual or religious
life is menaced,--possessors are required to contribute as much of
their superfluous goods as is necessary to meet all such cases of
distress. If all is needed all must be given. In other words, the
entire mass of superfluous wealth is morally subject to the call of
grave need. This seems to be the unanimous teaching of the moral
theologians.[211] It is also in harmony with the general principle of
the moral law that the goods of the earth should be enjoyed by the
inhabitants of the earth in proportion to their essential needs. In
any rational distribution of a common heritage, the claims of health,
mind, and morals are surely superior to the demands of luxurious
living, or investment, or mere accumulation.

What per cent. of the superfluous incomes in the United States would
suffice to alleviate all the existing grave and ordinary distress?
Nothing like an exact answer is possible, but we can get an
approximation that will have considerable practical value. From the
estimates of family incomes given by Professor W. I. King, it appears
that in 1910 the number of families with annual incomes of less than
one thousand dollars was a little more than ten and three quarter
millions, and that the total incomes of those families receiving more
than ten thousand dollars a year amounted to a little more than three
and three quarter billions.[212] If each of the latter class of
families should expend ten thousand dollars per year for the needs of
life and social position, they would have left nearly two and three
quarter billions for distribution among the ten and three quarter
million families who are below the one thousand dollar level. So far
as the figures of Professor King's table enable us to judge, the
greater part if not all of this sum would be required to bring this
group of families up to that standard. Possibly an income of one
thousand dollars per family is not required to remove all ordinary and
grave distress; and possibly ten thousand dollars is not enough for
the reasonable requirements of some families. If both these
suppositions are true they will tend to cancel each other: the needs
to be met will be less, but the superfluous income to be distributed
will be less also. Whatever be the minimum and maximum limits of
family income that approve themselves to competent students, the
conclusion will probably be inevitable that the greater part of the
superfluous income of the well-to-do and the rich would be required to
abolish all grave and ordinary need.


_Some Objections_

The desirability of such a thoroughgoing distribution of superfluous
incomes appears to be refuted by the fact that a considerable part of
the capital and organising ability that function in industry is
dependent upon the possession of superfluous goods by the richer
classes. That surplus of the larger incomes which is not consumed or
given away by its receivers at present, constitutes no small portion
of the whole supply of savings annually converted into capital. Were
all of it to be withdrawn from industry and distributed among the
needy, the process might involve more harm than good. Moreover, the
very large industrial enterprises are initiated and carried on by men
who have themselves provided a considerable share of the necessary
funds. Without these large masses of personal capital, they would have
much more difficulty in organising these great enterprises, and would
be unable to exercise their present dominating control.

To the first part of this objection we may reply that the distribution
of superfluous goods need not involve any considerable withdrawal of
existing capital from industry. The giving of large amounts to
institutions and organisations, as distinguished from needy
individuals, might mean merely a transfer of capital from one holder
to another; for example, the stocks and bonds of corporations. The
capital would be left intact, the only change being in the persons
that would thenceforth receive the interest. Small donations could
come out of the possessor's income. Moreover, there is no reason why
the whole of the distribution could not be made out of income rather
than out of capital. While the givers would still remain possessed of
superfluous wealth, they would have handed over to needy objects,
persons, and causes the thing that in modern times constitutes the
soul and essence of wealth; namely, its annual revenues.

Nevertheless, the distribution from income would apparently check the
necessary increase of capital, lessen unduly the supply of capital for
the future. Were all, or the greater part of superfluous incomes
devoted to benevolent objects it would be used up for consumption
goods; such as, food, clothing, housing, hospitals, churches, schools.
Would not this check to the increase of capital cause serious injury
to society?

New investment would not be diminished by an amount equal to the whole
amount of income transferred to objects of benevolence. For the
improved position of the poorer classes that had shared in the
distribution would enable them to increase their productive power and
their resources, and therefore to save money and convert it into
capital. Again, their increased consuming power would augment the
demand for goods, bring about a larger use of existing capital
instruments, and therefore lead to an enlargement of the community's
capacity for saving. Thus, the new saving and capital would, partially
at least, take the place of that which was formerly provided by the
possessors of surplus income. In so far as a net diminution occurred
in the community's supply of capital, it would probably be more than
offset, from the viewpoint of social welfare, by the better diffusion
of goods and opportunities among the masses of the population.

The second difficulty noted above, that such a thorough distribution
of superfluous goods would lessen considerably the power of the
captains of industry to organise and operate great enterprises, can be
disposed of very briefly. Those who made the distribution from income
rather than from invested wealth, would still retain control of large
masses of capital. All, however, would have deprived themselves of the
power to enlarge their business ventures by turning great quantities
of their own income back into industry. But if their ability and
character were such as to command the confidence of investors, they
would be able to find sufficient capital elsewhere to equip and carry
on any sound and necessary enterprise. In this case the process of
accumulating the required funds would, indeed, be slower than when
they used their own, but that would not be an unmixed disadvantage.
When the business was finally established, it would probably be more
stable, would respond to a more definite and considerable need, and
would be more beneficial socially, inasmuch as it would include a
larger proportion of the population among its proprietors. And the
diminished authority and control exercised by the great capitalist, on
account of his diminished ownership of the stock, would in the long
run be a good thing for society. It would mean the curtailment of a
species of power that is easily liable to abuse, wider opportunities
of industrial leadership, and a more democratic and stable industrial
system.

Only a comparatively small portion of the superfluous goods of the
country could with advantage be immediately and directly distributed
among needy individuals. The greater part would do more good if it
were given to religious and benevolent institutions and enterprises.
Churches, schools, scholarships, hospitals, asylums, housing projects,
insurance against unemployment, sickness, and old age, and benevolent
and scientific purposes generally,--constitute the best objects and
agencies of effective distribution. By these means social and
individual efficiency would be so improved within a few years that
the distress due to economic causes would for the most part have
disappeared.

The proposition that men are under moral obligation to give away the
greater portion of their superfluous goods or income is, indeed, a
"hard saying." Not improbably it will strike the majority of persons
who read these pages as extreme and fantastic. No Catholic, however,
who knows the traditional teaching of the Church on the right use of
wealth, and who considers patiently and seriously the magnitude and
the meaning of human distress, will be able to refute the proposition
by reasoned arguments. Indeed, no man can logically deny it who admits
that men are intrinsically sacred, and essentially equal by nature and
in their claims to a reasonable livelihood from the common heritage of
the earth. The wants that a man supplies out of his superfluous goods
are not necessary for rational existence. For the most part they bring
him merely irrational enjoyment, greater social prestige, or increased
domination over his fellows. Judged by any reasonable standard, these
are surely less important than those needs of the neighbour which are
connected with humane living. If any considerable part of the
community rejects these propositions the explanation will be found not
in a reasoned theory, but in the conventional assumption that a man
may do what he likes with his own. This assumption is adopted without
examination, without criticism, without any serious advertence to the
great moral facts that ownership is stewardship, and that the Creator
intended the earth for the reasonable support of all the children of
men.


_A False Conception of Welfare and Superfluous Goods_

If all the present owners of superfluous goods were to carry out their
own conception of the obligation, the amount distributed would be only
a fraction of the real superabundance. Let us recall the definition
of absolute superfluity as, that portion of individual or family
income which is not required for the reasonable maintenance of life
and social position. It allows, of course, a reasonable provision for
the future. But the great majority of possessors, as well as perhaps
the majority of others, do not interpret their needs, whether of life
or social position, in any such strict fashion. Those who acquire a
surplus over their present absolute and conventional needs, generally
devote it to an expansion of social position. They move into larger
and more expensive houses, thereby increasing their assumed
requirements, not merely in the matter of housing, but as regards
food, clothing, amusements, and the conventions of the social group
with which they are affiliated. In this way the surplus which ought to
have been distributed is all absorbed in the acquisition and
maintenance of more expensive standards. All classes of possessors
adopt and act upon an exaggerated conception of both the strict and
the conventional necessities. In taking this course, they are merely
subscribing to the current theory of life and welfare. It is commonly
assumed that to be worth while life must include the continuous and
indefinite increase of the number and variety of wants, and a
corresponding growth and variation in the means of satisfying them.
Very little endeavour is made to distinguish between kinds of wants,
or to arrange them in any definite scale of moral importance. Desires
for purely physical goods, such as, food, drink, adornment, and sense
gratifications generally, are put on the same level with the demands
of the spiritual, moral, and intellectual faculties. The value and
importance of any and all wants is determined mainly by the criterion
of enjoyment. In the great majority of cases this means a preference
for the goods and experiences that minister to the senses. Since these
satisfactions are susceptible of indefinite increase, variety, and
cost, the believer in this theory of life-values readily assumes that
no practical limit can be set to the amount of goods or income that
will be required to make life continuously and progressively worth
living. Hence the question whether he has superfluous goods, how much
of a surplus he has, or how much he is obliged to distribute, scarcely
occurs to him at all. Everything that he possesses or is likely to
possess, is included among the necessaries of life and social
position. He adopts as his working theory of life those propositions
which were condemned as "scandalous and pernicious" by Pope Innocent
XI in 1679: "It is scarcely possible to find among people engaged in
worldly pursuits, even among kings, goods that are superfluous to
social position. Therefore, hardly any one is bound to give alms from
this source."

The practical consequences of this false conception of welfare are
naturally most conspicuous among the rich, especially the very rich,
but they are also manifest among the comfortable and middle classes.
In every social group above the limit of very moderate circumstances,
too much money is spent for material goods and enjoyments, and too
little for the intellectual, religious, and altruistic things of life.


_The True Conception of Welfare_

This working creed of materialism is condemned by right reason, as
well as by Christianity. The teaching of Christ on the worth of
material goods is expressed substantially in the following texts: "Woe
to you rich." "Blessed are you poor." "Lay not up for yourselves
treasures on earth." "For a man's life consisteth not in the abundance
of things that he possesseth." "Be not solicitous as to what you shall
eat, or what you shall drink, or what you shall put on." "Seek ye
first the kingdom of God and his justice, and all these things shall
be added unto you." "You cannot serve God and Mammon." "If thou
wouldst be perfect, go, sell what thou hast and give to the poor, and
come follow me." Reason informs us that neither our faculties nor the
goods that satisfy them are of equal moral worth or importance. The
intellectual and spiritual faculties are essentially and intrinsically
higher than the sense faculties. Only in so far as they promote,
either negatively or positively, the development of the mind and soul
have the senses any reasonable claim to satisfaction. They have no
value in themselves; they are merely instruments to the welfare of the
spirit, the intellect, and the disinterested will. Right life
consists, not in the indefinite satisfaction of material wants, but in
the progressive endeavour to know the best that is to be known, and to
love the best that is to be loved; that is, God and His creatures in
the order of their importance. The man who denies the intrinsic
superiority of the soul to the senses, who puts sense gratifications
on the same level of importance as the activities of mind, and spirit,
and disinterested will, logically holds that the most degrading
actions are equally good and commendable with those which mankind
approves as the noblest. His moral standard does not differ from that
of the pig, and he himself is on no higher moral level than the pig.

Those who accept the view of life and welfare taught by Christianity
and reason cannot, if they take the trouble to consider the matter,
avoid the conclusion that the amount of material goods which can be
expended in the rational and justifiable satisfaction of the senses,
is very much smaller than is to-day assumed by the great majority of
persons. Somewhere between five and ten thousand dollars a year lies
the maximum expenditure that any family can reasonably devote to its
material wants. This is independent of the outlay for education,
religion, and charity, and the things of the mind generally. In the
overwhelming majority of cases in which more than five to ten thousand
dollars are expended for the satisfaction of material needs, some
injury is done to the higher life. The interests of health, intellect,
spirit, or morals would be better promoted if the outlay for material
things were kept below the specified limit.

The distribution advocated in this chapter is obviously no substitute
for justice or the deeds of justice. Inasmuch, however, as complete
justice is a long way from realisation, a serious attempt by the
possessors of true superfluous goods to fulfil their obligations of
distribution would greatly counteract and soften existing injustice,
inequality, and suffering. Hence, benevolent giving deserves a place
in any complete statement of proposals for a better distribution of
wealth. Moreover, we are not likely to make great advances on the road
of strict justice until we acquire saner conceptions of welfare, and a
more effective notion of brotherly love. So long as men put the senses
above the soul, they will be unable to see clearly what is justice,
and unwilling to practise the little that they are able to see. Those
who exaggerate the value of sense gratifications cannot be truly
charitable, and those who are not truly charitable cannot perform
adequate justice. The achievement of social justice requires not
merely changes in the social mechanism, but a change in the social
spirit, a reformation in men's hearts. To this end nothing could be
more immediately helpful than a comprehensive recognition of the
stewardship of wealth, and the duty of distributing superfluous goods.


REFERENCES ON SECTION III

     ELY: Monopolies and Trusts. Macmillan; 1900.

     VAN HISE: Concentration and Control. Macmillan; 1912.

     STEVENS: Industrial Combinations and Trusts. Macmillan; 1913.

     RUSSELL: Business, the Heart of the Nation. John Lane; 1911.

     GARRIGUET: Régime du Travail. Paris; 1909. The Social Value
     of the Gospel. St. Louis; 1911.

     HOBSON: Work and Wealth, a Human Valuation. Macmillan; 1914.

     WEST: The Inheritance Tax. New York; 1908.

     SELIGMAN: Progressive Taxation. Princeton; 1908. The Income
     Tax. New York; 1913.

     BOUQUILLON: De Virtutibus Theologicis. Brugis; 1890.

     Also, the works of Taussig, Devas, Hobson, Antoine, Pesch,
     Carver, Vermeersch, Nearing, and King which are cited in
     connection with the introductory chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[201] "Summa Theologica," 2a. 2ae., q. 66, a. 3.

[202] "Patrologia Graeca," vol. 31, cols. 275, 278.

[203] "Patrologia Latina," vol. 37, col. 1922.

[204] "Patrologia Latina," vol. 14, col. 747.

[205] "Patrologia Latina," vol. 77, col. 87. These and several other
extracts of like tenor may be found in Ryan's "Alleged Socialism of
the Church Fathers," ch. i; St. Louis, 1913.

[206] Op. cit., 2a. 2ae., q. 66, a. 7.

[207] Encyclical, "On the Condition of Labour," May 15, 1891.

[208] Encyclical, "On Socialism, Communism, Nihilism," Dec. 28, 1878.

[209] Op. cit., 2a. 2ae., q. 32, a. 1.

[210] Idem, q. 66, a. 7.

[211] A comprehensive, though brief, discussion of this question and
numerous references are contained in Bouquillon, "De Virtutibus
Theologicis," pp. 332-348. When Pope Leo XIII declared that the rich
are obliged to distribute "out of" their superfluity, he did not mean
that they are free to give only a portion thereof. The particle "de"
in his statement, "officium est de eo quod superat gratificari
indigentibus," is not correctly translated by "some." It means rather
"out of," "from," or "with"; so that the affluent are commanded to
devote their superfluous goods indefinitely to the relief of the
needy. In the Encyclical, "Quot Apostolici Muneris," he used the
expression, "gravissimo divites urget praecepto ut quod superest
pauperibus tribuant," which clearly declares the duty of distributing
all.

[212] "The Wealth and Income of the People of the United States," pp.
224-226.




SECTION IV

THE MORAL ASPECT OF WAGES




