CHAPTER X

THE ALLEGED RIGHT OF LABOUR TO THE ENTIRE PRODUCT OF INDUSTRY


In a preceding chapter we saw that Marxian Socialism is logically
debarred from passing _moral_ judgment upon any social institution or
practice.[114] If social institutions are produced necessarily by
socio-economic forces they are neither morally good nor morally bad.
They are quite as unmoral as rain and snow, verdure and decay,
tadpoles and elephants. Consistent Socialists cannot, therefore,
censure on purely ethical grounds the system of private capital and
interest.

This logical requirement of the theory of economic determinism is
exemplified in much of the rigidly scientific discussions of
Socialists. Marx maintained that the value of commodities is all
determined and created by labour, and that interest is the surplus
which the labourer produces above the cost of his keep; nevertheless
Marx did not formally assert that the labourer has a moral right to
the whole product, nor that interest is theft. He set forth his
theories of value and surplus value as positive explanations of
economic facts, not as an ethical evaluation of human actions. His
object was to show the causes and nature of value, wages, and
interest, not to estimate the moral claims of the agents of
production, or the morality of the distributive process. In his formal
discussion of the theory of value and of surplus value, Marx said
nothing that implied a belief in genuine moral responsibility, or
that contradicted the principles of philosophical materialism and
economic determinism. It is, therefore, quite erroneous to infer that,
since the Marxian theory attributes all value and products to the
action of labour, Marxian Socialists must condemn the interest-taker
as a robber.

Neither Marx nor any other Socialist authority, however, has always
held consistently to this purely positive method of economic
exposition. When they declare that the labourer is "exploited," that
surplus value is "filched" from him, that the capitalist is a
"parasite," etc., they are expressing and conveying distinct moral
judgments. In their more popular writings Socialist authors do not
seriously attempt to observe the logical requirements of their
necessitarian philosophy. They assume the same ethical postulates, and
give expression to the same ethical intuitions as the man who believes
in the human soul and free will.[115] And the great majority of their
followers likewise regard the question of distribution as a moral
question, as a question of justice. In their view the labourer not
only creates all value, but has a just claim to the whole product.


_The Labour Theory of Value_

This doctrine is sometimes formally based upon the Marxian theory of
value, and is sometimes defended independently of that theory. In the
former case its groundwork is about as follows: By eliminating the
factors of utility and scarcity, Marx found that the only element
common to all commodities is labour, and then concluded that labour is
the only possible explanation, creator, and determinant of value.[116]
Since capital, that is, concrete capital, is a commodity, its value is
likewise determined and created by labour. Since it cannot create
value, for only labour has that power, it can contribute to the
product of the productive process in which it is engaged only as much
value as it originally received. Since it is only a reservoir of
value, it cannot transfer more value than it holds and possesses. In
the words of Marx, "the means of production transfer value to the new
product, so far only as during the labour-process they lose value in
the shape of the old use-value. The maximum loss of value that they
can suffer in the process is plainly limited by the amount of the
original value with which they came into the process, or, in other
words, by the labour time necessary for their production. Therefore,
the means of production can ever add more value to the product than
they themselves possess independently of the process in which they
assist. However useful a given kind of raw material, or a machine, or
other means of production may be, though it may cost 150 pounds, or
say 500 days' labour, yet it cannot, under any circumstances, add to
the value of the product more than 150 pounds."[117]

To view the matter from another angle: capital contributes to the
product only sufficient value to pay for its own reproduction. When,
as is the normal usage, the undertaker has deducted from the product
sufficient value or money to replace the deteriorated or worn out
machine, or other concrete capital, all the remaining value in the
product is due specifically to labour.

When, therefore, the capitalist goes further, and appropriates from
the product interest and profits, he takes a part of the value that
labour has created. He seizes the surplus value which labour has
produced in excess of the wages that it receives. In ethical terms, he
robs the labourers of a part of their product.

It is not necessary to introduce any extended refutation of this
arbitrary, unreal, and fantastic argument. "The theory that labour is
the sole source of value has few defenders to-day. In the face of the
overwhelming criticism which has been directed against it, even good
Marxists are forced to abandon it, or to explain it away."[118] It
may, however, be useful to recount very briefly the facts which
disprove the theory. Labour creates some things which have no value,
as wooden shoes in a community that does not desire wooden shoes; some
things have value, exchange value, although no labour has been
expended upon them, as land and minerals; the value of things is
sometimes greater, sometimes less, proportionately, than the labour
embodied in them; for example, paintings by the old masters, and last
year's styles of millinery; and, finally, the true determinants of
value are utility and scarcity. If it be objected that Marx was aware
of these two factors, the reply is that he either restricted them to
the function of conditions rather than efficient causes of value, or
attributed to them an influence that is inconsistent with his main
theory that labour is the sole determinant of value. Indeed, the
contradictions into which Marx was led by the theory are its
sufficient refutation.[119]

With the destruction of the labour theory of value, the Marxian
contention that capital contributes only its own original value to the
product is likewise overthrown. The same conclusion is reached more
directly by recalling the obvious facts of experience that, since the
joint action of both capital and labour is required to bring into
being every atom of the product, each is in its own order the cause of
the whole product, and the proportion of the whole that is
specifically due to the casual influence of either is as incapable of
determination as the procreative contribution of either parent to
their common offspring. The productive process carried on by labour
and capital is virtually an organic process, in which the precise
amount contributed by either factor is unknown and unknowable.

In so far, therefore, as the alleged right of labour to the whole
product is based upon the Marxian theory of value, it has not a shadow
of validity.


_The Right of Productivity_

But the claim is not necessarily dependent upon this foundation. Those
Socialists who have abandoned the labour theory of value can argue
that the labourer (including the active director of industry) is the
only _human_ producer, that the capitalist as such produces nothing,
and consequently has no moral claim to any part of the product.
Whatever theory of value we may adopt, or whether we adopt any, we
cannot annul the fact that interest does not represent labour expended
upon the product by the capitalist.

Nevertheless, this fact does not compel the conclusion that the share
of the product now taken by the capitalist belongs of right to the
labourer. Productivity does not of itself create a right to the
product. It is not an intrinsic title. That is to say, a right to the
product is not inherent in the relation between product and producer.
It is determined by certain extrinsic relations. When Brown makes a
pair of shoes out of materials that he has stolen, he has not a right
to the whole product; when Jones turns out a similar product from
materials that he has bought, he becomes the exclusive owner of the
shoes. The intrinsic relation of productivity is the same in both
cases. It is the difference of extrinsic relation, namely, the
relation between the producer and the material, that begets the
difference between the moral claims of the two producers upon the
product.

The right of the producer is conditioned by certain other and more
fundamental relations. Why has Jones a right to the shoes that he has
made out of materials that he has bought? Not because he needs them;
he is not alone in this condition. The ultimate reason and basis of
his ownership is to be sought in the practical requirements of an
equitable social distribution. Unless men receive an adequate return
for their labour, they will not be able to satisfy their wants in a
regular and sufficient manner. If they are forced to labour for others
without compensation, they are deprived of the opportunity to develop
their personality. They are treated as mere instruments to the welfare
of beings who are not their superiors, but their moral and juridical
equals. Their intrinsic worth and sacredness of personality is
outraged, their essential equality with their fellows is disregarded,
and their indestructible rights are violated. On the other hand, when
a producer, such as Jones, gets possession of his product, he
subordinates no human being to himself, deprives no man of the
opportunity to perform remunerative labour, nor appropriates an
unreasonable share of the common bounty of the earth. He has a right
to his product because this is one of the reasonable methods of
distribution.

In fact, it is the exigencies of reasonable distribution that
constitute the fundamental justification of every title of ownership.
The title of purchase by which a man claims the hat that he wears; the
title of inheritance by which a son claims the house that once
belonged to his father; the title of contract through which a labourer
gets wages, a merchant prices, and a landlord rent,--are all valid
simply because they are reasonable devices for enabling men to obtain
the goods of the earth for the satisfaction of their wants. All titles
of property, productivity included, are conventional institutions
which reason and experience have shown to be conducive to human
welfare. None of them possesses intrinsic or metaphysical
validity.[120]

Therefore, the Socialist cannot establish the right of labour to the
full product of industry until he proves that this so-called right
could be reduced to practice consistently with individual and social
welfare. In other words, he must show that to give the entire product
to the labourer would be a reasonable method of distribution. Now the
arrangement by which the Socialist proposes to award the whole product
of labour is the collective ownership and operation of the means of
production, and the social distribution of the product. If this system
would not enable the labourer and the members of society generally to
satisfy their wants to better advantage than is possible under the
present system, the contention that the labourer has a right to the
entire product of industry falls to the ground. The question will be
considered in the following chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[114] Cf. Engels, "Socialism: Utopian and Scientific," pp. 45, 46; and
Hillquit-Ryan, "Socialism: Promise or Menace," 103, 104, 143-145.

[115] Cf. Hillquit-Ryan, op. cit., pp. 75, 76.

[116] "Capital," pp. 1-9.

[117] Op. cit., p. 117; Humboldt Edition.

[118] Skelton, "Socialism: A Critical Analysis," pp. 121, 122.

[119] Cf. Skelton, loc. cit.

[120] The exaggerated claims made on behalf of social productivity in
the matter of land values have been examined in a previous chapter.
Similar exaggerations with regard to capital will be considered in
chapter xii.




