CHAPTER XVIII

THE MORAL ASPECT OF MONOPOLY


The conclusion was drawn in the last chapter that the surplus gains of
corporations operating in conditions of competition, can justly be
retained by the stockholders as the remuneration of exceptional
productive efficiency. It is, of course, to be understood that the
proper allowance for interest on the capital is not necessarily the
amount authorised by the stipulated rate of dividend on the stock, but
the prevailing or competitive rate of interest plus an adequate rate
of insurance against the risks of the enterprise. If the prevailing
rate of interest is five per cent., and the risk is sufficiently
protected by an allowance of one per cent., the fair rate of return on
the investment is six per cent. The fact that a concern may actually
award its stockholders ten per cent. dividends, has no bearing on the
determination of the genuine surplus. If the actual surplus that
remains after paying all other charges and allowing ten per cent. on
the stock, is only 50,000 dollars, whereas it would be 100,000 dollars
with an allowance of only six per cent., then the true surplus gains,
or profits, are the latter amount not the former. No part of the
100,000 dollars can be justified as interest on capital. It must all
find its justification as profits proceeding from superior
productivity.

Bearing in mind this distinction between the actual rate of dividend
and the proper allowance for interest on capital, we take up the
question of the morality of profits or surplus gains in conditions of
monopoly.


_Surplus and Excessive Profits_

Several of the great industrial combinations of the United States have
obtained profits which are commonly stigmatised as "excessive." For
example, the Standard Oil Company paid, from 1882 to 1906, an average
annual dividend of 24.15 per cent. on the capital stock, and had
profits in addition at the rate of about 8 per cent. annually;[165]
from 1904 to 1908 the American Tobacco Company averaged 19 per cent.
on its actual investment;[166] and the United States Steel Corporation
obtained an average annual return of 12 per cent. on its investment
from 1901 to 1910.[167] A complete list of the American monopolies
that have reaped more than the competitive rate of return on their
capital would undoubtedly be a very long one.

Is it possible to justify such returns? Has a monopoly a right to take
surplus gains? Let us suppose a concern which is getting 15 per cent.
on its investment. Inasmuch as the risks are smaller than in
competitive enterprises, six per cent. is an ample allowance for
interest. Of the remaining 9 per cent., 4 per cent., we shall assume,
is derived from economies of production as compared with the great
majority of competitive concerns. This portion of the surplus, being
the reward of superior efficiency, may be retained by the owners of
the monopoly quite as justly as similar gains are taken by the
exceptionally efficient corporation in conditions of competition. The
objection that the monopoly ought to share these gains with the
public, since it limits individual opportunity in a socially
undesirable way, has some merit, but it can scarcely be urged on
grounds of strict justice. At most it points only to an obligation in
equity.

By what canon of distribution can the retention of the other 5 per
cent. of surplus gain be justified? Not by the titles of needs and
efforts, for these have already been satisfied through the salaries
paid to those stockholders who perform labour in the management of the
concern. These titles afford no basis for any other claim than that
which proceeds from labour. They cannot be made to justify claims made
on behalf of capital. Not by the title of productivity, for this has
already been remunerated in the 4 per cent. just considered. Not as
interest on capital, for ample allowance has already been made under
this head in the original 6 per cent. As we have seen in an earlier
chapter, the only reasons that give ethical support to interest on
capital are the sacrifice that is involved in some kinds of saving,
the possibility that interest is necessary in order to induce the
provision of sufficient capital, the certainty that the State would be
unable to enforce the abolition of interest, and some presumptive
considerations. Since all of these reasons and ends are satisfied by
the competitive rate of interest, none of them will justify the
exaction of more than the competitive rate. It is not possible to
justify a higher rate on either social or individual grounds.
Therefore, the only basis that is left upon which to defend the
retention of the five per cent. surplus that we are discussing, is the
power of appropriation. The monopoly possesses the economic strength
to take this five per cent. because it is able to impose higher than
competitive prices upon the consumer. Obviously such power has no
greater ethical sanction or validity than the pistol of the
highwayman. In both cases the gains are the product of extortion.

The conclusion that men have no right to more than the competitive
rate of interest, as interest, on their capital, and that a monopoly
has consequently no right to those surplus gains that are not produced
by superior efficiency, is confirmed by public opinion and by the
decisions of the courts. The monopolistic practice of taking more than
the usual rate of returns on capital merely because there exists the
power to take it, is universally condemned as inequitable. In fixing
the charges of public service corporations, the courts with practical
unanimity allow only the rate of return that is obtainable in
competitive conditions of investment.

The statement that the monopoly may retain those surplus gains which
are derived from superior efficiency assumes, of course, that fair
wages have been paid to employés, and fair prices to the sellers of
materials, and that fair methods have been used toward competitors. In
so far as any of these conditions is not met, the monopolistic concern
has no right to surplus gains of any sort. All three of the claims
just mentioned are morally stronger than the claim to superior rewards
because of superior efficiency.


_The Question of Monopolistic Efficiency_

So much for the moral principle. What proportion of the surplus gains
of monopoly are due to extortionate prices rather than to economies in
production, cannot be known even approximately. According to Justice
Brandeis, who is one of the most competent authorities in this field,
only a very small part of these gains are derived from superior
efficiency.[168] Professor E. S. Meade writes: "During a decade
[1902-1912] of unparalleled industrial development, the trusts,
starting with every advantage of large capital, well-equipped plants,
financial connections, and skilled superintendence, have not
succeeded."[169] On the other hand, President Van Hise thinks that,
"the weight of argument is strongly in favour of the increased
efficiency of large combinations of industry on the average."[170] The
difference of opinion existing among students of this subject is due
to lack of adequate data, particularly to the absence of such uniform
and comprehensive systems of accounting as would be required to
provide a basis for reliable general conclusions. Opposing particular
statements may be equally true, because based upon different
instances; but general statements are little better than guesses.

Let us approach the question from another side, that of prices.
Whenever the charges imposed by monopolistic concerns upon their
products are higher than those that would have prevailed under
competition, the surplus gains are obviously to that extent not due to
superior efficiency. They have their source in the arbitrarily made
prices. The Final Report of the United States Industrial Commission,
which was made at the beginning of the year 1902, declared that, "in
most cases the combination has exerted an appreciable power over
prices, and in practically all cases it has increased the margin
between raw materials and finished products."[171] Since the cost of
production had decreased during the preceding decade, this increase in
the margin, and the ensuing increased profits, necessarily involved an
increase in prices to the consumer. Taking the period of 1897-1910,
and comparing the movement of prices between eighteen important
trust-controlled products, and the same number of important
commodities not produced by monopolistic concerns, Professor Meade
concluded that the former were sold at a "much lower" relative level
than the latter.[172] His computations were based upon figures
compiled by the Bureau of Labour. According to the Commissioner of
Corporations, the Standard Oil Company "has taken advantage of its
monopoly power to extort prices much higher than would have existed
under free competition."[173] The same authority shows that the
American Tobacco Company used its power to obtain considerably more
than competitive prices on some of its products.[174] Excessive
prices, as measured by the standards of competition, were also
established by the United States Steel Corporation, the American Sugar
Refining Company, and the combinations in meat packing and in
lumber.[175]

A safe statement would probably be that the greater part of the
surplus gains of the most conspicuous American monopolies have been
due to excessive prices rather than to economies of production.

Let us turn from the subject of unjust monopoly gains to that of
unfair methods used by the great combinations toward their
competitors. These methods are mainly three: discriminative
underselling, exclusive-selling contracts, and advantages in
transportation.


_Discriminative Underselling_

The first of these practices is exemplified when a monopoly sells its
goods at unprofitably low rates in competitive territory, while
maintaining higher prices elsewhere; and when it offers at very low
prices those kinds of goods which are handled by competitors, while
holding at excessively high prices the kinds of commodities over which
it has exclusive control. Both forms of the practice seem to have been
extensively used by most of the monopolistic concerns of America.[176]
The Standard Oil Company has been perhaps the most conspicuous
offender in this field.[177] This practice is unjust because it
violates the fundamental moral principle that a man has a right to
pursue a lawful good without hindrance through illicit means. Among
the illicit means enumerated by the moral theologians are force,
fraud, deception, lying, slander, intimidation, and extortion.[178]

The illicit means employed in discriminative underselling are chiefly
extortion and deception. If the very low prices at which the monopoly
sells in the field which contains competitors were maintained outside
of that field also, and if they were continued not merely until the
independent concerns were driven out of business, but indefinitely
afterward, no injustice would be done the latter. For no man has a
natural right to any particular business. If a powerful concern can
eliminate competitors through low prices made possible by superior
efficiency, the competitors are not unjustly treated. They have no
more just cause of complaint than the inefficient grocer whose custom
is attracted from him by other and more efficient merchants. The
offence is at the worst contrary to charity. But when the monopoly
maintains the low and competition-eliminating prices only locally and
temporarily, when it is enabled to establish and continue these prices
only because it sells its goods at extortionate rates elsewhere, the
latter prices are evidently the instrument or means by which the
competitors are injured and eliminated. In that case the monopoly
violates the right of the competitors to pursue a lawful good immune
from unfair interference. The lawful good is a livelihood from this
kind of business; and the illicit interference is the unjust prices
maintained outside the competitive field.

In the preceding paragraph we have assumed that the extortionate
prices are operative at the same time as the excessively low prices,
but in a different place. Suppose that the former are imposed only
after the independent concerns are eliminated. The injustice to the
competitors remains the same as in the preceding case. Although the
extortionate prices are later in time, they are the instrumental cause
of the destructive low prices through which the competitors were
driven out of business. If the owners of the monopoly were not certain
of their ability to establish the subsequent extortionate prices, they
would not have put into effect the unprofitably low prices. Hence
there is a true causal connection between the former and the latter.
Although the connection is mainly psychical, through the consciousness
of the monopoly owners, it is none the less real and effective. Its
practical effectiveness is seen in the fact that the subsequent
possibility of imposing extortionate prices will induce men to lend
the monopoly money to carry on the process of exterminating
competition. The process is maintained by means of the extortionate
prices quite as effectively as though the two things were
simultaneous.

In so far as the patrons of the independent concerns are deceived into
expecting that the very low prices will be permanent, and in so far as
this impression causes them to withdraw their patronage from the
independents, the latter are injured through another illicit means,
namely, deception. The competitors have a right not to be deprived of
their customers through imposture.

What is the measure of extortionate prices in this connection? How can
we know that the high, competition-eliminating prices are really
extortionate? There are only two possible tests of just price. The
first is the proper cost of production,--fair wages to labour, fair
prices for materials, and fair interest on capital. If the monopoly
does not raise prices above this level, it obviously does not impose
extortionate prices, nor inflict injustice upon the eliminated
competitor. Moreover, if the monopoly has introduced economies of
production it may, as we have seen, justly charge prices somewhat
above the cost-of-production level. But it may not raise them above
the level that would have prevailed under competition. This is the
second test of just price. No possible justification can be found,
except one to be mentioned presently, for charging the consumers
higher prices than they could have obtained under competitive
conditions. At such prices the monopoly will be able to secure the
prevailing rate of interest on its capital, and all the surplus gains
that proceed from superior efficiency. A higher scale of prices will
be, therefore, extortionate, and the competitors who are eliminated
through its instrumentality will be the victims of injustice.[179]

The exception alluded to above occurs when the monopoly uses the
excess which it obtains over the competitive price to pay fair wages
to those labourers who were insufficiently compensated in competitive
conditions. In such a case the eliminated competitors would have no
just claim against the monopoly; for their elimination took place in
the just interest of the producers. The case, however, is purely
academic, since the discriminative underselling practised by our
monopolistic concerns has not been impelled by any such motive, nor
has it achieved any such result.


_Exclusive-Sales Contracts_

The second unfair method employed by monopolies toward competitors is
that of exclusive-selling contracts, sometimes called the "factor's
agreement." It requires the dealer, merchant, or jobber to refrain
from selling the goods produced by independent concerns, on penalty of
being refused the goods produced by the monopoly. The merchant is
compelled to choose between the less important line of wares to be had
from the former, and the more important line obtainable from the
latter. He will not be permitted to handle both. "Here is somebody who
has been buying goods, let us say, by way of illustration, from the
American Tobacco Company, and a rival producer comes in whom the
merchant likes to patronise. He buys goods for a time from the rival,
and an agent of the trust sends him a note to the effect that he must
not buy any more from that rival corporation; that, if he does so, the
trust will give all of its own goods, some of which the merchant is
obliged to have, to another agent. That will probably bring him to
terms."[180] By this method the independent manufacturer can be
deprived of sufficient patronage to injure him seriously, and perhaps
to drive him out of business.

This process is one of intimidation brought to bear upon the merchant.
Through fear of loss he is compelled to discontinue selling the goods
of the competing manufacturer. It is a kind of secondary boycott. As
such, it is an unreasonable interference with the liberty of the
merchant unless its object is to compel him to do something that he
may be reasonably required to do. In the case that we are considering,
the object of the pressure is not of that character; for to drive the
rival manufacturer out of business, or to assist in his expulsion, is
not a reasonable thing. The exclusive-selling contract which is forced
upon the merchant is quite as unreasonable as though its purpose were
to prevent him from, say, patronising manufacturers having red hair.
Being thus unreasonable, thus injurious to individual liberty, it
violates not only the law of charity but that of justice. It
transgresses the merchant's right to enter reasonable contracts with
the rival manufacturer, and if it results in a pecuniary loss to the
former it is an invasion of his rights of property. It likewise
violates the rights of the competitive manufacturer, since it is among
the unfair means which may not be used to prevent a man from pursuing
a legitimate good. It is an unfair means because it involves
unreasonable intimidation, uncharity, and injustice toward the
merchant. When the independent manufacturer is injured through such an
instrumentality, he suffers injustice quite as certainly at the hands
of the monopoly as though his property were destroyed through the
strong-arm methods of hired thugs.


_Discriminative Transportation Arrangements_

Concerning the third unfair method, discriminative advantages in
transportation, the United States Industrial Commission declared: "It
is incontestable that many of the great industrial combinations had
their origin in railroad discrimination. This has been emphasised many
times in the history of the Standard Oil Company, and of the great
monopolies dealing in live stock, dressed beef, and other
products."[181] The American Sugar Refining Company has been several
times convicted of receiving illegal favours from railroads, and has
paid in fines thousands upon thousands of dollars. Sometimes the
monopoly has openly been accorded lower freight rates than its
competitors, and sometimes it has paid the regular charges, and then
received back a part of them as a refund or rebate. At one time the
Standard Oil Company obtained rebates not only on its own shipments,
but on those of its rivals![182]

Special advantages of this sort necessarily involve injustice to the
competitors of the monopoly. If the low rates given to the
monopolistic concern are a sufficiently high price for the service of
carrying freight, the higher charges imposed upon the competing
concerns are extortionate; if the former rates are unprofitably low,
the difference between sufficient and insufficient freight charges is
made up by the independent concerns. In the former case the
independents pay the railroad too much; in the latter case they bear
burdens that should properly rest upon the monopoly. The monopolistic
concern is partly responsible for this injustice inasmuch as it urges
and often intimidates the railroad to establish the discriminating
rates.

All three of the practices that we have been considering are
universally condemned by public sentiment. They are all likewise under
the ban of statutory law. The first two have recently received
detailed and explicit prohibition in the Clayton Anti-Trust Act.


_Natural Monopolies_

Up to this point we have been dealing with private and artificial
monopolies. We turn now to consider briefly those natural and
quasi-public monopolies which are either tacitly or explicitly
recognised as monopolies by public authority, and whose charges are to
a greater or less extent regulated by some department of the State.
Such are, for example; steam railroads and municipal utilities. When
the charges made for the services of these corporations are
_adequately_ regulated by public authority, the owners of such
concerns will have a right to all the surplus gains that they can
obtain. In that case a contract is made between the corporation and
the public which is presumably fair to both parties, and which
represents the social estimate of what is just. If the public
authorities have not sufficiently safeguarded the interests of the
people, if they have permitted the charges to be so high as to provide
excessive returns for the corporation, the latter is under no moral
obligation to refrain from reaping the full benefit of the State's
negligence or incompetence. If, however, the unduly high rates have
been brought about through bribery, extortion, or deception practised
by the corporation, the inequitable contract thus arranged will not
justify the surplus gains thus produced. For example; if the
corporation deliberately and effectively conceals the real value of
its property through stockwatering, and thus misleads the public
authority into permitting charges which return twelve instead of six
per cent. on the actual investment, the corporation cannot forthwith
justly claim the surplus gain represented by the extra six per cent.

When the public authorities either fail entirely to regulate charges,
or do so only spasmodically and partially, the quasi-public monopoly
will not necessarily have a right to all the obtainable surplus gains.
For a long time the express companies of the United States were
permitted to exact what charges they pleased, and even yet the rates
on some of our railroads are not adequately regulated by the State. In
such cases the charges imposed on the public are not an adequate
expression of the social estimate of justice, nor an adequate basis of
legitimate surplus gains. In the absence of sufficient public
regulation, a quasi-public monopoly is morally bound to fix its
charges at such a level as will enable it to obtain only the
prevailing rate of interest on the investment, and such surplus gains
as it can produce through exceptional efficiency. In all such cases
the public service corporation is in the same moral position as the
artificial monopoly: it has no possible basis except superior
efficiency for claiming or getting any returns above the competitive
rate of interest on its capital. Its only possible reason for
obtaining more is the fact that it has the power to take more. This
fact has obviously no moral validity.


_Methods of Preventing Monopolistic Injustice_

How shall the injustices of monopoly be prevented in the future? So
far as quasi-public monopolies are concerned, all students of the
subject are now agreed that these should be permitted to exist under
adequate governmental regulation as to prices and service. The reason
is that in this field successful and useful competition is impossible.
Public utility corporations are natural monopolies, and must be dealt
with by the method of regulation until such time as they are brought
under the ownership and operation of the State. With regard to the
great industrial combinations which have become or threaten to become
artificial monopolies, there exists substantial agreement among
competent authorities on one point, and disagreement on another point.
All admit that the unfair competitive methods described in an earlier
part of this chapter should be stringently prohibited. No possible
reason can be found for legal toleration of these or any other
discriminative, uncharitable, or unjust practices on the part of
stronger toward weaker competitors.

The disagreement among students of monopoly relates to the fundamental
question of permitting or not permitting these combinations to exist.
According to the first theory, of which Mr. Justice Brandeis is the
most distinguished exponent, no new industrial monopolies should be
permitted, and those that we have should be dissolved. The basis of
this theory is the assumption that all the economies and all the
productive efficiency found in monopolistic concerns can be developed
and maintained in smaller business organisations, and that the method
of prevention and dissolution is the simplest means of protecting the
public against the danger of extortionate monopoly prices. Attention
has been called in a preceding paragraph to the impossibility of
determining whether the great monopolistic combinations have on the
average shown themselves to be more efficient than concerns subject
to active and adequate competition. It is significant, however, that
in the discussion of this subject which took place at the twenty-sixth
annual meeting of the American Economic Association, at Minneapolis in
1913, the economists who participated were practically unanimous in
holding that the superior efficiency of the trusts had not been
demonstrated, but was a matter of serious doubt, and that the burden
of proof of their alleged superiority had been definitely shifted upon
those who maintained the affirmative.[183] Probably the great majority
of the whole body of American economists would share these
conclusions.

On the other hand, the opponents of prevention and dissolution, of
whom Mr. George W. Perkins is probably the most conspicuous, point to
the obvious economies of large-scale over small-scale production, and
contend that these are sufficient reason for permitting and even
encouraging the great combinations. The power to oppress competitors
by unjust methods of business, and the public by extortionate prices,
should be kept under rigid control by supervision, and government
regulation of maximum prices. But the arguments advanced in favour of
this position are never conclusive. Most of its advocates fail to
realise, or at least to take adequately into account, the difference
between large-scale production and production by a monopoly. While the
large plant and the large business organisation have in many lines of
manufacture and trade a considerable advantage over the small plant
and the small organisation, there is not a scintilla of evidence to
show that the efficiency of magnitude increases indefinitely with
magnitude. There is no proof that the maximum efficiency is reached
only with the maximum size of the business unit. On the contrary, all
the evidence that we have points to the conclusion that in every field
of industrial and commercial enterprise, all the economies of
magnitude and of combination are obtained long before the concern
becomes a monopoly. There is not an industry of any importance in the
United States in which all the advantages of bigness and concentration
cannot be made operative in concerns that control as low as
twenty-five per cent. of the total product. The highest economy and
efficiency can be obtained without monopoly.

Indeed, this is admitted by the more reasonable advocates of the
regulation and price-fixing policy. While maintaining that
"concentration must go far in order to give the maximum of
efficiency," President Van Hise does not hold "that it should go to
the extent that the element of monopoly enters"; and he would have the
law "declare restraint of trade unreasonable that gets to monopoly,"
and fix the definite per cent. of business control which constitutes a
monopoly.[184] We are justified, therefore, in concluding that the
theory of prevention and dissolution (provided that the competing
units are not made so small as to destroy the certain economies of
magnitude) rather than the theory of permission and regulation,
indicates the sound economic and social policy of dealing with
monopolies.


_Legalised Price Agreements_

President Van Hise advocates the regulation policy in a modified form.
In substance his view is that, while no corporation should be
permitted to control the greater part of any product, monopolistic
price-agreements should be sanctioned and regulated by law. No amount
of restrictive legislation, he maintains, can secure universal
competition in the matter of prices. Experience shows that the
destructive results of cut-throat competition compel the more powerful
competitors to make price agreements in some lines of business.[185]
For example; all the retail grocers in a city are often found selling
certain staples at a uniform price for long periods of time.
Agreements of this sort should, in the opinion of President Van Hise,
be formally permitted by law, with the proviso that a government
commission should fix the maximum and possibly the minimum limits. And
he contends that the task of fixing fair maximum and minimum prices
would be much less difficult than is commonly supposed, and that it
would be much simpler and easier than the task of regulating railway
freight rates.

Whatever may be the merits of this plan, it is not likely to be
embodied in legislation in the near future. So far as we can see now,
the American people are committed to the policy of endeavouring to
restore genuine competition by prohibiting those predatory practices
to which the great monopolies mainly owe their existence. The attempt
will be made to give competition a fair opportunity to prevent both
monopolistic control of products and monopolistic fixing of prices.
Competition has not enjoyed any such opportunity during the last
quarter of a century. If this attempt should fail after a thorough
trial, the time will be at hand for the regulation of prices by the
government. Until that time has arrived (let us hope that it never
will arrive) the State will not, and should not, embark upon such a
large and difficult experiment.

FOOTNOTES:

[165] Report of the Commissioner of Corporations on the Petroleum
Industry, II, 40, 41.

[166] Report of the Commissioner of Corporations on the Tobacco
Industry, II, 26-34.

[167] Report of the Commissioner of Corporations on the Steel
Industry, I, 51. According to F. J. McRae, the expert accountant for
the Stanley congressional investigating committee, this concern
secured 40 per cent. on the _cost_ of its property.

[168] Hearings Before the Interstate Commerce Committee, U. S. Senate,
Part XVI, pages 1146-1166.

[169] _The Journal of Political Economy_, April, 1912, p. 366.

[170] "Concentration and Control," p. 20.

[171] Page 621.

[172] _The Journal of Political Economy_, April, 1912, p. 363.

[173] Report on the Petroleum Industry, II, 74.

[174] Report on the Tobacco Industry, II, 27.

[175] Cf. Van Hise, op. cit., pp. 140, 149, 153, 159.

[176] Final Report of the Industrial Commission, pp. 660-662.

[177] Report on the Petroleum Industry, I, 328-332.

[178] Cf. Lehmkuhl, "Theologia Moralis," I, No. 974.

[179] It may be of interest to recall the mediæval attitude toward
monopolistic exactions, as summarily stated by St. Antoninus, who was
archbishop of Florence in the first half of the fifteenth century:
"When monopolist merchants agree together to preserve a fixed price,
so as to secure an unlimited profit, they are guilty of sinful
trading." He maintained that they should not sell above the market
price, and should be prevented from so doing by law. See his "Summa
Theologica," III, 8, 3, iv, and II, 1, 16, ii. Present day moral
theologians lay down the same doctrine, and in addition condemn the
characteristic monopolistic methods as unjust. See Tanquerey, "De
Justitia," nos. 776, 777; Lehmkuhl, "Theologia Moralis," vol. I, no.
1119.

[180] Clark, "The Problem of Monopoly," p. 35.

[181] Final Report, p. 361.

[182] Report on the Petroleum Industry, pp. 22, 23.

[183] "Papers and Proceedings," pp. 158-194.

[184] Op. cit., pp. 20, 251.

[185] Op. cit., pp. 254-265.




