CHAPTER XVII

JUST PROFITS IN CONDITIONS OF COMPETITION


We have seen that profits are that share of the product of industry
which goes to the business man. They comprise that residual portion
which he finds in his hands after he has made all expenditures and
allowances for wages, salaries, interest at the prevailing rate on
both his own and the borrowed capital, and all other proper charges.
They constitute his compensation for his labour of direction, and for
the risks of his enterprise and capital.

In the opinion of most Socialists, profits are immoral because they
are an essential element of an unjust industrial system, and because
they are not entirely based upon labour. Under Socialism the
organising and directing functions that are now performed by the
business man, would be allotted to salaried superintendents and
managers. Their compensation would include no payment for the risks of
capital, and it would be fixed instead of indeterminate. Hence it
would differ considerably from present-day profits.

To the assertion that profits are immoral a sufficient reply at this
time is that Socialism has already been shown to be impracticable and
inequitable. Consequently the system of private industry is
essentially just, and profits, being a necessary element of the
system, are essentially legitimate. The question of their morality is
one of degree not of kind. It will be considered under two principal
heads: the right of the business man to obtain indefinitely large
profits; and his right to a certain minimum of profits.


_The Question of Indefinitely Large Profits_

As a general rule, business men who face conditions of active
competition have a right to all the profits that they can get, so long
as they use fair business methods. This means not merely fair and
honest conduct toward competitors, and buyers and sellers, but also
just and humane treatment of labour in all the conditions of
employment, especially in the matter of wages. When these conditions
are fulfilled, the freedom to take indefinitely large profits is
justified by the canon of human welfare. The great majority of
business men in competitive industries do not receive incomes in
excess of their reasonable needs. Their profits do not notably exceed
the salaries that they could command as hired managers, and generally
are not more than sufficient to reimburse them for the cost of
education and business training, and to enable them to live in
reasonable conformity with the standard of living to which they have
become accustomed.

Efforts and sacrifices are reflected to some extent in the different
amounts of profits received by different business men. When all due
allowance is made for chance, productivity, and scarcity, a
considerable proportion of profits is attributable to harder labour,
greater risk and worry, and larger sacrifices. Like the principle of
needs, that of efforts and sacrifices is a partial justification of
the business man's remuneration.

Those profits which cannot be justified by either of the titles just
mentioned, are ethically warranted by the principles of productivity
and scarcity. This is particularly true of those exceptionally large
profits which can be traced specifically to that unusual ability which
is exemplified in the invention and adoption of new methods and
processes in progressive industries. The receivers of these large
rewards have produced them in competition with less efficient business
men. While the title of productivity does not entirely satisfy the
seeker for decisive ethical sanctions, it is stronger morally than any
opposing considerations that can be invoked. It is probably as strong
as some other principles that we have to accept as the best attainable
in the very difficult field of industrial ethics.

Nevertheless, it would seem that those business men who obtain
exceptionally large profits could be reasonably required to transfer
part of their gains to their employés in the form of higher wages, or
to the consumers in the form of lower prices. Both of these methods
have been followed by Henry Ford, the automobile manufacturer. Neither
of them is certainly demanded by the principles of strict justice;
they rest upon the feebler and less decisive principle of general
equity or fairness.[163] This concept is less definite than those of
charity and justice, and stands midway between them. It comes into
operation when an action is obligatory on stricter grounds than those
of charity, and yet cannot with certainty be required on grounds of
justice. Notwithstanding its vagueness, it is sufficiently strong to
make the average conscientious man feel uncomfortable if he neglects
its prescriptions entirely. It has, therefore, sufficient practical
value to deserve a place in the ethics of distribution. And it seems
to have sufficient application to the problem before us to justify the
statement that the receivers of exceptionally large profits are bound
in equity to share them with those persons who have co-operated in
producing and providing them, namely, wage earners and consumers.

In the field of profits the canon of human welfare is not only sound
ethically but expedient socially. It permits the great majority of
business men to obtain, if they can, sufficient remuneration to meet
their reasonable needs. Whether it requires society to _guarantee_ at
least this amount of profit-income is a question that we shall examine
presently. It encourages efforts, and makes for the maximum social
product by permitting business men to retain all the profits that they
can get in conditions of fair competition. Does it forbid any attempt
by society to limit exceptionally large profit-incomes? If the limit
were placed very high, say, at 50,000 dollars per year, it would not
apparently check the productive efforts of the great majority of
business men, since they never hope to pass that figure. Whether it
would have a seriously discouraging effect upon the activity and
ambition of those who do hope to reach, and of those who have already
reached that level, is uncertain. Among business men who are
approaching or who have passed the 50,000 dollars annual profit-income
mark, the desire to possess more money is frequently weaker as a
motive to business activity than the longing for power and the driving
force of habit. At any rate, the question is not very practical. Any
sustained attempt to limit profits by law would require such extensive
and minute supervision of business that the policy would prove to be
socially intolerable and unprofitable. The espionage involved in the
policy would provoke general resentment, and the amount of profits
that could be diverted either to the State or to private persons would
be relatively insignificant.

Thus far we have been considering the independent business man and
business firm, not the joint stock company or corporation. In the
latter form of organisation, the labour of direction is remunerated by
fixed salaries to the executive officers, while the risks of
enterprise and capital are covered by the regular dividends received
by the whole body of stockholders. Consequently the only revenues
comparable to profits are the surplus gains that remain after wages,
salaries, interest, dividends, rent, and all other expenses and
charges have been met. These are apportioned through one process or
another among the stockholders. On what ethical principle can they be
thus distributed? The general principle of productivity, or superior
productivity, is the only one available. If a corporation which uses
fair methods of competition can obtain surplus gains, while the
majority of its competitors fail to do so, the cause must be sought in
its superior business management. This superiority must be credited to
the whole body of stockholders, even though the great majority of them
are responsible for it only in a very remote way, through their
selection of the executive officers. The stockholders surely have a
better claim to these surplus gains than any other group in the
community. At the same time, they are, like the independent business
man, bound by the principle of equity to share the surplus with the
labourers and consumers.


_The Question of Minimum Profits_

Has the business man a strict right to a minimum living profit? In
other words, have all business men a right to a sufficient volume of
sales at sufficiently high prices to provide them with living profits
or a decent livelihood? Such a right would imply a corresponding
obligation upon the consumers, or upon society, to furnish the
requisite amount of demand at the required prices. Is there such a
right, and such an obligation?

No industrial right is absolute. They are all conditioned by the
possibilities of the industrial system, and by the desires,
capacities, and actions of the persons who enter into industrial
relations with one another. As we shall see later, this statement is
true even of the right to a living wage. When the industrial resources
are adequate, all persons of average ability who contribute a
reasonable amount of labour to the productive process have a right to
a decent livelihood on two conditions: first, that such labour is
their only means of sustenance; and, second, that their labour is
economically indispensable to those who utilise it or its product.
"Economically indispensable" means that the beneficiary of the labour
would rather give the equivalent of a decent livelihood for it than go
without it. While both these conditions are apparently fulfilled in
the case of the great majority of wage earners, they are only rarely
realised with regard to business men. In most instances the business
man who is unable to make living profits could become an employé, and
thus convert his right to a decent livelihood into a right to a living
wage. Even when no such alternative is open to him, he cannot claim a
strict right to living profits, for the second condition stated above
remains unfulfilled. The consuming public does not regard the business
function of such men as economically indispensable. Rather than pay
the higher prices necessary to provide living profits for the
inefficient business men, consumers will transfer their patronage to
the efficient competitors. Should the retail grocer, for example,
raise his prices in the effort to get living profits, his sales would
fall off to such an extent as to reduce his profits still lower. While
the consumers may be willing to fulfil their obligation of furnishing
living profits for all necessary grocers, they are not willing, nor
are they morally bound, to do so in the case of grocers whose
inability to command sufficient patronage at remunerative prices shows
that they are not necessary to the community. The consuming public
does not want to employ such business men at such a cost.

Nor is the State under obligation to ensure living profits for all
business men. To carry out such a policy, either by enforcing a
sufficiently high level of prices, or by subsidising those who fail to
obtain living profits, would be to compel the public to support
inefficiency.

In the foregoing paragraphs we have assumed that the inability of the
business men under consideration to get living profits is due to their
own lack of capacity as compared with their more efficient
competitors. When, however, their competitors are not more efficient,
but are enabled to undersell through the use of unfair methods, such
as adulteration of goods and oppression of labour, a different moral
situation is presented. Honest and humane business men undoubtedly
have a claim upon society to protection against such unfair
competition. And the consumers are under obligation to make reasonable
efforts to withhold their patronage from those business men who
practise dishonesty and extortion.


_The Question of Superfluous Business Men_

Although we have rejected as impractical the proposal to set a legal
limit to profit-incomes, we have to admit that many of the abler
business men would continue to do their best work even if the profits
that they could hope to obtain were considerably smaller in volume.
These men hold a strategic position in industry, inasmuch as they are
not subject to the same degree of constant competition as the other
agents of production.[164] Were the supply of superior business
capacity more plentiful, their rewards would be automatically reduced,
and the burden of profits resting upon society would be to that extent
diminished. On the other hand, the number of mediocre business men,
especially in the distributive industries, is much larger than is
necessary to supply the wants of the community. This constitutes a
second unnecessary volume of payments under the head of profits. Is
there no way by which these wastes can be reduced?

The volume of exceptionally large profits could be diminished by an
extension of the facilities of technical and industrial education.
Thus the number of persons qualifying as superior business men could
be gradually increased, competition among this class of men would be
intensified, and their rewards correspondingly diminished.

The profits that go to superfluous business men, especially in the
class known as middlemen, can be largely eliminated through
combination and co-operation. The tendency to unite into a single
concern a large number of small and inefficient enterprises should be
encouraged up to the point at which the combination threatens to
become a monopoly. That this process is capable of effecting a
considerable saving in business profits as well as in capital, has
been amply demonstrated in several different lines of enterprise. As
we have seen in a preceding chapter, the co-operative movement,
whether in banking, agriculture, or stores, has been distinctly
successful in reducing profits. Millions of dollars are thus diverted
every year from unnecessary profit-receivers to labourers, consumers,
and to the man of small resources generally. Yet the co-operative
movement is only in its infancy. It contains the possibility of
eliminating entirely the superfluous business man, and even of
diminishing considerably the excessive profits of the exceptionally
able business man.

FOOTNOTES:

[163] Cf. pp. 212, 213 of Castelein's "Philosophia Moralis et
Socialis."

[164] Cf. Hobson, "The Industrial System," chapter on "Ability."




