CHAPTER XXIII

THE MINIMUM OF JUSTICE: A LIVING WAGE


Although the principle of needs is somewhat prominent among the
theories of wage justice, it received only incidental mention in the
last chapter. Considered as a comprehensive rule, this principle has
been defended with less energy and definiteness than most of the other
canons. Considered as a partial rule, it is sound and fundamental, and
therefore could not have been classed among theories that are
unacceptable.


_The Principle of Needs_

Many of the early French Socialists of the Utopian school advanced
this formula of distribution: "From each according to his powers; to
each according to his needs." It was also put forward by the German
Socialists in the Gotha Program in 1875. While they have not given to
this standard formal recognition in their more recent platforms,
Socialists generally regard it as the ideal rule for the distant
future.[242] The difficulties confronting it are so great and so
obvious that they would defer the introduction of it to a time when
the operation of their system will, they hope, have eradicated the
historical human qualities of laziness and selfishness. To adopt needs
as the sole rule of distribution would mean, of course, that each
person should be rewarded in proportion to his wants and desires,
regardless of his efforts or of the amount that he had produced. The
mere statement of the proposal is sufficient to refute it as regards
the men and women of whom we have any knowledge. In addition to this
objection, there is the insuperable difficulty of measuring fairly or
accurately the relative needs of any group composed of men, women, and
children. Were the members' own estimates of their needs accepted by
the distributing authority, the social product would no doubt fall far
short of supplying all. If the measurement were made by some official
person or persons, "the prospect of jobbery and tyranny opened up must
give the most fanatical pause." Indeed, the standard of needs should
be regarded as a canon of Communism rather than of Socialism; for it
implies a large measure of common life as well as of common ownership,
and paternalistic supervision of consumption as well as collectivist
management of production.

While the formula of needs must be flatly rejected as complete rule of
distributive justice, or of wage justice, it is valid and
indispensable as a partial standard. It is a partial measure of
justice in two senses: first, inasmuch as it is consistent with the
admission and operation of other principles, such as productivity and
sacrifice; second, inasmuch as it can be restricted to certain
fundamental requisites of life, instead of being applied to all
possible human needs. It can be made to safeguard the minimum demands
of reasonable life, and therefore to function as a minimum standard of
wage justice.

Human needs constitute the primary title or claim to material goods.
None of the other recognised titles, such as productivity, effort,
sacrifice, purchase, gift, inheritance, or first occupancy, is a
fundamental reason or justification of either rewards or possessions.
They all assume the existence of needs as a prerequisite to their
validity. If men did not need goods they could not reasonably lay
claim to them by any of the specific titles just enumerated. First
comes the general claim or fact of needs; then the particular title
or method by which the needs may be conveniently supplied. While these
statements may seem elementary and platitudinous, their practical
value will be quite evident when we come to consider the conflicting
claims that sometimes arise out of the clash between needs and some of
the other titles. We shall see that needs are not merely a physical
reason or impulse toward acquisition and possession, but a moral title
which rationalises the claim to a certain amount of goods.[243]


_Three Fundamental Principles_

The validity of needs as a partial rule of wage justice rests
ultimately upon three fundamental principles regarding man's position
in the universe. The first is that God created the earth for the
sustenance of _all_ His children; therefore, that all persons are
equal in their inherent claims upon the bounty of nature. As it is
impossible to demonstrate that any class of persons is less important
than another in the eyes of God, it is logically impossible for any
believer in Divine Providence to reject this proposition. The man who
denies God or Providence can refuse assent to the second part of the
proposition only by refusing to acknowledge the personal dignity of
the human individual, and the equal dignity of all persons. Inasmuch
as the human person is intrinsically sacred and morally independent,
he is endowed with those inherent prerogatives, immunities, and claims
that we call rights. Every person is an end in himself; none is a mere
instrument to the convenience or welfare of any other human being. The
worth of a person is something intrinsic, derived from within, not
determined or measurable by reference to any earthly object or purpose
without. In this respect the human being differs infinitely from, is
infinitely superior to, a stone, a rose, or a horse. While these
statements help to illustrate what is meant by the dignity of
personality, by the intrinsic worth, importance, sacredness of the
human being, they do not prove the existence of this inherent
juridical quality. Proof in the strict sense is irrelevant and
impossible. If the intrinsic and equal moral worth of all persons be
not self evident to a man, it will not approve itself to him through
any process of argumentation. Whosoever denies it can also logically
deny men's equal claims of access to the bounty of the earth; but he
cannot escape the alternative conclusion that brute force, exercised
either by the State or by individuals, is the only proper determinant
of possessions and of property. Against this monstrous contention it
is not worth while to offer a formal argument.

The second fundamental principle is that the inherent right of access
to the earth is conditioned upon, and becomes actually valid through,
the expenditure of useful labour. Generally speaking the fruits and
potentialities of the earth do not become available to men without
previous exertion. "In the sweat of thy brow thou shalt eat thy
bread," is a physical no less than a moral commandment. There are,
indeed, exceptions: the very young, the infirm, and the possessors of
a sufficient amount of property. The two former classes have claims to
a livelihood through piety and charity, while the third group has at
least a presumptive claim of justice to rent and interest, and a
certain claim of justice to the money value of their goods.
Nevertheless, the general condition is that men must work in order to
live. "If a man will not work neither shall he eat." For those who
refuse to comply with this condition the inherent right of access to
the earth remains only hypothetical and suspended.

The two foregoing principles involve as a corollary a third principle;
the men who are in present control of the opportunities of the earth
are obliged to permit reasonable access to these opportunities by
persons who are willing to work. In other words, possessors must so
administer the common bounty of nature that non-owners will not find
it unreasonably difficult to get a livelihood. To put it still in
other terms, the right to subsist from the earth implies the right to
access thereto on reasonable terms. When any man who is willing to
work is denied the exercise of this right, he is no longer treated as
the moral and juridical equal of his fellows. He is regarded as
inherently inferior to them, as a mere instrument to their
convenience; and those who exclude him are virtually taking the
position that their rights to the common gifts of the Creator are
inherently superior to his birthright. Obviously this position cannot
be defended on grounds of reason. Possessors are no more justified in
excluding a man from reasonable access to the goods of the earth than
they would be in depriving him of the liberty to move from place to
place. The community that should arbitrarily shut a man up in prison
would not violate his rights more fundamentally than the community or
the proprietors who should shut him out from the opportunity of
getting a livelihood from the bounty of the earth. In both cases the
man demands and has a right to a common gift of God. His moral claim
is as valid to the one good as to the other, and it is as valid to
both goods as is the claim of any of his fellows.


_The Right to a Decent Livelihood_

Every man who is willing to work has, therefore, an inborn right to
sustenance from the earth on reasonable terms or conditions. This
cannot mean that all persons have a right to equal amounts of
sustenance or income; for we have seen on a preceding page that men's
needs, the primary title to property, are not equal, and that other
canons and factors of distribution have to be allowed some weight in
determining the division of goods and opportunities. Nevertheless,
there is a certain minimum of goods to which every worker is entitled
by reason of his inherent right of access to the earth. He has a right
to at least a _decent_ livelihood. That is; he has a right to so much
of the requisites of sustenance as will enable him to live in a manner
worthy of a human being. The elements of a decent livelihood may be
summarily described as: food, clothing, and housing sufficient in
quantity and quality to maintain the worker in normal health, in
elementary comfort, and in an environment suitable to the protection
of morality and religion; sufficient provision for the future to bring
elementary contentment, and security against sickness, accident, and
invalidity; and sufficient opportunities of recreation, social
intercourse, education, and church-membership to conserve health and
strength, and to render possible in some degree the exercise of the
higher faculties.

On what ground is it contended that a worker has a right to a decent
livelihood, as thus defined, rather than to a bare subsistence? On the
same ground that validates his right to life, marriage, or any of the
other fundamental goods of human existence. On the dignity of
personality. Why is it wrong and unjust to kill or maim an innocent
man? Because human life and the human person possess intrinsic worth;
because personality is sacred. But the intrinsic worth and sacredness
of personality imply something more than security of life and limb,
and the material means of bare existence. The man who is not provided
with the requisites of normal health, efficiency, and contentment
lives a maimed life, not a reasonable life. His physical condition is
not worthy of a human being. Furthermore, man's personal dignity
demands not merely the conditions of reasonable physical existence,
but the opportunity of pursuing self perfection through the harmonious
development of all his faculties. Unlike the brutes, he is endowed
with a rational soul, and the capacity of indefinite self
improvement. A due regard to these endowments requires that man shall
have the opportunity of becoming not only physically stronger, but
intellectually wiser, morally better, and spiritually nearer to God.
If he is deprived of these opportunities he cannot realise the
potentialities of his nature nor attain the divinely appointed end of
his nature. He remains on the plane of the lower animals. His
personality is violated quite as fundamentally as when his body is
injured or his life destroyed.

While it is impossible to define with mathematical precision the
degree of personal development that is necessary to satisfy the claims
of personal dignity, it is entirely practicable to state with
sufficient definiteness the minimum conditions of such development.
They are that quantity of goods and opportunities which fair-minded
men would regard as indispensable to humane, efficient, and reasonable
life. The summary description of a decent livelihood at the end of the
second last paragraph, would probably be accepted by all men who
really believe in the intrinsic worth of personality.


_The Claim to a Decent Livelihood from a Present Occupation_

The claim of a worker to a decent livelihood from the goods of the
earth does not always imply a strict right to a livelihood from one's
present occupation. To demand this would in some circumstances be to
demand a livelihood not on reasonable but on unreasonable terms; for
the persons in control of the sources could not reasonably be required
to provide a decent livelihood. Their failure to do so would not
constitute an unreasonable hindrance to the worker's access to the
earth in such circumstances. In chapter xvi we saw that not all
business men have a strict right to that minimum of profits which is
required to yield them a decent livelihood: first, because the
direction of industry is not generally the business man's only means
of getting a living; second, because the community, the consumers, do
not regard the presence and activity of all existing business men as
indispensable. Of course, the community is morally bound to pay such
prices for goods as will enable all the necessary business men,
whether manufacturers or traders, to obtain a decent livelihood in
return for their directive functions; but it is not obliged to provide
a livelihood for those business men whose presence is not required,
who could vanish from the field of industrial direction without
affecting either the supply or the price of goods, and whose
superfluous character is proved by the fact that they cannot make a
livelihood at the prevailing prices. They are in the position of
persons whom the community does not desire to employ as business men.
In refusing to pay prices sufficiently high to provide these
inefficient business men with a decent livelihood, the community is
not unreasonably hindering their access to the common goods of the
earth. Such men are really demanding a livelihood on unreasonable
terms.


_The Labourer's Right to a Living Wage_

On the other hand, the wage earner's claim to a decent livelihood is
valid, generally speaking, in his present occupation. In other words,
his right to a decent livelihood in the abstract means in the concrete
a right to a living wage. To present the matter in its simplest terms,
let us consider first the adult male labourer of average physical and
mental ability who is charged with the support of no one but himself,
and let us assume that the industrial resources are adequate to such a
wage for all the members of his class. Those who are in control of the
resources of the community are morally bound to give such a labourer a
living wage. If they fail to do so they are unreasonably hindering his
access to a livelihood on reasonable terms; and his right to a
livelihood on reasonable terms is violated. The central consideration
here is evidently the _reasonableness_ of the process. Unlike the
business man, the rent receiver, and the interest receiver, the
labourer has ordinarily no other means of livelihood than his wages.
If these do not furnish him with a decent subsistence he is deprived
of a decent subsistence. When he has performed an average day's work,
he has done all that is within his power to make good his claim to a
decent livelihood. On the other hand, the community is the beneficiary
of his labour, and desires his services. If, indeed, the community
would rather do without the services of an individual labourer than
pay him a living wage, it is morally free to choose the former
alternative, precisely as it is justified in refusing to pay a price
for groceries that will enable an inefficient grocer to obtain living
profits. Whatever concrete form the right of such persons to a decent
livelihood may take, it is not the right to living wages or living
profits from the occupations in question. Here, however, we are
discussing the labourer to whom the community would rather pay a
living wage than not employ him at all. To refuse such a one a living
wage merely because he can be constrained by economic pressure to work
for less, is to treat him unreasonably, is to deprive him of access to
a livelihood on reasonable terms. Such treatment regards the labourer
as inferior to his fellows in personal worth, as a mere instrument to
their convenience. It is an unreasonable distribution of the goods and
opportunities of the earth.

Obviously there is no formula by which such conduct can be
mathematically demonstrated as unreasonable; but the proposition is as
certain morally as any other proposition that is susceptible of
rational defence in the field of distribution. No man who accepts the
three fundamental principles stated some pages back, can deny the
right of the labourer to a living wage. The man who does not accept
them must hold that all property rights are the arbitrary creation of
the State, or that there is no such thing as a moral right to
material goods. In either supposition the distribution and possession
of the earth's bounty are subject entirely to the arbitrament of
might. There is nothing to be gained by a formal criticism of this
assumption.

What persons, or group, or authority is charged with the obligation
which corresponds to the right to a living wage? We have referred to
"the community" in this connection, but we do not mean the community
in its corporate capacity, i.e., the State. As regards private
employments, the State is not obliged to pay a living wage, nor any
other kind of wage, since it has not assumed the wage-paying function
with respect to these labourers. As protector of natural rights, and
as the fundamental determiner of industrial institutions, the State is
obliged to enact laws which will enable the labourer to obtain a
living wage; but the duty of actually providing this measure of
remuneration rests upon that class which has assumed the wage-paying
function. This is the employers. In our present industrial system, the
employer is society's paymaster. He, not the State, receives the
product out of which all the agents of production must be rewarded.
Where the labourer is engaged in rendering personal services to his
employer, the latter is the only beneficiary of the labourer's
activity. In either case the employer is the only person upon whom the
obligation of paying a living wage can primarily fall.

If the State were in receipt of the product of industry, the
wage-paying fund, it would naturally be charged with the obligation
that now rests immediately upon the employer. If any other class in
the community were the owners of the product that class would be under
this specific obligation. As things are, the employer is in possession
of the product, and discharges the function of wage payer;
consequently he is the person who is required to perform this function
in a reasonable manner.


_When the Employer Is Unable to Pay a Living Wage_

Evidently the employer who cannot pay a living wage is not obliged to
do so, since moral duties suppose a corresponding physical capacity.
In such circumstances the labourer's right to a living wage becomes
suspended and hypothetical, just as the claim of a creditor when the
debtor becomes insolvent. Let us see, however, precisely what meaning
should reasonably be given to the phrase, "inability to pay a living
wage."

An employer is not obliged to pay a full living wage to all his
employés so long as that action would deprive himself and his family
of a decent livelihood. As active director of a business, the employer
has quite as good a right as the labourer to a decent livelihood from
the product, and in case of conflict between the two rights, the
employer may take advantage of that principle of charity which permits
a man to prefer himself to his neighbour, when the choice refers to
goods of the same order of importance. Moreover, the employer is
justified in taking from the product sufficient to support a somewhat
higher scale of living than generally prevails among his employés; for
he has become accustomed to this higher standard, and would suffer a
considerable hardship if compelled to fall notably below it. It is
reasonable, therefore, that he should have the means of maintaining
himself and family in moderate conformity with their customary
standard of living; but it is unreasonable that they should indulge in
anything like luxurious expenditure, so long as any of the employés
fail to receive living wages.

Suppose that an employer cannot pay all his employés living wages and
at the same time provide the normal rate of interest on the capital in
the business. So far as the borrowed capital is concerned, the
business man has no choice; he must pay the stipulated rate of
interest, even though it prevents him from giving a living wage to
all his employés. Nor can it be reasonably contended that the loan
capitalist in that case is obliged to forego the interest due him. He
cannot be certain that this interest payment, or any part of it, is
really necessary to make up what is wanting to a complete scale of
living wages. The employer would be under great temptation to defraud
the loan capitalist on the pretext of doing justice to the labourer,
or to conduct his business inefficiently at the expense of the loan
capitalist. Anyhow, the latter is under no obligation to leave his
money in a concern that is unable to pay him interest regularly. The
general rule, then, would seem to be that the loan capitalist is not
obliged to refrain from taking interest in order that the employés may
have living wages.

Is the employer justified in withholding the full living wage from his
employés to provide himself with the normal rate of interest on the
capital that he has invested in the enterprise? Speaking generally, he
is not. In the first place, the right to any interest at all, except
as a return for genuine sacrifices in saving, is not certain but only
presumptive.[244] Consequently it has no such firm and definite basis
as the right to a living wage. In the second place, the right to
interest, be it ever so definite and certain, is greatly inferior in
force and urgency. It is an axiom of ethics that when two rights
conflict, the less important must give way to the more important.
Since all property rights are but means to the satisfaction of human
needs, their relative importance is determined by the relative
importance of the ends that they serve; that is, by the relative
importance of the dependent needs. Now the needs that are supplied
through interest on the employer's capital are slight and not
essential to his welfare; the needs that are supplied through a living
wage are essential to a reasonable life for the labourer. On the
assumption that the employer has already taken from the product
sufficient to provide a decent livelihood, interest on his capital
will be expended for luxuries or converted into new investments; a
living wage for the labourer will all be required for the fundamental
goods of life, physical, mental, or moral. Evidently, then, the right
to interest is inferior to the right to a living wage. To proceed on
the contrary theory is to reverse the order of nature and reason, and
to subordinate essential needs and welfare to unessential needs and
welfare.

Nor can it be maintained that the capitalist-employer's claim to
interest is a claim upon the product prior to and independent of the
claim of the labourer to a living wage. That would be begging the
question. The product is in a fundamental sense the common property of
employer and employés. Both parties have co-operated in turning it
out, and they have equal claims upon it, in so far as it is necessary
to yield them a decent livelihood. Having taken therefrom the
requisites of a decent livelihood for himself, the employer who
appropriates interest at the expense of a decent livelihood for his
employés, in effect treats their claims upon the common and joint
product as essentially inferior to his own. If this assumption were
correct it would mean that the primary and essential needs of the
employés are of less intrinsic importance than the superficial needs
of the employer, and that the employés themselves are a lower order of
being than the employer. The incontestable fact is that such an
employer deprives the labourers of access to the goods of the earth on
reasonable terms, and gives himself an access thereto that is
unreasonable.

Suppose that all employers who found themselves unable to pay full
living wages and obtain the normal rate of interest, should dispose of
their businesses and become mere loan capitalists, would the condition
of the underpaid workers be improved? Two effects would be certain: an
increase in the supply of loan capital relatively to the demand, and
a decrease in the number of active business men. The first would
probably lead to a decline in the rate of interest, while the second
might or might not result in a diminution of the volume of products.
If the rate of interest were lowered the employing business men would
be able to raise wages; if the prices of products rose a further
increase of wages would become possible. However, it is not certain
that prices would rise; for the business men who remained would be the
more efficient in their respective classes, and might well be capable
of producing all the goods that had been previously supplied by their
eliminated competitors. Owing to their superior efficiency and their
larger output, the existing business men would be able to pay
considerably higher wages than those who had disappeared from the
field of industrial direction. As things are to-day, it is the less
efficient business men who are unable to pay living wages and at the
same time obtain the prevailing rate of interest on their capital. The
ultimate result, therefore, of the withdrawal from business of those
who could not pay a living wage, would probably be the universal
establishment of a living wage.

Of course, this supposition is purely fanciful. Only a small minority
of the business men of to-day are likely to be driven by their
consciences either to pay a living wage at the cost of interest on
their capital, or to withdraw from business when they are confronted
with such a situation. Is this small minority under moral obligation
to adopt either of these alternatives, when the effect of such action
upon the great mass of the underpaid workers is likely to be very
slight? The question would seem to demand an answer in the
affirmative. Those employers who paid a living wage at the expense of
interest would confer a concrete benefit of great value upon a group
of human beings. Those who shrank from this sacrifice, and preferred
to go out of business, would at least have ceased to co-operate in an
unjust distribution of wealth, and their example would not be
entirely without effect upon the views of their fellow employers.


_An Objection and Some Difficulties_

Against the foregoing argument it may be objected that the employer
does his full duty when he pays the labourer the full value of the
product or service. Labour is a commodity of which wages are the
price; and the price is just if it is the fair equivalent of the
labour. Like any other onerous contract, the sale of labour is
governed by the requirements of commutative justice; and these are
satisfied when labour is sold for its moral equivalent. What the
employer is interested in and pays for, is the labourer's activity.
There is no reason why he should take into account such an extrinsic
consideration as the labourer's livelihood.

Most of these assertions are correct, platitudinously correct, but
they yield us no specific guidance because they use language vaguely
and even ambiguously. The contention underlying them was adequately
refuted in the last chapter, under the heads of theories of value and
theories of exchange equivalence. At present it will be sufficient to
repeat summarily the following points: if the value of labour is to be
understood in a purely economic sense it means market value, which is
obviously not a universal measure of justice; if by the value of
labour we mean its ethical value we cannot determine it in any
particular case merely by comparing labour and compensation; we are
compelled to have recourse to some extrinsic ethical principle; such
an extrinsic principle is found in the proposition that the personal
dignity of the labourer entitles him to a wage adequate to a decent
livelihood; therefore, the ethical value of labour is always
equivalent to at least a living wage, and the employer is morally
bound to give this much remuneration.

Moreover, the habit of looking at the wage contract as a matter of
commutative justice in the mere sense of contractual justice, is
radically defective. The transaction between employé and employer
involves other questions of justice than that which arises immediately
out of the relation between the things exchanged. When a borrower
repays a loan of ten dollars, he fulfils the obligation of justice
because he returns the full equivalent of the article that he
received. Nothing else is pertinent to the question of justice in this
transaction. Neither the wealth nor the poverty, the goodness nor the
badness, nor any other quality of either lender or borrower, has a
bearing on the justice of the act of repayment. In the wage contract,
and in every other contract that involves the distribution of the
common bounty of nature, or of the social product, the juridical
situation is vitally different from the transaction that we have just
considered. The employer has obligations of justice, not merely as the
receiver of a valuable thing through an onerous contract, but as the
_distributor_ of the common heritage of nature. His duty is not merely
contractual, but social. He fulfils not only an individual contract,
but a social function. Unless he performs this social and distributive
function in accordance with justice, he does not adequately discharge
the obligation of the wage contract. For the product out of which he
pays wages is not his in the same sense as the personal income out of
which he repays a loan. His claim upon the product is subject to the
obligation of just distribution; the obligation of so distributing the
product that the labourers who have contributed to the product shall
not be denied their right to a decent livelihood on reasonable terms
from the bounty of the earth. On the other hand, the activity of the
labourer is not a mere commodity, as money or pork; it is the output
of a _person_, and a person who has no other means of realising his
inherent right to a livelihood. Consequently, both terms of the
contract, the labour and the compensation, involve other elements of
justice than that which arises out of their assumed mutual
equivalence.

In a word, justice requires the employer not merely to give an
equivalent for labour (an equivalent which is determined by some
arbitrary, conventional, fantastic, or impossible attempt to compare
work and pay) but to fulfil his obligation of justly distributing that
part of the common bounty of the earth which comes into his hands by
virtue of his social function in the industrial process. How futile,
then, to endeavour by word juggling to describe the employer's
obligation in terms of mere equivalence and contractual justice!

Some difficulties occur in connection with the wage rights of adult
males whose ability is below the average, and female and child
workers. Since the dignity and the needs of personality constitute the
moral basis of the claim to a decent livelihood, it would seem that
the inefficient worker who does his best is entitled to a living wage.
Undoubtedly he has such a right if it can be effectuated in the
existing industrial organisation. As already noted, the right of the
workman of average ability to a living wage does not become actual
until he finds an employer who would rather give him that much pay
than do without his services. Since the obligation of paying a living
wage is not an obligation to employ any particular worker, an employer
may refrain from hiring or may discharge any labourer who does not add
to the product sufficient value to provide his wages. For the employer
cannot reasonably be expected to employ any one at a positive loss to
himself. Whence it follows that he may pay less than living wages to
any worker whose services he would rather dispense with than
remunerate at that figure.[245]

Women and young persons who regularly perform a full day's work, have
a right to compensation adequate to a decent livelihood. In the case
of minors, this means living at home, since this is the normal
condition of all, and the actual condition of almost all. Adult
females have a right to a wage sufficient to maintain them away from
home, because a considerable proportion of them live in this
condition. If employers were morally free to pay home-dwelling women
less than those adrift, they would endeavour to employ only the
former. This would create a very undesirable social situation. The
number of women away from home who are forced to earn their own living
is sufficiently large (20 to 25 per cent. of the whole) to make it
reasonable that for their sakes the wage of all working women should
be determined by the cost of living outside the parental precincts.
This is one of the social obligations that reasonably falls upon the
employer on account of his function in the present industrial system.
In all the American minimum wage laws, the standard of payment is
determined by the cost of living away from home. Besides, the
difference between the living costs of women in the two conditions is
not nearly as great as is commonly assumed. Probably it never amounts
to a dollar a week.


_The Family Living Wage_

Up to the present we have been considering the right of the labourer
to a wage adequate to a decent livelihood for himself as an
individual. In the case of an adult male, however, this is not
sufficient for normal life, nor for the reasonable development of
personality. The great majority of men cannot live well balanced
lives, cannot attain a reasonable degree of self development outside
the married state. Therefore, family life is among the essential
needs of a normal and reasonable existence. It is not, indeed, so
vitally necessary as the primary requisites of individual life, such
as food, clothing, and shelter, but it is second only to these.
Outside the family man cannot, as a rule, command that degree of
contentment, moral strength, and moral safety which are necessary for
reasonable and efficient living. It is unnecessary to labour this
point further, as very few would assert that the average man can live
a normal and complete human life without marriage.

Now, the support of the family falls properly upon the husband and
father, not upon the wife and mother. The obligation of the father to
provide a livelihood for the wife and young children is quite as
definite as his obligation to maintain himself. If he has not the
means to discharge this obligation he is not justified in getting
married. Yet, as we have just seen, marriage is essential to normal
life for the great majority of men. Therefore, the material requisites
of normal life for the average adult male, include provision for his
family. In other words, his decent livelihood means a family
livelihood. Consequently, he has a right to obtain such a livelihood
on reasonable terms from the bounty of the earth. In the case of the
wage earner, this right can be effectuated only through wages;
therefore, the adult male labourer has a right to a family living
wage. If he does not get this measure of remuneration his personal
dignity is violated, and he is deprived of access to the goods of the
earth, quite as certainly as when his wage is inadequate to personal
maintenance. The difference between family needs and personal needs is
a difference only of degree. The satisfaction of both is indispensable
to his reasonable life.

Just as the woman worker who lives with her parents has a right to a
wage sufficient to maintain her away from home, so the unmarried adult
male has a right to a family living wage. If only married men get the
latter wage they will be discriminated against in the matter of
employment. To prevent this obviously undesirable condition, it is
necessary that a family living wage be recognised as the right of all
adult male workers. No other arrangement is reasonable in our present
industrial system. In a competitive régime the standard wage for both
the married and the unmarried men is necessarily the same. It will be
determined by the living costs of either the one class or the other.
At present the wage of the unskilled is unfortunately adjusted to the
subsistence cost of the man who is not married. Since two prevailing
scales of wages are impossible, the remuneration of the unmarried must
in the interests of justice to the married be raised to the living
costs of the latter. Moreover, the unmarried labourer needs more than
an individual living wage in order to save sufficient money to enter
upon the responsibilities of matrimony.

Only two objections of any importance can be brought against the male
labourer's claim to a family living wage. The first is that just wages
are to be measured by the value of the labour performed, and not by
such an extrinsic consideration as the needs of a family. It has
already been answered in this and the preceding chapters. Not the
economic but the ethical value of the service rendered, is the proper
determinant of justice in the matter of wages; and this ethical value
is always the equivalent of at least a decent livelihood for the
labourer and his family. According to the second objection, the
members of the labourer's family have no claim upon the employer,
since they do not participate in the work that is remunerated. This
contention is valid, but it is also irrelevant. The claim of the
labourer's family to sustenance is directly upon him, not upon his
employer; but the labourer has a just claim upon the employer for the
means of meeting the claims of his family. His right to this amount of
remuneration is directly based neither upon the needs nor the rights
of his family, but upon his own needs, upon the fact that family
conditions are indispensable to his own normal life. If the wife and
young children were self supporting, or were maintained by the State,
the wage rights of the father would not include provision for the
family. Since, however, family life involves support by the father,
the labourer's right to such a life necessarily includes the right to
a wage adequate to family support.


_Other Arguments in Favour of a Living Wage_

Thus far, the argument has been based upon individual natural rights.
If we give up the doctrine of natural rights, and assume that all the
rights of the individual come to him from the State, we must admit
that the State has the power to withhold and withdraw all rights from
any and all persons. Its grant of rights will be determined solely by
considerations of social utility. In the concrete this means that some
citizens may be regarded as essentially inferior to other citizens,
that some may properly be treated as mere instruments to the
convenience of others. Or it means that all citizens may be completely
subordinated to the aggrandisement of an abstract entity, called the
State. Neither of these positions is logically defensible. No group of
persons has less intrinsic worth than another; and the State has no
rational significance apart from its component individuals.

Nevertheless, a valid argument for the living wage can be set up on
grounds of social welfare. A careful and comprehensive examination of
the evil consequences to society and the State from the under-payment
of any group of labourers, would show that a universal living wage is
the only sound social policy. Among competent social students, this
proposition has become a commonplace. It will not be denied by any
intelligent person who considers seriously the influence of low wages
in diminishing the efficiency, physical, mental, and moral, of the
workers; in increasing the volume of crime, and the social cost of
meeting it; in the immense social outlay for the relief of unnecessary
poverty, sickness, and other forms of distress; and in the formation
of a large and discontented proletariat.[246]

The living wage doctrine also receives strong support from various
kinds of authority. Of these the most important and best known is the
famous encyclical, "On the Condition of Labour," May 15, 1891, by Pope
Leo XIII. "Let it then be granted that workman and employer should, as
a rule, make free agreements, and in particular should agree freely as
to wages; nevertheless, there is a dictate of natural justice more
imperious and ancient than any bargain between man and man; namely,
that the remuneration should be sufficient to maintain the wage earner
and reasonable and frugal comfort." Although the Pope refrained from
specifying whether the living wage that he had in mind was one
adequate merely to an individual livelihood, or sufficient to support
a family, other passages in the Encyclical leave no room for doubt
that he regarded the latter as the normal and equitable measure of
remuneration. Within a dozen lines of the sentence quoted above, he
made this statement: "If the workman's wages be sufficient to maintain
himself, his wife, and his children in reasonable comfort, he will not
find it difficult, if he be a sensible man, to practise thrift; and he
will not fail, by cutting down expenses, to put by some little savings
and thus secure a small income."

All lesser Catholic authorities hold that the adult male labourer has
some kind of moral claim to a family living wage. In all probability
the majority of them regard this claim as one of strict justice, while
the minority would put it under the head of legal justice, or natural
equity, or charity. The differences between their views are not as
important as the agreements; for all the Catholic writers maintain
that the worker's claim is strictly moral in its nature, and that the
corresponding obligation upon the employer is likewise of a moral
character.

The Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America, representing
the principal Protestant denominations, has formally declared in
favour of "a living wage as a minimum in every industry."

Public opinion likewise accepts the principle of a living wage as the
irreducible minimum of fair treatment for all workers. Indeed, it
would be difficult to find any important person in any walk of life
to-day who would have the temerity to deny that the labourer is
entitled to a wage sufficient for reasonable family life. Among
employers the opinion is fairly general that the narrow margin of
profit in competitive industries renders the burden of paying a family
living wage to all adult males unfairly heavy; but the assertion that
the wage contract is merely an economic transaction, having no
relation to justice, is scarcely ever uttered publicly.


_The Money Measure of a Living Wage_

For self-supporting women a living wage is not less than eight dollars
per week in any city of the United States, and in some of our larger
cities it is from one to two dollars above this figure. The state
minimum wage commissions that have acted in the matter, have fixed the
rates not lower than eight nor higher than ten dollars per week.[247]
These determinations are in substantial agreement with a large number
of other estimates, both official and unofficial.

When the present writer was making an estimate of the cost of decent
living for a family about eleven years ago, he came to the conclusion
that six hundred dollars per year was the lowest amount that would
maintain a man and wife and four or five small children in any American
city, and that this sum was insufficient in some of the larger
cities.[248] Since that time retail prices seem to have risen at least
twenty-five and possibly forty-five per cent.[249] If the six hundred
dollar minimum were correct in 1905 it should, therefore, be increased
to seven hundred and fifty dollars to meet the present range of prices.
That this estimate is too low for some of the more populous cities, has
been fully proved by several recent investigations. In 1915 the Bureau
of Standards put the minimum cost of living for a family of five in New
York City at $840.18. About the same time the New York Factory
Investigating Commission gave the estimate of $876.43 for New York
City, and $772.43 for Buffalo. In 1908, when the cost of living was
from ten to thirty per cent. cheaper than to-day, the United States
Bureau of Labour found that, "according to the customs prevailing in
the communities selected for study," a fair standard of living for a
family of five persons among mill workers, was $600.74 in the South,
and from $690.60 to $731.64 in Fall River, Massachusetts.[250]

According to the "Manly Report" of the Federal Commission on
Industrial Relations, between two-thirds and three-fourths of the
adult male labourers of the United States receive less than $750.00 a
year, and the same proportion of women workers are paid under eight
dollars a week. A considerable majority, therefore, of both male and
female labourers fail to obtain living wages. We are still very far
from having actualised even the minimum measure of wage justice.

FOOTNOTES:

[242] Cf. Skelton, "Socialism: A Critical Analysis," p. 202; Menger,
"The Right to the Whole Produce of Labour," pp. 8, sq.

[243] All the questions treated in this chapter are discussed at much
greater length in the author's work, "A Living Wage"; Macmillan; 1906.

[244] See chapters xii and xiii.

[245] While the statement in the text applies to _all_ labourers of
less than average ability, it obviously is applicable only to
individual cases among those who are up to the average. These are the
workers at the "margin" of the labour force in an establishment, those
who could be discharged without causing the industry to shut down. If
an employer would rather go out of business than pay a living wage to
all his necessary labourers of average ability, he is morally free to
do so; but he may not employ them at less than living wages in order
to obtain interest on his capital.

[246] One of the best statements of the evil social results of low
wages will be found in Webb's "Industrial Democracy," vol. II, pp.
749-766.

[247] See reports of these commissions in Oregon, Washington,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, and California.

[248] "A Living Wage," p. 150.

[249] See Bulletins of the Federal Bureau of Labour Statistics on
"Retail Prices"; and Nearing, "Reducing the Cost of Living."

[250] "Summary of the Report on Condition of Woman and Child Wage
Earners in the United States," pp. 383, 384. The best intensive study
of family cost of living is that published in the volume edited by
Robert C. Chapin, "The Standard of Living Among Workingmen's Families
in New York City"; 1909. It led to the conclusion that anything less
than eight hundred dollars was insufficient for the yearly maintenance
of a husband and wife and three small children in Manhattan.




