CHAPTER XV

THE NATURE OF PROFITS


We have seen that rent goes to the landlord as the price of land use,
while interest is received by the capitalist as the return for the use
of capital. The two shares of the product which remain to be
considered include an element which is absent from both rent and
interest. The use for which profits and wages are paid comprises not
merely the utilisation of a productive factor, but the sustained
exertion of the factor's owner. Like the landowner and the capitalist,
the business man and the labourer put the productive factors which
they control at the disposal of the industrial process; but they do so
only when and so long as they exercise human activity. The shares that
they receive are payments for the continuous output of human energy.
No such significance attaches to rent or interest.


_The Functions and Rewards of the Business Man_

Who is the business man, and what is the nature of his share of the
product of industry? Let us suppose that the salaried manager of a hat
factory decides to set up a business of the same kind for himself. He
wishes to become an entrepreneur, an undertaker, a director of
industry, in more familiar language, a business man. Let us assume
that he is without money, but that he commands extraordinary financial
credit. He is able to borrow half a million dollars with which to
organise, equip, and operate the new enterprise. Having selected a
favourable site, he rents it on a long term lease, and erects thereon
the necessary buildings. He installs all the necessary machinery and
other equipment, hires capable labour, and determines the kinds and
quantities of hats for which he thinks that he can find a market. At
the end of a year, he realises that, after paying for labour of all
sorts, returning interest to the capitalist and rent to the landowner,
defraying the cost of repairs, and setting aside a fund to cover
depreciation, he has left for himself the sum of ten thousand dollars.
This is the return for his labour of organisation and direction, and
for the risk that he underwent. It constitutes the share called
profits, sometimes specified as net profits.

This case is artificial, since it assumes that the business man is
neither capitalist nor landowner in addition to his function as
director of industry. It has, however, the advantage of distinguishing
quite sharply the action of the business man as such. For the latter
merely organises, directs, and takes the risks of the industrial
process, finds a market for the product, and receives in return
neither rent nor interest but only profits. In point of fact, however,
no one ever functions solely as business man. Always the business man
owns some of the capital, and very often some of the land involved in
his enterprise, and is the receiver not only of profits but of
interest and rent. Thus, the farmer is a business man, but he is also
a capitalist, and frequently a landowner. The grocer, the clothier,
the manufacturer, and even the lawyer and the doctor own a part at
least of the capital with which they operate, and sometimes they own
the land. Nevertheless their rewards as business men can always be
distinguished from their returns as capitalists and landowners by
finding out what remains after making due allowance for rent and
interest.

It is a fact that many business men, especially those directing the
smaller establishments, use the term profits to include rent and
interest on their own property. In other words, they describe their
entire income from the business as profits. In the present discussion,
and throughout this book generally, profits are to be understood as
comprising merely that part of the business man's returns which he
takes as the reward of his labour, and as insurance against the risks
affecting his enterprise. Deduct from the business man's total income
a sum which will cover interest on his capital at the prevailing rate
and rent on his land, and you have left his income as business man,
his profits.


_The Amount of Profits_

In a preceding chapter we have seen that where the conditions of
capital are the same, there exists a fairly uniform rate of interest.
No such uniformity obtains in the field of profits. Businesses subject
to the same risks and requiring the same kind of management yield very
different amounts of return to their directors. In a sense the
business man may be regarded as the residual claimant of industry.
This does not mean that he takes no profits until all the other agents
of production have been fully remunerated, but that his share remains
indeterminate until the end of the productive period, say, six months
or a year, while the shares of the other agents are determined
beforehand. At the end of the productive period, the business man may
find that his profits are large, moderate, or small, while the
landowner, the capitalist, and the labourer ordinarily obtain the
precise amounts of rent, interest, and wages that they had expected to
obtain. That there exists no definite upper limit to profits is proved
by the history of modern millionaires. That there exists no rigid
lower limit is proved by the large proportion of enterprises that meet
with failure.

Nevertheless it would be wrong to infer that the volume of profits is
governed by no law whatever, or that they show no tendency toward
uniformity in any part of the industrial field. There is a calculated
or preconceived minimum. No man will embark in business for himself
unless he has reason to expect that it will yield him, in addition to
protection against risks, an income as large as he could obtain by
hiring his services to some one else. In other words, contemplated
profits must be at least equal to the income of the salaried business
manager. No tendency toward uniformity of profits exists among very
large enterprises nor among industries which are constantly adopting
new methods and new inventions. In businesses of small and moderate
size, and in those whose methods have become standardised, such as a
retail grocery store, or a factory that turns out staple kinds of
shoes, profits tend to be about the same in the great majority of
establishments. In such industries the profits of the business man do
not often exceed the salary that he could command as general manager
for some one else in the same kind of business.

Professor King estimates the total volume of profits in the United
States in 1910 as almost eight and one-half billion dollars. This was
27.5 per cent. of the national product, as against 24.6 per cent. in
1890 and 30 per cent. in 1900.[160] He interprets the fall in the wage
earners' share which has taken place since 1890 (53.5 to 46.9 per
cent.) as indicating a considerable increase in the share of those
business men who control the very large industries. "The promoters and
manipulators of these concerns have received, as their share of the
spoils, permanent income claims, in the shape of securities, large
enough to make Croesus appear like a pauper."[161] Moreover, even
outside this monopoly field, the more able and successful business men
seem to have obtained in recent years what might be termed a
relatively large share of the product of industry. The exceptionally
efficient undertakers, those possessing the imagination, foresight,
judgment, and courage to take full advantage of the recent
improvements in the industrial arts, and in the methods of production
generally, seem to have advanced in wealth and income more rapidly
than any other class that has been subject to the operation of
competition.


_Profits in the Joint-Stock Company_

Up to this point we have been considering the independent business
man, the undertaker who manages his enterprise either alone or as a
member of a partnership. In all such concerns it is easy to identify
the business man. Who or where is the business man in a joint stock
company? Where are the profits, and who gets them?

Strictly speaking, there is no undertaker or business man in a
corporation. His functions of ownership, responsibility, and direction
are exercised by the whole body of stockholders through the board of
directors and other officers. It is true that in very many, probably
in most corporations, one or a very few of the largest stockholders
dominate the policies of the concern, and exercise almost as much
power and authority as though they were the sole owners. Neither
these, however, nor any other officer in a corporation receives
profits in the same sense as the independent owner of a business. For
their active services the officers of the corporation are given
salaries; for the risks that they undergo as owners of the stock they
are compensated in the same way as all the other stockholders, that
is, through a sufficiently high rate of dividend. For example, in
railroads the bonds usually pay from four to five per cent., the stock
from five to six per cent. The bonds represent borrowed money, and are
secured by a mortgage on the physical property. The stock represents
the money invested by the owners, and is subject to all the risks of
ownership; hence its holders require the protection which is afforded
by the extra one per cent. which they obtain over that paid to the
bondholders.

While a corporation has no profits in the sense of a reward for
directive activity or a protection against risk, it frequently
possesses profits in the sense of a surplus which remains after costs
and expenses of every kind have been defrayed. These profits are
ordinarily distributed pro rata among the stockholders, either
outright in the form of an extra dividend, or indirectly through
enlargement of the property and business of the company. They are
surplus gains or profits having the same intermittent and speculative
character as the extra gains which the individual business man
sometimes obtains in addition to those profits which are necessary to
remunerate him for his labour, and protect him against risks. They are
not profits in the ordinary economic sense of the term.

FOOTNOTES:

[160] "The Wealth and Income of the People of the United States," 158,
160.

[161] Idem, p. 218.




