CHAPTER XXV

METHODS OF INCREASING WAGES


Proposals for the reform of social conditions are important in
proportion to the magnitude of the evils which they are designed to
remove, and are desirable in proportion to their probable efficacy.
Applying these principles to the labour situation, we find that among
the remedies proposed the primacy must be accorded to a minimum wage.
It is the most important project for improving the condition of labour
because it would increase the compensation of some two-thirds of the
wage earners, and because the needs of this group are greater and more
urgent than the needs of the better-paid one-third. The former are
below the level of reasonable living, while the latter are merely
deprived of the opportunities of a more ample and liberal scale of
living. Hence the degree of injustice suffered by the former is much
greater than in the case of the latter. A legal minimum wage is the
most desirable single measure of industrial reform because it promises
a more rapid and comprehensive increase in the wages of the underpaid
than any alternative device that is now available. The superior
importance of a legally established minimum wage is obvious; its
superior desirability will form the subject of the pages that are
immediately to follow.


_The Minimum Wage in Operation_

Happily the advocate of this measure is no longer required to meet the
objection that it is novel and utterly uncertain. For more than twenty
years it has been in operation in Australasia. It was implicit in the
compulsory arbitration act of New Zealand, passed in 1894; for the
wages which the arbitration boards enforce are necessarily the lowest
that the affected employers are permitted to pay; besides, the
district conciliation boards are empowered by the law to fix minimum
wages on complaint of any group of underpaid workers. The first formal
and explicit minimum wage law of modern times was enacted by the state
of Victoria in 1896. In the beginning it applied to only six trades,
but it has been extended at various legislative sessions, so that
to-day it protects substantially all the labourers of the state,
except those employed in agriculture. Since the year 1900 all the
other states of Australia have made provision for the establishment of
minimum wages. At present, therefore, the legal minimum wage in some
form prevails throughout the whole of Australasia.

In 1909 the Trade Boards Act authorised the application of this device
to four trades in Great Britain. In 1913 the provisions of the Act
were made applicable to four other trades, and in 1914 to a third
group of four industries. A special minimum wage law was in 1912
enacted to govern the entire coal mining industry of the country.

The first minimum wage law in the United States was passed in 1912 by
Massachusetts. It has been followed by similar legislation in ten
other states; namely, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Kansas,
Minnesota, Nebraska, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wisconsin.
California has adopted a constitutional amendment which specifically
authorises minimum wage legislation for women and minors, and Ohio
added a similar provision to her constitution which applies to men as
well.

The minimum wage statutes of Australasia and Great Britain cover all
classes of workers, but those of the United States are restricted to
minors and women. With the exception of the Utah act, all the
important laws on this subject in all three regions establish minimum
wages indirectly, by authorising commissions and wage boards to
determine the actual rates. In Australasia and Great Britain the
statutes do not attempt to specify any standard to which the wage
determinations of the boards must conform, but the tendency in the
former country in recent years has been to enforce a living wage as
the minimum; that is, wage rates sufficiently high to provide a decent
family livelihood for men, and a reasonable personal livelihood for
women and minors. All the laws in America but one require the
commissions to establish living wages. In Utah no commission is
provided for, as the law itself specifies in terms of money the
minimum rates of remuneration that the employers of women are
permitted to pay.

The effectiveness of the laws that have been put into operation is at
least as great as their friends had dared to hope. According to
Professor M. B. Hammond of Ohio, who investigated the situation on the
spot in the winter of 1911-1912, the people of Australasia have
accepted the minimum wage "as a permanent policy in the industrial
legislation of that part of the world." Professor Hammond's
observations, and the replies of the Chief Factory Inspector of
Melbourne to the New York Factory Investigating Commission, show the
main effects of minimum wage legislation to be as follows: sweating
and strikes have all but disappeared; the efficiency of the workers
has on the whole increased; the number of workers unable to earn the
legal minimum has not been as great as most persons had feared, and
almost all of them have obtained employment at lower remuneration
through special permits; the legal minimum has not only not become the
actual maximum, but is exceeded in the case of the majority of
workers; no evidence exists to show that any industry has been
crippled, or forced to move out of the country; with the exception of
a very few instances, the prices of commodities have not been raised
by the law.[251]

In the four trades of Great Britain which were first brought under the
operation of the Trade Boards Act, and which presented some of the
worst examples of economic oppression, the beneficial effects of the
minimum wage have been even more striking than in Australasia. Wages
have been considerably raised, in some cases as high as one hundred
per cent.; dispirited and helpless workers have gained courage, power,
and self-respect to such an extent as to increase considerably their
membership in trade unions, and to obtain in several instances further
increases in remuneration beyond the legal minimum; the compensation
of the better paid labourers has not been reduced to the level fixed
by the trade boards; the efficiency of both employés and productive
processes has been on the whole increased; the number of persons
forced out of employment by the law is negligible; no important rise
of prices is traceable to the law; and the number of business concerns
unable to pay the increase in wages is too small to deserve serious
consideration. All these results had been established before the
outbreak of the war.[252]

The legal minimum wage has been carried into effect in only four
states of our own country. It covers practically all the industries
employing women and minors in Oregon and Washington, all the working
women and girls of Utah, and the women and minors of a few trades in
Massachusetts. The rates established for experienced women vary from
$7.50 per week in Utah to ten dollars a week for some classes in
Washington. As the first wage determinations were put into effect only
in 1913, American experience has been too short as well as too narrow
to warrant certain conclusions. So far as it has been applied,
however, the legal minimum wage has been as successful in the United
States as in Australasia or Great Britain. All competent witnesses
agree that it has brought a considerable increase in wages to a
considerable proportion of the women and minors in the industries in
which it is operative, and that it has neither thrown any important
number of workers out of employment nor forced any important concern
out of business. Speaking of the three leading industries in which
minimum wages were first established in Washington, the Industrial
Welfare Commission of that state testifies: "Seldom has any piece of
legislation, in prospect, engendered so much discussion and so much
criticism, as did the minimum wage law, with the intricacies of its
ramifications touching almost every industry in the state, large or
small, and the family of nearly every wage earner; seldom, too, has
any law, in actuality, been so well received, its application been
accomplished with so little open opposition, and, for a law of this
character, has been attended with so little industrial disturbance as
that same minimum wage law. None of the dire predictions made prior to
the passage of the law have come about to an extent that questions the
general efficiency of the law. There has been no wholesale discharge
of women employés, no wholesale levelling of wages, no wholesale
replacing of higher paid workers by cheaper help, no tendency to make
the minimum the maximum, while the employers of the state in general
have been following the letter and spirit of the law, and aiding
greatly in its application.... The law, in other words, has advanced
the wages of practically sixty per cent. of the workers in these
industries, and has done it without serious opposition at a time when
business conditions were none too good."[253] The Bureau of Labour
Statistics of the United States investigated the operation of the
minimum wage in the mercantile establishments of Oregon at the end of
the first year. The conclusions of the investigators were in brief
that both the number and the proportion of women getting the legal
minimum ($9.25 per week) for adults had increased, that the proportion
obtaining more than this rate had likewise increased, that those who
had received a rise in remuneration did not show any decline in
efficiency, that women had not been displaced by men, and that the
average increase in the labour cost resulting from the advance in
wages was only three mills on each dollar of sales.[254] The effects
of the Utah law during the first year of its operation were summarised
by the Labour Commissioner, Mr. H. T. Haines, as follows: a rise in
the wages of a "number of women and girls who most needed the
additional sums of money"; increased efficiency of female workers
admitted by most employers; but few cases of women or girls utterly
deprived of employment by the law; none of the higher paid women
suffered a reduction in wages; and ninety per cent. of the employers
are satisfied with the minimum wage statute.[255] So far as the law
has been applied in Massachusetts, it seems to be relatively as
successful as in the other three states.[256]


_The Question of Constitutionality_

The principal reason why the minimum wage laws on the statute books of
the other seven states have not been carried into effect, is the
uncertainty of the validity of minimum wage legislation in our
constitutional system. In November, 1914, a district judge granted a
writ of injunction, restraining the Minimum Wage Commission of
Minnesota from enforcing their wage determinations, on the ground that
the law attempted to delegate legislative power, and that its
provisions violated that section of the fourteenth amendment to the
United States Constitution which forbids any state to deprive a person
of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. One of the
courts of Arkansas has taken substantially the same position. The
second objection urged by the Minnesota judge is probably much the
more serious of the two, and is the one upon which chief emphasis has
been laid in the briefs filed in various courts by the opponents of
minimum wage legislation. As regards labour legislation, "due process
of law" may be practically translated, "reasonable and necessary
exercise of the State's police power." And the police power means that
indefinite power of the State to legislate for the health, safety,
morals, and welfare of the community.[257] Now it is obvious that a
minimum wage law deprives both employer and employé of some liberty of
contract, and also that it virtually deprives the former of some
property, inasmuch as it generally increases his outlay for wages. On
the other hand, this restriction of liberty and equivalent diminution
of property seem to be carried out in harmony with due process of law,
since they constitute an exercise of the police power of the State on
behalf of the general welfare. Some months before the Minnesota judge
granted the writ of injunction against the enforcement of the minimum
wage law of that state, a lower court and the Supreme Court of Oregon
had pronounced the Oregon statute constitutional, as a legitimate
exercise of the police power. An appeal from this judgment was argued
in the Supreme Court of the United States, Dec. 17, 1914, but no
decision has yet (October, 1916) been rendered. Until the highest
court has spoken on the question of constitutionality, no state is
likely to take any further step toward establishing minimum wages.
Should the decision of the Supreme Court be unfavourable valid minimum
wage legislation will be impossible without an amendment of the United
States Constitution.[258]


_The Ethical and Political Aspects_

Whether it be considered from the viewpoint of ethics, politics, or
economics, the principle of the legal minimum wage is impregnable. The
State has not only the moral right but the moral duty to enact
legislation of this sort, whenever any important group of labourers
are receiving less than living wages. One of the elementary functions
and obligations of the State is to protect citizens in the enjoyment
of their natural rights; and the claim to a living wage is, as we have
seen, one of the natural rights of the person whose wages are his only
means of livelihood. Therefore, the establishment of minimum living
wages is not among the so-called "optional functions" of the State in
our present industrial society. Whenever it can be successfully
performed, it is a primary and necessary function. So far as political
propriety is concerned, the State may as reasonably be expected to
protect the citizen against the physical, mental, and moral injury
resulting from an unjust wage contract, as to safeguard his money
against the thief, his body against the bully, or his life against the
assassin. In all four cases the essential welfare of the individual
is injured or threatened through the abuse of superior force and
cunning. Inasmuch as the legal minimum wage is ethically legitimate,
the question of its enactment is, politically speaking, entirely a
question of expediency.


_The Economic Aspect_

Now the question of expediency is mainly economic. A great deal of
nonsense has been written and spoken about the alleged conflict
between the legal minimum wage and "economic law." Economists have
used no such language, indeed; for they know that economic laws are
merely the expected uniformities of social action in given
circumstances. The economists know that economic laws are no more
opposed to a legal minimum wage than to a legal eight hour day, or
legal regulations of safety and sanitation in work places. All three
of these measures tend to increase the cost of production, and
sometimes carry the tendency into reality. A minimum wage law is
difficult to enforce, but not much more so than most other labour
regulations. At any rate, the practical consideration is whether even
a partial enforcement of it will not result in a marked benefit to
great numbers of underpaid workers. It may throw some persons, the
slower workers, out of employment; but here, again, the important
question relates to the balance of good over evil for the majority of
those who are below the level of decent living. At every point,
therefore, the problem is one of concrete expediency, not of agreement
or disagreement with a real or imaginary economic law.

Some of those who oppose the device on the ground of expediency set up
an argument which runs about as follows: the increase in wages caused
by a minimum wage law will be shifted to the consumer in the form of
higher prices; this result will in turn lead to a falling off in the
demand for products; a lessened demand for goods means a reduced
demand for labour; and this implies a diminished volume of employment,
so that the last state of the workers becomes worse than the first.
Not only is this conception too simple, but it proves too much. If it
were correct every rise in wages, howsoever brought about, would be
ill advised; for every rise would set in motion the same fatal chain
of events. Voluntary increases of remuneration by employers would be
quite as futile as the efforts of a labour union. This is little more
than the old wages fund theory in a new dress. And it is no less
contrary to experience.

The argument is too simple because it is based upon an insufficient
analysis of the facts. There are no less than four sources from which
the increased wages required by a minimum wage law might in whole or
in part be obtained. In the first place, higher wages will often give
the workers both the physical capacity and the spirit that make
possible a larger output. Thus, they could themselves equivalently
provide a part at least of their additional remuneration. When,
secondly, the employer finds that labour is no longer so cheap that it
can be profitably used as a substitute for intelligent management,
better methods of production, and up to date machinery, he will be
compelled to introduce one or more of these improvements, and to
offset increased labour cost by increased managerial and mechanical
efficiency. This is what seems to have happened in the tailoring
industry of England. According to Mr. Tawney, "the increased costs of
production have, on the whole, been met by better organisation of work
and by better machinery."[259] In the third place, a part of the
increased wage cost can be defrayed out of profits, in two ways:
through a reduction in the profits of the majority of business
concerns in an industry; but more frequently through the elimination
of the less efficient, and the consequent increase in the volume of
business done by the more efficient. In the latter establishments the
additional outlay for wages might be fully neutralised by the
diminished managerial expenses and fixed charges per unit of product.
This elimination of unfit undertakers would not only be in the
direction of greater social efficiency, but in the interest of better
employment conditions generally; for it is the less competent
employers who are mainly responsible for the evil of "sweating," when
they strive to reduce the cost of production by the only method that
they know; that is, the oppression of labour. Should the three
foregoing factors fall short of providing or neutralising the
increased wages, the recourse would necessarily be to the fourth
source; namely, a rise in the price of products. However, there is no
definite reason for assuming that the rise will in any case be
sufficient to cause a net decrease of demand. In Oregon the increased
labour cost due to the minimum wage law amounted, as we have seen, to
only three mills per dollar of sales in mercantile establishments.
Even if this were all shifted to the consumer--something that is
practically impossible--it would be equivalent to an increase of only
three cents on each ten dollars' worth of purchases, and thirty cents
on each hundred. The reduction in sales on account of such a slight
rise in prices would be infinitesimal. In the case of possibly the
majority of products, the lessened demand on the part of the other
classes might be entirely counterbalanced by the increased demand at
the hands of the workers whose purchasing power had been raised
through the minimum wage law. The effect upon sales, and hence upon
business and production, which follows from an increase in the
effective consuming power of the labouring classes is frequently
ignored or underestimated. So far as consumers' goods are concerned,
it seems certain that a given addition to the income of the
wage-earning classes will lead to a greater increase in the demand
for products than an equal addition to the income of any other section
of the people.

Nevertheless, the possibility must be admitted of some diminution of
employment, owing to higher prices and decreased demand. And it is
certain that some workers would not be worth the legal minimum to
their employers. A part, but probably not all, of these could find
employment at a lower wage, through a system of permits for "slow
workers." Whatever the amount of unemployment resulting from both
these causes, it would undoubtedly be an evil of lesser magnitude than
that which at present follows from the under-payment of a majority of
the labouring population. And it could be remedied by two measures
which are in any case necessary for social welfare, and which would be
hastened by the establishment of a legal minimum wage. These are
adequate and scientific laws and institutions to deal with the general
problem of unemployment, and a comprehensive system of industrial and
vocational training.

These conclusions, then, seem to be justified: the economic objections
to a legal minimum wage are not essentially different from those that
may be urged against any other beneficial labour legislation; and they
have been sufficiently refuted by experience to throw the burden of
proof upon the objectors. Expediency suggests, however, that in the
United States the device should be applied gradually in two respects:
for a few years it ought to be confined to women and minors; and when
it is extended to men, the rates should approach the level of a
complete family living wage by stages, covering, say, three or four
years. The former restriction would enable the law to be carried
through its experimental stages with a minimum disturbance to industry
as a whole, and with a minimum of opposition, and the latter would
greatly reduce the danger of male unemployment.[260]


_Opinions of Economists_

When the present writer made an argument for the legal minimum wage
something more than ten years ago, he was able to find only one
American economist who had touched the subject, and the verdict of
that one was unfavourable.[261] A little over a year ago, Dr. John
O'Grady sent an inquiry to one hundred and sixty economists of the
United States to ascertain their opinions on the same subject. Of the
ninety-four who replied seventy were in favour of a minimum wage law
for women and minors, thirteen were opposed, and eleven were
non-committal; fifty-five favoured such legislation for men, twenty
were against it, and nineteen were disinclined to give a categorical
answer. About three-fourths of those who responded expressed the
opinion that the measure would tend to increase the efficiency both of
the workers and of methods of production.[262]

It is worthy of note that the nine members of the late Federal
Commission on Industrial Relations, although disagreeing widely and
variously on most other important questions and proposals, were all
favourable to a minimum wage law for women and minors.[263]

The most comprehensive and most searching criticism of the legal
minimum wage from the viewpoint of economic theory has been made by
Professor F. W. Taussig.[264] While he does not commit himself
definitely to the assertion that a universal minimum wage of, say,
eight dollars per week, would cause a notable amount of unemployment
among women, he regards this consequence as sufficiently probable to
indicate the "need of going slow in the regulation of women's wages."
Specifically, he would have public wage boards refrain from fixing the
minimum rates high enough to maintain women living away from home. His
final and only serious argument for this position relates to the
marginal effectiveness of women workers. He assumes that all "the
fitful, untrained, indifferent women are got rid of; that all who
offer themselves for work at the age of (say) eighteen years have had
an industrially helpful education,--" and then raises the question
whether all of them will be "able to get distinctly higher wages than
are now current."[265] Obviously the question is not serious unless it
contemplates the probability of unemployment for a _considerable
proportion_. If only one per cent. or less of the women should be
unable to find employment at the higher wages, the net social
advantage of the minimum wage device would be so obvious as to render
Professor Taussig's opposition quite unreasonable. Making the
assumptions quoted above from his pages, let us try to see whether his
apprehensions are economically justifiable.

If they are reasonable or probable they must rest on one of two
fundamental conditions: the occupations available to women are too few
to absorb all that would seek to become wage earners at eight dollars
per week; or a considerable section of them would be unable to produce
such a high wage. Possibly the first of these assumptions is true, but
neither Professor Taussig nor any other authority has presented
evidence to support it, and it is on the face of things not
sufficiently probable to justify hesitation in the advocacy of a
minimum living wage. If the second assumption be correct, if the
product of a considerable section of women (all adequately trained)
would be insufficient to yield them eight dollars per week, in
addition to the other costs of production, the conclusion is
inevitable that the same result would follow the attempt to pay all
male adults (likewise adequately trained) a family living wage of,
say, fifteen dollars per week. For the product of the average man does
not exceed that of the average woman by even as great a ratio as
fifteen to eight. If the average woman is not worth eight dollars a
week to an employer in any kind of woman's occupation, the average man
is not worth fifteen dollars. Therefore, we cannot hope, even with the
aid of a thorough system of industrial and vocational training, to
provide all adult males of average capacity with a family living wage
and the minimum means of living a reasonable life.

This is a veritable counsel of despair. It implies either that the law
of diminishing returns is already operating in this country in such a
way as to prevent the national product from being sufficiently large
to provide a minimum wage of fifteen dollars a week for men, and eight
dollars a week for women; or that the product, though ample for this
purpose, and for all the other necessary payments to the higher priced
workers and to the other agents of production, cannot under our
present industrial system be so distributed as to attain the desired
end. For the first of these hypotheses there is no evidence worthy of
the name. If Professor King is right in his estimate of an average
family income of 1494 dollars annually[266] the difficulty before us
does not lie in the field of production. Professor Taussig seems to
rest his fears on the second hypothesis, on the assumed impossibility
of bringing about the required distribution; for he points out that
increased efficiency of the workers may, like increased efficiency of
the material instrumentalities of production, in the long run redound
mainly to the benefit of the consumers, while wages may be little if
any above the old level. If these fears are justified, if the
difficulty is entirely one of the mechanism of distribution, and if it
cannot be overcome by legal enactment, then is our competitive
organisation of industry bankrupt, and the sooner we find out that
fact definitely the better. If the legal minimum wage will help to
expose such a situation, will show that, no matter how much the
productivity of the workers may be increased, a large proportion of
them must by the very nature of the competitive system be forever
condemned to live below the level of decent existence, then the
minimum wage is worth having merely as an instrument of economic
enlightenment.

Professor Taussig's argument and illustrations[267] seem to
contemplate a condition in which the number of women who become fitted
for a certain trade is excessive relatively to the demand for its
products, and to the supply of women in other industries. Were
industrial training thus misdirected, and were the trained persons
unable or unwilling to distribute themselves over other occupations,
they would, indeed, face precisely the same dilemma as do the
unskilled workers to-day. That is; a majority would be condemned to
insufficient wages, or a minority to unemployment. But we have been
assuming an _adequate_ system of industrial and vocational training, a
well-balanced system, one that would enable the workers to adjust
their supply to the demand throughout the various occupations. In
these conditions the economic axiom that a supply of goods is a demand
for goods should become beneficently effective: the workers should all
be able to find employment, and to obtain the greater part of their
increased product. Surely Professor Taussig does not mean to commit
himself to the view that every increase in the productive power of the
workers will in the long run help them only inasmuch as they are
consumers, the lion's share of the additional product being taken by
other classes. Probably such is the usual result in a régime of
unregulated competition, and unlimited freedom as regards the wage
contract. But this is precisely what we expect a minimum wage law to
correct and prevent. We rely upon this device to enable the workers to
retain for themselves that share of the product which under free
competition would automatically go to the non-labouring consumers. We
hope that blind and destructive economic force can be held in check by
deliberate and beneficent social control.

The fact of the matter seems to be that Professor Taussig's argument
is too hypothetical and conjectural to justify his pessimistic
conclusions. It is unpleasantly suggestive of the reasoning by which
the classical economists tried to show the English labourers the folly
and futility of trade unionism.


_Other Legislative Proposals_

The ideal standard of a minimum wage law is a scale of remuneration
adequate not only to the present needs of individuals and families,
but to savings for the contingencies of the future. Until such time as
the compensation of all labourers has been brought up to this level,
the State should make provision for cheap housing, and for insurance
against accidents, sickness, invalidity, old age, and unemployment.
The theory underlying such measures is that they would merely
supplement insufficient remuneration, and indirectly contribute to the
establishment of genuine living wages. In Europe, housing and
insurance legislation is so common that no reasonable and intelligent
person any longer questions the competency or propriety of such action
by the State.

If an adequate legal minimum wage, in the sense just defined, were
universally established, the State would not be required to do
anything further to effectuate wage justice, except in the matter of
vocational and industrial education. This would qualify practically
all persons to earn at least a living wage, and would enable those
who underwent unusual sacrifices either before or during their
employment to command something over and above. In other words, all
workers would then be able to obtain what we have called "the
equitable minimum." And the labouring class as a whole would possess
sufficient economic power to secure substantially all that was due by
any of the canons of distributive justice.


_Labour Unions_

The general benefits and achievements of labour organisations in the
United States down to the beginning of the present century, cannot be
more succinctly nor more authoritatively stated than in the words of
the United States Industrial Commission: "An overwhelming
preponderance of testimony before the Industrial Commission indicates
that the organisation of labour has resulted in a marked improvement
in the economic condition of the workers."[268] Some of the most
conspicuous and unquestionable proofs of rises in wages effected by
the unions are afforded by the building trades, the printing trades,
the coal mining industry, and the more skilled occupations on the
railroads. Between 1890 and 1907 wages increased considerably more in
the organised than in the unorganised trades.[269]

Nevertheless, when all due credit is given to the unions for their
part in augmenting the share of the product received by labour, there
remain two important obstacles which seriously lessen their efficacy
as a means of raising the wages of the underpaid.

The first is the fact that the unions still embrace only a small
portion of the total number of wage earners. According to Professor
Leo Wolman, a little more than twenty-seven million of the
thirty-eight million persons engaged in "gainful occupations" in the
United States in 1910 were wage earners in the ordinary sense of that
phrase, and of these twenty-seven million only 2,116,317, or 7.7 per
cent., were members of labour organisations.[270] The membership
to-day is about two and three quarter millions. If the total number of
wage earners increased between 1910 and 1916 at the same rate as
during the preceding decade, the organised portion is now somewhat
less than 7.7 per cent. of the whole. Evidently the labour unions have
not grown with sufficient rapidity, nor are they sufficiently powerful
to warrant the hope that they will be soon able to lift even a
majority of the underpaid workers to the level of living wage
conditions.

The second obstacle is the fact that only a small minority of the
members of labour unions are drawn from the unskilled and underpaid
classes, who stand most in need of organisation. The per cent. of
those getting less than living wages that is in the unions is almost
negligible. With the exception of a few industries, the unskilled and
the underpaid show very little tendency to increase notably their
organised proportion. The fundamental reason of this condition has
been well stated by John A. Hobson: "The great problem of poverty ...
resides in the conditions of the low-skilled workman. To live
industrially under the new order he must organise. He cannot organise
because he is so poor, so ignorant, so weak. Because he is not
organised he continues to be poor, ignorant, weak. Here is a great
dilemma, of which whoever shall have found the key will have done much
to solve the problem of poverty."[271]

The most effective and expeditious method of raising the wages of the
underpaid through organisation is by means of the "industrial," as
distinguished from the "trade," or "craft," union. In the former all
the trades of a given industry are united in one compact organisation,
while the latter includes only those who work at a certain trade or
occupation. For example: the United Mine Workers embrace all persons
employed in coal mines, from the most highly skilled to the lowest
grade of unspecialised labour; while the craft union is exemplified in
the engineers, firemen, conductors, switchmen, and other groups having
their separate organisations in the railroad industry. The industrial
union is as much concerned with the welfare of its unskilled as of its
skilled members, and exerts the whole of its organised force on behalf
of each and every group of workers throughout the industry which it
covers. The superior suitability of the industrial type of union to
the needs of the unskilled labourers is seen in the fact that more of
them are organised in the coal mining than in any other industry, and
have received greater benefits from organisation than their unskilled
fellow workers in any other industry. Were the various classes of
railway employés combined in one union, instead of being organised
along the lines of their separate crafts, it is quite improbable that
the unskilled majority would be getting, as they now are getting, less
than living wages. While it is true that the various craft unions in
an industry are often federated into a comprehensive association, the
bond uniting them is not nearly so close, nor so helpful to the weaker
groups of workers as in the case of the industrial unions.

Human nature being what it is, however, the members of the skilled
crafts cannot all be induced or compelled to adopt the industrial type
of organisation. The Knights of Labour attempted to accomplish this,
and for a time enjoyed a considerable measure of success, but in the
end the organisation was unable to withstand those fundamental
inclinations which impel men to prefer the more narrow, homogeneous,
and exclusive type of association. The skilled workers refused to
merge their local and craft interests in the wider interests of men
with whom they had no strong nor immediate bonds of sympathy. Among
labourers, as well as among other persons, the capacity for altruism
is limited by distance in space and occupational condition. The
passion for distinction likewise affects the wage earner, impelling
the higher groups consciously or unconsciously to oppose association
that tends to break down the barrier of superiority. Owing to their
greater resources and greater scarcity, the skilled members of an
industrial union are less dependent upon the assistance of the
unskilled than the latter are dependent upon the former; yet the
skilled membership is always in a minority, and therefore in danger of
being subordinated to the interests of the unskilled majority.

For these and many other reasons it is quite improbable that the
majority of union labourers can be amalgamated into industrial unions
in the near future. The most that can be expected is that the various
occupational unions within each industry should become federated in a
more compact and effective way than now prevails, thus conserving the
main advantages of the local and craft association, while assuring to
the unskilled workers some of the benefits of the industrial union.


_Organisation Versus Legislation_

In the opinion of some labour leaders, the underpaid workers should
place their entire reliance upon organisation. The arguments for this
position are mainly based upon three contentions: it is better that
men should do things for themselves than to call in the intervention
of the State; if the workers secure living wages by law they will be
less likely to organise, or to remain efficiently organised; and if
the State fixes a minimum wage it may some day decide to fix a
maximum.

Within certain limits the first of these propositions is
incontestable. The self education, self reliance, and other
experiences obtained by the workers through an organised struggle for
improvements of any kind, are too valuable to be lightly passed over
for the sake of the easier method of State assistance. Indeed, it
would be better to accept somewhat less, or to wait somewhat longer,
in order that the advantages might be secured through organisation.
However, these hypotheses are not verified as regards the minimum wage
problem. The legal method promises with a high degree of probability
to bring about universal living wages within ten or fifteen years. The
champions of organisation can point to no solid reasons for indulging
the hope that their method would achieve the same result within a half
a century. Therefore, the advantages of the device of organisation are
much more than neutralised by its disadvantages.

The fear that the devotion of the workers to the union would decline
as soon as living wages had been secured by law, seems to have no
adequate basis either in experience or in probability. Speaking of the
establishment of minimum wages in the tailoring industry of Great
Britain, Mr. Tawney declares that it "has given an impetus to trade
unionism among both men and women. The membership of the societies
connected with the tailoring trade has increased, and in several
districts the trade unions have secured agreements fixing the standard
rate considerably above the minimum contained in the Trade Board's
determination."[272] Similar testimony comes from Australasia. Indeed,
this is precisely what we should be inclined to expect; for the
workers whose wages had been raised would for the first time possess
the money and the courage to support unions; and would have sufficient
incentives thereto in the natural desire to obtain something more than
the legal minimum, and in the realisation that organisation was
necessary to give them a voice in the determination of the minimum,
and to enable them to co-operate in compelling its enforcement.
Indeed, general experience shows that organisation becomes normally
efficient and produces its best results only among workers who have
already approximated the level of living wages.

To be sure, the State could set up maximum instead of minimum
wages,--if the employing classes were sufficiently powerful. But all
indications point to a decline rather than an increase in their
political influence, and to a corresponding expansion in the
governmental influence of the labouring classes and their
sympathisers. Moreover, the labour leaders who urge this objection are
inconsistent, inasmuch as they advocate other beneficial labour
legislation. The distinction which they profess to find between laws
that merely remove unfair legal and judicial disabilities and laws
that reduce the length of the working day or fix minimum wages, has no
importance in practical politics or in the mind of the average
legislature. If the political influence of labour should ever become
so weak and that of capital so strong as to make restrictive labour
legislation generally feasible, legislators would not confine their
unfriendly action to the field of positive measures. They would be
quite as ready to pass a law prohibiting strikes as to enact a statute
fixing maximum wages. The formal legalisation of strikes, picketing,
and the primary boycott which is contained in the Clayton Act, and for
which the labour unions worked long and patiently, could conceivably
be seized upon by some future unfriendly Congress as a precedent and
provocation for legislation which would not only repeal all the
favourable provisions of the Clayton Act, but subject labour to
entirely new and far more odious restraints and interferences. The
fact that governments passed maximum wage laws in the past is utterly
irrelevant to the question of wage legislation to-day. A legal minimum
wage, and a multitude of other protective labour laws are desirable
and wise in the twentieth century for the simple reason that labour
and the friends of labour are sufficiently powerful to utilise this
method, and because their influence seems destined to increase rather
than decrease. The contrary hypothesis is too improbable for serious
consideration.

The conclusions that seem justified by a comprehensive and critical
view of all the facts of the situation, are that organisation is not
of itself an adequate means of bringing about living wages for the
underpaid, but that it ought nevertheless to be promoted and extended
among these classes, not only for its direct effect upon wages, but
for its bearing upon legislation. The method of organisation and the
method of legislation are not only not mutually opposed, but are in a
very natural and practical manner complementary.


_Participation in Capital Ownership_

While those workers whose remuneration is below the level of decent
maintenance are not ordinarily in a position to become owners of any
kind of capital, many of them, especially among the unmarried men, can
accumulate savings by making large sacrifices. As a matter of fact,
hundreds of thousands of the underpaid have become interest receivers
through the medium of savings banks, real estate possessions, and
insurance policies. Every effort in this direction is distinctly worth
while, and deserving of encouragement. Labourers who are above the
minimum wage level can, of course, save much larger amounts, and with
less sacrifices than the underpaid classes. In all cases the main
desideratum is that the workers should derive some income from
capital; but it is almost equally important that their capital
ownership should wherever possible take the form of shares in the
industry in which they are employed, or the store at which they buy
their goods. This means co-operative production and co-operative
distribution. The general benefits of the co-operative enterprise
have already been described in chapter xiv. For the wage earner
proprietorship in a co-operative concern is preferable to any other
kind of capital ownership because of the training that it affords in
business management and responsibility, in industrial democracy, and
in the capacity to subordinate his immediate and selfish interests to
his more remote and larger welfare.

Co-operative ownership of the tools with which men work has advantages
of its own over co-operative ownership of the stores from which they
made their purchases, inasmuch as it increases their control over the
conditions of employment, and gives them incentives to efficiency
which results in a larger social product and a larger share thereof
for themselves. As already pointed out in chapter xiv, the ideal type
of productive co-operation is that known as the "perfect" form, in
which the workers are the exclusive owners of the concern where they
exercise their labour. Nevertheless, the "federal" type, in which the
productive concern is directly owned by a wholesale co-operative,
indirectly by the retail co-operative store, and ultimately by the
co-operative consumers,--presents one important advantage. It could be
so modified as to enable the employés of the productive enterprise to
share the ownership of the latter with the wholesale establishment.
Such an arrangement would at once give the workers the benefits of
productive co-operation mentioned above, and render probable a
satisfactory adjustment of the conflicting claims of producers and
consumers. As intimated in chapter xxiv, such a conflict is inherent
in every system of industrial organisation, and will become more
evident and more acute in proportion to the strengthening of the
position of labour.

A final reason for ownership of capital by labour deserves mention
here, even though it has no immediate bearing upon the question of
remuneration. Were all labourers receiving the full measure of wages
to which they are entitled by the canons of distributive justice, it
would still be highly desirable that the majority if not all of them
should possess some capital, preferably in the productive and
distributive concerns in which they were immediately interested. It
does not seem probable that our economic system as now constituted,
with the capital owners and the capital operators for the most part in
two distinct classes, will be the final form of industrial
organisation. Particularly does this arrangement seem undesirable,
incongruous, and unstable in a society whose political form is that of
democracy. Ultimately the workers must become not merely wage earners
but capitalists. Any other system will always contain and develop the
seeds of social discontent and social disorder.


REFERENCES ON SECTION IV

     ADAMS AND SUMNER: Labour Problems. Macmillan; 1905.

     COMMONS AND ANDREWS: Principles of Labour Legislation.
     Harpers; 1916.

     WALKER: The Wages Question. New York; 1876.

     RYAN: A Living Wage. Macmillan; 1906.

     SNOWDEN: The Living Wage. London; Hodder & Stoughton.

     O'GRADY: A Legal Minimum Wage. Washington; 1915.

     BRODA: La Fixation Légale des Salaires. Paris; 1912.

     N. Y. FACTORY INVESTIGATING COMMISSION. Appendix to Vol. III.

     TAWNEY: Minimum Rates in the Chain-Making Industry. London;
     1914.

     Minimum Rates in the Tailoring Industry. London; 1915.

     TURMAN: Le Catholicisme Social. Paris; 1900.

     POTTIER: De Jure et Justitia. Liege; 1900.

     POLIER: L'Idée du Juste Salaire. Paris; 1903.

     MENGER: The Right to the Whole Produce of Labour. London;
     1899.

     GARRIGUET: Régime du Travail. Paris; 1908.

     NEARING: Reducing the Cost of Living. Philadelphia; 1914.

     CHAPIN: The Standard of Living in New York City. New York;
     1909.

     Also the works on co-operation cited in connection with
     Section II, and those of Hobson, Carver, Nearing and
     Streightoff.

FOOTNOTES:

[251] See articles by Hammond in the _American Economic Review_, June,
1913, and in the _Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science_, July, 1913; and page 62 of the Appendix to the third
volume of the Report of the New York State Factory Investigating
Commission.

[252] See the replies of the London Board of Trade to the N. Y.
Factory Investigating Commission, on pages 77, 78 of the volume cited
above; and especially the two monographs by R. H. Tawney, "The
Establishment of Minimum Rates in the Chain-Making Industry," and "The
Establishment of Minimum Rates in the Tailoring Industry." London;
1914 and 1915.

[253] "First Biennial Report of the Industrial Welfare Commission of
Washington," pp. 13, 15.

[254] "Effect of Minimum Wage Determinations in Oregon." Bulletin No.
176 of United States Bureau of Labour Statistics.

[255] From a paper read before the National Convention of the
Association of Government Labour Officials, Nashville, Tenn., June 9,
1914.

[256] See Bulletins of Massachusetts Minimum Wage Commission.

[257] See the excellent and varied series of papers on the subject in
Orth's "The Relation of Government to Property and Industry," pp.
103-178. Ginn & Company; 1915.

[258] The arguments for and against the constitutionality of a legal
minimum wage are adequately presented in the briefs, respectively, of
Louis D. Brandeis and Rome G. Brown, in the cases of Stettler _vs._
O'Hara and Simpson _vs._ O'Hara. The former is published by the
National Consumers' League, New York, and the latter by the Review
Publishing Company, Minneapolis.

[259] "Minimum Rates in the Tailoring Industry," p. 161.

[260] One of the best statements of the economic aspect of the minimum
wage is that by Sidney Webb, in the _Journal of Political Economy_,
Dec., 1912. Probably the most varied and comprehensive general
discussion is the symposium in the _Survey_, Feb. 6, 1915. See
especially the excellent presentation in Commons and Andrews'
"Principles of Labour Legislation," pp. 167-200.

[261] See pages 303, 304 of "A Living Wage"; Macmillan, 1906.

[262] O'Grady, "A Legal Minimum Wage"; Washington, 1915.

[263] "Final Report," pp. 101, 255, 364.

[264] _The Quarterly Journal of Economics_, May, 1916. A somewhat less
unfavourable criticism is contained in the paper by Professor John
Bates Clark in the _Atlantic Monthly_, September, 1913.

[265] Page 436.

[266] "The Wealth and Income of the People of the United States," p.
129.

[267] Page 437.

[268] "Final Report," p. 802. Washington, 1902.

[269] See article by Professor Commons in "The New Encyclopedia of
Social Reform," p. 1233.

[270] _The Quarterly Journal of Economics_, May, 1916, p. 502.

[271] "Problems of Poverty," p. 227. London, 1891.

[272] "Minimum Rates in the Tailoring Industry," p. 96.




