CHAPTER XII

ALLEGED INTRINSIC JUSTIFICATIONS OF INTEREST


In his address as President of the American Sociological Society at
the annual meeting, Dec. 27, 1913, Professor Albion W. Small denounced
"the fallacy of treating capital as though it were an active agent in
human processes, and crediting income to the personal representatives
of capital, irrespective of their actual share in human service."
According to his explicit declaration, his criticism of the modern
interest-system was based primarily upon grounds of social utility
rather than upon formally ethical considerations.

A German priest has attacked interest from the purely moral
viewpoint.[133] In his view the owner of any sort of capital who
exacts the return of anything beyond the principal, violates strict
justice.[134] The Church, he maintains, has never formally authorised
or permitted interest, either on loans or on producing capital. She
has merely tolerated it as an irremovable evil.

Is there a satisfactory justification of interest? If there is, does
it rest on individual or on social grounds? That is to say: is
interest justified immediately and intrinsically by the relations
existing between the owner and the user of capital? Or, is rendered
morally good owing to its effects upon social welfare? Let us see what
light is thrown on these questions by the anti-usury legislation of
the Catholic Church.


_Attitude of the Church Toward Interest on Loans_

During the Middle Ages all interest on _loans_ was forbidden under
severe penalties by repeated ordinances of Popes and Councils.[135]
Since the end of the seventeenth century the Church has quite
generally permitted interest on one or more extrinsic grounds, or
"titles." The first of these titles was known as "lucrum cessans," or
relinquished gain. It came into existence whenever a person who could
have invested his money in a productive object, for example, a house,
a farm, or a mercantile enterprise, decided instead to lend the money.
In such cases the interest on the loan was regarded as proper
compensation for the gain which the owner might have obtained from an
investment on his own account. The title created by this situation was
called "extrinsic" because it arose out of circumstances external to
the essential relations of borrower and lender. Not because of the
loan itself, but because the loan prevented the lender from investing
his money in a productive enterprise, was interest on the former held
to be justified. In other words, interest on the loan was looked upon
as merely the fair equivalent of the interest that might have been
obtained on the investment.

During the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries, another
title or justification of loan-interest found some favour among
Catholic moralists. This was the "praemium legale," or legal rate of
interest allowed by civil governments. Wherever the State authorised a
definite rate of interest, the lender might, according to these
writers, take advantage of it with a clear conscience.

To-day the majority of Catholic authorities on the subject prefer the
title of virtual productivity as a justification. Money, they contend,
has become virtually productive. It can readily be exchanged for
income-bearing or productive property, such as, land, houses,
railroads, machinery, and distributive establishments. Hence it has
become the economic equivalent of productive capital, and the interest
which is received on it through a loan is quite as reasonable as the
annual return to the owner of productive capital. Between this theory
and the theory connected with "lucrum cessans" the only difference is
that the former shifts the justification of interest from the
circumstances and rights of the lender to the present nature of the
money itself. Not merely the fact that the individual will suffer if,
instead of investing his money he loans it without interest, but the
fact that money is generally and virtually productive, is the
important element in the newer theory. In practice, however, the two
explanations or justifications come to substantially the same thing.

Nevertheless, the Church has given no positive approval to any of the
foregoing theories. In the last formal pronouncement by a Pope on the
subject, Benedict XIV[136] condemned anew all interest that had no
other support than the intrinsic conditions of the loan itself. At the
same time, he declared that he had no intention of denying the
lawfulness of interest which was received in virtue of the title of
"lucrum cessans," nor the lawfulness of interest or profits arising
out of investments in productive property. In other words, the
authorisation that he gave to both kinds of interest was merely
negative. He refrained from condemning them.

In the Responses given by the Roman Congregations from 1822 onward to
questions relating to the lawfulness of loan-interest, we may
profitably consider four principal features. First, they declare more
or less specifically that interest may be taken in the absence of the
title of "lucrum cessans"; second, some of them definitely admit the
title of "praemium legale," or civil authorisation, as sufficient to
give the practice moral sanction; third, they express a genuine
permission, not a mere toleration, of interest taking; fourth, none of
them explicitly declares that any of the titles or reasons for
receiving loan-interest will necessarily or always give the lender a
_strict right_ thereto. None of them contains a positive and reasoned
approval of the practice. Most of them merely decide that persons who
engage in it are not to be disturbed in conscience, so long as they
stand ready to submit to a formal decision on the subject by the Holy
See. The insertion of the latter condition clearly intimates that some
day interest taking might be formally and officially condemned.

Should such a condemnation ever appear, it would not contradict any
moral principle contained in the "Roman Responses," nor in the present
attitude of the Church and of Catholic moralists. Undoubtedly it could
come only as the result of a change in the organisation of industry,
just as the existing ecclesiastical attitude has followed the changed
economic conditions since the Middle Ages.

All the theological discussion on the subject, and all the
authoritative ecclesiastical declarations indicate, therefore, that
interest on loans is to-day regarded as lawful because a loan is the
economic equivalent of an investment. Evidently this is good logic and
common sense. If it is right for the stockholder of a railway to
receive dividends, it is equally right for the bondholder to receive
interest. If it is right for a merchant to take from the gross returns
of his business a sum sufficient to cover interest on his capital, it
is equally right for the man from whom he has borrowed money for the
enterprise to exact interest. The money in a loan is economically
equivalent to, convertible into, concrete capital. It deserves,
therefore, the same treatment and the same rewards. The fact that the
investor undergoes a greater risk than the lender, and the fact that
the former often performs labour in connection with the operation of
his capital, have no bearing on the moral problem; for the investor
is repaid for his extra risk and labour by the profits which he
receives, and which the lender does not receive. As a mere recipient
of interest, the investor undergoes no more risk nor exertion than
does the lender. His claim to interest is no better than that of the
latter.


_Interest on Productive Capital_

On what ground does the Church or Catholic theological opinion justify
interest on invested capital? on the shares of the stockholders in
corporations? on the capital of the merchant and the manufacturer?

In the early Middle Ages the only recognised titles to gain from the
ownership of property were labour and risk.[137] Down to the beginning
of the fifteenth century substantially all the incomes of all classes
could be explained and justified by one or other of these two titles;
for the amount of capital in existence was inconsiderable, and the
number of large personal incomes insignificant.

When, however, the traffic in rent charges and the operation of
partnerships, especially the "contractus trinus," or triple contract,
had become fairly common, it was obvious that the profits from these
practices could not be correctly attributed to either labour or risk.
The person who bought, not the land itself, but the right to receive a
portion of the rent thereof, and the person who became the silent
member of a partnership, evidently performed no labour beyond that
involved in making the contract. And their profits clearly exceeded a
fair compensation for their risks, inasmuch as the profits produced a
steady income. How then were they to be justified?

A few authorities maintained that such incomes had no justification.
In the thirteenth century Henry of Ghent condemned the traffic in rent
charges; in the sixteenth Dominicus Soto maintained that the returns
to the silent partner in an enterprise ought not to exceed a fair
equivalent for his risks; about the same time Pope Sixtus V denounced
the triple contract as a form of usury. Nevertheless, the great
majority of writers admitted that all these transactions were morally
lawful, and the gains therefrom just. For a time these writers
employed merely negative and _a pari_ arguments. Gains from rent
charges, they pointed out, were essentially as licit as the net rent
received by the owner of the land; and the interest received by a
silent partner, even in a triple contract, had quite as sound a moral
basis as rent charges. By the beginning of the seventeenth century the
leading authorities were basing their defence of industrial interest
on positive grounds. Lugo, Lessius, and Molina adduced the
productivity of capital goods as a reason for allowing gains to the
investor. Whether they regarded productivity as in itself a sufficient
justification of interest, or merely as a necessary prerequisite to
justification, cannot be determined with certainty.

At present the majority of Catholic writers seem to think that a
formal defence of interest on capital is unnecessary. Apparently they
assume that interest is justified by the mere productivity of capital.
However, this view has never been explicitly approved by the Church.
While she permits and authorises interest, she does not define its
precise moral basis.

So much for the teaching of ecclesiastical and ethical authorities.
What are the objective reasons in favour of the capitalist's claim to
interest? In this chapter we consider only the intrinsic reasons, those
arising wholly out of the relations between the interest-receiver and
the interest-payer. Before taking up the subject it may be well to
point out the source from which interest comes, the class in the
community that pays the interest to the capitalist. From the language
sometimes used by Socialists it might be inferred that interest is
taken from the labourer, and that if it were abolished he would be the
chief if not the only beneficiary. This is incorrect. At any given time
interest on producing capital is paid by the consumer. Those who
purchase the products of industry must give prices sufficiently high to
provide interest in addition to the other expenses of production. Were
interest abolished and the present system of private capital continued,
the gain would be mainly reaped by the consumer in the form of lower
prices; for the various capitalist directors of industry would bring
about this result through their competitive efforts to increase sales.
Only those labourers who were sufficiently organised and sufficiently
alert to make effective demands for higher wages before the movement
toward lower prices had got well under way, would obtain any direct
benefit from the change. The great majority of labourers would gain far
more as consumers than as wage earners. Speaking generally, then, we
may say that the capitalist's gain is the consumer's loss, and the
question of the justice of interest is a question between the
capitalist and the consumer.

The intrinsic or individual grounds upon which the capitalist's claim
to interest has been defended are mainly three: productivity, service,
and abstinence. They will be considered in this order.


_The Claims of Productivity_

It is sometimes asserted that the capitalist has as good a right to
interest as the farmer has to the offspring of his animals. Both are
the products of the owner's property. In two respects, however, the
comparison is inadequate and misleading. Since the owner of a female
animal contributes labour or money or both toward her care during the
period of gestation, his claim to the offspring is based in part upon
these grounds, and only in part upon the title of interest. In the
second place, the offspring is the definite and easily distinguishable
product of its parent. But the sixty dollars derived as interest from
the ownership of ten shares of railway stock, cannot be identified as
the exact product of one thousand dollars of railway property. No man
can tell whether this amount of capital has contributed more or less
than sixty dollars of value to the joint product, i.e., railway
services. The same is true of any other share or piece of concrete
capital. All that we know is that the interest, be it five, six,
seven, or some other per cent., describes the share of the product
which goes to the owner of capital in the present conditions of
industry. It is the conventional not the actual and physical product
of capital.

Another faulty analogy is that drawn between the productivity of
capital and the productivity of labour. Following the terminology of
the economists, most persons think of land, labour, and capital as
productive in the same sense. Hence the productivity of capital is
easily assumed to have the same moral value as the productive action
of human beings; and the right of the capitalist to a part of the
product is put on the same moral basis as the right of the labourer.
Yet the differences between the two kinds of productivity, and between
the two moral claims to the product are more important than their
resemblances.

In the first place, there is an essential physical difference. As an
instrument of production, labour is active, capital is passive. As
regards its worth or dignity, labour is the expenditure of human
energy, the output of a _person_, while capital is a material thing,
standing apart from a personality, and possessing no human quality or
human worth. These significant intrinsic or physical differences
forbid any immediate inference that the moral claims of the owners of
capital and labour are equally valid. We should logically expect to
find that their moral claims are unequal.

This expectation is realised when we examine the bearing of the two
kinds of productivity upon human welfare. In the exercise of
productive effort the average labourer undergoes a sacrifice. He is
engaged in a process that is ordinarily irksome. To require from him
this toilsome expenditure of energy without compensation, would make
him a mere instrument of his fellows. It would subordinate him and his
comfort to the aggrandisement of beings who are not his superiors but
his moral equals. For he is a person; they are no more than persons.
On the other hand, the capitalist as such, as the recipient of
interest, performs no labour, painful or otherwise. Not the
capitalist, but capital participates in the productive process. Even
though the capitalist should receive no interest, the productive
functioning of capital would not subordinate him to his fellows in the
way that wageless labour would subordinate the labourer.

The precise and fundamental reason for according to the labourer his
product is that this is the only rational rule of distribution. When a
man makes a useful thing out of materials that are his, he has a
strict right to the product simply because there is no other
reasonable method of distributing the goods and opportunities of the
earth. If another individual, or society, were permitted to take this
product, industry would be discouraged, idleness fostered, and
reasonable life and self development rendered impossible. Direful
consequences of this magnitude would not follow the abolition of
interest.

Perhaps the most important difference between the moral claims of
capitalist and labourer is the fact that for the latter labour is the
sole means of livelihood. Unless he is compensated for his product he
will perish. But the capitalist has in addition to the interest that
he receives the ability to work. Were interest abolished he would
still be in as good a position as the labourer. The product of the
labourer means to him the necessaries of life; the product of the
capitalist means to him goods in excess of a mere livelihood.
Consequently their claims to the product are greatly unequal in vital
importance and moral value.

The foregoing considerations show that even the claim of the labourer
to his product is not based upon merely intrinsic grounds. It does not
spring entirely from the mere fact that he has produced the product,
from the mere relation between producer and thing produced. If this is
true of labour-productivity we should expect to find it even more
evident with regard to the productivity of capital; for the latter is
passive instead of active, non rational instead of human.

The expectation is well founded. Not a single conclusive argument can
be brought forward to show that the productivity of capital directly
and necessarily confers upon the capitalist a right to the
interest-product. All the attempted arguments are reducible to two
formulas: "res fructificat domino" ("a thing fructifies to its owner")
and "the effect follows its cause." The first of these was originally
a legal rather than an ethical maxim; a rule by which the title was
determined in the civil law, not a principle by which the right was
determined in morals. The second is an irrelevant platitude. As a
juristic principle, neither is self evident. Why should the owner of a
piece of capital, be it a house, a machine, or a share of railway
stock, have a right to its product, when he has expended neither time,
labour, money, nor inconvenience of any kind? To answer, "because the
thing which produced the product belongs to him," is merely to beg the
question. To answer, "because the effect follows the cause," is to
make a statement which has nothing to do with the question. What we
want to know is why the ownership of a productive thing gives a right
to the product; why this particular effect should follow its cause in
this particular way. To answer by repeating under the guise of
sententious formulas the thesis to be proved, is scarcely satisfactory
or convincing. To answer that if the capitalist were not given
interest industry and thrift would decrease and human welfare suffer,
is to abandon the intrinsic argument entirely. It brings in the
extrinsic consideration of social consequences.


_The Claims of Service_

The second intrinsic ground upon which interest is defended, is the
_service_ performed by the capitalist when he permits his capital to
be used in production. Without capital, labourers and consumers would
be unable to command more than a fraction of their present means of
livelihood. From this point of view we see that the service in
question is worth all that is paid in the form of interest.
Nevertheless it does not follow that the capitalist has a claim in
strict justice to any payment for this service. According to St.
Thomas, a seller may not charge a buyer an extra amount merely because
of the extra value attached to the commodity by the latter.[138] In
other words, a man cannot justly be required to pay an unusual price
for a benefit or advantage or service, when the seller undergoes no
unusual deprivation. Father Lehmkuhl carries the principle further,
and declares that the seller has a right to compensation only when and
to the extent that he undergoes a privation or undertakes a
responsibility.[139] According to this rule, the capitalist would have
no right to interest; for as mere interest-receiver he undergoes no
privation. His risk and labour are remunerated in profits, while the
responsibility of not withdrawing from production something that can
continue in existence only by continuing in production, is scarcely
deserving of a reward according to the canons of strict justice.

Whatever we may think of this argument from authority, we find it
impossible to prove objectively that a man who renders a service to
another has an intrinsic right to anything beyond compensation for the
expenditure of money or labour involved in performing the service. The
man who throws a life preserver to a drowning person may justly demand
a payment for his trouble. On any recognised basis of compensation,
this payment will not exceed a few dollars. Yet the man whose life is
in danger would pay a million dollars for this service if he were
extremely rich. He would regard the service as worth this much to him.
Has the man with the life preserver a right to exact such a payment?
Has he a right to demand the full value of the service? No reasonable
person would answer this question otherwise than in the negative. If
the performer of the service may not charge the full value thereof, as
measured by the estimate put upon it by the recipient, it would seem
that he ought not to demand anything in excess of a fair price for his
trouble. In other words, he may not justly exact anything for the
service as such.

It would seem, then, that the capitalist has no moral claim to pure
interest on the mere ground that the use of his capital in production
constitutes a service to labourers and consumers. It would seem that
he has no right to demand a payment for a costless service.


_The Claims of Abstinence_

The third and last of the intrinsic justifications of interest that we
shall consider is _abstinence_. This argument is based upon the
contention that the person who saves his money, and invests it in the
instruments of production undergoes a sacrifice in deferring to the
future satisfactions that he might enjoy to-day. One hundred dollars
now is worth as much as one hundred and five dollars a year hence.
That is, when both are estimated from the viewpoint of the present.
This sacrifice of present to future enjoyment which contributes a
service to the community in the form of capital, creates a just claim
upon the community to compensation in the form of interest. If the
capitalist is not rewarded for this inconvenience he is, like the
unpaid labourer, subordinated to the aggrandisement of his fellows.

Against this argument we may place the extreme refutation attempted by
the Socialist leader, Ferdinand Lassalle:

"But the profit of capital is _the reward of abstinence_. Truly a happy
phrase! European millionaires are ascetics, Indian penitents, modern
St. Simons Stylites, who perched on their columns, with withered
features and arms and bodies thrust forward, hold out a plate to the
passers-by that they may receive the wages of their privations! In the
midst of this sacro-saint group, high above his fellow-mortifiers of
the flesh, stands the Holy House of Rothschild. That is the real truth
about our present society! How could I have hitherto blundered on this
point as I have?"[140]

Obviously this is a malevolently one-sided implication concerning the
sources of capital. But it is scarcely less adequate than the
explanation in opposition to which it has been quoted. Both fail to
distinguish between the different kinds of savers, the different kinds
of capital-owners. For the purposes of our inquiry savings may be
divided into three classes.

First, those which are accumulated and invested automatically. Very
rich persons save a great deal of money that they have no desire to
spend, since they have already satisfied or safeguarded all the wants
of which they are conscious. Evidently this kind of saving involves no
real sacrifice. To it the words of Lassalle are substantially
applicable, and the claim to interest for abstinence decidedly
inapplicable.

Second, savings to provide for old age and other future contingencies
which are estimated as more important than any of the purposes for
which the money might now be expended. Were interest abolished this
kind of saving would be even greater than it is at present; for a
larger total would be required to equal the fund that is now provided
through the addition of interest to the principal. In a no-interest
régime one thousand dollars would have to be set aside every year in
order to total twenty thousand dollars in twenty years; when interest
is accumulated on the savings, a smaller annual amount will suffice to
produce the same fund. Inasmuch as this class of persons would save in
an even greater degree without interest, it is clear that they regard
the sacrifice involved as fully compensated in the resulting provision
for the future. In their case sacrifice is amply rewarded by
accumulation. Their claim to additional compensation in the form of
interest does not seem to have any valid basis. In the words of the
late Professor Devas, "there is ample reward given without any need of
any interest or dividend. For the workers with heads or hands keep the
property intact, ready for the owner to consume whenever convenient,
when he gets infirm or sick, or when his children have grown up, and
can enjoy the property with him."[141]

The third kind of saving is that which is made by persons who could
spend, and have some desire to spend, more on present satisfactions,
and who have already provided for all future wants in accordance with
the standards of necessaries and comforts that they have adopted.
Their fund for the future is already sufficient to meet all those
needs which seem weightier than their present unsatisfied wants. If
the surplus in question is saved it will go to supply future desires
which are no more important than those for which it might be expended
now. In other words, the alternatives before the prospective saver
are to procure a given amount of satisfaction to-day, or to defer the
same degree of satisfaction to a distant day.

In this case the inducement of interest will undoubtedly be necessary
to bring about saving. As between equal amounts of satisfaction at
different times, the average person will certainly prefer those of the
present to those of the future. He will not decide in favour of the
future unless the satisfactions then obtainable are to be greater in
quantity. To this situation the rule that deferred enjoyments are
worth less than present enjoyments, is strictly applicable. The
increased quantity of future satisfaction which is necessary to turn
the choice from the present to the future, and to determine that the
surplus shall be saved rather than spent, can be provided only through
interest. In this way the accumulations of interest and savings will
make the future fund equivalent to a larger amount of enjoyment or
utility than could be obtained if the surplus were exchanged for the
goods of the present. "Interest magnifies the distant object."
Whenever this magnifying power seems sufficiently great to outweigh
the advantage of present over future satisfactions, the surplus will
be saved instead of spent.

Among the well-to-do there is probably a considerable number of
persons who take this attitude toward a considerable part of their
savings. Since they would not make these savings without the
inducement of interest, they regard the latter as a necessary
compensation for the sacrifice of postponed enjoyment. In a general
way we may say that they have a strict right to this interest on the
intrinsic ground of sacrifice. Inasmuch as the community benefits by
the savings, it may quite as fairly be required to pay for the
antecedent sacrifices of the savers as for the inconvenience undergone
by the performer of any useful labour or service.

Summing up the matter regarding the intrinsic justification of
interest, we find that the titles of productivity and service do not
conclusively establish the strict right of the capitalist to interest,
and that the title of abstinence is morally valid for only a portion,
probably a rather small portion, of the total amount of interest now
received by the owners of capital. Consequently interest as a whole is
not conclusively vindicated on individual grounds. If it is to be
proved morally lawful its justification must be sought in extrinsic
and social considerations. This inquiry will form the subject of the
next chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[133] Hohoff, "Die Bedeutung der Marxschen Kapitalkritik"; Paderborn,
1908.

[134] Pp. 64-67, 88, 89, 96.

[135] Cf. Van Roey, "De Justo Auctario ex Contractu Crediti"; and
Ashley, "English Economic History."

[136] Encyclical, "Vix Pervenit," 1745.

[137] Cf. St. Thomas, "Summa Theologica," 2a 2ae, q. 78, a. 2 et 3.

[138] "Secunda Secondae," q. 77, a. 1, in corp.

[139] "Theologia Moralis," I, no. 1050.

[140] "What is Capital?" p. 27.

[141] "Political Economy," p. 507.




