CHAPTER XXIV

THE PROBLEM OF COMPLETE WAGE JUSTICE


A living wage for all workers is merely the _minimum_ measure of just
remuneration. It is not in every case complete justice. Possibly it is
not the full measure of justice in any case. How much more than a
living wage is due to any or all of the various classes of labourers?
How much more may any group of workers demand without exposing itself
to the sin of extortion? By what principles shall these questions be
answered?

The problem of complete wage justice can be conveniently and logically
considered in four distinct relations, as regards: the respective
claims of the different classes of labourers to a given amount of
money available for wage payments; the claims of the whole body of
labourers, or any group thereof, to higher wages at the expense of
profits; at the expense of interest; and at the expense of the
consumer.


_Comparative Claims of Different Labour Groups_

In the division of a common wage fund, no section of the workers is
entitled to anything in excess of living wages until all the other
sections have received that amount of remuneration. The need of a
decent livelihood constitutes a more urgent claim than any other that
can be brought forward. Neither efforts, nor sacrifices, nor
productivity, nor scarcity can justify the payment of more than living
wages to any group, so long as any other group in the industry remains
below that level; for the extra compensation will supply the
nonessential needs of the former by denying the essential needs of
the latter. The two groups of men will be treated unequally in respect
of those qualities in which they are equal; namely, their personal
dignity and their claims to the minimum requisites of reasonable life
and self development. This is a violation of justice.

Let us suppose that all the workers among whom a given amount of
compensation is to be distributed, have already received living wages,
and that there remains a considerable surplus. On what principles
should the surplus be apportioned? For answer we turn to the canons of
distribution, as explained in chapter xvi. When the elementary needs
of life and development have been supplied, the next consideration
might seem to be the higher or nonessential needs and capacities.
Proportional justice would seem to suggest that the surplus ought to
be distributed in accordance with the varying needs and capacities of
men to develop their faculties beyond the minimum reasonable degree.
As we have already pointed out, this would undoubtedly be the proper
rule if it were susceptible of anything like accurate application, and
if the sum to be distributed were not produced by and dependent upon
those who were to participate in the distribution. However, we know
that the first condition is impracticable, while the second is
non-existent. Inasmuch as the sharers in the distribution have
produced and constantly determine the amount to be apportioned, the
distributive process must disregard nonessential needs, and govern
itself by other canons of justice.

The most urgent of these is the canon of efforts and sacrifices.
Superior effort, as measured by unusual will-exertion, is a
fundamental rule of justice, and a valid title to exceptional reward.
Men who strive harder than the majority of their fellows are ethically
deserving of extra compensation. At least, this is the pure theory of
the matter. In practice, the situation is complicated by the fact
that unusual effort cannot always be distinguished, and by the further
fact that some exceptional efforts do not fructify in correspondingly
useful results. Among men engaged at the same kind of work, superior
effort is to a great extent discernible in the unusually large
product. As such it actually receives an extra reward in accordance
with the canon of productivity. When men are employed at different
tasks, unusual efforts cannot generally be distinguished and
compensated. Hence the general principle is that superior efforts put
forth in the production of utilities, entitle men to something more
than living wages, but that the enforcement of this principle is
considerably hindered by the difficulty of discerning such efforts.

The unusual sacrifices that deserve extra compensation are connected
with the costs of industrial functions and the disagreeable character
of occupations. Under the first head are included the expense of
industrial training and the debilitating effects of the work. Not only
justice to the worker but a farsighted view of social welfare, dictate
that all unusual costs of preparation for an industrial craft or
profession should be repaid in the form of unusual compensation. This
means something more than a living wage. For the same reasons the
unusual hazards and disability resulting from industrial accidents and
diseases should be provided for by higher remuneration. In the absence
of such provision, these costs will have to be borne by parents, by
society in the form of charitable relief, or by the worker himself
through unnecessary suffering and incapacity. The industry that does
not provide for all these costs is a social parasite, the workers in
it are deprived of just compensation for their unusual sacrifices, and
society suffers a considerable loss through industrial friction and
diminished productive efficiency. In so far, however, as any of the
foregoing occupational costs are borne by society, as in the matter of
industrial education, or by the employer, as by the devices of
accident compensation or sickness insurance, they do not demand
provision in the form of extra wages.

Other unusual sacrifices that entitle the worker to more than living
wages, are inherent in disagreeable or despised occupations. The
scavenger and the bootblack ought to get more than the performers of
most other unskilled tasks. On the principles of comparative
individual desert, they should receive larger remuneration than many
persons who are engaged upon skilled but relatively pleasant kinds of
work. For if they were given the choice of expending the time and
money required to fit them for the latter tasks, or of taking up
immediately their present disagreeable labour, they would select the
more pleasant occupations, for the same or even a smaller
remuneration. And the majority of those who are now in the more
skilled occupations would make the same choice. Hence the sacrifices
inherent in disagreeable kinds of work are in many cases as great as
or greater than the sacrifices of preparation for the more pleasant
tasks; consequently the doers of the former are relatively underpaid.
If all wages were regulated by some supreme authority according to the
principles of complete justice, the workers in disagreeable
occupations would receive something more than living wages. Nor would
this determination of rewards be in any way contrary to social welfare
or the principle of maximum net results; for the superior
attractiveness of the other kinds of work would draw a sufficient
supply of labour to offset the advantage conferred by higher wages
upon the disagreeable occupations. The main reason why the latter kind
of labour is so poorly paid now is the fact that it is very plentiful,
a condition which is in turn due to the unequal division of industrial
opportunity. Were the opportunities of technical education and of
entrance to the higher crafts and professions more widely diffused,
the labourers offering themselves for the disagreeable tasks would be
scarcer and their remuneration correspondingly larger. This would be
not only more comfortable to the abstract principles of justice, but
more conducive to social efficiency.

To sum up the discussion concerning the canon of efforts and
sacrifices: Labourers have a just claim to more than living wages
whenever they put forth unusual efforts, and whenever their
occupations involve unusual sacrifices, either through costs of
preparation, exceptional hazards, or inherent disagreeableness. The
precise amount of extra compensation due under any of these heads can
be determined, as a rule, only approximately.

The next canon to be considered as a reason for more than living wages
is that of productivity. This offers little difficulty; for the
unusual product is always visible among men who are performing the
same kind of work, and the employer is always willing to give the
producer of it extra compensation. While superior productive power
which is based solely upon superior native ability has only
presumptive validity as a canon of justice, that is ethically
sufficient in our workaday world. Moreover, the canon of human welfare
demands that superior productivity receive superior rewards, so long
as these are necessary to evoke the maximum net product.

The canon of scarcity has exactly the same value as that of
productivity. Society and the employer are well advised and are
justified in giving extra compensation to scarce forms of labour when
the product is regarded as worth the corresponding price. This remains
true even when the scarcity is due to restricted opportunity of
preparation, rather than to sacrifices of any sort. In that case the
higher rewards are as fully justified as the superior remuneration of
that superior productivity which is based upon exceptional native
endowments. The amount of extra compensation which may properly be
given on account of scarcity is determined either by the degree of
sacrifice involved or by the ordinary operation of competition. When
men are scarce because they have made exceptional sacrifices of
preparation, they ought to be rewarded in full proportion to these
sacrifices. When they are scarce merely because of exceptional
opportunities, their extra compensation should not exceed the amount
that automatically comes to them through the interplay of supply and
demand.

The canon of human welfare has already received implicit application.
When due regard is given to efforts, sacrifices, productivity, and
scarcity, the demands of human welfare, both in its individual and its
social aspects, are sufficiently safeguarded.

In the foregoing pages the attempt has been made to describe the
proportions in which a given wage fund ought to be distributed among
the various classes of labourers who have claims upon the fund. The
first requisite of justice is that all should receive living wages. It
applies to all workers of average ability, even to those who have no
special qualifications of any sort. When this general claim has been
universally satisfied, those groups of workers who are in any wise
special, whose qualifications for any reason differentiate them from
and place them above the average, will have a right to something more
than living wages. They will have the first claim upon the surplus
that remains in the wage fund. Their claims will be based upon the
various canons of distribution explained in detail above; and the
amounts of extra remuneration to which they will be entitled, will be
determined by the extent to which their special qualifications
differentiate them from the average and unspecialised workers. If the
total available wage fund is merely sufficient to provide universal
living wages and the extra compensation due to the specialised groups,
no section of the labour force will be justified in exacting a larger
share. Even though the employer should withhold a part of the amount
due to some weaker group, a stronger group that is already getting its
proper proportion would have no right to demand the unjustly withheld
portion. For this belongs neither to the employer nor to the powerful
labour group, but to the weaker section of labourers.

This does not mean that a powerful body of workers who are already
receiving their due proportion as compared with other labour groups,
would not be justified in seeking any increase in remuneration
whatever. The increase might come out of profits, or interest, or the
consumer, and thus be in no sense detrimental to the rights of the
other sections of labourers. This problem will be considered a little
later. At present we confine our attention to the relative claims of
different labour groups to a definite wage fund.

Suppose, however, that after all workers have received living wages,
and all the exceptional groups have obtained those extra amounts which
are due them on account of efforts, sacrifices, productivity, and
scarcity, there remains a further surplus in the wage fund. In what
proportions should it be distributed? It should be equally divided
among all the labourers. The proportional justice which has been
already established can be maintained only by raising the present
rates of payment equally in all cases. All the average or
unspecialised groups would get something more than living wages, and
all the other groups would have their extra compensation augmented by
the same amount.

Of course, the wage-fund hypothesis which underlies the foregoing
discussion is not realised in actual life, any more than was the "wage
fund" of the classical economists. Better than any other device,
however, it enables us to describe and visualise the comparative
claims of different groups of labourers who have a right to unequal
amounts in excess of living wages.


_Wages Versus Profits_

Let us suppose that the wage fund is properly apportioned among the
different classes of labourers, according to the specified canons of
distribution. May not one or all of the labour groups demand an
increase in wages on the ground that the employer is retaining for
himself an undue share of the product?

As we have seen in the last chapter, the right of the labourers to
living wages is superior to the right of the employer or business man
to anything in excess of that amount of profits which will insure him
against risks, and afford him a decent livelihood in reasonable
conformity with his accustomed plane of expenditure. It is also
evident that those labourers who undergo more than average sacrifices
have a claim to extra compensation which is quite as valid as the
similarly based claim of the employer to more than living profits. In
case the business does not provide a sufficient amount to remunerate
both classes of sacrifices, the employer may prefer his own to those
of his employés, on the same principle that he may prefer his own
claim to a decent livelihood. The law of charity permits a man to
satisfy himself rather than his neighbour, when the needs in question
are of the same degree of urgency or importance. As to those labourers
who turn out larger products than the average, or whose ability is
unusually scarce, there is no practical difficulty; for the employer
will find it profitable to give them the corresponding extra
compensation. The precise question before us, then, is the claims of
the labourers upon profits for remuneration above universal living
wages and above the extra compensation due on account of unusual
efforts, sacrifices, productivity, and scarcity. Let us call the wage
that merely includes all these factors "the equitable minimum."

In competitive conditions this question becomes practical only with
reference to the exceptionally efficient and productive business men.
The great majority have no surplus available for wage payments in
excess of the "equitable minimum." Indeed, the majority do not now pay
the full "equitable minimum"; yet their profits do not provide them
more than a decent livelihood. The relatively small number of
establishments that show such a surplus as we are considering have
been brought to that condition of prosperity by the exceptional
ability of their directors, rather than by the unusual productivity of
their employés. In so far as this exceptional directive ability is due
to unusual efforts and sacrifices, the surplus returns which it
produces may be claimed with justice by the employer. In so far as the
surplus is the outcome of exceptional native endowments, it may still
be justly retained by him in accordance with the canon of
productivity. In other words, when the various groups of workers are
already receiving the "equitable minimum," they have no strict right
to any additional compensation out of those rare surplus profits which
come into existence in conditions of competition.

This conclusion is confirmed by reference to the canon of human
welfare. If exceptionally able business men were not permitted to
retain the surplus in question they would not exert themselves
sufficiently to produce it; labour would gain nothing; and the
community would be deprived of the larger product.

When the employer is a corporation instead of an individual or a
partnership, and when it is operating in competitive conditions, the
same principles are applicable, and the same conclusions justified.
The officers and the whole body of stockholders will have a right to
those surplus profits that remain after the "equitable minimum" has
been paid to the employés. Every consideration that urges such a
distribution in the case of the individual business holds good for the
corporation.

The corporation that is a monopoly will have the same right as the
competitive concern to retain for its owners those surplus profits
which are due to exceptional efficiency on the part of the managers of
the business. That part of the surplus which is derived from the
extortion of higher than competitive prices cannot be justly retained,
since it rests upon no definite moral title. As we saw in the chapter
on monopoly, the owners have no right to anything more than the
prevailing rate of interest, together with a fair return for their
labour and for any unusual efficiency that they may exercise. Should
the surplus in question be discontinued by lowering prices, or should
it be continued and distributed among the labourers? As a rule, the
former course would seem morally preferable. While the labourers, as
we shall see presently, are justified in contending for more than the
"equitable minimum" at the expense of the consumer, their right to do
so through the exercise of monopoly power is extremely doubtful.
Whether this power is exerted by themselves or by the employer on
their behalf, it remains a weapon which human nature seems incapable
of using justly.


_Wages Versus Interest_

Turning now to the claims of the labourers as against the capitalists,
or interest receivers, we perceive that the right to any interest at
all is morally inferior to the right of all the workers to the
"equitable minimum." As heretofore pointed out more than once, the
former right is only presumptive and hypothetical, and interest is
ordinarily utilised to meet less important needs than those supplied
by wages. Through his labour power the interest receiver can supply
all those fundamental needs which are satisfied by wages in the case
of the labourer. Therefore, it seems clear that the capitalist has no
right to interest until all labourers have received the "equitable
minimum." It must be borne in mind, however, that any claim of the
labourer against interest falls upon the owners of the productive
capital in a business, upon the undertaker-capitalist, not upon the
loan-capitalist.

When all the labourers in an industry are receiving the "equitable
minimum," have they a right to exact anything more at the expense of
interest? By interest we mean, of course, the prevailing or
competitive rate that is received on productive capital--five or six
per cent. Any return to the owners of capital in excess of this rate
is properly called profits rather than interest, and its relation to
the claims of the labourers has received consideration in the
immediately preceding section of this chapter. The question, then, is
whether the labourers who are already getting the "equitable minimum"
would act justly in demanding and using their economic power to obtain
a part or all of the pure interest. No conclusive reason is available
to justify a negative answer. The title of the capitalist is only
presumptive and hypothetical, not certain and unconditional. It is,
indeed, sufficient to justify him in retaining interest that comes to
him through the ordinary processes of competition and bargaining; but
it is not of such definite and compelling moral efficacy as to render
the labourers guilty of injustice when they employ their economic
power to divert further interest from the coffers of the capitalist to
their own pockets. The interest-share of the product is morally
debatable as to its ownership. It is a sort of no-man's property (like
the rent of land antecedently to its legal assignment through the
institution of private landownership) which properly goes to the first
occupant as determined by the processes of bargaining between
employers and employés. If the capitalists get the interest-share
through these processes it rightfully belongs to them; if the
labourers who are already in possession of the "equitable minimum"
develop sufficient economic strength to get this debatable share they
may justly retain it as their own.

The foregoing conclusion may seem to be a very unsatisfactory solution
of a problem of justice. However, it is the only one that is
practically defensible. If the capitalist's claim to interest were as
definite and certain as the labourer's right to a living wage, or as
the creditor's right to the money that he has loaned, the solution
would be very simple: the labourers that we are discussing would have
no right to strive for any of the interest. But the claim of the
capitalists is not of this clear and conclusive nature. It is
sufficient when combined with actual possession; it is not sufficient
when the question is of future possession. The title of first
occupancy as regards land is not valid until the land has been
actually occupied; and similarly the claim of the capitalist to
interest is not valid until the interest has been received. If the
economic forces which determine actual possession operate in such a
way as to divert the interest-share to the labourers, they, not the
capitalists, will have the valid moral title, just as Brown with his
automobile rather than Jones with his spavined nag will enjoy the
valid title of first occupancy to a piece of ownerless land which both
have coveted.

This conclusion is confirmed by reference to the rationally and
morally impossible situation that would follow from its rejection. If
we deny to the labourers the moral freedom to strive for higher wages
at the expense of the capitalist, we must also forbid them to follow
this course at the expense of the consumer. For the great majority of
consumers would stand to lose advantages to which they have as good a
moral claim as the capitalists have to interest. Practically this
would mean that the labourers have no right to seek remuneration in
excess of the "equitable minimum"; for such excess must in
substantially all cases come from either the consumer or the
capitalist. On what principle can we defend the proposition that the
great majority of labourers are forever restrained by the moral law
from seeking more than bare living wages, and the specialised
minority from demanding more than that extra compensation which
corresponds to unusual efforts, sacrifices, productivity, and
scarcity? Who has authorised us to shut against these classes the
doors of a more liberal standard of living, and a more ample measure
of self development?


_Wages Versus Prices_

The right of the labourers to the "equitable minimum" implies
obviously the right to impose adequate prices upon the consumers of
the labourer's products. This is the ultimate source of the rewards of
all the agents of production. Suppose that the labourers are already
receiving the "equitable minimum." Are they justified in seeking any
more at the cost of the consumer? If all the consumers were also
labourers the answer would be simple, at least in principle: rises in
wages and prices ought to be so adjusted as to bring equal gains to
all individuals. The "equitable minimum" is adjusted to the varying
moral claims of the different classes of labourers; therefore, any
rise in remuneration must be equally distributed in order to leave
this adjustment undisturbed. It is a fact, however, that a large part
of the consumers are not labourers; consequently they cannot look to
rises in wages as an offset to their losses through rises in prices.
Can they be justly required to undergo this inconvenience for the
benefit of labourers who are already getting the "equitable minimum"?

Let us consider first the case of higher wages versus lower prices. A
few progressive and efficient manufacturers of shoes find themselves
receiving large surplus profits which are likely to continue. So far
as the presumptions of strict justice are concerned, they may, owing
to their superior productivity, retain these profits for themselves.
Seized, however, with a feeling of benevolence, or a scruple of
conscience, they determine to divide future profits of this class
among either the labourers or the consumers. If they reduce prices the
labourers will gain something as users of shoes, but the other wearers
of shoes will also be beneficiaries. If the surplus profits are all
diverted to the labourers in the form of higher wages the other
consumers of shoes will gain nothing. Now there does not seem to be
any compelling reason, any certain moral basis, for requiring the shoe
manufacturers to take one course rather than the other. Either will be
correct morally. Possibly the most perfect plan would be to effect a
compromise by lowering prices somewhat and giving some rise in wages;
but there is no strict obligation to follow this course. To be sure,
since the manufacturers have a right to retain the surplus profits,
they have also a right to distribute them as they prefer. Let us get
rid of this complication by assuming that the manufacturers are
indifferent concerning the disposition of the surplus, leaving the
matter to be determined by the comparative economic strength of
labourers and consumers. In such a situation it is still clear that
either of the two classes would be justified in striving to secure any
or all of the surplus. No definite moral principle can be adduced to
the contrary. To put the case in more general terms: there exists no
sufficient reason for maintaining that the gains of cheaper production
should go to the consumer rather than to the labourer, or to the
labourer rather than to the consumer, so long as the labourer is
already in receipt of the "equitable minimum."

Turning now to the question of higher wages at the cost of higher
prices, we note that this would result in at least temporary hardship
to four classes of persons: the weaker groups of wage earners; all
self employing persons, such as farmers, merchants, and manufacturers;
the professional classes; and persons whose principal income was
derived from rent or interest. All these groups would have to pay more
for the necessaries, comforts, and luxuries of living, without being
immediately able to raise their own incomes correspondingly.

Nevertheless, the first three classes could in the course of time
force an increase in their revenues sufficient to offset at least the
more serious inconveniences of the increase in prices. So far as the
wage earners are concerned, it is understood that all these would have
a right to whatever advance in the money measure of the "equitable
minimum" was necessary to neutralise the higher cost of living
resulting from the success of the more powerful groups in obtaining
higher wages. The right of a group to the "equitable minimum" of
remuneration is obviously superior to the right of another group to
more than that amount. And a supreme wage-determining authority would
act on this principle. It cannot be shown, however, that in the
absence of any such authority empowered to protect the "equitable
minimum" of the weaker labourers, the more powerful groups are obliged
to refrain from demanding extra remuneration. The reason of this we
shall see presently. In the meantime we call attention to the fact
that, owing to the greater economic opportunity resulting from the
universal prevalence of the "equitable minimum" and of industrial
education, even the weaker groups of wage earners would be able to
obtain some increases in wages. In the long run the more powerful
groups would enjoy only those advantages which arise out of superior
productivity and exceptional scarcity. These two factors are
fundamental, and could not in any system of industry be prevented from
conferring advantages upon their possessors.

As regards the self employing classes, the remedy for any undue
hardship suffered through the higher prices of commodities would be
found in a discontinuance of their present functions until a
corresponding rise had occurred in the prices of their own products.
They could do this partly by organisation, and partly by entering into
competition with the wage earners. Substantially the same recourse
would be open to the professional classes. In due course of time,
therefore, the remuneration of all workers, whether employés or self
employed or professional, would tend to be in harmony with the canons
of efforts, sacrifices, productivity, scarcity, and human welfare.

Since the level of rent is fixed by forces outside the control of
labourers, employers, or landowners, the receivers thereof would be
unable to offset its decreased purchasing power by increasing its
amount. However, this situation would not be inherently unjust, nor
even inequitable. Like interest, rent is a "workless" income, and has
only a presumptive and hypothetical justification. Therefore, the
moral claim of the rent receiver to be protected against a decrease in
the purchasing power of his income, is inferior to the moral claim of
the labourer to use his economic power for the purpose of improving
his condition beyond the limits of welfare fixed by the "equitable
minimum." What is true of the rent receiver in this respect applies
likewise to the case of the capitalist. As we saw a few pages back,
the wage earners are morally free to take this course at the expense
of interest. Evidently they may do the same thing when the consequence
is merely a diminution in its purchasing power. To be sure, if capital
owners should regard their sacrifices in saving as not sufficiently
rewarded, owing either to the low rate or the low purchasing power of
interest, they would be free to diminish or discontinue saving until
the reduced supply of capital had brought about a rise in the rate of
interest. Should they refrain from this course they would show that
they were satisfied with the existing situation. Hence they would
suffer no wrong at the hands of the labourers who forced up wages at
the expense of prices.

Two objections come readily to mind against the foregoing paragraphs.
The more skilled labour groups might organise themselves into a
monopoly, and raise their wages so high as to inflict the same degree
of extortion upon consumers as that accomplished by a monopoly of
capitalists. This is, indeed, possible. The remedy would be
intervention by the State to fix maximum wages. Just where the maximum
limit ought to be placed is a problem that could be solved only
through study of the circumstances of the case, on the basis of the
canons of efforts, sacrifices, productivity, scarcity, and human
welfare. The second objection calls attention to the fact that we have
already declared that the more powerful labour groups would not be
justified in exacting more than the "equitable minimum" out of a
common wage fund, so long as any weaker group was below that level;
yet this is virtually what would happen when the former caused prices
to rise to such an extent that the weaker workers would be forced
below the "equitable minimum" through the increased cost of living.
While this contingency is likewise possible, it is not a sufficient
reason for preventing any group of labourers from raising their
remuneration at the expense of prices. Not every rise in prices would
effect the expenditures of the weaker sections of the wage earners. In
some cases the burden would be substantially all borne by the better
paid workers and the self employing, professional, and propertied
classes. When it did fall to any extent upon the weaker labourers,
causing their real wages to fall below the "equitable minimum," it
could be removed within a reasonable time by organisation or by
legislation. Even if these measures were found ineffective, if some of
the weaker groups of workers should suffer through the establishment
of the higher prices, this arrangement would be preferable on the
whole to one in which no class of labourers was permitted to raise its
remuneration above the "equitable minimum" at the expense of prices. A
restriction of this sort, whether by the moral law or by civil
regulation, would tend to make wage labour a status with no hope of
pecuniary progress.

It is true that a universal and indefinite increase of wages at the
expense of prices might at length leave the great majority of the
labourers no better off than they were when they had merely the
"equitable minimum." Such would certainly be the result if the
national product were only sufficient to provide the "equitable
minimum" for all workers, and that volume of incomes for the other
agents of production which was required to evoke from them a fair
degree of productive efficiency. In that case the higher wages would
be an illusion. The gain in the amount of money would be offset by the
loss in its purchasing power. Even so, this condition would be greatly
superior to a régime in which the labourers were universally prevented
from making any effort to raise their wages above a fixed maximum.


_Concluding Remarks_

All the principles and conclusions defended in this chapter have been
stated with reference to the present distributive system, with its
free competition and its lack of legal regulation. Were all incomes
and rewards fixed by some supreme authority, the same canons of
justice would be applicable, and the application would have to be made
in substantially the same way, if the authority were desirous of
establishing the greatest possible measure of distributive justice.
The main exception to this statement would occur in relation to the
problem of raising wages above the "equitable minimum" at the expense
of prices. In making any such increase, the wage-fixing authority
would be obliged to take into account the effects upon the other
classes of labourers, and upon all the non-wage-earning classes.
Substantially the same difficulties would confront the government in a
collectivist organisation of industry. The effect that a rise in the
remuneration of any class would produce, through a rise in the prices
of commodities, upon the purchasing power of the incomes of other
classes, would have to be considered and as nearly as possible
ascertained. This would be no simple task. Simple or not, it would
have to be faced; and the guiding ethical principles would always
remain efforts, sacrifices, productivity, scarcity, and human welfare.

The greater part of the discussion carried on in this chapter has a
highly theoretical aspect. From the nature of the subject matter this
was inevitable. Nevertheless the principles that have been enunciated
and applied seem to be incontestable. In so far as they are enforcible
in actual life, they seem capable of bringing about a wider measure of
justice than any other ethical rules that are available.

Possibly the applications and conclusions have been laid down with too
much definiteness and dogmatism, and the whole matter has been made
too simple. On the other hand, neither honesty nor expediency is
furthered by an attitude of intellectual helplessness, academic
hyper-modesty, or practical agnosticism. If there exist moral rules
and rational principles applicable to the problem of wage justice, it
is our duty to state and apply them as fully as we can. Obviously we
shall make mistakes in the process; but until the attempt is made, and
a certain (and very large) number of mistakes are made, there will be
no progress. We have no right to expect that ready-made applications
of the principles will drop from Heaven.

For a long time to come, however, many of the questions discussed in
this chapter will be devoid of large practical interest. The problem
immediately confronting society is that of raising the remuneration
and strengthening generally the economic position of those labourers
who are now below the level, not merely of the "equitable minimum,"
but of a decent livelihood. This problem will be the subject of the
next chapter.




