CHAPTER XVI

THE PRINCIPAL CANONS OF DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE


Before taking up the question of the morality of profits, it will be
helpful, if not necessary, to consider the chief rules of justice that
have been or might be adopted in distributing the product of industry
among those who participate actively in the productive process. While
the discussion is undertaken with particular reference to the rewards
of the business man, it will also have an important bearing on the
compensation of the wage earner. The morality of rent and interest
depends upon other principles than those governing the remuneration of
human activity; and it has been sufficiently treated in chapters xii
and xiii. The canons of distribution applicable to our present study
are mainly six in number: arithmetical equality; proportional needs;
efforts and sacrifices; comparative productivity; relative scarcity;
and human welfare.


_The Canon of Equality_

According to the rule of arithmetical equality, all persons who
contribute to the product should receive the same amount of
remuneration. With the exception of Bernard Shaw, no important writer
defends this rule to-day. It is unjust because it would treat unequals
equally. Although men are equal as moral entities, as human persons,
they are unequal in desires, capacities, and powers. An income that
would fully satisfy the needs of one man would meet only 75 per cent.,
or 50 per cent., of the capacities of another. To allot them equal
amounts of income would be to treat them unequally with regard to the
requisites of life and self development. To treat them unequally in
these matters would be to treat them unequally as regards the real and
only purpose of property rights. That purpose is welfare. Hence the
equal moral claims of men which admittedly arise out of their moral
equality must be construed as claims to equal degrees of welfare, not
to equal amounts of external goods. To put the matter in another way,
external goods are not welfare; they are only means to welfare;
consequently their importance must be determined by their bearing upon
the welfare of the individual. From every point of view, therefore, it
is evident that justice in industrial distribution must be measured
with reference to welfare rather than with reference to incomes, and
that any scheme of distribution which provided equal incomes for all
persons would be radically unjust.

Moreover, the rule of equal incomes is socially impracticable. It
would deter the great majority of the more efficient from putting
forth their best efforts and turning out their maximum product. As a
consequence, the total volume of product would be so diminished as to
render the share of the great majority of persons smaller than it
would have been under a rational plan of unequal distribution.


_The Canon of Needs_

The second conceivable rule is that of proportional needs. It would
require each person to be rewarded in accordance with his capacity to
use goods reasonably. If the task of distribution were entirely
independent of the process of production, this rule would be ideal;
for it would treat men as equal in those respects in which they are
equal; namely, as beings endowed with the dignity and the potencies of
personality; and it would treat them as unequal in those respects in
which they are unequal; that is, in their desires and capacities. But
the relation between distribution and production cannot be left out
of account. The product is distributed primarily among the agents of
production only, and it must be so distributed as to give due
consideration to the moral claims of the producer as such. The latter
has to be considered not merely as a person possessing needs, but as a
person who has contributed something to the making of the product.
Whence arise the questions of relative efforts and sacrifices, and
relative productivity.

Since only those who have contributed to the product participate in
the distribution thereof, it would seem that they should be rewarded
in proportion to the efforts and sacrifices that they exert and
undergo. As an example of varying effort, let us take two men of equal
needs who perform the same labour in such a way that the first expends
90 per cent. of his energy, while the second expends 60 per cent. As
an example of varying sacrifice, let us take the ditch digger, and the
driver who sits all day on the dump wagon. In both these examples the
first man expends more painful exertion than the second. This would
seem to make a difference in their moral desert. Justice would seem to
require that in each case compensation should be proportionate to
exertion rather than to needs. At any rate, the claims of needs should
be modified to some extent in favour of the claims of exertion. It is
upon the principle of efforts and sacrifices that we expect our
eternal rewards to be based by the infinitely just Rewarder. The
principle of needs is likewise in conflict with the principle of
comparative productivity. Men generally demand rewards in proportion
to their products. The validity of this demand we shall examine in a
subsequent paragraph.

Like the rule of arithmetical equality, the rule of proportional needs
is not only incomplete ethically but impossible socially. Men's needs
vary so widely and so imperceptibly that no human authority could use
them as the basis of even an approximately accurate distribution.
Moreover, any attempt to distribute rewards on this basis alone would
be injurious to social welfare. It would lead to a great diminution in
the productivity of the more honest, the more energetic, and the more
efficient among the agents of production.


_The Canon of Efforts and Sacrifice_

The third canon of distribution, that of efforts and sacrifices, would
be ideally just if we could ignore the questions of needs and
productivity. But we cannot think it just to reward equally two men
who have expended the same quantity of painful exertion, but who
differ in their needs and in their capacities of self development. To
do so would be to treat them unequally in the matter of welfare, which
is the end and reason of all distribution. Consequently the principle
of efforts and sacrifices must be modified by the principle of needs.
Apparently it must also give way in some degree to the principle of
comparative productivity. When two men of unequal powers make equal
efforts, they turn out unequal amounts of product. Almost invariably
the more productive man believes that he should receive a greater
share of the product than the other. He believes that the rewards
should be determined by productivity.

It is evident that the rule of efforts and sacrifices, like those of
equality and needs, could not be universally enforced in practice.
With the exception of cases in which the worker is called upon
regularly to make greater sacrifices owing to the disagreeable nature
of the task, attempts to measure the amounts of effort and painful
exertion put forth by the different agents of production would on the
whole be little more than rough guesses. These would probably prove
unsatisfactory to the majority. Moreover, the possessors of superior
productive power would in most instances reject the principle of
efforts and sacrifices as unfair, and refuse to do their best work
under its operation.

The three rules already considered are formally ethical, inasmuch as
they are directly based upon the dignity and claims of personality.
The two following are primarily physical and social; for they measure
economic value rather than ethical worth. Nevertheless, they must have
a large place in any system which includes the factor of competition.


_The Canon of Productivity_

According to this rule, men should be rewarded in proportion to their
contributions to the product. It is open to the obvious objection that
it ignores the moral claims of needs and efforts. The needs and
use-capacities of men do, indeed, bear some relation to their
productive capacities, and the man who can produce more usually needs
more; but the differences between the two elements are so great that
distribution based solely upon productivity would fall far short of
satisfying the demands of needs. Yet we have seen that needs
constitute one of the fundamentally valid principles of distribution.
Between productivity on the one hand and efforts and sacrifices on the
other, there are likewise important differences. When men of equal
productive power are performing the same kind of labour, superior
amounts of product do represent superior amounts of effort; when the
tasks differ in irksomeness or disagreeableness, the larger product
may be brought into being with a smaller expenditure of painful
exertion. If men are unequal in productive power their products are
obviously not in proportion to their efforts. Consider two men whose
natural physical abilities are so unequal that they can handle with
equal effort shovels differing in capacity by fifty per cent.
Instances of this kind are innumerable in industry. If these two men
are rewarded according to productivity, one will get fifty per cent.
more compensation than the other. Yet the surplus received by the more
fortunate man does not represent any action or quality for which he is
personally responsible. It corresponds to no larger output of personal
effort, no superior exercise of will, no greater personal desert. It
is based solely upon a richer physical endowment by the Creator.

It is clear, then, that the canon of productivity cannot be accepted
to the exclusion of the principles of needs and efforts. It is not the
only ethical rule of distribution. Is it a valid partial rule?
Superior productivity is frequently due to larger effort and expense
put forth in study and in other forms of industrial preparation. In
such cases it demands superior rewards by the title of efforts and
sacrifices. Where, however, the greater productivity is due merely to
higher native qualities, physical or mental, the greater reward is not
easily justified on purely ethical grounds. For it represents no
personal responsibility, will-effort, or creativeness. Nevertheless,
the great majority of the more fortunately endowed think that they are
unfairly treated unless they are recompensed in proportion to their
products. Sometimes this conviction is due to the fact that such men
wrongly attribute their larger product to greater efforts. In very
many cases, however, the possessors of superior productive power
believe that they should be rewarded in proportion to their products,
regardless of any other principle or factor. Probably the true
explanation of this belief is to be found in man's innate laziness.
While the prevalence of the conviction that superior productivity
constitutes a just title to superior compensation, does create some
kind of a presumption in favour of its correctness, it must be
remembered that presumption is not proof. Weighing this presumption
against the objective considerations on the opposite side of the
argument, we take refuge in the conclusion that the ethical validity
of the canon of comparative productivity can neither be certainly
proved nor certainly disproved.

Like the rules of equality, needs, and efforts, that of productivity
cannot be universally enforced in practice. It is susceptible of
accurate application among producers who perform the same kind of work
with the same kind of instruments and equipment; for example, between
two shovellers, two machine operators, two bookkeepers, two lawyers,
two physicians. As a rule, it cannot be adequately applied to a
product which is brought into existence through a combination of
different processes. The engine driver and the track repairer
contribute to the common product, railway transportation; the
bookkeeper and the machine tender co-operate in the production of
hats; but we cannot tell in either case whether the first contributes
more or less than the second, for the simple reason that we have no
common measure of their contributions. Sometimes, however, we can
compare the productivity of _individuals_ engaged in different
processes; that is, when both can be removed from the industry without
causing it to come to a stop. Thus, it can be shown that a single
engine driver produces more railway transportation than a single track
repairer, because the labour of the latter is not indispensable to the
hauling of a given load of cars. But no such comparison can be made as
between the whole body of engine drivers and the whole body of track
repairers, since both groups are indispensable to the production of
railway transportation. Again, a man can be shown to exert superior
productivity because he affects the productive process at more points
and in a more intimate way than another who contributes to the product
in a wholly different manner. While the surgeon and the attendant
nurse are both necessary to a surgical operation, the former is
clearly more productive than the latter. When due allowance is made
for all such cases, the fact remains that in a large part of the
industrial field it is simply impossible to determine remuneration by
the rule of comparative productivity.


_The Canon of Scarcity_

It frequently happens that men attribute their larger rewards to
larger productivity, when the true determining element is scarcity.
The immediate reason why the engine driver receives more than the
track repairer, the general manager more than the section foreman, the
floorwalker more than the salesgirl, lies in the fact that the former
kinds of labour are not so plentiful as the latter. Were general
managers relatively as abundant as section foremen their remuneration
would be quite as low; and the same principle holds good of every pair
of men whose occupations and products are different in kind. Yet the
productivity of the general managers would remain as great as before.
On the other hand, no matter how plentiful the more productive men may
become, they can always command higher rewards than the less
productive men in the same occupation, for the simple reason that
their products are superior either in quantity or in quality. Men
engaged upon the more skilled tasks are likewise mistaken when they
attribute their greater compensation to the intrinsic excellence of
their occupation. The fact is that the community cares nothing about
the relative nobility, or ingenuity, or other inherent quality of
industrial tasks or functions. It is concerned solely with products
and results. As between two men performing the same task, superior
efficiency receives a superior reward because it issues in a larger or
better product. As between two men performing different tasks,
superior skill receives superior compensation simply because it can
command the greater compensation; and it is able to do this because it
is scarce.

In most cases where scarcity is the immediate determinant of rewards,
the ultimate determinant is, partly at least, some kind of sacrifice.
One reason why chemists and civil engineers are rarer than common
labourers is to be found in the greater cost of preparation. The
scarcity of workers in occupations that require no special degree of
skill is due to unusual hazards and unpleasantness. In so far as
scarcity is caused by the uncommon sacrifices preceding or involved in
an occupation, the resulting higher rewards obviously rest upon most
solid ethical grounds. However, some part of the differences in
scarcity is the result of unequal opportunities. If all young persons
had equal facilities of obtaining college and technical training, the
supply of the higher kinds of labour would be considerably larger than
it now is, and the compensation would be considerably smaller.
Scarcity would then be determined by only three factors; namely,
varying costs of training, varying degrees of danger and
unattractiveness among occupations, and inequalities in the
distribution of native ability. As a consequence, competition would
tend to apportion rewards according to efforts, sacrifices, and
efficiency.

How can we justify the superior rewards of that scarcity which is not
due to unusual costs of any sort, but merely to restricted
opportunity? So far as society is concerned, the answer is simple: the
practice pays. As to the possessors of the rarer kinds of ability,
they are in about the same ethical position as those persons whose
superior productivity is derived entirely from superior native
endowment. In both cases the unusual rewards are due to factors
outside the control of the recipients; to advantages which they
themselves have not brought into existence. In the former case the
decisive factor and advantage is opportunity; in the latter it is a
gift of the Creator. Now we have seen that this sort of productivity
cannot be proved to be immoral as a canon of distribution;
consequently the same statement will hold good of this sort of
scarcity.


_The Canon of Human Welfare_

We say "human" welfare rather than "social" welfare, in order to make
clear the fact that this canon considers the well being of men not
only as a social group, but also as individuals. It includes and
summarises all that is ethically and socially feasible in the five
canons already reviewed. It takes account of equality, inasmuch as it
regards all men as persons, as subjects of rights; and of needs,
inasmuch as it awards to all the necessary participants in the
industrial system at least that amount of remuneration which will meet
the elementary demands of decent living and self development. It is
governed by efforts and sacrifices, at least in so far as they are
reflected in productivity and scarcity; and by productivity and
scarcity to whatever extent is necessary in order to produce the
maximum net results. It would give to every producer sufficient
remuneration to evoke his greatest net contribution to the productive
process. Greatest "net" contribution; for a man's _absolute_ maximum
product may not always be worth the required price. For example: a man
who for a salary of 2500 dollars turns out a product valued at 3000
dollars, should not be given 3000 dollars in order to induce him to
bring forth a product worth 3300 dollars. In this case a salary of
2500 dollars evokes the maximum net product, and represents the reward
which would be assigned by the canon of human welfare. Once the vital
needs of the individual have been safeguarded, the supreme guide of
the canon of human welfare is the principle of maximum net results, or
the greatest product at the lowest cost.

It is not contended here that this canon ought never to undergo
modification or exception. Owing to the exceptional hazards and
sacrifices of their occupation, a combination of producers might be
justified in exacting larger compensation than would be accorded them
by the canon of human welfare on the basis of net results in the
present conditions of supply and scarcity. Unusual needs and
capacities might also justify a strong group in pursuing the same
course. All that is asserted at present is that in conditions of
average competition the canon of human welfare is not unjust. And this
is all that is necessary as a preliminary to the discussion of just
profits.[162]

FOOTNOTE:

[162] A very suggestive discussion of the psychology, the general
principles, and the practical limitations of distributive justice,
will be found in an article by Gustav Schmoller, entitled, "The Idea
of Justice in Political Economy." It is No. 113 in the Publications of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science.




