CHAPTER VIII

METHODS OF REFORMING OUR LAND SYSTEM


In economic and social discussion the word reform is commonly opposed
to the word revolution. It implies modification rather than abolition,
gradual rather than violent change. Hence reforms of the system of
land tenure do not include such radical proposals as those of land
nationalisation or the Single Tax. On the other hand, some extension
of State ownership of land, and some increase in the proportion of
taxes imposed upon land, may quite properly be placed under the head
of reform, inasmuch as they are changes in rather than a destruction
of the existing system.

In general, the reform measures needed are such as will meet the
defects described in the last chapter; namely, monopoly, excessive
gains, and exclusion from the land. Obviously they can be provided
only by legislation; and they may all be included under two heads,
ownership and taxation.

By far the greater part of the more valuable lands of the country are
no longer under the ownership of the State. Urban land is practically
all in the hands of private proprietors. While many millions of acres
of land suitable for agriculture are still under public ownership,
almost all of this area requires a considerable outlay for irrigation,
clearing, and draining before it can become productive. Forty years
ago, three-fourths of the timber now standing was public property; at
present about four-fifths of it is owned by private persons or
corporations.[84] The bulk of our mineral deposits, coal, copper,
gold, silver, etc., have likewise fallen under private ownership, with
the exception of those of Alaska. The undeveloped water power
remaining under government ownership has been roughly estimated at
fourteen million horse power in the national forests, and considerably
less than that amount in other parts of the public domain.[85] This is
a gratifying proportion of the whole supply, developed and
undeveloped, of this national resource, which is said to be somewhere
between 27 and 60 millions horse power.[86] Only about seven million
horse power has yet been developed, almost all of which is privately
owned.


_The Leasing System_

In many countries of Europe it has long been the policy of governments
to retain ownership of all lands containing timber, minerals, oil,
natural gas, phosphate, and water power. The products of these lands
are extracted and put upon the market through a leasing system. That
is; the user of the land pays to the State a rental according to the
amount and quality of raw material which he takes from the storehouse
of nature. Theoretically, the State could sell such lands at prices
that would bring in as much revenue as does the leasing system;
practically, this result has never been attained. The principal
advantages of the leasing arrangement are: to prevent the premature
destruction of forests, the private monopolisation of limited natural
resources (which has happened in the case of the anthracite coal
fields of Pennsylvania) and the private acquisition of exceptionally
valuable land at ridiculously low prices; and to enable the State to
secure just treatment for the consumer and the labourer by
stipulating that the former shall obtain the product at fair prices,
and that the latter shall receive fair wages.

This example should be followed by the United States. All timber,
mineral, gas, oil, and water power lands which have not been alienated
to private persons should remain under government ownership, and be
brought into use through a leasing arrangement which would enable the
private operators to obtain the rates of profit and interest which are
ordinarily yielded by enterprises subject to the same degree of risk.
Happily this policy now seems likely to be adopted. In 1913 a law was
passed by the United States providing for the operation of the coal
mines of Alaska on leases. The amount that can be leased by any person
or corporation is limited to 2560 acres, and the penalty for
attempting to monopolise the product is forfeiture of tenure. The
Secretary of the Interior has urged a similar arrangement for the
development and extraction of water power, coal, oil, gas, phosphate,
sodium, and potassium on the public domain of Continental United
States, and his recommendation will probably be adopted by Congress.
Thus the rent of these lands will go to the whole people instead of to
a comparatively small number of individuals, monopoly of the products
will be made impossible, and our remaining public resources will be
protected from rapid and ruinous exploitation.

To the objection that capitalists will not invest their money in nor
carry on extractive enterprises on a leasing basis, the sufficient
answer is that they are doing it now. In 1909, 24.5 per cent. of all
the lands producing minerals, precious metals, and stone; 94.6 per
cent. of the lands producing petroleum and gas; and 61.2 per cent. of
the two groups of lands combined, were operated under leases from
private owners or from the government.[87] If the rental or royalty
demanded is not unreasonably high capitalists will be quite as
willing to produce raw materials of these kinds from leased land as
they are to manufacture or sell goods in a rented building. Not the
leasing system, but the terms of the particular lease are the
important consideration.

Public grazing lands should remain government property until such time
as they become available for agriculture. Cattle owners could lease
the land from the State on equitable terms, and receive ample
protection for money invested in improvements.


_Public Agricultural Lands_

The leasing system cannot well be applied to agricultural lands. In
order that they may be continuously improved and protected against
deterioration, they must be owned by the cultivators. The temptation
to wear out a piece of land quickly, and then move to another piece,
and all the other obstacles that stand in the way of the Single Tax as
applied to agricultural land, show that the government cannot with
advantage assume the function of landlord in this domain. In the great
majority of cases the State would do better to sell the land in small
parcels to genuine settlers. There are, indeed, many situations,
especially in connection with government projects of irrigation,
clearing, and drainage, in which the leasing arrangement could be
adopted temporarily. It should not be continued longer than is
necessary to enable the tenants to become owners. With this end in
view the State should make loans to cultivators at moderate rates of
interest, as is done in New Zealand and Australia.

Whether the State ought to purchase undeveloped land from private
owners in order to sell it to settlers, may well be doubted. The only
lands to which such a scheme would be at all applicable are large
estates which are held out of use by their proprietors. Even here the
transfer of the land to cultivators could be accomplished indirectly,
through an extra heavy tax. This method has been adopted with success
by Australia and New Zealand. The only other action by the State that
seems necessary or wise in order to place settlers upon privately
owned agricultural land, is the establishment of a comprehensive
system of rural credits. The need of cheaper food products, and the
desirability of checking the abnormal growth of our urban populations,
are powerful additional reasons for the adoption of this policy. The
Hollis Rural Credits Bill recently enacted into law by Congress goes a
considerable way toward meeting these needs.


_Public Ownership of Urban Land_

No city should part with the ownership of any land that it now
possesses. Since capitalists are willing to erect costly buildings on
sites leased from private owners, there is no good reason why any one
should refuse to put up or purchase any sort of structure on land
owned by the municipality. The situation differs from that presented
by agricultural land; for the value of the land can easily be
distinguished from that of improvements, the owner of the latter can
sell them even if he is not the owner of the land, and he cannot be
deprived of them without full compensation. While the lessee paid his
annual rent, his control of the land would be as complete and certain
as that of the landowner who continues to pay his taxes. On the other
hand, the leaseholder could not permit or cause the land to
deteriorate if he would; for the nature of the land renders this
impossible. Finally, the official activities involved in the
collection of the rent and the periodical revaluation of the land,
would not differ essentially from those now required to make
assessments and gather taxes.

The benefits of this system would be great and manifest. Persons who
were unable to own a home because of their inability to purchase land,
could get secure possession of the necessary land through a lease from
the city. Instead of spending all their lives in rented houses,
thousands upon thousands of families could become the owners and
occupiers of homes. The greater the amount of land thus owned and
leased by the city, the less would be the power of private owners to
hold land for exorbitant prices. Competition with the city would
compel them to sell the land at its revenue-producing value instead of
at its speculative value. Finally, the city would obtain the benefit
of every increase in the value of its land by means of periodical
revaluation, and periodical readjustment of rent.

Unfortunately the amount of municipal land available for such an
arrangement in our American cities is negligible. If they are to
establish the system they must first purchase the land from private
owners. Undoubtedly this ought to be done by all large cities in which
the housing problem has become acute, and the value of land is
constantly rising. This policy has been adopted with happy results by
many of the municipalities of France and Germany.[88] At the state
election of 1915 the voters of Massachusetts adopted by an
overwhelming majority a constitutional amendment authorising the
cities of the commonwealth to acquire land for prospective home
builders. In Savannah, Georgia, no extension of the municipal limits
is made until the land to be embraced has passed into the ownership of
the city. Another method is to refrain from opening a new street in a
suburban district until the city has become the proprietor of the
abutting land. Whatever be the particular means adopted, the objects
of municipal purchase and ownership of land are definite and obvious:
to check the congestion of population in the great urban centres, to
provide homes for the homeless, and to secure for the whole community
the socially occasioned increases in land values. Indeed, it is
probable that no comprehensive scheme of housing reform can be
realised without a considerable amount of land purchase by the
municipalities. Cities must be in a position to provide sites for
those home builders who cannot obtain land on fair conditions from
private proprietors.[89]

Turning now from the direct method of public ownership to the indirect
method of reform through taxation, we reject the thoroughgoing
proposals of the Single Taxers. To appropriate all economic rent for
the public treasury would be to transfer all the value of land without
compensation from the private owner to the State. For example: a piece
of land that brought to the owner an annual revenue of one hundred
dollars would be taxed exactly that amount; if the prevailing rate of
interest were five per cent. the proprietor would be deprived of
wealth to the amount of two thousand dollars; for the value of all
productive goods is determined by the revenue that they yield, and
benefits the person who receives the revenue. Thus the State would
become the beneficiary and the virtual owner of the land. Inasmuch as
we do not admit that the so-called social creation of land values
gives the State a moral right to these values, we must regard the
complete appropriation of economic rent through taxation as an act of
pure and simple confiscation.[90]


_Appropriating Future Increases of Land Value_

Let us examine, then, the milder suggestion of John Stuart Mill, that
the State should impose a tax upon land sufficient to absorb all
future increases in its value.[91] This scheme is commonly known as
the appropriation of future unearned increment. Either in whole or in
part it is at least plausible, and is to-day within the range of
practical discussion. It is expected to obtain for the whole
community all future increases in land values, and to wipe out the
speculative, as distinguished from the revenue-producing value of
land. Consequently it would make land cheaper and more accessible than
would be the case if the present system of land taxation were
continued. Before discussing its moral character, let us see briefly
whether the ends that it seeks may properly be sought by the method of
taxation. For these ends are mainly social rather than fiscal.

To use the taxing power for a social purpose is neither unusual nor
unreasonable. "All governments," says Professor Seligman, "have
allowed social considerations in the wider sense to influence their
revenue policy. The whole system of productive duties has been framed
not merely with reference to revenue considerations, but in order to
produce results which should directly affect social and national
prosperity. Taxes on luxuries have often been mere sumptuary laws
designed as much to check consumption as to yield revenue. Excise
taxes have as frequently been levied from a wide social, as from a
narrow fiscal, standpoint. From the very beginning of all tax systems
these social reasons have often been present."[92] Our Federal taxes
on imports, on intoxicating liquors, on oleo-margarine, and on white
phosphorus matches, and many of the license taxes in our
municipalities, as on pedlars, saloon keepers, and dog owners, are in
large part intended to meet social as well as fiscal ends. They are in
the interest of domestic production, public health, and public safety.
The reasonableness of effecting social reforms through taxation cannot
be seriously questioned. While the maintenance of government is the
primary object of taxation, its ultimate end, the ultimate end of
government itself, is the welfare of the people. Now if the public
welfare can be promoted by certain social changes, and if these in
turn can be effected through taxation, this use of the taxing power
will be quite as normal and legitimate as though it were employed for
the upkeep of government. Hence the morality of taxing land for
purposes of social reform will depend entirely upon the nature of the
particular tax that is imposed.


_Some Objections to the Increment Tax_

The tax that we are now considering can be condemned as unjust on only
two possible grounds: first, that it would be injurious to society;
and, second, that it would wrong the private landowner. If it were
fairly adjusted and efficiently administered it could not prove
harmful to the community. In the first place, landowners could not
shift the tax to the consumer. All the authorities on the subject
admit that taxes on land stay where they are put, and are paid by
those upon whom they are levied in the first instance.[93] The only
way in which the owners of a commodity can shift a tax to the users or
consumers of it, is by limiting the supply until the price rises
sufficiently to cover the tax. By the simple device of refusing to
erect more buildings until those in existence have become scarce
enough to command an increase in rent equivalent to the new tax, the
actual and prospective owners of buildings can pass the tax on to the
tenants thereof. By refusing to put their money into, say, shoe
factories, investors can limit the supply of shoes until any new tax
on this commodity is shifted upon the wearers of shoes in the form of
higher prices. Until these rises take place in the rent of buildings
and the price of shoes, investors will put their money into
enterprises which are not burdened with equivalent taxes. But nothing
of this sort can follow the imposition of a new tax upon land. The
supply of land is fixed, and cannot be affected by any action of
landowners or would-be landowners. The users of land and the consumers
of its products are at present paying all that competition can compel
them to pay. They would not pay more merely because they were
requested to do so by landowners who were labouring under the burden
of a new tax. If all landowners were to carry out an agreement to
refrain from producing, and to withhold their land from others until
rents and prices had gone up sufficiently to offset the tax, they
could, indeed, shift the latter to the renters of land and the
consumers of its products. Such a monopoly, however, is not within the
range of practical achievement. In its absence, individual landowners
are not likely to withhold land nor to discontinue production in
sufficient numbers to raise rents or prices. Indeed, the tendency will
be all the other way; for all landowners, including the proprietors of
land now vacant, will be anxious to put their land to the best use in
order to have the means of paying the tax. Owing to this increased
production, and the increased willingness to sell and let land, rents
and prices must fall. It is axiomatic that new taxes upon land always
make it cheaper than it would have been otherwise, and are beneficial
to the community as against the present owners.

In the second place, the tax in question could not injure the
community on account of discouraging investment in land. Once men
could no longer hope to sell land at an advance in price, they would
not seek it to the extent that they now do as a field of investment.
For the same reason many of the present owners would sell their
holdings sooner than they would have sold them if the tax had not been
levied. From the viewpoint of the public the outcome of this situation
would be wholly good. Land would be cheaper and more easy of access to
all who desired to buy or use it for the sake of production, rather
than for the sake of speculation. Investments in land which have as
their main object a rise in value are an injury rather than a benefit
to the community; for they do not increase the products of land, while
they do advance its price, thereby keeping it out of use. Hence the
State should discourage instead of encouraging mere speculators in
land. Whether it is or is not bought and sold, the supply of land
remains the same. The supreme interest of the community is that it
should be put to use, and made to supply the wants of the people.
Consequently the only land investments that help the community are
those that tend to make the land productive. Under a tax on future
increases in value, such investments would increase for the simple
reason that land would be cheaper than it would have been without the
tax. Men who desired land for the sake of its rent or its product
would continue as now to pay such prices for it as would enable them
to obtain the prevailing rate of interest on their investment after
all charges, including taxes, had been paid. Men who wanted to rent
land would continue as now to get it at a rental that would give them
the usual return for their capital and labour.

So much for the effect of the tax upon the community. Would it not,
however, be unjust to the landowners? Does not private ownership of
its very nature demand that increases in the value of the property
should go to the owners thereof? "Res fructificat domino:" a thing
fructifies to its owner; and value-increases may be classed as a kind
of fruit.

In the first place, this formula was originally a dictum of the civil
law merely, the law of the Roman Empire. It was a legal rather than an
ethical maxim. Whatever validity it has in morals must be established
on moral grounds, by moral arguments. It cannot forthwith be assumed
to be morally sound on the mere authority of legal usage. In the
second place, it was for a long time applied only to natural products,
to the grain grown in a field, to the offspring of domestic animals.
It simply enunciated the policy of the law to defend the owner of the
land in his claim to such fruits, as against any outsider who should
attempt to set up an adverse title through mere appropriation or
possession. Thus far, the formula was evidently in conformity with
reason and justice. Later on it was extended, both by lawyers and
moralists, to cover commercial "fruits," such as, rent from lands and
houses, and interest from loans and investments. Its validity in this
field will be examined in connection with the justification of
interest. More recently the maxim has received the still wider
application which we are now considering. Obviously increases in value
are quite a different thing from the concrete fruit of the land, its
natural product. A right to the latter does not necessarily and
forthwith imply a right to the former. In the third place, the formula
in question is not a self evident, fundamental principle. It is merely
a summary conclusion drawn from the consideration of the facts and
principles of social and industrial life. Consequently its validity as
applied to any particular situation will depend on the correctness of
these premises, and on the soundness of the process by which it has
been deduced.

The increment tax is sometimes opposed on the ground that it is new,
in fact, revolutionary. In some degree the charge is true, but the
conditions which the proposal is intended to meet are likewise of
recent origin. The case for this legislation rests mainly on the fact
that, for the first time in the world's history, land values
everywhere show an unmistakable tendency to advance indefinitely. This
means that the landowning minority will be in a position to reap
unbought and continuous benefits at the expense of the landless
majority. This new fact, with its very important significance for
human welfare, may well require a new limitation on the right of
property in land.

It is also objected that to deprive men of the opportunity of
profiting by changes in the value of their land would be an unfair
discrimination against one class of proprietors. But there are good
reasons for making the distinction. Except in the case of monopoly,
increases in the value of goods other than land are almost always due
to expenditures of labour or money upon the goods themselves. The
value increases that can be specifically traced to external and social
influences are intermittent, uncertain, and temporary. Houses,
furniture, machinery, and every other important category of artificial
goods are perishable, and decline steadily in value. Land, however, is
substantially imperishable, becomes steadily scarcer relatively to the
demand, and its value-increases are on the whole constant, certain,
and permanent. Moreover, it is the settled policy of most enlightened
governments to appropriate or to prevent all notable increases in the
value of monopolistic goods, either through special taxation or
through regulation of prices and charges. Taking the increment values
of land is, therefore, not so discriminative as it appears at first
glance.[94]

Another objection is that the proposal would violate the canons of
just taxation, since it would impose a specially heavy burden upon one
form of property. The general doctrine of justice in taxation which is
held by substantially all economists to-day, and which has been taught
by Catholic moralists for centuries, is that known as the "faculty"
theory.[95] Men should be taxed in proportion to their ability to pay,
not in accordance with the benefits that they may be assumed to
receive from the State. And it is universally recognised that the
proper measure of "ability" is not a man's total possessions,
productive and unproductive, but his income, his annual revenue. Now,
the increment tax does seem to violate the rule of taxation according
to ability, inasmuch as it would take all of one species of revenue,
while all other incomes and properties pay only a certain percentage.

All the adherents of the faculty theory maintain, however, that it is
subject to certain modifications. Incomes from interest, rent, and
socially occasioned increases in the value of property should be taxed
at a higher rate than incomes that represent expenditures of labour;
for to give up a certain per cent. of the former involves less
sacrifice than to give up the same per cent. of the latter. Therefore,
increments of land-value may be fairly taxed at a higher rate than
salaries, personal property, or even rent and interest. When, however,
the law absorbs the whole of the value increments, it seems to be
something more than a tax. The essential nature of a tax is to take
only a portion of the particular class of income or property upon
which it is imposed. The nearest approach to the plan of taking all
future increases in land value is to be found in the special
assessments that are levied in many American cities. Thus, the owners
of urban lots are frequently compelled to defray the entire cost of
street improvements on the theory that their land is thereby and to
that extent increased in value. In such cases the contribution is
levied not on the basis of the faculty theory, but on that of the
benefit theory; that is, the owners are required to pay in proportion
to benefits received. All adherents of the faculty theory admit that
the benefit theory is justifiably applied in situations of this kind.
It might be argued that the latter theory can also be fairly applied
to increments of land value that are to arise in the future. In both
cases the owner returns to the State the equivalent of benefits which
have cost him nothing. There is, however, a difference. In the former
case the value increases are specifically due to expenditures made by
the State, while in the latter they are indirectly brought about by
the general activities of the community. We do not admit with the
Single Taxers that this "social production" of value increments
creates a right thereto on the part of either the community or the
civil body; but even if we did we should be compelled to admit that
the two situations are not exactly parallel; for the social production
of increases in the value of land involves no special expenditure of
labour or money. Hence it is very questionable whether the
appropriation of the whole of the future value increments can be
harmonised with the received conceptions and applications of the
canons of taxation.


_The Morality of the Proposal_

However, it is neither necessary nor desirable to justify the proposal
on the mere ground of taxation. Only in form and administration is it
a tax; primarily and in essence it is a method of distribution. It
resembles the action by which the State takes possession of a newly
discovered territory by the title of first occupancy. The future
increases of land value may be regarded as a sort of no man's property
which the State appropriates for the benefit of the community. And the
morality of this proceeding must be determined by the same criterion
that is applied to every other method or rule of distribution; namely,
social and individual consequences. No principle, title, or practice
of ownership, nor any canon of taxation, has intrinsic or metaphysical
value. All are to be evaluated with reference to human welfare. Since
the right of property is not an end in itself, but only a means of
human welfare, its just prerogatives and limitations are determined by
their conduciveness to the welfare of human beings. By human welfare
is meant not merely the good of society as a whole, but the good of
all individuals and classes of individuals. For society is made up of
individuals, all of whom are of equal worth and importance, and have
equal claims to consideration in the matter of livelihood, material
goods, and property. In general, then, any method of distribution, any
modification of property rights, any form of taxation, is morally
lawful which promotes the interests of the whole community, without
causing undue inconvenience to any individual. Whether a given rule of
ownership or method of distribution which is evidently conducive to
the public good is, nevertheless, unduly severe on a certain class of
individuals, is a question that is not always easily answered. Some of
the methods and practices appearing in history were clearly fair and
just, others clearly unfair and unjust, and still others of doubtful
morality. Frequently the State has compelled private persons to give
up their land at a lower price than they paid for it; in more than one
country freebooters and kingly favourites robbed the people of the
land, yet their heirs and successors are recognised by both moralists
and statesmen as the legitimate owners of that land; in Ireland
stubborn landlords are to-day compelled by the British government to
sell their holdings to the tenants at an appraised valuation; in many
countries men may become owners of their neighbours' lands by the
title of prescription, without the payment of a cent of compensation.
All these practices and titles inflict considerable hardship upon
individuals, but most of them are held to be justified on grounds of
social welfare.

Now the public appropriation of all future increments of land value
would evidently be beneficial to the community as a whole. It would
enable all the people to profit by gains that now go to a minority,
and it would enable the landless majority to acquire land more easily
and more cheaply. We have in mind, of course, only those value
increases that are not due to improvements in or on the land, and we
assume that these could be distinguished in practice from the
increments of value that represent improvements. Would the measure in
question inflict undue hardship upon individuals? Here we must make a
distinction between those persons who own land at the time that, and
those who buy land after, the law is enacted.

The only inconvenience falling upon the latter class would be
deprivation of the power to obtain future increases in value. The law
would not cause the value of the land to decline below their purchase
price. Other forces might, indeed, bring about such a result; but, as
a rule, such depreciation would be relatively insignificant, for the
simple reason that it would already have been "discounted" in the
reduction of value which followed the law at the outset. The very
knowledge that they could not hope to profit by future increases in
the value of the land would impel purchasers to lower their price
accordingly. While taking away the possibility of gaining, the law
enables the buyers to take the ordinary precautions against losing.
Therefore, it does not, as sometimes objected, lessen the so called
"gambler's chances." On the other hand, the tax does not deprive the
owners of any value that they may add to the land through the
expenditure of labour or money, nor in any way discourage productive
effort. Now it is, as a rule, better for individuals as well as for
society that men's incomes should represent labour, expenditure, and
saving instead of being the result of "windfalls," or other fortuitous
and conjunctural circumstances. And the power to take future value
increments is not an intrinsically essential element of private
property in land. Like every other condition of ownership, its
morality is determined by its effects upon human welfare. But we have
seen in the last paragraph that human welfare in the sense of the
social good is better promoted by a system of landownership which does
not include this element; and we have just shown that such a system
causes no undue hardship to the individual who buys land after its
establishment. Such is the answer to the contention, noticed a few
pages back, that the landowner has a right to future increments of
value because they are a kind of fruit of his property. It is more
reasonable that he should not enjoy this particular and peculiar
"fruit." Were the increment tax introduced into a new community before
any one had purchased land, it would clearly be a fair and valid
limitation on the right of ownership. Those who should become owners
after the regulation went into effect in an old community would be in
exactly the same moral and economic position. Finally, there exists
some kind of legal precedent for the proposal in the present policy of
efficient governments with regard to the only important increases that
occur in the value of goods other than land; namely, increases due to
the possession of monopoly power. By various devices these are either
prevented or appropriated by the State.

Those persons who are landowners when the increment tax goes into
effect are in a very different situation from those that we have just
been considering. Many of them would undoubtedly suffer injury through
the operation of the measure, inasmuch as their land would reach and
maintain a level of value below the price that they had paid for it.
The immediate effect of the increment tax would be a decline in the
value of all land, caused by men's increased desire to sell and
decreased desire to buy. In all growing communities a part of the
present value of land is speculative; that is, it is due to demand for
the land by persons who want it mainly to sell at an expected rise,
and also to the disinclination of present owners to sell until this
expectation is realised. The practical result of the attitude of these
two classes of persons is that the demand for, and therefore the value
of land is considerably enhanced. Let a law be enacted depriving them
of all hope of securing the anticipated increases in value, and the
one group will cease to buy, while the other will hasten to sell, thus
causing a decline in demand relatively to supply, and therefore a
decline in value and price.

All persons who had paid more for their land than the value which it
came to have as a result of the increment tax law, would lose the
difference. For, no matter how much the land might rise in value
subsequently, the increase would all be taken by the State. And all
owners of vacant land the value of which after the law was passed did
not remain sufficiently high to provide accumulated interest on the
purchase price, would also lose accordingly. To be sure, both these
kinds of losses would exist even if the law should cause no decline in
the value of land, but they would not be so great either in number or
in volume.

Landowners who should suffer either of these sorts of losses would
have a valid moral claim against the State for compensation. Through
its silence on the subject of increment-tax legislation, the State
virtually promised them at the time of their purchases that it would
not thus interfere with the ordinary course of values. Had it given
any intimation that it would enact such a law at a future time, these
persons would not have paid as much for their land as they actually
did pay. When the State passes the law, it violates its implicit
promise, and consequently is under obligation to make good the
resulting losses.

Is it not obliged to go further, and pay for the positive gains that
many of the owners would have reaped in the absence of the law? For
example: a piece of land is worth one thousand dollars the day after
the tax goes into effect, and that was exactly the price paid for it
by the present owner; another piece has the same value, but was bought
by the present owner for eight hundred dollars. While neither of these
men suffer any loss on their investments, they are deprived of
possible gains; for had the law not been enacted their holdings would
be worth, say, eleven hundred dollars. Nevertheless, they are no worse
off in this respect than those persons who buy land after the
increment tax goes into effect, and have no greater claim to
compensation for abolished opportunities of positive gain. As we have
seen above, the certain advantages of the measure to the community,
the doubtful advantages to individuals of profiting by changes in
price which do not represent labour, expense, or saving, show that the
owners have no strict right to compensation. And it is still clearer
that no landowner has a valid claim on account of value increases that
would have taken place subsequent to the time that the measure was
enacted. There is no way by which owners who would have held their
land long enough to profit by these increments can be distinguished
from owners who would not have availed themselves of this conjectural
opportunity, nor any method by which the amount of such gains can be
determined.

On the other hand, it might be objected that, in reimbursing all
owners who suffer the positive losses above described, the State is
unduly generous; for if the law had not been enacted many of the
reimbursed persons would have sold their holdings at a price
insufficient to cover their losses. But these cannot be distinguished
from those who would have sold at a remunerative price. Hence the
State must compensate all or none. The former alternative is not only
the more just all round, but in the long run the more expedient.

In view of the social benefits of the increment tax, especially the
removal of many of the inequities of the present taxing system, the
State might sometimes be justified in making good only a part of the
losses that we have been discussing. But this could probably occur
only for administrative reasons, such as the difficulty of determining
the persons entitled to and the amounts of compensation. It would not
be justified merely to enable the State to profit at the expense of
individuals. And, in any case, there seems to be no good reason why
the unpaid losses should amount to more than a small fraction of the
whole.

In the foregoing pages we have been considering a law which would from
the beginning of its operation take _all_ the future increments of
land value. There is, however, no likelihood that any such measure
will soon be enacted in any country, least of all, in the United
States. What we shall probably see is the spread of legislation
designed to take a part, and a gradual growing part, of value
increases, after the example of Germany and Great Britain. Let us
glance at the laws in force in these two countries.


_The German and British Increment Taxes_

The first increment tax (Werthzuwachssteuer) was established in the
year 1898 in the German colony of Kiautschou, China. In 1904 the
principle of the tax was adopted by Frankfort-am-Main, and in 1905 by
Cologne. By April, 1910, it had already been enacted in 457 cities and
towns of Germany, some twenty of which had a population of more than
100,000 each, in 652 communes, several districts, one principality,
and one grand duchy. In 1911 it was inserted in the imperial fiscal
system, and thus extended over the whole German Empire. While these
laws are all alike in certain essentials, they vary greatly in
details. They agree in taking only a per cent. of the value increases,
and in imposing a higher rate on the more rapid increases. The rates
of the imperial law vary from ten per cent. on increases of ten per
cent. or less to thirty per cent. on increases of 290 per cent. or
over. In Dortmund the scale progresses from one to 12-1/2 per cent.
Inasmuch as the highest rate in the imperial law is 30 per cent., and
in any municipal law (Cologne and Frankfort) 25 per cent.; inasmuch as
all the laws allow deductions from the tax to cover the interest that
was not obtained while the land was unproductive; and inasmuch as only
those increases are taxed which are measured from the value that the
land had when it came into the possession of the present owner,--it is
clear that landowners are not obliged to undergo any positive loss,
and that they are permitted to retain the lion's share of the
"unearned increment."[96]

It is to be noted that most of the German laws are retroactive, since
they apply not merely to future value increases, but to some of those
that occurred before the law was enacted. Thus, the Hamburg ordinance
measures the increases from the last sale, no matter how long ago that
transaction took place. The imperial law uses the same starting point,
except in cases where the last sale occurred before 1885. Accordingly,
a man who had in 1880 paid 2500 marks for a piece of land which in
1885 was worth only 2000 marks, and who sold it for 3000 marks after
the law went into effect, would pay the increment tax on 1000
marks,--unless he could prove that his purchase price was 2500 marks.
In all such cases the burden of proof is on the owner to show that the
value of the land in 1885 was lower than when he had bought it at the
earlier date. Obviously this retroactive feature of the German
legislation inflicts no wrong on the owner, since it does not touch
value increases that he has paid for. Indeed, the value of the land
when it came into the present owner's possession seems to be a fairer
and more easily ascertained basis from which to reckon increases than
any date subsequent to the enactment of the law. On the one hand,
persons whose lands had fallen in value during their ownership would
be automatically excluded from the operation of the law until such
time as the acquisition value was again reached; on the other hand,
those owners whose lands had increased in value before the law went
into effect would be taxed as well as those whose gains began after
that event; thus the law would reach a greater proportion of the
existing beneficiaries of "unearned increment." Moreover, it would
bring in a larger amount of revenue.

The British law formed a part of the famous Lloyd-George budget of
1909. It taxes only those increments that occur after its enactment.
These are subject to a tax of twenty per cent. on the occasion of the
next transfer of the land, by sale, bequest, or otherwise.[97] In some
cases this arrangement will undoubtedly cause hardship. For example:
if land which was bought for 1,000 pounds in 1900 had fallen to 800
pounds in 1909, and were sold for 1,000 pounds in 1915, the owner
would have to pay a tax of twenty per cent. on 200 pounds. This would
mean a net loss of forty pounds, to say nothing of the loss of
interest in case the land was unproductive. It would seem that some
compensation ought to be given here; yet the rarity of such
instances, the administrative difficulties, and the general advantages
of this sort of legislation quite conceivably might forbid the
conclusion that the owner was made to suffer certain injustice. The
compensating social advantages of the increment tax as well as of
other special taxes on land, will receive adequate discussion
presently.


_Transferring Other Taxes to Land_

Another taxation plan for reducing the evils of our land system
consists in the imposition of special taxes on the _present_ value of
land. As a rule, these imply, not an addition to the total tax levy,
but a transfer of taxes from other forms of property. The usual
practice is to begin by exempting either partly or wholly buildings
and other kinds of improvements from taxation, and then to apply the
same measure to certain kinds of personal property. In most cases the
transfer of such taxes to land is gradual, extending over a period of
five, ten, or fifteen years. The plan is in operation in Canada and
Australasia, and to a slight extent in the United States.

It has received its greatest development in the western provinces of
Canada; namely, British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba.
The cities of Edmonton, Medicine Hat, and Red Deer; Vancouver,
Victoria, and thirteen others of the thirty-three cities of British
Columbia; all the towns of Alberta except two; all but one of the
villages of Alberta, and one-fourth of those in Saskatchewan; all the
rural municipalities and local improvements districts in Alberta,
Manitoba, and Saskatchewan, and 24 of the 28 in British
Columbia,--exempt improvements entirely from taxation. The three
cities in Alberta which retain some taxes on improvements; all the
cities and towns and three-fourths of the villages in Saskatchewan;
the four largest cities in Manitoba; and a considerable number of the
municipalities in Ontario (by the device of illegal under-assessment
in this instance),--tax improvements at less than full value, in some
cases as low as fifteen per cent. Land is invariably assessed at its
full value. It is to be observed that these special land taxes provide
only local revenues; they do not contribute anything to the
maintenance of either the provincial or the dominion governments. The
reason why the local jurisdictions have adopted these taxes so much
more extensively in Alberta than in the other provinces is to be found
in a provincial law enacted in 1912, which requires all towns,
villages, and rural areas to establish within seven years the practice
of exempting from taxation personal property and buildings.
Saskatchewan permits cities and towns to tax improvements up to sixty
per cent. of their value, while British Columbia and Manitoba leave
the matter entirely in the hands of the local authorities. The
provincial revenues are derived from many sources, chiefly real
estate, personal property, and incomes; but British Columbia,
Saskatchewan, and Alberta levy a special tax on unimproved and only
slightly improved rural land. The rate of this "wild lands tax" is in
British Columbia four per cent., and in the other two provinces one
per cent. Some of the municipalities of British Columbia and
Saskatchewan also impose a "wild lands tax." By a law passed in 1913
Alberta levies a provincial tax of five per cent. on the value
increases of non-agricultural lands. A movement for the reduction of
the tax on buildings has developed considerable strength in the
eastern provinces of Ontario, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick.[98]

New Zealand and most of the states of Australia have for several years
levied special taxes on land, consisting mainly of general rates on
estates of moderate size, and a progressive super tax on large
estates. The Commonwealth of Australia also imposes a tax of one penny
in the pound on the value of land. A considerable proportion of the
cities and towns in both New Zealand and Australia derive practically
all their revenues from land, exempting improvements entirely. In both
countries, however, the bulk of the total revenue is obtained from
other sources than land taxes. In New Zealand they yield less than
thirteen per cent. of the national receipts.[99]

Pittsburgh and Scranton were required by a law enacted in 1913 to
reduce the local tax rate on buildings at such a pace that in 1925 and
thereafter it would be only one-half the highest rate on other forms
of property. Everett, Wash., and Pueblo, Col., within recent years
adopted by popular vote more sweeping measures of the same character,
but the Everett law has never gone into effect, and the Pueblo statute
was repealed two years after it had been passed. In many cities of the
United States, buildings are undervalued relatively to land by the
informal and illegal action of assessors. The most pronounced and best
known instance of this kind is Houston, Texas, where in 1914 land was
assessed at seventy per cent. of its value and buildings at only
twenty-five per cent. In 1915, however, the practice was forbidden by
the courts as contrary to the Texas constitution. At more than one
recent session of the New York legislature, bills have been introduced
providing for the gradual reduction of the tax on buildings in New
York City to a basis of fifty per cent. of their value. While none of
them has been passed, the sentiment in favour of some such measure is
probably increasing. A similar movement of opinion is apparent in many
other sections of the country.

On the whole, the special land taxes of Canada and Australasia are not
remarkably high. They seem to be as low or lower than the average
rates imposed on land, as well as on other forms of general property,
in the United States. In the provinces, the special land taxes provide
only a small portion of the total revenues; in the cities and towns,
there are, as a rule, other sources of revenue as well as land, and
the expenses of municipal government are probably not as high as in
this country. Hence the land taxes of Canada have not reached an
abnormally high level, and are probably lower than most persons who
have heard of them would be inclined to expect. The chief exceptions
to the foregoing statements are to be found in the "wild lands tax" of
British Columbia, and in the land taxes of some of the towns (not the
cities) of Alberta. A rate of four per cent. on unimproved and
slightly improved rural land is extraordinary in fiscal annals, and is
scarcely warranted by any received principle of taxation, although it
may possibly be justified by peculiar social and administrative
conditions in the province of British Columbia. Some of the smaller
towns of Alberta which adopted the land tax during the recent period
of depression have been compelled to impose even higher rates, the
maximum being reached by Castor in 1912, with a rate of 8-1/2 per
cent. As a natural consequence, a large proportion of the land in this
town was surrendered by its owners to the municipality. While this
amazing tax rate is probably temporary, and is likely to be lowered
after the return of the average conditions of prosperity, it inflicts
unfair hardship upon those owners whose circumstances are such that
they must give up their land, instead of awaiting the hoped for
decline in the rate of taxation.


_The Morality of the Plan_

The losses of various kinds that would result from the transfer of
other taxes to land may be thus summarised. Land would depreciate in
value by an amount equal to the capitalised tax. For example; if the
rate of interest were five per cent., an additional tax of one per
cent. would reduce land worth one hundred dollars an acre to eighty
dollars. This decline might, indeed, be partly, wholly, or more than
offset by a simultaneous rise due to economic forces. In any case,
however, the land would be worth twenty dollars less than it would
have been worth had the tax not been imposed. For some owners this
would mean a positive loss; for others it would signify mere failure
to gain. The latter would happen in the case of all those owners who
at any time after the imposition of the tax sold their land at as high
a price as they had paid for it. Not all of the owners whose land was
forced by the tax to a figure below their purchase price would suffer
positive loss; for the land might subsequently rise in value
sufficiently to wipe out the unfavourable difference. In this respect
a special tax on the present value of land has a different effect from
a tax that appropriates all the future value increases. Only those
owners who actually sold their land below their purchase price could
charge the former tax with inflicting upon them positive losses. In
the case of the land exemplified above, the owner who sold at ninety
dollars per acre could properly attribute to the tax a loss of ten
dollars; the owner who sold at eighty dollars would have a grievance
amounting to twenty dollars; and a loss would be suffered by any owner
who sold for less than eighty dollars. In the second place, all owners
of vacant land who sold at a price insufficient to provide for
accumulated interest on the purchase price, could justly hold the tax
responsible, so long as the deficiency did not exceed the
value-depreciation caused by the tax. Thirdly, all persons whose land
had an unusually high value relatively to the value of their exempted
property, would suffer losses as taxpayers. They would lose more
through the heavier land taxes than they would gain through the
lighter taxes, or the absence of taxes, on their other property.

To compensate all owners who underwent these three kinds of losses
would be practically impossible. The number of persons would be too
large, the difficulty of proving many of the claims would be too
expensive, and the compensation process would be too long drawn out,
since it would have to continue until the death of all persons who had
owned land when the last instalment of the increased land taxes went
into effect. Therefore, the losses in question must be counterbalanced
by other and indirect methods. These will be found mainly in the
following considerations: the amount of the new taxes; the gradual
method of imposing them; and their socially beneficial results.


_Amount of Taxes Practically Transferable_

According to Professor King's computations, the total rent of land in
the United States in 1910 was $2,673,900,000, while the total
expenditures of national, state, county and city governments were
$2,591,800,000.[100] In his opinion (p. 162) "the rent would have been
barely sufficient to pay off the various governmental budgets as at
present constituted, and with the growing concentration of activities
in the hands of the government, it appears that rent will soon be a
quantity far too small to meet the required changes. With increasing
pressure on our natural resources, however, it is probable that the
percentage of the total income paid for rent will gradually increase
and, since this is true, the lag behind the growing governmental
expenses will be considerably less than would otherwise be the case."

A change in our fiscal system providing for the immediate derivation
of all revenues from land taxes would, therefore, involve the
confiscation of all rent, and the destruction of all private land
values. Land would be worth nothing to the owners when its entire
annual return was taken by the State in the guise of taxes. Even if
the process of imposing the new taxes on land were extended over a
long term of years the same result would be reached in the end; for
whatever increase had taken place in the economic value of land during
the process would in all probability have been neutralised by the
increase in governmental expenditures. It is evident, therefore, that
the proposal to put _all_ taxes on land must be rejected on grounds of
both morals and expediency.

Let us suppose that all national revenues continued, as now, to be
raised from other sources than land, and that all state, county, and
city revenues remained as they are, except those derived from the
general property tax. This would mean that all the following taxes
would be unchanged: all federal taxes, the taxes on licenses of all
kinds, all taxes on business, incomes, and inheritances, and all
special property taxes. If, then, the whole of the general property
tax were concentrated on land; that is, if all the taxes on
improvements and on all forms of personal property were legally
shifted to land,--the entire revenue to be raised from land would in
1912 have amounted to $1,349,841,038.[101] This is slightly more than
one-half of Professor King's estimate of the total rent for 1910,
which was $2,673,900,000. But this figure equals four per cent. of the
land values of the country; hence the concentration of the general
property tax on land would mean a tax rate of two per cent. on the
full value of the land.

How much would this change increase the present rate of land taxes,
and decrease existing land values? While no accurate and definite
answer can be given to either of these questions, certain
approximations can be attempted which should be of considerable
service.

In 1912 the average tax rate on the assessed valuation of all goods
subject to the general property tax was .0194, or $19.40 per thousand
dollars.[102] The assessed valuation of taxed real property and
improvements (land, buildings, and other improvements) was nearly
fifty-two billion dollars, while the true value of the same property
was nearly ninety-eight and one-half billions.[103] Consequently, the
actual tax rate of .0194 on the assessed valuation was exactly one per
cent. on the true value of real estate. On the assumption that both
land and improvements were undervalued to the same extent, the land
tax was one per cent. of the full value of the land. If now we take
Thomas G. Shearman's estimate, that land values form sixty per cent.
of the total value of real estate, we find that the taxes derived from
land constituted only forty-four per cent. of the total revenues
raised by the general property tax. To concentrate the whole of the
general property tax on land, by transferring thereto the taxes on
improvements and on personal property, would, accordingly, cause the
land tax to be somewhat more than doubled. It would be slightly above
two per cent. on the full value of the land. This is the same estimate
that we obtained above by a different process; that is, by comparing
Professor King's estimate of land value and rent with the total
revenues derived from the general property tax.

However, it is not improbable that sixty per cent. is too low an
estimate of the ratio of land values to entire real estate values. In
1900, farm land and improvements, exclusive of buildings, formed 78.6
per cent. of the value of real estate, i.e., land, improvements, and
buildings. In 1910, the per cent. was a little less than 82. Now it is
quite unlikely that the value of non-building improvements on farms
amounted to the difference between sixty per cent. and seventy-eight
per cent. in 1900, or between sixty per cent. and eighty-two per cent.
in 1910. Hence the value of farm land is something more than sixty per
cent. of farm real estate. On the other hand, the value of factory
land in 1900 formed only 41.5 per cent. of the total value of factory
land and buildings, while the value of city and town lots in five
rural states varied from 34 to 62 per cent. of this species of real
estate.[104] In Greater New York land constitutes 61 per cent. of real
estate values.[105] Owing to the lack of data, the average ratio for
all kinds of real estate for the whole country is impossible of
determination. If the estimate of seventy per cent. be adopted, which
is probably the upper limit of the average proportion between land
values and real estate values throughout the country, the portion of
the general property tax now paid by land amounts to about fifty-two
per cent. Consequently the imposition of the whole general property
tax on land would not quite double the present rate on land. To the
first of the two questions raised above the answer can be given with a
fair amount of confidence that the transfer of improvement and
personal property taxes to land would cause land taxes to be about
twice what they are at present.

To the second question, concerning the extent to which land values
would fall in consequence of the heavier taxes, the answer must be
somewhat less definite. The added land taxes would be about one-half
the present general property taxes, or $675,000,000. This is about one
per cent. the total land values of the country. One per cent. of land
values capitalised at five per cent. represents a depreciation of
twenty per cent. in the value of land; capitalised at four per cent.,
it represents a depreciation of twenty-five per cent. For example; if
land worth one hundred dollars an acre returns to its owner a net
income of five dollars annually, the appropriation of one dollar by a
new tax will leave a net revenue of only four dollars; capitalised at
the current rate of five per cent., this represents only eighty
dollars of land value, or a depreciation of twenty per cent. If the
land has the same value of one hundred dollars, and still yields only
four dollars revenue, a deduction of one dollar in new taxes will
leave only three dollars net; capitalised at the current rate of four
per cent., this represents only seventy-five dollars of land value, or
a depreciation of twenty-five per cent. Using the other method of
calculation, which estimated the present tax rate on the full value of
land at one per cent., we get exactly the same results; namely, the
new tax is one per cent., which is equivalent to a depreciation of
twenty per cent. or of twenty-five per cent., according as we assume
an interest rate of five per cent. or of four per cent. Suppose,
however, that the assessors do not undervalue land to the extent that
we have been assuming; suppose that the present rate of .0194 on
assessed valuation is equivalent to, not merely one per cent., but one
and one-half per cent. of the full value of land. In that hypothesis
the additional tax would likewise be one and one-half per cent., which
capitalised at five per cent, would represent a depreciation of thirty
per cent., and at four per cent. a depreciation of thirty-seven and
one-half per cent. Combining in one generalisation the various
suppositions made in this paragraph, we estimate the depreciation of
land values resulting from the proposed tax transfer as somewhere
between twenty and forty per cent.

We have considered two hypothetical transfers of taxes to land. The
first we found to be out of the question because it would appropriate
the whole of the rent and destroy all private land values. The second
would apparently amount to two per cent. of the value of land, and
cause land values to depreciate from twenty to forty per cent. It is
unnecessary to consider the probable effects of any plan that would
involve heavier land taxes than the second; that is, the scheme of
imposing all the general property tax on land; for it represents the
extreme feasible and fair limit of the movement within, at any rate,
the next fifteen or twenty years.

Even this degree of tax transference would be unjust to the landowners
if it were brought about at once. No social or other considerations
exist that would justify a depreciation in land values of from twenty
to forty per cent. If, however, the process were extended over a
period of, say, twenty years, the decline would be only one or two per
cent. annually, which is considerably less than the rate at which farm
lands and the land in large cities have risen in value during recent
years. Under such an arrangement the great majority of owners would
probably find that the depreciation caused by the heavier land taxes,
had been more than offset by the upward tendency resulting from the
increased demand for land.

Nevertheless, there would still be positive losses of the three kinds
described a few pages back; namely, to owners who sold land below the
price that they had paid for it; to owners who sold vacant land at a
price insufficient to cover accumulated interest on the investment;
and to owners whose aggregate tax burdens were increased. Some degree
of each of these sorts of losses would be due specifically to the new
land taxes. As noted above, public compensation in all such cases
would be impracticable. Consequently the justification of a law that
inflicts such losses must be found, if it exists, in social
considerations.


_The Social Benefits of the Plan_

These may be summed up under three heads: making land easier to
acquire; cheapening the products and rent of land; and reducing the
burdens of taxation borne by the poorer and middle classes. An
increase in the tax on land would reduce its value and price, or at
least cause the price to be lower than it would have been in the
absence of the tax. This does not mean that land would be more
profitable to the purchaser, since he is enabled to buy it at a lower
price only because it yields him less net revenue, or because it is
less likely to increase in value. The value of land is always
determined by its revenue-producing power, and by its probabilities of
price-appreciation. Consequently, what the purchasers would gain by
the lower price resulting from the new tax, they would lose when they
came to pay the tax itself, and when they found the chances of value
increases diminished. If a piece of land which brings a return of five
dollars a year costs one hundred dollars before the new tax of one per
cent. is imposed, and can be bought for eighty dollars afterward, the
net interest on the purchase price has not changed. It is still five
per cent. Hence the only advantage to the prospective purchaser of
land in getting it cheaper consists in the fact that he can obtain it
with a smaller outlay of capital. For persons in moderate
circumstances this is a very important consideration.

In the second place, higher taxes would cause many existing owners
either to improve their land, in order to have the means of meeting
the added fiscal charges, or to sell it to persons who would be
willing to make improvements. And the desire to erect buildings and
other forms of improvements would be reinforced by the reduction or
abolition of taxes on those kinds of personal property which consist
of building materials. An increase in the rapidity of improvements on
land would mean an increase in the rate at which land was brought into
use, and therefore an unusual increase in the volume of products. This
virtual increase in the supply of land, and actual increase in the
supply of products, would cause a fall in three kinds of prices: the
price of products, the rent of land, and the price of land. The last
named reduction would be distinct from the reduction of land value
caused in the first instance by the imposition of the tax.

In the third place, the reduction, and finally the abolition, of taxes
on improvements and personal property would be especially beneficial
to the poorer and middle classes because they now pay a
disproportionate share of these charges. Lower taxes on dwellings
would mean lower rents for all persons who did not own their homes,
and lower taxes for all owners whose residence values were unusually
large relatively to their land values. And the tendency to lower rents
on dwellings would be reinforced by the lower cost of building
materials resulting, as noted above, from the increased supply and the
lower tax on this form of personal property. Lower taxes on that
species of personal property which consists of consumers' goods, such
as household furniture and wearing apparel, would lessen the present
inequity of taxation because this class of goods is reached to a much
greater extent in the case of the poor than in the case of the rich.
It is not easy to conceal or to undervalue a relatively small number
of simple and standard articles; but diamonds, costly furniture, and
luxurious wardrobes can be either hidden, or certified to the assessor
at a low valuation. As for those forms of personal property which are
of the nature of capital and other profit producing goods, such as
machinery and tools of all kinds, productive animals, money,
mortgages, securities, the stocks of goods held by manufacturers and
merchants, and likewise buildings which are used for productive
purposes,--the taxes on all these kinds of property are for the most
part shifted to the consumer. The latter ultimately pays the tax in
the form of higher prices for food, clothing, shelter, and the other
necessaries and comforts of life.[106] Now a tax on consumption is
notoriously unfair to the poorer and middle classes because it affects
a greater portion of their total expenditures, and takes a larger per
cent. of their income than in the case of the rich. Hence the removal
of the taxes specified in this paragraph would be at once the
abolition of a fiscal injustice, and a considerable assistance to the
less fortunate classes.

All those landowners who occupied rented dwellings would benefit by
the reduction in house rent, and all landowners without exception
would reap some advantage from the reduction or abolition of the taxes
on consumers' goods and on the various forms of producers' goods. It
is not improbable that a considerable proportion of them would gain as
much in these respects as they would lose in the capacity of
landowners.

Would the social benefits summarily described in the foregoing
paragraphs be sufficient to justify the increased land taxes in the
face of the losses that would be undergone by some landowners in the
three ways already specified? In view of our ignorance concerning the
probable amount of benefits on the one hand and losses on the other,
it is impossible to give a dogmatic answer. However, when we reflect
on the manifold social evils that are threatened by a rapid and
continuous increase in land values, and the resulting decrease in the
proportion of the population that can hope to participate in the
ownership of land, we are forced to conclude that some means of
checking both tendencies is urgently necessary for the sake of social
justice and social peace. The project that we have been considering;
namely, the transfer of taxes on improvements and on personal property
to land by a process extending over twenty years, seems to involve a
sufficiently large amount of advantage and a sufficiently small amount
of disadvantage to justify systematic and careful experiment.


_A Supertax on Large Holdings_

Every estate containing more than a maximum number of acres, say, ten
thousand, whether composed of a single tract or of several tracts,
could be compelled to pay a special tax in addition to the ordinary
tax levied on land of the same value. The rate of this supertax
should increase with the size of the estate above the fixed maximum.
Through this device large holdings could be broken up, and divided
among many owners and occupiers. For several years it has been
successfully applied for this purpose in New Zealand and
Australia.[107] Inasmuch as this tax exemplifies the principle of
progression, it is in accord with the principles of justice; for
relative ability to pay is closely connected with relative sacrifice.
Other things being equal, the less the sacrifice involved, the greater
is the ability of the individual to pay the tax. Thus, the man with an
income of ten thousand dollars a year makes a smaller sacrifice in
giving up two per cent. of it than the man whose income is only one
thousand dollars; for the latter case the twenty dollars surrendered
represent a privation of the necessaries or the elementary comforts of
life, while the two hundred dollars taken from the rich man would have
been expended for luxuries or converted into capital. While the
incomes of both are reduced in the same proportion, their
satisfactions are not diminished to the same degree. The wants that
are deprived of satisfaction are much less important in the case of
the richer than in that of the poorer man. Hence the only way to bring
about anything like equality of sacrifice between them is to increase
the proportion of income taken from the former. This means that the
rate of taxation would be progressive.[108]

It is in order to object that the principle of progression should not
be applied to the taxation of great landed estates, since a
considerable part of them is unproductive, and consequently does not
directly affect sacrifice. But the same objection can be urged against
any taxation of unoccupied land. The obvious reply is that the equal
taxation of unproductive with productive land is justified by social
reasons, chiefly, the unwisdom of permitting land to be held out of
use. The same social reasons apply to the question of levying an
exceptionally high tax on large estates, even though they may at
present produce no revenue.

While the tax is sound in principle, it is probably not much needed in
America in connection with agricultural or urban land. Its main sphere
of usefulness would seem to be certain great holdings of mineral,
timber, and water power lands. "There are many great combinations in
other industries whose formation is complete. In the lumber industry,
on the other hand, the Bureau now finds in the making a combination
caused, fundamentally, by a long standing public policy. The
concentration already existing is sufficiently impressive. Still more
impressive are the possibilities for the future. In the last forty
years concentration has so proceeded that 195 holders, many
interrelated, now have practically one-half of the privately owned
timber in the investigation area (which contains eighty per cent. of
the whole). This formidable process of concentration, in timber and in
land, clearly involves grave future possibilities of impregnable
monopolistic conditions, whose far reaching consequences to society it
is now difficult to anticipate fully or to overestimate."[109] In
January, 1916, the Secretary of Agriculture called the attention of
Congress to the fact that a small number of corporations closely
associated in a policy of community of interest were threatening to
secure and exercise a monopoly over the developed water power of the
country. Ninety per cent. of the anthracite coal lands of Pennsylvania
are owned or controlled by some nine railroads acting as a unit in all
important matters. For situations of this kind a supertax on large
estates would seem to hold the promise of a large measure of relief.

To sum up the main conclusions of this very long chapter:
Exceptionally valuable lands, as those containing timber, minerals,
oil, gas, phosphate, and water power, which are still under public
ownership should remain there. Through a judicious system of loans,
deserving and efficient persons should be assisted to get possession
of some land. Municipalities should lease rather than sell their
lands, and should strive to increase their holdings. To take all the
future increases in the value of land would be morally lawful,
provided that compensation were given to owners who thereby suffered
positive losses of interest or principal. To take a small part of the
increase, and to transfer very gradually the taxes on improvements and
on personal property to land, would probably be just, owing to the
beneficial effects upon public welfare. A supertax on large holdings
of exceptionally valuable and scarce land would likewise be beneficial
and legitimate.[110]


REFERENCES ON SECTION I

     ASHLEY: The Origin of Property in Land. London; 1892.

     LAVELEYE: Primitive Property. London; 1878.

     WHITTAKER: The Taxation, Tenure, and Ownership of Land.
     London; 1914.

     PREUSS: The Fundamental Fallacy of Socialism. St. Louis;
     1908.

     GEORGE: Progress and Poverty; and A Perplexed Philosopher.

     MARSH: Land Value Taxation in American Cities. N. Y.; 1911.

     FILLEBROWN: A Single Tax Handbook for 1913. Boston; 1912.

     YOUNG: The Single Tax Movement in the United States.
     Princeton; 1916.

     SHEARMAN: Natural Taxation. N. Y.; 1898.

     MATHEWS: Taxation and the Distribution of Wealth. N. Y.;
     1914.

     CATHREIN: Das Privatgrundeigenthum und seine Gegner.
     Freiburg; 1909.

     FALLON: Les Plus-Values et l'Impot. Paris; 1914.

     NEARING: Anthracite. Philadelphia; 1916.

     HAIG: Final Report of the Committee on Taxation of the City
     of New York; 1916.

     The exemption of Improvements from Taxation in Canada and U.
     S.; 1915.

     Some Probable Effects of Exemption in City of New York; 1915.

     KELLEHER: Private Ownership. Dublin; 1911.

     Proceedings of the 1913 Meeting of the American Economic
     Association.

     U. S. COMMISSIONER OF CORPORATIONS: Reports on the Lumber,
     Petroleum, Steel, and Water Power of the United States.

     SELIGMAN: Essays in Taxation; Shifting and Incidence of
     Taxation; and Progressive Taxation in Theory and Practice.

     Also the works of Taussig, Devas, Carver, Pesch, King,
     Vermeersch, Willoughby, and the Commission on Industrial
     Relations, all of which are cited at the end of the
     introductory chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[84] "Summary of Report of the Commissioner of Corporations on the
Timber Industry in the United States," p. 3.

[85] "Report of the Commissioner of Corporations on Water Power
Development in the United States," pp. 193-195.

[86] Idem, pp. 4, 5.

[87] "Abstract of the Thirteenth Census," p. 552.

[88] Cf. Marsh, "Land Value Taxation in American Cities," p. 95.

[89] Municipal purchase and ownership of land have been advocated by
such a conservative authority as the Rev. Heinrich Pesch, S.J.
"Lehrbuch der Nationaloekonomie," I, 203.

[90] As we shall see in a later chapter, the confiscation and
injustice would be smaller if the State should simultaneously abolish
interest. In any case, the decline in land value resulting from
complete confiscation of rent should be made up to the private owner
by public compensation.

[91] "Principles of Political Economy," book V, ch. 2, sect. v.

[92] "Progressive Taxation in Theory and Practice," 1908, p. 130.

[93] Cf. Taussig, "Principles of Economics," II, 516: Seligman, "The
Shifting and Incidence of Taxation," p. 223.

[94] The "discrimination" objection is put in a somewhat different
form by the Rev. Sydney F. Smith, S.J., in an article in _The Month_,
Sept., 1909, entitled "The Theory of Unearned Increment." His argument
is in substance that if the people of a city can claim the increases
in land values which their presence and activity have occasioned, the
purchasers of food, clothes, books, or concert tickets are equally
justified in claiming that, "having added to the value of the shops
and music halls, they had acquired a co-proprietary right in the
increased value of the owners' stock, and the owners' premises." While
this argument is specifically directed against those who maintain that
the "social production" of values confers a right thereto, it affects
to some extent our thesis that there is a vast difference between
value-increases in land and in other goods. Father Smith seems to
confuse the origination of value with the increase of value. The
presence of consumers is an obvious prerequisite to the existence of
any value at all in any kind of goods, but labour and financial outlay
on the part of the producers of the goods are an equally indispensable
prerequisite. The reason why the value is appropriated by the latter
rather than the former is that this is clearly the only rational
method of distribution. What we are concerned with here, however, is
not this initial or cost-of-production-value of artificial goods, but
the _increases_ in value above this level which are brought about by
external and social influences. Theoretically, the State could as
reasonably take these as the increases in the value of land;
practically, such a performance is out of the question, for the simple
reason that such increases are spasmodic and exceptional. If Father
Smith thinks that "food or clothes, or books, or concert tickets"
regularly advance above the cost-of-production-value, he is simply
mistaken. Since these and other artificial goods bring to their owners
as a rule no socially occasioned increments of value, they and their
owners are in quite a different situation from land and the owners of
land.

[95] Cf. Seligman, "Progressive Taxation in Theory and Practice," part
II, chs. ii and iii; also the classic refutation of the "benefit"
theory by John Stuart Mill in "Principles of Political Economy," book
V, ch. ii, sec. 2. The traditional Catholic teaching on the subject is
compactly stated by Cardinal de Lugo in "De Justitia et Jure," disp.
36; cf. Devas, "Political Economy," p. 594, 2d ed.

[96] Cf. Fallon, "Les Plus-Values et l'Impot," pp. 455, sq.; Paris,
1914; Fillebrown, "A Single Tax Handbook for 1913"; Boston, 1912;
Marsh, "Taxation of Land Values in American Cities," pp. 90-92; New
York, 1911; "The Quarterly Journal of Economics," vols. 22, 24, 25;
"The Single Tax Review," March-April, 1912; "Stimmen aus Maria-Laach,"
Oct., 1907.

[97] See the references in the second last paragraph.

[98] The most comprehensive and reliable account of the special land
taxes in Canada is contained in the report prepared for the Committee
on Taxation of the City of New York, by Robert Murray Haig, Ph.D.,
entitled, "The Exemption of Improvements from Taxation in Canada and
the United States"; New York, 1915. See also Fallon, op. cit., pp.
452-455.

[99] Cf. Fallon, op. cit., pp. 443-452.

[100] "The Wealth and Income of the People of the United States," pp.
158, 143.

[101] "Abstract of Bulletins on Wealth, Debt, and Taxation," p. 16; U.
S. Census, 1913.

[102] Idem, p. 15.

[103] Idem, p. 16; and Bulletin of the Census on "Estimated Valuation
of National Wealth," p. 15.

[104] "Special Report of the Twelfth Census on Wealth, Debt, and
Taxation," pp. 12, 13.

[105] Haig, "Probable Effects of Exemption of Improvements....", p.
23.

[106] Cf. Seligman, "The Shifting and Incidence of Taxation," pp. 187,
245, 272, and all of part II; N. Y., 1899; Taussig, "Principles of
Economics," II, 518-549, and chs. 67-69.

[107] Cf. Fallon, op. cit., pp. 442, sq.

[108] Cf. Vermeersch, "Quaestiones de Justitia," pp. 94-126; Seligman,
"Progressive Taxation in Theory and Practice," pp. 210, 211; Mill,
"Principles of Political Economy," book V, ch. ii, sec. 3.

[109] "Summary of Report of the Commissioner of Corporations on the
Lumber Industry in the United States," p. 8.

[110] Probably the most concrete and satisfactory discussion of the
increment tax and the project to transfer improvement taxes to land,
is that presented in the "Final Report of the Committee on Taxation of
the City of New York"; 1916. It contains brief, though complete,
statements of all phases of the subject, together with concise
arguments on both sides, majority and minority recommendations, a
great variety of dissenting individual opinions, and considerable
testimony by experts, authorities, and other interested persons.




SECTION II

THE MORALITY OF PRIVATE CAPITAL AND INTEREST




