CHAPTER IX

THE NATURE AND THE RATE OF INTEREST


Interest denotes that part of the product of industry which goes to
the capitalist. As the ownership of land commands rent, so the
ownership of capital commands interest; as rent is a price paid for
the use of land, so interest is a price paid for the use of capital.

However, the term capital is less definite and unambiguous, both in
popular and in economic usage, than the word land. The farmer, the
merchant, and the manufacturer often speak of their land, buildings,
and chattels as their capital, and reckon the returns from all these
sources as equivalent to a certain per cent. of interest or profit.
This is not technically correct; when we use the terms capital and
interest we should exclude the notions of land and rent.


_Meaning of Capital and Capitalist_

Capital is ordinarily defined as, wealth employed directly for the
production of new wealth. According as it is considered in the
abstract or the concrete, it is capital-value or capital-instruments.
For example, the owner of a wagon factory may describe his capital as
having a value of 100,000 dollars, or as consisting of certain
buildings, machines, tools, office furniture, etc. In the former case
he thinks of his capital as so much abstract value which, through a
sale, he could take out of the factory, and put into other concrete
capital forms, such as a railroad or a jobbing house. In the latter
case he has in mind the particular instruments in which his capital is
at present embodied. The capital-value concept is the more convenient,
and is usually intended when the word capital is used without
qualification. It is also the basis upon which interest is reckoned;
for the capitalist does not measure his share of the product as so
many dollars of rent on his capital-instruments, but as so many per
cent. on his capital-value.

Capitalists are of two principal kinds: those who employ their own
money in their own enterprises; and those who lend their money to
others for use in industry. The former may be called active
capitalists, the latter loan-capitalists. Perhaps a majority of active
capitalists use some borrowed money in their business. To the lenders
of this borrowed money or capital they turn over a part of the product
in the form of interest. When, therefore, interest is defined as the
share of the product that goes to the capitalist, it is the owner of
capital-value rather than of capital-instruments that is meant. For
the man who has loaned 50,000 dollars at five per cent. to the wagon
manufacturer is not, except hypothetically, the owner of the buildings
which have been erected with that money. These are owned (subject
possibly to a mortgage) by the borrower, the active capitalist. But
the abstract value which has gone into them continues to be the
property of the lender. As owner thereof, he, instead of the active
capitalist, receives the interest that is assigned to this portion of
the total capital. Hence interest is the share of the product that is
taken by the owner of capital, whether he employs it himself or lends
it to some one else. While the fundamental reason of interest is the
fact that certain concrete instruments are necessary to the making of
the product, interest is always _reckoned_ on capital-value, and goes
to the owner of the capital-value. It goes to the man whose money has
been put into the instruments, whether or not he is the owner of the
instruments.


_Meaning of Interest_

Interest is the share of the capitalist as capitalist. The man who
employs his own capital in his own business receives therefrom in
addition to interest other returns. Let us suppose that some one has
invested 100,000 dollars of borrowed money and 100,000 dollars of his
own money in a wholesale grocery business. At the end of the year,
after defraying the cost of labour, materials, rent, repairs, and
replacement, his gross returns are 15,000 dollars. Out of this sum he
must pay five thousand dollars as interest on the money that he has
borrowed. This leaves him a total amount of ten thousand dollars, as
his share of the product of the industry. Since he could command a
salary of three thousand dollars if he worked for some one else, he
regards his labour of directing his own business as worth at least
this sum. Deducting it from ten thousand dollars, he has left seven
thousand dollars, which must in some sense be accredited as payment
for the use of his own capital. However, it is not all pure interest;
for he runs the risk of losing his capital, and also of failing to get
the normal rate of interest on it during future unprosperous years.
Hence he will require a part of the seven thousand dollars as
insurance against these two contingencies. Two per cent. of his
capital, or two thousand dollars, is not an excessive allowance. If
the business did not provide him with this amount of insurance he
would probably regard it as unsafe, and would sell it and invest his
money elsewhere. Subtracting two thousand dollars from seven thousand,
we have five thousand left as pure interest on the director's own
capital. This is equivalent to five per cent., which is the rate that
he is paying on the capital that he has borrowed. If he could not get
this rate on his own money he would probably prefer to become a lender
himself, a loan capitalist instead of an active capitalist. This part
of his total share, then, and only this part, is pure interest. The
other two sums that he receives, the three thousand dollars and the
two thousand dollars, are respectively wages for his labour and
insurance against his risks. Sometimes they are classified together
under the general name of profits.

Let us suppose, however, that the gross returns are not 15,000
dollars, but 17,000. How is the additional sum to be denominated? In
strict economic language it would probably be called net profits, as
distinguished from normal or necessary profits, which comprise wages
of direction and insurance against loss. Sometimes it is called
interest. In that case the owner of the store would receive seven
instead of five per cent, on his own capital. Whether the extra two
per cent. (2,000 dollars) be called net profits or surplus interest,
is mainly a matter of terminology. The important thing is to indicate
clearly that these terms designate the surplus which goes to the
active capitalist in addition to necessary profits and necessary
interest.

At the risk of wearisome repetition, one more example will be given to
illustrate the distinction between interest and the other returns that
are received in connection with capital. The annual income from a
railway bond is interest on lender's capital, and consequently pure
interest. Ordinarily the bondholder is adequately protected against
the loss of his capital by a mortgage on the railroad. On the other
hand, the holder of a share of railway stock is a part owner of the
railroad, and consequently incurs the risk of losing his property.
Hence the dividend that he receives on his stock comprises interest on
capital plus insurance against loss. It is usually one or two per
cent. higher than the rate on the bonds. Since the officers and
directors are the only shareholders who perform any labour in the
management of the railroad, only they receive wages of management.
Consequently the gross profits are divided into interest and dividends
at fixed rates, and fixed salaries. When a surplus exists above these
requirements it is not, as a rule, distributed among the stockholders
annually. In railroads, therefore, and many other corporations,
interest is easily distinguished from those other returns with which
it is frequently confused in partnerships and enterprises carried on
by individuals.


_The Rate of Interest_

Is there a single rate of interest throughout industry? At first sight
this question would seem to demand a negative answer. United States
bonds pay about two per cent.; banks about three per cent.; municipal
bonds about four per cent.; railway bonds about five per cent.; the
stocks of stable industrial corporations about six per cent. net; real
estate mortgages from five to seven per cent.; promissory notes
somewhat higher rates; and pawnbrokers' loans from twelve per cent.
upwards. Moreover, the same kind of loans brings different rates in
different places. For example, money lent on the security of farm
mortgages yields only about five per cent. in the states of the East,
but seven or eight per cent. on the Pacific coast.

These and similar variations are differences not so much of interest
as of security, cost of negotiation, and mental attitude. The farm
mortgage pays a higher rate than the government bond partly because it
is less secure, partly because it involves greater trouble of
investment, and partly because it does not run for so long a time. For
the same reasons a higher rate of interest is charged on a promissory
note than on a bank deposit certificate. Again, the lower rates on
government bonds and bank deposits are due in some degree to the
peculiar attitude of that class of investors whose savings are small
in amount, who are not well aware of the range of investment
opportunities, and to whom security and convenience are exceptionally
important considerations. If such persons did not exist the rates on
government bonds and savings deposits would be higher than they
actually are. The higher rates in a new country on, say, farm
mortgages are likewise due in part to psychical peculiarities. Where
men are more speculative and more eager to borrow money for industrial
purposes, the demand for loans is greater relatively to the supply
than in older and more conservative communities. Therefore, the price
of the loans, the rate of interest, is higher.

In one sense it would seem that the lowest of the rates cited above,
namely, that on United States bonds, represents pure interest, and
that all the other rates are interest plus something else.
Nevertheless, the sums invested in these bonds form but a very small
part of the whole amount of money and capital drawing interest, and
they come from persons who do not display the average degree either of
business ability or of willingness to take risks. Hence it is more
convenient and more correct to regard as the standard rate of interest
in any community that which is obtained on first class industrial
security, such as the bonds of railroads and other stable
corporations, and mortgages on real estate. Loans to these enterprises
are subject to what may properly be called the average or prevailing
industrial risks, are negotiated in average psychical conditions, and
embrace by far the greater part of all money drawing interest;
consequently the rate that they command may be looked upon as in a
very real and practical sense normal. While this conception of the
normal rate is in a measure conventional, it accords with popular
usage. It is what most men have in mind when they speak of the
prevailing rate of interest.

The prevailing or standard rate in any community can usually be stated
with a sufficient approach to precision to be satisfactory for all
practical purposes. In all the Eastern States it is now about five per
cent.; in the Middle West it is somewhere between five and six per
cent.; on the Pacific coast it is between six and seven per cent. The
supreme court of Minnesota decided in 1896 that, in view of the actual
rates of interest then obtaining, five per cent. on the reproduction
cost of railroads was a fairly liberal return, and could be adopted by
the state authorities in fixing charges for carrying freight and
passengers.[111] A few years later the Michigan tax commission allowed
the railroads four per cent. on the reproduction cost of their
property, on the ground that investments which yielded that rate in
addition to the usual tax of one per cent. (or five per cent. before
the deduction of the tax) stood at par on the stock market.[112] In
other words, the prevailing rate was five per cent. At the beginning
of the year 1907, the railroad commission of Wisconsin fixed six per
cent. as the return to which the stockholders of railroads were
entitled, because this was about the return which investors generally
were able to get on that kind of security. In the view of the
Commission, the current rate of interest on railroad _bonds_, and
similar investments, was about five per cent.[113] The significance of
these decisions by the public authorities of three states is found not
so much in the particular rates which they sanctioned as in the fact
that they were able to determine a standard or prevailing rate.
Therefore a standard rate exists. At the same time it is interesting
to note that in all three states the rate of industrial interest was
declared to be about the same, that is, five per cent. Perhaps it is
safe to say that, throughout the greater part of the industrial field
of America, five or six per cent. is the prevailing rate of interest.

What causes the rate to be five per cent., or six per cent., or any
other per cent.? Briefly stated, it is the interplay of supply and
demand. Since interest is a price paid for the use of a thing, i.e.,
capital, its rate or level is determined by the same general forces
that govern the price of wheat, or shoes, or hats, or any other
commodity that is bought and sold in the market. The rate is five or
six per cent. because at that rate the amount of money offered by
lenders equals the amount demanded by borrowers. Should the amount
offered at that rate increase without a corresponding increase in the
amount demanded, the rate would fall, just as it would rise under
opposite conditions.

Supply and demand, however, are merely the immediate forces. They are
themselves the outcome or resultant of factors more remote. On the
side of supply, the principal remote forces which regulate the rate of
interest are: the industrial resources of the community, and the
relative strength of its habits of saving and spending. On the side of
demand, the chief ultimate factors are: the productivity of
capital-instruments, the comparative intensity of the social desires
of investing and lending, and the supplies of land, business ability
and labour. Each of these factors exercises upon the rate of interest
an influence of its own, and each of them may be assisted or
counteracted by one or more of the others. Precisely what rate will
result from any given condition of the factors, cannot be stated
beforehand, for the factors cannot be measured in such a way as to
provide a basis for this kind of forecast. All that can be said is
that, when changes occur on the side of either demand or supply, there
will be a corresponding change in the rate of interest, provided that
no neutralising change takes place on the other side.

FOOTNOTES:

[111] "Final Report of the Industrial Commission," pp. 410, 411.

[112] "Report of the Industrial Commission," vol. IX, p. 380.

[113] "Publication No. 32 of the Railroad Commission of Wisconsin,"
pp. 165, 166.




