CHAPTER XIX

THE MORAL ASPECT OF STOCK WATERING


In the last chapter we saw that a monopoly has no right to gains in
excess of the competitive rate of interest on its capital, except in
so far as these have been derived from superior efficiency. Now
superior efficiency is clearly present whenever the monopolistic
concern obtains surplus gains by selling its product at competitive
prices, or at the prices that would have prevailed under competition.
Evidently the surplus in such a case is due to the greater
productivity of the monopoly as compared with the average productivity
of competitive concerns. When, however, the monopoly charges prices
above the competitive level, its surplus gains cannot all be
attributed to unusual efficiency. A part if not all of them are the
result simply of the power to take; consequently they are immoral.

One of the means by which some monopolies have obtained unjust surplus
gains is overcapitalisation, or stockwatering. This practice is rarely
found in businesses that are subject to normal competition. So far as
the consumer is concerned, a corporation that cannot fix prices
arbitrarily has nothing to gain by inflating its capital. Unless it
develops exceptional efficiency, it cannot hope to obtain more than
the competitive rate of interest on its capital; if it does become
exceptionally efficient, it can take the resulting surplus gains
without arousing public resentment or criticism. In either case, it
will have no sufficient reason to deceive the public by exaggerating
the amount of its capital. When a competitive concern does water its
stock, the object will be to defraud investors. If the scheme is
successful the unjust surplus gains are taken by one set of
stockholders from another set of stockholders. Whenever anything of
this sort occurs, the deceptive devices employed are so crude and
obvious that they present no special problem for the moralist. Even as
practised by monopolies, stockwatering raises no principle that has
not been already discussed. It does, however, create some special
difficulties in the matter of applying the moral principles involved.
Consequently, it may with advantage be considered in a separate
chapter.

The general definition of overcapitalisation is capitalisation in
excess of the proper valuation of a business. What is the measure of
proper valuation? According to many corporation directors, it is
earning power. If a concern is able to get the prevailing rate of
interest on a capitalisation of ten million dollars, that is the
proper capitalisation for that concern, even though the money actually
invested might not have exceeded five million dollars. In the opinion
of most other persons, however, a company is overcapitalised when the
face value of its securities is greater than the money put into the
business plus the subsequent enhancement in the value of its land.
"The money put into the business," means that which has been expended
for labour, materials, land, equipment, and all other items and costs
of organising the concern, together with the sum that is necessary to
cover the interest not obtained by the investors during the
preparatory period before the business became productively operative.
The increase in the value of the land after its acquisition by the
company also deserves a place in the legitimate valuation, and may
reasonably be represented by an appropriate amount of securities.
Monopolistic corporations have as good a right, generally speaking, to
profit by the "unearned increment" of land as competitive concerns. In
brief, the proper measure of capitalisation is cost: either the
original cost, as just explained and supplemented; or the present
cost of reproducing the business.


_Injurious Effects of Stockwatering_

Stockwatering can become an instrument of unjust gains in two ways:
first, through fraud inflicted upon some of the investors; second,
through the imposition of exorbitant prices upon the consumers. The
former cannot occur so long as the process of inflation does not go
beyond earning power; for in that case all stockholders, barring
dishonest manipulation of the company's receipts, will obtain the
normal rate of interest on their investment. If, however, stock is
sold in excess of the earning power of the concern, those stockholders
who fail to obtain the ordinary rate of interest on their money are
unjustly treated in so far as they have been deceived. And those
officers or other members of the corporation who have profited by the
deception of and injury to these stockholders, are the recipients of
unjust gains. Daniel Drew inflated the capitalisation of the Erie
Railroad from seventeen millions to seventy-eight millions within four
years for the purpose of manipulating the stock market; owing to
excessive issues of stock, the American Shipbuilding Company was
thrown into bankruptcy to the great injury of all but one of its
stockholders;[186] because they issued securities to buy subsidiary
railway lines at exorbitant prices, and to provide extravagant
commissions and discounts for bankers, the directors of the 'Frisco
System forced it into a receivership, after having inflicted a net
loss of four million dollars per year upon the stockholders.[187] Many
other notable performances might be cited where stockwatering, both in
railroads and in industrial concerns, has defrauded investors of
millions of dollars, and enabled a few powerful directors to reap
corresponding enormous profits.

At first sight it would seem that stockwatering is of little or no
importance to the consumer. Since a monopolistic concern endeavours to
fix its prices at the point that will yield the maximum net profit in
any case, the amount of stock in existence would seem to be irrelevant
to the problem. Nevertheless, the presence of a large quantity of
fictitious capital whose owners are calling for dividends, sometimes
constitutes a special force impelling the imposition of higher prices
and charges. "It will happen at times that overcapitalisation does at
least cause a clinging to high prices. The managers of an
overcapitalised monopoly may have to face the fact that great blocks
of securities are outstanding, very likely issued by their
predecessors, and now held by all sorts of investors. They are then
loath to let go any slice of its profits. We have seen that often the
monopoly principle of maximum net profit is not applied in its full
sweep, especially in industries which are potentially subject to
public control. Where abnormal returns on the original investment have
been made, concessions to public opinion in the way of low rates and
better facilities are more likely to come when capitalisation has not
been inflated."[188] The United States Industrial Commission found
that as regards railroads: "In the long run excessive capitalisation
tends to keep rates high; conservative capitalisation tends to make
rates low."[189]

This indirect influence of stockwatering toward excessive rates and
prices becomes effective in two ways. The existence of fictitious
capital conceals from the public the high rate of return that is
obtained on the true valuation, thus preventing effective action for a
reduction in prices and charges; and it sometimes causes the
rate-making authorities to allow rates to be sufficiently high to
yield something to the investors in the inflated capital. If a trust
or a railroad has issued stock having a par value of twice the capital
invested, its rate of dividend on the entire capitalisation will be
only one-half the rate of interest that it is receiving on the
investment. If it pays, for example, seven per cent. on all its stock,
it will be getting fourteen per cent. on its genuine capital. While
the consumers of tobacco, or the patrons of a railroad, would raise no
outcry against seven per cent. dividends, they would probably begin to
agitate for an enforcement of the anti-trust laws, and for a reduction
in freight and passenger charges, if they realised that they were
providing for dividends of fourteen per cent. Nor is the public
adequately protected by government investigations of trusts and
regulation of railway rates. Despite the anti-trust laws, many
American monopolies have for many years received exorbitant profits
through excessive prices imposed upon the consumer; and in many of
these instances overcapitalisation and its resulting concealment of
real profits have been of considerable assistance to the extortionate
monopoly. In fixing railway rates, the Interstate Commerce Commission,
and the various state railroad commissions, have been seriously
hampered by their inability to determine the real investment of the
roads, and to separate the genuine from the fictitious capitalisation.
Not until the year 1913 did the national government begin the task of
making a valuation of interstate railroad property, and the work will
require several years. Very few of the states have made valuations of
the railroads within their borders. In the meantime it is certain that
many of the rates fixed by both the national and the state bodies will
continue, as in the past, to be higher than they would have been if
the true value of the railroads were known and accepted as the basis
of freight and passenger charges.

The second bad effect of stockwatering on the consumer is seen when
rate-fixing bodies deliberately permit the charges of public service
corporations to be high enough to include some returns on that portion
of the capitalisation which is fictitious. It is very difficult for
such authorities to resist entirely the plea of the "innocent
investor." Consequently, railroad commissions and other rate making
authorities, and even the courts, have occasionally made some
provision for dividends on the "water." Chairman Knapp of the
Interstate Commerce Commission admitted a few years ago that, in
considering the reasonableness of a given rate, this body took into
account the financial condition, and therefore the capitalisation of
the railroad.[190] In 1914 and 1915 practically all the great railway
systems of the United States made powerful, and in a measure
successful, appeals to the Interstate Commerce Commission for a rise
in rates on the ground that they were unable to pay the normal rate of
interest on their securities, and hence could not obtain on
advantageous terms new capital needed for improvements. Had the
capitalisation of the roads been kept down to the actual investment,
most of them would have been able to pay the competitive rate of
interest on all their stock, and still have a sufficient surplus to
command excellent credit.


_The Moral Wrong_

When prices or charges are made high enough to provide returns on
fictitious capital, the consumer is treated unjustly. As we have shown
more than once, the consumer cannot rightfully be required to pay for
the products of a monopoly at a greater rate than is necessary to
provide the competitive rate of interest on capital in the average
conditions of efficiency. If some concerns are able to sell at this
price, and still obtain surplus gains, they have a right thereto on
account of their exceptional productivity. But the capital upon which
a monopolistic concern has a claim to the prevailing rate of interest,
is genuine capital: that is, the actual investment as interpreted
above, not an inflated capitalisation. The consumers may justly be
required to pay for the use and benefit of actual productive goods;
but it is not just that they should be compelled to pay for the
supposed use of a capital that has no concrete reality.

The stockholders of the monopolistic corporation which imposes upon
the consumers exorbitant prices or charges through the instrumentality
of inflated capitalisation, can become guilty of this injustice in two
ways: by promoting the improper capitalisation; and by getting
dividends on stock for which they have not given a fair equivalent. As
a rule, the greater part of such guilt and responsibility rests upon
certain special and powerful groups among the stockholders. For
example; the J.P. Morgan syndicate which organised the United States
Steel Corporation received for that service securities to the value of
$63,500,000. "There can be no question," says the Commissioner of
Corporations, "that this huge compensation to the syndicate was
greatly in excess of a reasonable payment."[191] The syndicate was
able to exact this stupendous sum mainly because some of its members
were also in control of some of the companies that were brought into
the combination. "In other words, as managers of the Steel Corporation
these various interests virtually determined their compensation as
underwriters."[192] In the opinion of the minority members of the
Stanley congressional investigating committee, "such a sum bore no
relation whatever to the service rendered, the risk run, and the
capital advanced."[193] The majority of the committee characterised
the transaction in even stronger language. It is clear, therefore,
that the syndicate committed injustice toward the consumers both by
organising a monopoly which afterward imposed unjust prices, and by
taking millions of dollars in securities which its members did not
earn, and on which they received interest through the exorbitant
prices. While this transaction is exceptionally conspicuous, it is
substantially typical of the methods by which many powerful monopolies
have watered their stock to the detriment of the public, and the
advantage of a small group of directors and financiers.


_The "Innocent" Investor_

Is the State obliged to protect, or is even justified in protecting,
the innocent victims of stockwatering? That is to say, should
rate-making authorities fix the charges of public service corporations
high enough to return some interest to the purchasers of fictitious
securities? All the facts and presumptions of the case seem to demand
an answer in the negative. In the first place, it is impossible to
distinguish the "innocent" holders from those who were fully
acquainted with the questionable and speculative nature of the stock
at the time it came into their possession. In the second place, the
civil law has never formally recognised any such claim on the part of
even innocent investors, nor any such obligation on the part of
itself. It has never laid down the principle that any class of
investors in fictitious stock has a legal or moral right to obtain the
normal rate of interest on such stock through the imposition of
sufficiently high charges upon the consumers. Nor have the courts,
except in isolated instances, sanctioned any such principle. On the
contrary, the Supreme Court of the United States, in the case of Smyth
vs. Ames, declared that a railroad "may not impose upon the public the
burden of such increased rates as may be required for the purpose of
realising profits upon such excessive valuation or fictitious
capitalisation." In the third place, when we consider the matter from
the side of morals, we see that the innocent investors are not the
only persons whose rights are involved. If charges are placed high
enough to cover interest on fictitious capital, the cost and the
injury fall upon the consumers. The latter have a right to the
services of utility corporations, such as railways and gas companies,
at a fair price; that is, a price which will return to the capital put
into the concern the prevailing rate of interest, plus whatever gains
are obtained by exceptional efficiency. To require them to pay more
than this, is to compel them to give something for nothing; namely, to
provide interest on capital which does not exist, and from which they
receive no benefit. When, therefore, the State intervenes to secure
fair charges for the consumers, it should base them upon the capital
actually invested and used in the business of public service.

Frequently, however, the State has permitted overcapitalisation, and
charges sufficient to pay normal dividends thereon, for long periods
of years. Has it not thereby encouraged investors to cherish the
expectation that these high charges would be permitted to continue,
and that the fictitious stock would remain indefinitely as valuable as
when it came into their possession? Is it not breaking faith with
these investors when it reduces charges to the basis of the actual
investment? A sufficient answer to these questions is found in the
fact that the State has never officially sanctioned the practice of
stockwatering, nor in any way intimated that it would recognise the
existence of the fictitious stock when it should take up the neglected
task of fixing fair rates and charges. At the most, the civil law has
merely tolerated the practice, and the resulting extortion upon the
public. And there has never been a time when the greater and saner
part of public opinion did not look upon overcapitalisation as at the
least abnormal and irregular. Neither from the civil law nor from
public sentiment have the devices of inflating capitalisation received
that measure of approval which would confer upon investments therein
the legal or the moral status of vested rights. To the "innocent
investor" in watered stocks the maxim, _caveat emptor_, is as fairly
applicable as to the man who has been deceived into lending his money
on insufficient security, or the man who has been induced by the
asseverations of a highly imaginative prospectus to put his money into
a salted gold mine, or the man who buys stolen goods from a pawn shop,
or the man who because of insufficient police protection loses his
purse to a highwayman. In all these cases perfect legal safeguards
would have prevented the loss; yet in none of them does the State
undertake to make the loss good to the innocent victim.

Such seems to be the strict justice of the situation as between the
consumer and the innocent investor. It may sometimes happen that a
particularly grave hardship can be averted from the latter at a
comparatively slight cost to the former. In such a case equity would
seem to require that some concession be made to the investors through
the imposition of somewhat higher charges upon the consumer.


_Magnitude of Overcapitalisation_

Probably the majority of the great steam railroads, street railways,
and gas companies that were organised during the last quarter of the
nineteenth century inflated their capitalisation to a greater or less
extent. Since the year 1900 the trusts have been the chief exponents
and illustrations of the practice. According to President Van Hise,
"the majority of the great concentrations of industry have gone
through two or three stages of reorganisation, the promoters and
financiers each time profiting greatly, sometimes enormously."[194]
For example; in 1908 the "water" in the American Tobacco Company was
estimated by the Commissioner of Corporations at $66,000,000; the
United States Shipbuilding Company diluted its twelve and one-half
million dollars of capital with more than fifty-five millions of
"water"; the United States Steel Corporation contained at the time of
its organisation fictitious capital to the amount of $500,000,000; and
at least fifty per cent. of the common stock of the American Sugar
Refining Company represented no actual investment.[195] Owing to the
penetrating and widespread criticism, and the government
investigations and prosecutions of the last few years, the practice of
stockwatering has very greatly diminished. Perhaps the most flagrant
recent example is that of the Pullman Company, which according to the
testimony of R. T. Lincoln before the Federal Commission on Industrial
Relations, distributed among its stockholders $100,000,000 in stock
dividends between 1898 and 1910.

Nevertheless the temptation to inflate capital will exist until the
device is stringently prohibited by law. Both the nation and the
states ought to adopt the policy of forbidding the sale of stock at
less than par value, and restricting issues of stock to the amount
required for the establishment, equipment, and permanent betterment of
a concern, including a sum to cover the loss of interest to the
investors during the early period of the business. Any extraordinary
risks to which an enterprise is liable can be protected by the simple
device of allowing a correspondingly high rate of interest on the
securities. With such legislation enacted and enforced, neither the
investor nor the consumer could be deceived or defrauded; and the
financing and management of corporations would become less
speculative, and more beneficial to the community. The present chapter
may be fittingly closed with a moderate and significant statement from
the pen of Professor Taussig: "It is doubtful whether the whole
mechanism of irregular and swollen capitalisation was at any time
necessary or wise. Why not provide once for all that securities shall
be issued only to represent what has been invested?... It is
sometimes said that freedom, even recklessness, in the issue of
securities was a useful device, in that it enabled the projectors to
look forward to returns really tempting, and at the same time
concealed these returns from a grudging public.... A more simple and
straightforward way of dealing with the issue of securities might thus
have dampened in some degree the feverish speculation and restless
progress of railway development. But a slower pace would have had its
advantages also, and, not least, restriction of securities would have
saved great complications in the later stages of established monopoly
and needed regulation."[196]

FOOTNOTES:

[186] Cf. Ripley, "Trusts, Pools, and Corporations," pp. 207-210.

[187] See Report of the Interstate Commerce Commission on these
transactions.

[188] Taussig, "Principles of Economics," II, 385, 386.

[189] Final Report, p. 414.

[190] Final Report of the Industrial Commission, p. 413.

[191] Report on the Steel Industry, p. 38.

[192] Idem, p. 39.

[193] _Chicago Record-Herald_, July 29, 1912.

[194] Op. cit., p. 28.

[195] Cf. Van Hise, op. cit., pp. 29, 142, 149.

[196] Op. cit., II, 387, 388.




