CHAPTER 2

The Princess Loses Herself


I have said the Princess Irene was about eight years old when my story
begins.  And this is how it begins.

One very wet day, when the mountain was covered with mist which was
constantly gathering itself together into raindrops, and pouring down
on the roofs of the great old house, whence it fell in a fringe of
water from the eaves all round about it, the princess could not of
course go out.  She got very tired, so tired that even her toys could
no longer amuse her.  You would wonder at that if I had time to
describe to you one half of the toys she had.  But then, you wouldn't
have the toys themselves, and that makes all the difference: you can't
get tired of a thing before you have it.  It was a picture, though,
worth seeing--the princess sitting in the nursery with the sky ceiling
over her head, at a great table covered with her toys.  If the artist
would like to draw this, I should advise him not to meddle with the
toys.  I am afraid of attempting to describe them, and I think he had
better not try to draw them.  He had better not.  He can do a thousand
things I can't, but I don't think he could draw those toys.  No man
could better make the princess herself than he could, though--leaning
with her back bowed into the back of the chair, her head hanging down,
and her hands in her lap, very miserable as she would say herself, not
even knowing what she would like, except it were to go out and get
thoroughly wet, and catch a particularly nice cold, and have to go to
bed and take gruel.  The next moment after you see her sitting there,
her nurse goes out of the room.

Even that is a change, and the princess wakes up a little, and looks
about her.  Then she tumbles off her chair and runs out of the door,
not the same door the nurse went out of, but one which opened at the
foot of a curious old stair of worm-eaten oak, which looked as if never
anyone had set foot upon it.  She had once before been up six steps,
and that was sufficient reason, in such a day, for trying to find out
what was at the top of it.

Up and up she ran--such a long way it seemed to her!--until she came to
the top of the third flight.  There she found the landing was the end
of a long passage.  Into this she ran.  It was full of doors on each
side.  There were so many that she did not care to open any, but ran on
to the end, where she turned into another passage, also full of doors.
When she had turned twice more, and still saw doors and only doors
about her, she began to get frightened.  It was so silent!  And all
those doors must hide rooms with nobody in them!  That was dreadful.
Also the rain made a great trampling noise on the roof.  She turned and
started at full speed, her little footsteps echoing through the sounds
of the rain--back for the stairs and her safe nursery.  So she thought,
but she had lost herself long ago.  It doesn't follow that she was
lost, because she had lost herself, though.

She ran for some distance, turned several times, and then began to be
afraid.  Very soon she was sure that she had lost the way back. Rooms
everywhere, and no stair!  Her little heart beat as fast as her little
feet ran, and a lump of tears was growing in her throat. But she was
too eager and perhaps too frightened to cry for some time.  At last her
hope failed her.  Nothing but passages and doors everywhere!  She threw
herself on the floor, and burst into a wailing cry broken by sobs.

She did not cry long, however, for she was as brave as could be
expected of a princess of her age.  After a good cry, she got up, and
brushed the dust from her frock.  Oh, what old dust it was! Then she
wiped her eyes with her hands, for princesses don't always have their
handkerchiefs in their pockets, any more than some other little girls I
know of.  Next, like a true princess, she resolved on going wisely to
work to find her way back: she would walk through the passages, and
look in every direction for the stair. This she did, but without
success.  She went over the same ground again an again without knowing
it, for the passages and doors were all alike.  At last, in a corner,
through a half-open door, she did see a stair.  But alas! it went the
wrong way: instead of going down, it went up.  Frightened as she was,
however, she could not help wishing to see where yet further the stair
could lead.  It was very narrow, and so steep that she went on like a
four-legged creature on her hands and feet.




CHAPTER 3

The Princess and--We Shall See Who


When she came to the top, she found herself in a little square place,
with three doors, two opposite each other, and one opposite the top of
the stair.  She stood for a moment, without an idea in her little head
what to do next.  But as she stood, she began to hear a curious humming
sound.  Could it be the rain?  No.  It was much more gentle, and even
monotonous than the sound of the rain, which now she scarcely heard.
The low sweet humming sound went on, sometimes stopping for a little
while and then beginning again.  It was more like the hum of a very
happy bee that had found a rich well of honey in some globular flower,
than anything else I can think of at this moment.  Where could it come
from?  She laid her ear first to one of the doors to hearken if it was
there--then to another.  When she laid her ear against the third door,
there could be no doubt where it came from: it must be from something
in that room.  What could it be?  She was rather afraid, but her
curiosity was stronger than her fear, and she opened the door very
gently and peeped in.  What do you think she saw?  A very old lady who
sat spinning.

Perhaps you will wonder how the princess could tell that the old lady
was an old lady, when I inform you that not only was she beautiful, but
her skin was smooth and white.  I will tell you more.  Her hair was
combed back from her forehead and face, and hung loose far down and all
over her back.  That is not much like an old lady--is it?  Ah! but it
was white almost as snow.  And although her face was so smooth, her
eyes looked so wise that you could not have helped seeing she must be
old.  The princess, though she could not have told you why, did think
her very old indeed--quite fifty, she said to herself.  But she was
rather older than that, as you shall hear.

While the princess stared bewildered, with her head just inside the
door, the old lady lifted hers, and said, in a sweet, but old and
rather shaky voice, which mingled very pleasantly with the continued
hum of her wheel:

'Come in, my dear; come in.  I am glad to see you.'

That the princess was a real princess you might see now quite plainly;
for she didn't hang on to the handle of the door, and stare without
moving, as I have known some do who ought to have been princesses but
were only rather vulgar little girls.  She did as she was told, stepped
inside the door at once, and shut it gently behind her.

'Come to me, my dear,' said the old lady.

And again the princess did as she was told.  She approached the old
lady--rather slowly, I confess--but did not stop until she stood by her
side, and looked up in her face with her blue eyes and the two melted
stars in them.

'Why, what have you been doing with your eyes, child?' asked the old
lady.

'Crying,' answered the princess.

'Why, child?'

'Because I couldn't find my way down again.'

'But you could find your way up.'

'Not at first--not for a long time.'

'But your face is streaked like the back of a zebra.  Hadn't you a
handkerchief to wipe your eyes with?'

'No.'

'Then why didn't you come to me to wipe them for you?'

'Please, I didn't know you were here.  I will next time.'

'There's a good child!' said the old lady.

Then she stopped her wheel, and rose, and, going out of the room,
returned with a little silver basin and a soft white towel, with which
she washed and wiped the bright little face.  And the princess thought
her hands were so smooth and nice!

When she carried away the basin and towel, the little princess wondered
to see how straight and tall she was, for, although she was so old, she
didn't stoop a bit.  She was dressed in black velvet with thick white
heavy-looking lace about it; and on the black dress her hair shone like
silver.  There was hardly any more furniture in the room than there
might have been in that of the poorest old woman who made her bread by
her spinning.  There was no carpet on the floor--no table
anywhere--nothing but the spinning-wheel and the chair beside it.  When
she came back, she sat down and without a word began her spinning once
more, while Irene, who had never seen a spinning-wheel, stood by her
side and looked on.  When the old lady had got her thread fairly going
again, she said to the princess, but without looking at her:

'Do you know my name, child?'

'No, I don't know it,' answered the princess.

'My name is Irene.'

'That's my name!' cried the princess.

'I know that.  I let you have mine.  I haven't got your name. You've
got mine.'

'How can that be?' asked the princess, bewildered.  'I've always had my
name.'

'Your papa, the king, asked me if I had any objection to your having
it; and, of course, I hadn't.  I let you have it with pleasure.'

'It was very kind of you to give me your name--and such a pretty one,'
said the princess.

'Oh, not so very kind!' said the old lady.  'A name is one of those
things one can give away and keep all the same.  I have a good many
such things.  Wouldn't you like to know who I am, child?'

'Yes, that I should--very much.'

'I'm your great-great-grandmother,' said the lady.

'What's that?' asked the princess.

'I'm your father's mother's father's mother.'

'Oh, dear! I can't understand that,' said the princess.

'I dare say not.  I didn't expect you would.  But that's no reason why
I shouldn't say it.'

'Oh, no!' answered the princess.

'I will explain it all to you when you are older,' the lady went on.
'But you will be able to understand this much now: I came here to take
care of you.'

'Is it long since you came?  Was it yesterday?  Or was it today,
because it was so wet that I couldn't get out?'

'I've been here ever since you came yourself.'

'What a long time!' said the princess.  'I don't remember it at all.'

'No.  I suppose not.'

'But I never saw you before.'

'No.  But you shall see me again.'

'Do you live in this room always?'

'I don't sleep in it.  I sleep on the opposite side of the landing. I
sit here most of the day.'

'I shouldn't like it.  My nursery is much prettier.  You must be a
queen too, if you are my great big grand-mother.'

'Yes, I am a queen.'

'Where is your crown, then?' 'In my bedroom.'

'I should like to see it.'

'You shall some day--not today.'

'I wonder why nursie never told me.'

'Nursie doesn't know.  She never saw me.'

'But somebody knows that you are in the house?'

'No; nobody.'

'How do you get your dinner, then?'

'I keep poultry--of a sort.'

'Where do you keep them?'

'I will show you.'

'And who makes the chicken broth for you?'

'I never kill any of MY chickens.'

'Then I can't understand.'

'What did you have for breakfast this morning?' asked the lady.

'Oh! I had bread and milk, and an egg--I dare say you eat their eggs.'

'Yes, that's it.  I eat their eggs.'

'Is that what makes your hair so white?'

'No, my dear.  It's old age.  I am very old.'

'I thought so.  Are you fifty?'

'Yes--more than that.'

'Are you a hundred?'

'Yes--more than that.  I am too old for you to guess.  Come and see my
chickens.'

Again she stopped her spinning.  She rose, took the princess by the
hand, led her out of the room, and opened the door opposite the stair.
The princess expected to see a lot of hens and chickens, but instead of
that, she saw the blue sky first, and then the roofs of the house, with
a multitude of the loveliest pigeons, mostly white, but of all colours,
walking about, making bows to each other, and talking a language she
could not understand.  She clapped her hands with delight, and up rose
such a flapping of wings that she in her turn was startled.

'You've frightened my poultry,' said the old lady, smiling.

'And they've frightened me,' said the princess, smiling too.  'But what
very nice poultry!  Are the eggs nice?'

'Yes, very nice.' 'What a small egg-spoon you must have!  Wouldn't it
be better to keep hens, and get bigger eggs?'

'How should I feed them, though?'

'I see,' said the princess.  'The pigeons feed themselves.  They've got
wings.'

'Just so.  If they couldn't fly, I couldn't eat their eggs.'

'But how do you get at the eggs?  Where are their nests?'

The lady took hold of a little loop of string in the wall at the side
of the door and, lifting a shutter, showed a great many pigeon-holes
with nests, some with young ones and some with eggs in them.  The birds
came in at the other side, and she took out the eggs on this side.  She
closed it again quickly, lest the young ones should be frightened.

'Oh, what a nice way!' cried the princess.  'Will you give me an egg to
eat?  I'm rather hungry.'

'I will some day, but now you must go back, or nursie will be miserable
about you.  I dare say she's looking for you everywhere.'

'Except here,' answered the princess.  'Oh, how surprised she will be
when I tell her about my great big grand-grand-mother!'

'Yes, that she will!' said the old lady with a curious smile. 'Mind you
tell her all about it exactly.'

'That I will.  Please will you take me back to her?'

'I can't go all the way, but I will take you to the top of the stair,
and then you must run down quite fast into your own room.'

The little princess put her hand in the old lady's, who, looking this
way and that, brought her to the top of the first stair, and thence to
the bottom of the second, and did not leave her till she saw her
half-way down the third.  When she heard the cry of her nurse's
pleasure at finding her, she turned and walked up the stairs again,
very fast indeed for such a very great grandmother, and sat down to her
spinning with another strange smile on her sweet old face.

About this spinning of hers I will tell you more another time.

Guess what she was spinning.




