CHAPTER 16

The Ring


The same moment her nurse came into the room, sobbing.  When she saw
her sitting there she started back with a loud cry of amazement and
joy.  Then running to her, she caught her in her arms and covered her
with kisses.

'My precious darling princess! where have you been?  What has happened
to you?  We've all been crying our eyes out, and searching the house
from top to bottom for you.'

'Not quite from the top,' thought Irene to herself; and she might have
added, 'not quite to the bottom', perhaps, if she had known all.  But
the one she would not, and the other she could not say. 'Oh, Lootie!
I've had such a dreadful adventure!' she replied, and told her all
about the cat with the long legs, and how she ran out upon the
mountain, and came back again.  But she said nothing of her grandmother
or her lamp.

'And there we've been searching for you all over the house for more
than an hour and a half!' exclaimed the nurse.  'But that's no matter,
now we've got you!  Only, princess, I must say,' she added, her mood
changing, 'what you ought to have done was to call for your own Lootie
to come and help you, instead of running out of the house, and up the
mountain, in that wild, I must say, foolish fashion.'

'Well, Lootie,' said Irene quietly, 'perhaps if you had a big cat, all
legs, running at you, you might not exactly know what was the wisest
thing to do at the moment.'

'I wouldn't run up the mountain, anyhow,' returned Lootie.

'Not if you had time to think about it.  But when those creatures came
at you that night on the mountain, you were so frightened yourself that
you lost your way home.'

This put a stop to Lootie's reproaches.  She had been on the point of
saying that the long-legged cat must have been a twilight fancy of the
princess's, but the memory of the horrors of that night, and of the
talking-to which the king had given her in consequence, prevented her
from saying what after all she did not half believe--having a strong
suspicion that the cat was a goblin; for she knew nothing of the
difference between the goblins and their creatures: she counted them
all just goblins.

Without another word she went and got some fresh tea and bread and
butter for the princess.  Before she returned, the whole household,
headed by the housekeeper, burst into the nursery to exult over their
darling.  The gentlemen-at-arms followed, and were ready enough to
believe all she told them about the long-legged cat. Indeed, though
wise enough to say nothing about it, they remembered, with no little
horror, just such a creature amongst those they had surprised at their
gambols upon the princess's lawn.

In their own hearts they blamed themselves for not having kept better
watch.  And their captain gave orders that from this night the front
door and all the windows on the ground floor should be locked
immediately the sun set, and opened after upon no pretence whatever.
The men-at-arms redoubled their vigilance, and for some time there was
no further cause of alarm.

When the princess woke the next morning, her nurse was bending over
her.  'How your ring does glow this morning, princess!--just like a
fiery rose!' she said.

'Does it, Lootie?' returned Irene.  'Who gave me the ring, Lootie? I
know I've had it a long time, but where did I get it?  I don't
remember.'

'I think it must have been your mother gave it you, princess; but
really, for as long as you have worn it, I don't remember that ever I
heard,' answered her nurse.

'I will ask my king-papa the next time he comes,' said Irene.




CHAPTER 17

Springtime


The spring so dear to all creatures, young and old, came at last, and
before the first few days of it had gone, the king rode through its
budding valleys to see his little daughter.  He had been in a distant
part of his dominions all the winter, for he was not in the habit of
stopping in one great city, or of visiting only his favourite country
houses, but he moved from place to place, that all his people might
know him.  Wherever he journeyed, he kept a constant look-out for the
ablest and best men to put into office; and wherever he found himself
mistaken, and those he had appointed incapable or unjust, he removed
them at once.  Hence you see it was his care of the people that kept
him from seeing his princess so often as he would have liked.  You may
wonder why he did not take her about with him; but there were several
reasons against his doing so, and I suspect her great-great-grandmother
had had a principal hand in preventing it.  Once more Irene heard the
bugle-blast, and once more she was at the gate to meet her father as he
rode up on his great white horse.

After they had been alone for a little while, she thought of what she
had resolved to ask him.

'Please, king-papa,' she said, 'Will you tell me where I got this
pretty ring?  I can't remember.'

The king looked at it.  A strange beautiful smile spread like sunshine
over his face, and an answering smile, but at the same time a
questioning one, spread like moonlight over Irene's.  'It was your
queen-mamma's once,' he said.

'And why isn't it hers now?' asked Irene.

'She does not want it now,' said the king, looking grave.

'Why doesn't she want it now?'

'Because she's gone where all those rings are made.'

'And when shall I see her?' asked the princess.

'Not for some time yet,' answered the king, and the tears came into his
eyes.

Irene did not remember her mother and did not know why her father
looked so, and why the tears came in his eyes; but she put her arms
round his neck and kissed him, and asked no more questions.

The king was much disturbed on hearing the report of the
gentlemen-at-arms concerning the creatures they had seen; and I presume
would have taken Irene with him that very day, but for what the
presence of the ring on her finger assured him of.  About an hour
before he left, Irene saw him go up the old stair; and he did not come
down again till they were just ready to start; and she thought with
herself that he had been up to see the old lady.  When he went away he
left other six gentlemen behind him, that there might be six of them
always on guard.

And now, in the lovely spring weather, Irene was out on the mountain
the greater part of the day.  In the warmer hollows there were lovely
primroses, and not so many that she ever got tired of them.  As often
as she saw a new one opening an eye of light in the blind earth, she
would clap her hands with gladness, and unlike some children I know,
instead of pulling it, would touch it as tenderly as if it had been a
new baby, and, having made its acquaintance, would leave it as happy as
she found it.  She treated the plants on which they grew like birds'
nests; every fresh flower was like a new little bird to her.  She would
pay visits to all the flower-nests she knew, remembering each by
itself.  She would go down on her hands and knees beside one and say:
'Good morning!  Are you all smelling very sweet this morning?
Good-bye!' and then she would go to another nest, and say the same.  It
was a favourite amusement with her.  There were many flowers up and
down, and she loved them all, but the primroses were her favourites.

'They're not too shy, and they're not a bit forward,' she would say to
Lootie.

There were goats too about, over the mountain, and when the little kids
came she was as pleased with them as with the flowers.  The goats
belonged to the miners mostly-a few of them to Curdie's mother; but
there were a good many wild ones that seemed to belong to nobody.
These the goblins counted theirs, and it was upon them partly that they
lived.  They set snares and dug pits for them; and did not scruple to
take what tame ones happened to be caught; but they did not try to
steal them in any other manner, because they were afraid of the dogs
the hill-people kept to watch them, for the knowing dogs always tried
to bite their feet.  But the goblins had a kind of sheep of their
own--very queer creatures, which they drove out to feed at night, and
the other goblin creatures were wise enough to keep good watch over
them, for they knew they should have their bones by and by.




