CHAPTER 29

Masonwork


He had all at once remembered the resolution of the goblins to carry
out their second plan upon the failure of the first.  No doubt they
were already busy, and the mine was therefore in the greatest danger of
being flooded and rendered useless--not to speak of the lives of the
miners.

When he reached the mouth of the mine, after rousing all the miners
within reach, he found his father and a good many more just entering.
They all hurried to the gang by which he had found a way into the
goblin country.  There the foresight of Peter had already collected a
great many blocks of stone, with cement, ready for building up the weak
place--well enough known to the goblins. Although there was not room
for more than two to be actually building at once, they managed, by
setting all the rest to work in preparing the cement and passing the
stones, to finish in the course of the day a huge buttress filling the
whole gang, and supported everywhere by the live rock.  Before the hour
when they usually dropped work, they were satisfied the mine was secure.

They had heard goblin hammers and pickaxes busy all the time, and at
length fancied they heard sounds of water they had never heard before.
But that was otherwise accounted for when they left the mine, for they
stepped out into a tremendous storm which was raging all over the
mountain.  The thunder was bellowing, and the lightning lancing out of
a huge black cloud which lay above it and hung down  its edges of thick
mist over its sides.  The lightning was breaking out of the mountain,
too, and flashing up into the cloud.  From the state of the brooks, now
swollen into raging torrents, it was evident that the storm had been
storming all day.

The wind was blowing as if it would blow him off the mountain, but,
anxious about his mother and the princess, Curdie darted up through the
thick of the tempest.  Even if they had not set out before the storm
came on, he did not judge them safe, for in such a storm even their
poor little house was in danger.  Indeed he soon found that but for a
huge rock against which it was built, and which protected it both from
the blasts and the waters, it must have been swept if it was not blown
away; for the two torrents into which this rock parted the rush of
water behind it united again in front of the cottage--two roaring and
dangerous streams, which his mother and the princess could not possibly
have passed.  It was with great difficulty that he forced his way
through one of them, and up to the door.

The moment his hand fell on the latch, through all the uproar of winds
and waters came the joyous cry of the princess:

'There's Curdie!  Curdie!  Curdie!'

She was sitting wrapped in blankets on the bed, his mother trying for
the hundredth time to light the fire which had been drowned by the rain
that came down the chimney.  The clay floor was one mass of mud, and
the whole place looked wretched.  But the faces of the mother and the
princess shone as if their troubles only made them the merrier.  Curdie
burst out laughing at the sight of them.

'I never had such fun!' said the princess, her eyes twinkling and her
pretty teeth shining.  'How nice it must be to live in a cottage on the
mountain!'

'It all depends on what kind your inside house is,' said the mother.

'I know what you mean,' said Irene.  'That's the kind of thing my
grandmother says.'

By the time Peter returned the storm was nearly over, but the streams
were so fierce and so swollen that it was not only out of the question
for the princess to go down the mountain, but most dangerous for Peter
even or Curdie to make the attempt in the gathering darkness.

'They will be dreadfully frightened about you,' said Peter to the
princess, 'but we cannot help it.  We must wait till the morning.'

With Curdie's help, the fire was lighted at last, and the mother set
about making their supper; and after supper they all told the princess
stories till she grew sleepy.  Then Curdie's mother laid her in
Curdie's bed, which was in a tiny little garret-room.  As soon as she
was in bed, through a little window low down in the roof she caught
sight of her grandmother's lamp shining far away beneath, and she gazed
at the beautiful silvery globe until she fell asleep.




CHAPTER 30

The King and the Kiss


The next morning the sun rose so bright that Irene said the rain had
washed his face and let the light out clean.  The torrents were still
roaring down the side of the mountain, but they were so much smaller as
not to be dangerous in the daylight.  After an early breakfast, Peter
went to his work and Curdie and his mother set out to take the princess
home.  They had difficulty in getting her dry across the streams, and
Curdie had again and again to carry her, but at last they got safe on
the broader part of the road, and walked gently down towards the king's
house.  And what should they see as they turned the last corner but the
last of the king's troop riding through the gate!

'Oh, Curdie!' cried Irene, clapping her hands right joyfully, 'my
king-papa is come.'

The moment Curdie heard that, he caught her up in his arms, and set off
at full speed, crying:

'Come on, mother dear!  The king may break his heart before he knows
that she is safe.'

Irene clung round his neck and he ran with her like a deer.  When he
entered the gate into the court, there sat the king on his horse, with
all the people of the house about him, weeping and hanging their heads.
The king was not weeping, but his face was white as a dead man's, and
he looked as if the life had gone out of him.  The men-at-arms he had
brought with him sat with horror-stricken faces, but eyes flashing with
rage, waiting only for the word of the king to do something--they did
not know what, and nobody knew what.

The day before, the men-at-arms belonging to the house, as soon as they
were satisfied the princess had been carried away, rushed after the
goblins into the hole, but found that they had already so skilfully
blockaded the narrowest part, not many feet below the cellar, that
without miners and their tools they could do nothing. Not one of them
knew where the mouth of the mine lay, and some of those who had set out
to find it had been overtaken by the storm and had not even yet
returned.  Poor Sir Walter was especially filled with shame, and almost
hoped the king would order his head to be cut off, for to think of that
sweet little face down amongst the goblins was unendurable.

When Curdie ran in at the gate with the princess in his arms, they were
all so absorbed in their own misery and awed by the king's presence and
grief, that no one observed his arrival.  He went straight up to the
king, where he sat on his horse.

'Papa! papa!' the princess cried, stretching out her arms to him; 'here
I am!'

The king started.  The colour rushed to his face.  He gave an
inarticulate cry.  Curdie held up the princess, and the king bent down
and took her from his arms.  As he clasped her to his bosom, the big
tears went dropping down his cheeks and his beard.  And such a shout
arose from all the bystanders that the startled horses pranced and
capered, and the armour rang and clattered, and the rocks of the
mountain echoed back the noises.  The princess greeted them all as she
nestled in her father's bosom, and the king did not set her down until
she had told them all the story.  But she had more to tell about Curdie
than about herself, and what she did tell about herself none of them
could understand--except the king and Curdie, who stood by the king's
knee stroking the neck of the great white horse.  And still as she told
what Curdie had done, Sir Walter and others added to what she told,
even Lootie joining in the praises of his courage and energy.

Curdie held his peace, looking quietly up in the king's face.  And his
mother stood on the outskirts of the crowd listening with delight, for
her son's deeds were pleasant in her ears, until the princess caught
sight of her.

'And there is his mother, king-papa!' she said.  'See--there.  She is
such a nice mother, and has been so kind to me!'

They all parted asunder as the king made a sign to her to come forward.
She obeyed, and he gave her his hand, but could not speak.

'And now, king-papa,' the princess went on, 'I must tell you another
thing.  One night long ago Curdie drove the goblins away and brought
Lootie and me safe from the mountain.  And I promised him a kiss when
we got home, but Lootie wouldn't let me give it him.  I don't want you
to scold Lootie, but I want you to tell her that a princess must do as
she promises.'

'Indeed she must, my child--except it be wrong,' said the king. 'There,
give Curdie a kiss.'

And as he spoke he held her towards him.

The princess reached down, threw her arms round Curdie's neck, and
kissed him on the mouth, saying: 'There, Curdie!  There's the kiss I
promised you!'

Then they all went into the house, and the cook rushed to the kitchen
and the servants to their work.  Lootie dressed Irene in her shiningest
clothes, and the king put off his armour, and put on purple and gold;
and a messenger was sent for Peter and all the miners, and there was a
great and a grand feast, which continued long after the princess was
put to bed.




