IV

ART AND HUMAN NATURE


2. REALISM AND REALITY

At an exhibition in New York City there was displayed a picture of an
ocean wave upon the crest of which the artist had nailed a real bar of
soap. The first idea of the spectator was to consider this peculiar
product an advertisement, but it seems to have been intended as a
serious, if perverted, attempt at art. If the artist was not slyly
proposing the caricature of excessive realism, the cake of soap will
serve well as a parable for those artists who do not distinguish between
realism and reality.

The ultra-realist forgets that art is a creation, the making of another
world. The artist cannot really create what he puts into his new world
of sight or hearing or imagination, of color, of sound, of words. If
he could actually make something new, not based on nature or on human
nature, he would do so on the penalty of being unintelligible. Neither
should he go to the other extreme and not leave the world of reality at
all. He may not eat his cake and have it. If what he takes from actuality
is not merged fully into his art form, he tries to give us fact and
fiction, history and art, in the same product, and he nails a piece of
soap on a painted wave.

Aristotle insists above all on probability in art, or motivation, as
it is now commonly called. A probable or well-motived impossibility,
he says, is more artistic and pleasing than an improbable, that is,
an unmotived fact. For a like reason he demands that fiction be more
philosophical than history. We accept a chronicle of facts without
necessarily being aware of their causal connections. In the realms of
art the connection must be established. This principle, so fruitful for
art, is not to be understood as justifying or approving that school of
subjective novelists which is parsimonious in happenings but diffuse
in reasoning and gives us a maximum of discussion with a minimum of
incident. Aristotle is thinking more of the people who witness the
drama. The spectators want the motivation and plausibility of action
rather than that of logic. The soliloquy has gone from the stage; the
printed soliloquy should be curtailed in the novel. A true understanding
of motivation will send all artists back to nature and to human nature
for those incidents which are the springs of action and do not require
lengthy logic to labor at their explanation. Homer is completely lacking
in logical refining. Incident leads to feeling and talk, which gives rise
to further incident. Action, feeling and character, Aristotle’s trinity
of art subjects, are mingled and detailed, and the story moves on in a
way plausible and pleasing to Homeric audiences. When Homer runs short of
motivation, he does not resort to logic; he refers the causality to the
gods, as modern writers refer all insoluble problems to evolution, which
puts hardly more restrictions upon imagination than Homeric mythology.

The artist must transfer his product wholly to the world of art.
Sculptured horses must not neigh, nor painted flowers give perfume, but
neighing and scents may be suggested even in stone, and in lines by
art happenings, which all may read running if the artist will use the
language of human nature. He should paint his cake of soap in, not nail
it on. If the exigencies of the story demand it, costumes of the night
or costumes of bathing may be in place, but it is nailing on a cake of
soap, it is outraging probabilities, to force a story into a setting or
to adopt a style of dress or of undress simply for the sake of producing
a shock. That is the shock of reality, not of art and beauty. Should the
dramatist have an excellent quartet and stop the play in order to give a
song, he is nailing on a piece of soap, which may be magnificent soap,
but it is not art.

Why is the so-called realism depressing? Why is the Russian novelist left
for the connoisseur but is caviar to the general? Is it the presence or
absence of evil? Hardly that. Homer’s stories are full of evil and of
death; Sophocles’ _King Œdipus_ and the _Prometheus_ of Eschylus are
surcharged with evil, but they do not depress. Euripides, on the other
hand, and Lucian have more alleged realism and are depressing, even when
they cause a smile. The realist is cynical, and cynics do not soar off
into the world of art, but keep tethering themselves to the real world.
They do not lose themselves in their story because they are always
thinking of keeping some one’s nose against their grindstone. Why should
the optimistic moralizing of Polyanna be resented by critics any more
than the cynic moralizing of Shaw or of _Main Street_? The cheerful idiot
and the purblind dyspeptic are depressing in real life, especially when
they are moralizing, but in and out of art we can laugh at the idiot,
while we squirm at the assumed superiority of the cynic. The moralizing
is a cake of soap.

Shakespeare is not depressing and Homer is not depressing. They do not
blink the facts of life, and beyond the humor and humanity which saves
them and their audience, they lose themselves in their story. The evil
they depict is true evil, so recognized, in their art-world. It is,
besides, evil called for by their story, not lugged in for a moral or to
exemplify a theory of art. They know that drab is not the only color in
life. They know that bright things are as real as black things, but they
are not illustrating a theory but giving us a story. We pass with them
into a fictitious world, and the things which depress the denizens of
that world do not depress us if we are not brought back to reality by
stumbling on a cake of real soap, not integrated with the story.

The sight of his dog Argos made the heart of Odysseus sink. Even for
those who think ugliness the only reality, Argos was covered with
realities and squatted on reality. He depressed his master but he does
not depress us. He lies upon Main Street and has a Polyanna wag to his
tail. His optimism and his pessimism are, however, not tacked on. “And
lo, a hound raised up his head and pricked his ears, Argos, the hound of
Odysseus.... Despised he lay (his master being afar) in the deep dung of
mules and swine.... There lay the dog Argos, full of vermin. Yet even now
when he was aware of Odysseus standing by, he wagged his tail and dropped
both his ears, but nearer to his master he had not the strength to draw.
But Odysseus looked aside and wiped a tear.” Argos is the ideal dog of
a far away master; “who has lost his dominion,” as Eumæus, the shepherd
of Odysseus, says. Argos registers the fate of his master. We feel, but
we do not feel depressed. It is human; it is all inevitable; it is real
as life but perfectly idealized by perfect transfer to the realm of art.
Eumæus gives us the morality of it, the truth of it, but he is far from
moralizing, either pessimistically or optimistically. Argos is the dog
Schneider that Jefferson’s Rip Van Winkle could not find to recognize
him; he is the picture in brief of his master’s fate. Eumæus is as free
from all obtrusive soap as Argos himself. The dog’s fate is ascribed
to the careless women who “are no more inclined to honest service when
their masters have lost dominion, for Zeus takes away the half of a man’s
virtue when the day of slavery comes upon him.”




