
                             ART PRINCIPLES
                              IN LITERATURE

                             [Illustration]

                          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                  NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO · DALLAS
                         ATLANTA · SAN FRANCISCO

                        MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED
                       LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA
                                MELBOURNE

                    THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.
                                 TORONTO




                             ART PRINCIPLES
                              IN LITERATURE

                      BY FRANCIS P. DONNELLY, S.J.

                             [Illustration]

                          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                  PUBLISHERS      NEW YORK      MCMXXV

                 PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                            COPYRIGHT, 1923,
                        BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
              SET UP AND PRINTED. PUBLISHED OCTOBER, 1923.
                         REPRINTED APRIL, 1925.

                          REPRINTED JULY, 1928.

         WYNKOOP HALLENBECK CRAWFORD COMPANY, NEW YORK, U. S. A.




INTRODUCTION


In the _Art of Interesting_ (Kenedy, 1920) the writer began a discussion
of the principles of art and of their application to writing and
speaking. In this work the discussion is carried further and is not
restricted to the one feature of arousing and fixing attention,
especially in oratory, which was the chief topic of the _Art of
Interesting_. The following chapters represent the reactions of the
writer to literature both as composed today and as taught in our schools.
Any active mind, bewildered by the ceaseless experimenting in literature
and education, and not satisfied with a passive acceptance of even
excellent critics, is necessarily forced back upon first principles.
Such a mind will not yield to the despair of skepticism, that there
are no first principles, nor to the despair of agnosticism, that there
may be such principles but we cannot know them, nor yet to the despair
of pragmatism, that we must wait and see whether the human race ages
from now will give us assurance that there really are principles of art
because the last man has seen that these principles have been found to
work up to the moment prior to which he joined Tutankhamen.

Art, just as morals and pure science, differs entirely from the natural
sciences, which are generalizations based upon acquired information and
must change as long as the information upon which they are based can be
modified and enlarged. But where, as in art or pure science, principles
are based on final truths, the principles have also a finality and can
only be rejected if their basis can be changed or modified. Aristotle’s
principles have something of that finality. Aristotle had for his study
a body of literature that has for centuries met with the approval of
the best taste in every age and of every critic. Aristotle’s biology
or physics are not final, but his ethics, his logic, his esthetics
are in measurable distance of finality except where some additions
have been made to the materials upon which he based his analysis. In
religion, because of revelation, in music because of discoveries in
instrumentation, and perhaps in other arts, time has added to the
original store, but in literature there are few additions to the fields
which lay before Aristotle, and subsequent ages have not developed any
keener analytical powers than those of Aristotle.

It is Aristotle’s principles that in the main have dominated the writer’s
reactions to modern art and literature. When Greek literature held an
honored place in our schools, there was less need of insisting on obvious
truths of art. The intense modernism now predominating everywhere has
driven classical literature and classical methods from school and life.
History is modernized too or fails to supply the vital contact with
the ever-living past which earlier schools experienced in the poets,
historians, orators and philosophers of Greece and Rome. So-called
cultural subjects in modern education are chiefly informational. Culture
is a word which calls for definition, but on its intellectual side at
least, culture for the largest number of persons in the world can be
gauged most satisfactorily by their appreciation of literature and by
their capacity to produce literature. The study of literature as an art
is the chief topic of this book, and Aristotle’s great principles need
all the more stressing now that his philosophy of art and the supreme
literature on which he based his conclusions are passing away from
present-day consciousness.

The chapters that follow are popular rather than scientific in
presentation. Readers who seek a fuller and wider view may be interested
in such a work as Benedetto Croce’s _Æsthetic_, from the Italian by
Douglas Ainslie. Its historical summary, especially for modern times,
is valuable and good. For the Greeks and earlier periods, Butcher’s
_Aristotle’s Theory of Poetry and Fine Arts_ is easily best. Professor
Rhys Roberts’ editions of the works of Dionysius, Longinus and Demetrius
are excellent for the traditions of classical rhetoric, a tradition weak
in America.

In theory Croce is an extreme intellectualist in the principles of art.
He locates all of esthetics in pure intuition, which is “lyrical,”
that is, emotional, because it represents “the states of the soul,”
“passionality, feeling, personality.” For Croce “natural beauty
is simply a stimulus to esthetic reproduction, which presupposes
previous production.” He is therefore an idealist in his conception of
beauty. Even monuments of art seem to be only “stimulants to esthetic
reproduction” and are not beautiful in themselves. In another place,
however, Croce seems to be a realist. “Art is governed entirely by
imagination; its only riches are images. Art does not classify objects
nor pronounce them real or imaginary nor qualify them nor define them.
Art feels and represents them. In as far as it apprehends ‘the real’
immediately before it is modified and made clear by the concept, it must
be called pure intuition.”

Quite to the other extreme in theory goes _The Psychology of Beauty_
by Ethel D. Puffer. This author has much about sensations and their
physiology and but little about ideas. For Croce the last stage is in the
idea; for Puffer it would seem to be in the work of art. “The low-lying
wide expanse of some of the old Dutch landscapists give us repose, not
because they remind us of the peaceful happiness of the land but because
we cannot melt ourselves into all those horizontal lines without the
restful feeling which accompanies such relaxation.” This passage might
almost class the writer with the _Einfühlung_ school,—the school which
gives Ruskin’s “pathetic fallacy” a number of advocates. Pathetic fallacy
was a complete misnomer when applied by Ruskin to the well-known tropes
of metaphor and personification. Kingsley was not insane enough to
imagine that a wave was actually cruel and actually crawled. He likened
the wave that drowned to a wild animal. But the school of Lipps in
Germany desires you to moan with the wind and smile with the rose and lie
flat with painted horizontal lines.

Perhaps Puffer’s formula of stimulation with repose and Croce’s formula
of intuition with lyricism can be reconciled with Aquinas’ definition of
the beautiful, _quæ visa placent_. A study of Maurice De Wulf’s excellent
little volume _L’Œuvre d’Art et la Beauté_ gives us briefly and clearly
the neo-scholastic solution of the esthetic problem. The book is a
good example of the reasonable discussion which has won for scholastic
philosophy the universal designation as the philosophy of common sense.
Longhaye’s _Théorie des Belles Lettres_, which is scholastic philosophy
applied to literature, is another clear and sane presentation of the
principles of the art.

The reader who desires to supplement the popular exposition of this
book with a systematic treatise on the esthetic and its application to
literature is recommended to De Wulf and to Longhaye. English is rich in
criticism but is deficient in works treating of the philosophy of beauty
in literature.




CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE

                              INTRODUCTION

    Connection with author’s _Art of Interesting_—Need of principles
      of an art amidst violent experimentation in art and
      education—Aristotle’s principles valid except where the basis
      of his deductions has been modified—With Greek literature
      leaving our schools, Greek taste is needed against excessive
      modernism—Recent art discussions— Croce’s _Æsthetic_; Puffer’s
      _Psychology of Beauty_; De Wulf’s _L’Œuvre d’Art et la Beauté_     v

                      ART PRINCIPLES IN LITERATURE

                               PART FIRST

                  ART IN THE APPRECIATION OF LITERATURE

                                    I

                         ART AND THE INDIVIDUAL

    1. INDIVIDUALISM AND RESPONSIBILITY                                  1

        Talking to oneself in art—Chaos in religion, morals
          and art from unchecked individualism—Altruism a better
          principle—Responsibility inevitable—Responsibility a
          help, no hindrance to the artist—Greek drama; Italian
          Madonnas; Horace.

                                   II

                         ART AND THE INDIVIDUAL

    2. VAGARIES OF INDIVIDUALISM                                         8

        Modern literature and art and a sense of humor—Fiction,
          biographical and pathological—New poetry shallow—Riot
          of emotionalism—Novel of satire, European continental
          type originating in low comedy—Novel of Scott, epic
          in origin—Nature, experience, wisdom, the remedies of
          individualism.

                                   III

                          ART AND HUMAN NATURE

    1. THE UNIVERSAL ELEMENT                                            14

        Art movements begin in nature—Art is social—Permanence
          of literature due to universal appeal—The camera and the
          canvas—Personality and individuality—Shock of nerves not
          the mental thrill of art.

                                   IV

                          ART AND HUMAN NATURE

    2. REALISM AND REALITY                                              20

        Real cake of soap on a painted wave—Art a distinct world
          from reality—Motivation, not through logical discussion
          but through probable incident—Painting in the cake of
          soap—Realism depressing because of cynic moralizing—Evil
          in Shakespeare and Homer, relieved by pathos and humor,
          not depressing.

                                    V

                           ART AND THE DIVINE

    1. RELIGIOUS ORIGIN OF ART                                          26

        Rich tombs of the past testify to belief in
          immortality—Cro-Magnon cave pictures probably
          religious—Earliest art of all nations due to
          religion—Dancing, song, music, sculpture, architecture,
          drama, epic—Gothic cathedral of religious middle-ages,
          synthesis of all arts.

                                   VI

                           ART AND THE DIVINE

    2. THE KINSHIP OF ART AND RELIGION                                  31

        Hebraism, Puritanism, Islamism, reacting against art
          and the result—Explanation of the origin of art—Taine’s
          environment theory—Spencer’s play theory—Theory of fear
          and magic spells—Adequate explanation found in man’s
          intellectual nature—Art like religion intellectual—Art
          and religion idealistic—Personal and emotional—Art and
          religion social in appeal—Sublimity of art and the
          revelation of _Genesis_—Harmonious equation between soul
          and the truth of reality, between soul and the good of
          morality, same as equation between soul and beauty, all
          founded on the fact that both soul and triple reality are
          images of God.

                                   VII

                           ART AND THE DIVINE

    3. ART IN ITS RELATION TO VIRTUE                                    39

        The theomorphism of man in the threefold tendency
          of science, morality and art—Religion, a virtue;
          art, a function of perceptions—Ruskin’s school of
          the religion of beauty—Moralizing not a function of
          art—Estheticism neither asceticism nor sensualism—Evil
          in art to be represented as evil—Evil to be a
          rationalized element—Contemporary evil excites feelings
          of reality—Art and religion ennobling—Art and religion
          purifying—Creation and disinterestedness most divine
          elements in art.

                                  VIII

                       THE VISCERAL TEST OF BEAUTY

        The critic’s equipment—Defective philosophy of
          some modern critics, Mencken, Murry, Cohen—Ugly
          in art and its subdual—Esthetic feeling not
          concupiscence—Disinterestedness of beauty excludes
          sensuality of appetites—Visceral reactions not from beauty    48

                               PART SECOND

                    ART IN THE TEACHING OF LITERATURE

                                   IX

                      LOOKING FORWARD IN LITERATURE

        Literature taught for use in Greece, Rome, and
          elsewhere—Science and history always changing; literature
          lasting—Object of literature in university—True humanism,
          equipping man’s faculties with art—Every school subject
          teaches its like—Correlations of literature and
          creation—Contemporary literature not suitable—Scientific
          study partly; artistic study is wholly satisfying             57

                                    X

                  UNIFYING EDUCATION THROUGH LITERATURE

        Necessity of unity—In university through profession—No
          unity in college electivism—Unity impaired by
          departments and by specializing—Unity in France, Germany
          and England—Departmental system destroying the art appeal
          of literature—Science through knowing; art through
          doing—Recent mental tests accentuate expression and
          language—General education through art of literature          64

                                   XI

                  THE INTERESTING TEACHER OF LITERATURE

        Spread of science—System and eliminating of
          personality—Dissertations for the doctorate—Scholarly
          means encyclopedic—The impersonal lecturer—Justin
          McCarthy’s teacher and his methods—Not scientific
          specialization, but exercise of mental powers—Formulas
          and personality—Another interesting teacher—Literature
          educates equally with science—The ideal                       70

                                   XII

                         EDUCATING THE EMOTIONS

        Life full of emotions—Emotions intense in our crowded
          civilization—Morale, organized emotion—Emotions
          neglected in education—Education of facts dominating
          schools—Twofold nature of emotions—Emotions from concrete
          imagining—Kindled by contact—Literature embodiment of
          emotions—Emotions developed by self-expression and
          controlled by exercise                                        83

                                  XIII

                    KEEP THE CLASSICS BUT TEACH THEM

        Classics to be kept but taught differently—Former help of
          translation—Literature overwhelmed by erudition—Germany,
          France, England, America—True use of erudition—Natural
          sciences change; art endures—Reproduction, the soul of
          literary teaching—Method of training—Modern literatures
          not yet able to supplant ancient literatures                  91

                                   XIV

                       THE VITALIZER OF THE WORLD

        Literary renaissances associated with Greek
          literature—Revivals through Irish monks—Spain,
          France, Scholasticism—Germany with Wolf, Winckelmann,
          Lessing—England under Queen Anne and Queen Victoria—Youth
          of civilization in Greece                                    100

                                   XV

                  TRUE PRINCIPLES OF HOMERIC CRITICISM

        Story of Phidias’ statue and Homer—Homer tested
          by art—Flaws in material—Absorption in immediate
          effects—Told story different from story read—Outline of
          a study on a broad scale—Variety, alternation, growth in
          Homeric battling—Homeric palace, the place of Homer’s
          recital                                                      106

                                   XVI

                      THE CHILD-TEST OF LITERATURE

        Child-test in religion and morals, in the Bible—Homer’s
          mother and child—Hector and Andromache—Child in later
          literature rare—Latin writers—Conventionality instead of
          Homeric naturalness                                          114

                                  XVII

                   THE CHRIST-CHILD TEST OF LITERATURE

        Christ-Child in art—Christmas and the drama—In
          Ireland—Medieval and Renaissance writers—Milton’s
          war-like child—Wordsworth, Shelley, Tennyson,
          Longfellow—Return of naturalness in Stevenson, Carroll
          and others—Faith and its effects in Thompson and Tabb        119

                                APPENDIX

                         GREEK SPEAKS FOR ITSELF

        Mosaic of etymology—Ecclesiastical sphere—Diet, posies
          and programs—Geography, zoology, politics—Pharmacies and
          surgery—Schools and composition—Apology and epitaph          129

                 NOTE: THE NATURE OF ESTHETIC ENJOYMENT

        Ownership not of the essence of beauty as of
          good—Perception sufficient for the enjoyment of the
          beautiful—No new faculty required—Pleasure is normal life
          consciously localized—Esthetic Enjoyment in the simple
          apprehension, not in judgment or inference as such—Fact
          not of the essence of esthetic enjoyment, which is had
          in fiction too—_Causa Exemplaris_—Imagination, source of
          originality—Aristotle’s principles: creation, motivation,
          unity, universality                                          134

    A FORWARD-LOOKING LESSON IN LITERATURE                             159




ART PRINCIPLES IN LITERATURE




PART FIRST

ART IN THE APPRECIATION OF LITERATURE




I

ART AND THE INDIVIDUAL


1. INDIVIDUALISM AND RESPONSIBILITY

A group was standing before a futurist or cubist picture. The group did
not know what the picture was all about, but one spoke up in defense
of the bewildering work: “Well, after all, art is a language, and why
shouldn’t a man be permitted to speak his own language?” A bystander,
not daring to address strangers, made answer under his breath: “If art
is a language, this artist is talking to himself.” Maudlin, incoherent
remarks, disjointed utterances, and in general talking to one’s self,
all that, does not pass for high art among men, but for something quite
different. To talk to one’s self is the extreme of individualism in
conversation; to ignore the world addressed through artistic composition
is the triumph of individualism in art.

The abrupt break with all tradition in every art, and the untrammeled
expression of the individual, have worked out to the inevitable and
bizarre conclusions which a like rebellion has brought about in religion
and morals. Every man his own dogmatist; every man his own moralist; that
is the individualism which has divided mankind into multitudinous sects
and has made millions of moral, unmoral and immoral moralists eager for
legislation of infinite variety without any fixed principles to enforce
the observance of even one law. Conscience, the executive impulse of all
legislation, used to be the voice of God, but individualism has made it
anything from a survival of the fittest or an economic standard, through
countless varieties all the way to a Freudian complex.

Individualism has run amuck in art from classicism to cubism. It is a
barren day which does not produce a new system of religion or morals, and
only the occurrence of earthquake, war, fire or some other tremendous
upheaval keeps our journals from recording some new theory of art,
some Tomism, Dickism or Harryism. Art for art’s sake has been given an
individualistic interpretation and has produced the same rich crop, as
the individualistic cry, every man his own dogmatist and moralist, has
produced—a rich crop of weeds.

If ever an individual could pursue his blissful way oblivious of the
existence of a surrounding universe, surely he may not do so now when
the universe impinges upon him every moment through ticker, telephone,
wireless and unlimited “extras.” There is, however, no such thing as
unrestricted individualism. Of God alone can be predicated existence for
its own sake. Everybody his own dogmatist means ultimately everybody his
own god. Art for art’s sake, interpreted in an individualistic sense,
would not only destroy art but would destroy the world. Art for art’s
sake should read art for everybody’s sake and for the sake of God, and
such a reading will be infinitely better for art’s sake.

It was an Irish colleen, accepting matrimony as a complete submergence
of individuality, who replied to a friend dwelling on the dangers of a
long ocean trip to be taken by the new bride and groom: “And why should I
be afraid, sure ’tis his loss if anything happen to me now!” She was the
counterpart of the Irish lad who sang under similar circumstances, “I’m
not myself at all.” There you have the complete altruism resulting from
the perfect union of matrimony. There is the antithesis of individualism,
and such matrimonial communism is far better for every one than any cry
of “wife for wife’s sake” or “husband for husband’s sake.”

It is quite evident that no artist can exempt himself from responsibility
as though his art were a deity. If a picture or statue or poem would be
an incentive to murder or suicide, the artist must stay his hand. He may
not manufacture bombs for soul destruction, no matter how artistic the
container, even if someone else is to supply the detonator. A lie in
beautiful language is a more ugly lie. Recent pretended upholders of
the Volstead law have printed an emphatic warning on compounds of their
manufacture: “Do not add such an ingredient or this compound will violate
the law.” May an artist naïvely dissociate himself from responsibility by
stating: “Do not add human nature to my art-product or you will violate
the law”? Were the artist a real creator, he would have to forecast
results and be dominated by a purpose. Nor may the artist, like God,
permit evil, because no artist has omnipotence and infinite wisdom and
justice and mercy, governing the permission of evil and guaranteeing
good as the final result. May a man who owns a wild tiger of surpassing
beauty, trusting in the right of property, parade down a crowded
thoroughfare with his jungle pet tethered to a thread?

But why all these truisms? Because individualism in art aims in principle
and production not only to free art from restrictions but even to exempt
the artist from responsibility. The artist may not talk to himself unless
he can find a South Sea island where there is neither man nor God. Nor
is it a deadening of his artistic impulse for the artist to be ruled by
high purposes, but rather it is a stimulus and an inspiration. Eschylus
and Sophocles have a sublimer beauty than Euripides because the earlier
dramatists recognized more fully and kept better in view the religious
purposes of Athenian drama. Euripides, wishing to cater more to theatric
effects, succeeded in being more emotional and in achieving a realistic
but transient interest, the hectic flush that marks decay and death
in twilight and autumn and sinister disease. Is the marked revival of
Euripides within recent years a sign of decadence?

The Madonnas of Italian art received from the painter a solemn beauty
not only because they depict Divine maternity, but even too because they
were to grace a religious shrine and to constitute part of a religious
service. That may be one reason why the Madonnas of Italy are far
superior to the prettiness and sentimentality of more recent Madonnas
which are painted for private homes and for ephemeral interest.

The purpose of the artist is one thing and the purpose of art is another
thing. The purpose of a watch is to keep time whatever purpose the
watch-maker may have. It is likely, however, that if he makes the watch
for his mother, he will produce better results than if he worked for
his usual wage or than if he functioned as part of a machine, having
no clearly defined ulterior purpose. So an artist will be inspired in
painting, in sculpture, in music, in all arts, to elicit better his
full powers and to achieve finer results when he toils for a cathedral
than when he works for a cabaret. Noble responsibility conscientiously
recognized and fulfilled is no check, but rather a spur to the artist.

“Art for art’s sake” may, however, be taken to mean, “Embody beauty
wherever found, or realize to the full your ideal,” and such a meaning
is excellent and fruitful unless excessive individualism insists upon
expressing its own perverted ideas of beauty and its own eccentric
ideals. When Horace said, “Let justice be done though the heavens come
crashing down,” a line that might be rendered, “Justice for justice’s
sake,” he was far from advocating the explosion of a bomb by some Roman
anarchist whose idea of justice was to bring all to a dead level of ruin.
The progressive improvement in the realization of art-ideals may be very
well illustrated from the career of Horace. Horace gradually worked
himself free from the conventionality and baseness of his epodes and
earlier satires, experienced the cleansing process of true humor in later
satires, took fire at the moral degeneracy of Rome in the initial odes
of the third and last book of his first edited lyrics. There the _sæva
indignatio_ of Horace brought him within distant sight of sublimity.
His progress in philosophy weighted the wings of his song but dowered
him with the crystal and clean wisdom of his epistles, of which it has
been said one need not blot out a single line. Had Horace retained the
youthful vehemence of the republican amid the enervating peace of the new
empire, he might have followed Dante and Milton from lyric beauty to epic
sublimity, or might have risen with Shakespeare and Molière from song to
comedy or even to tragedy, but his hedonistic sleekness and his excessive
self-consciousness kept his ripened philosophy in brief letters, when a
more vigorous mentality with the help of philosophy might have converted
his ennobled power of satire into comedy or transformed the lyric
portraits of his early days into tragedy or epic story.




