VII

ART AND THE DIVINE


3. ART IN ITS RELATION TO VIRTUE

The fact that religion and art are connected is abundantly established
by history. The naturalness of that connection is made clear by the many
traits art and religion possess in common. As philosophers have argued
to the existence of God from the fact that the universal belief in His
existence can be accounted for satisfactorily on no other supposition;
as philosophers also argue to the immortality of the soul from man’s
universal and inevitable tendency to unending existence, so in like
manner, it may be argued that since always and everywhere the art impulse
is connected in its origin and growth with religion, that impulse too,
like belief in God and desire of immortality and conscience for law and
tendency to truth, is a projection of the divine upon humanity, not the
anthropomorphism of God but the theomorphism of man. The structure of our
eye, made to respond to light, justifies us in concluding there is light.
The nature of the soul, which can respond to infinite beauty, justifies
us in concluding there is infinite beauty. He who said, “Let there be
light,” said also, “Let us make man after our own image and likeness.”

An explanation of the nature of these two human acts of art and religion
will disclose more analogies while revealing essential differences.
Religion is a virtue of the will, a habit developed by the free act of
man, a virtue which culminates in worship of God as the supreme being.
The impulse of art has not been analyzed as fully and as satisfactorily
as the virtue of religion, but from Aristotle’s analysis in the
_Poetics_, through the Neo-Platonists and the Scholastics down to Kant
and his followers, there is common agreement that the tendency to beauty
does not belong to the inclination towards good, actuating appetite and
will, but that the enjoyment of beauty is a function of the perceptions,
the imagination, and the mind. The admitted disinterestedness of the
art impulse is the paramount and irresistible evidence that it differs
essentially from the self-seeking tendency of will and appetite which
cannot be indifferent to good, since good is the very cause and condition
of the appetite’s existence. The enjoyment of a painted fruit is akin to
the enjoyment of verified theory or of a triumphant conclusion, and not
like the satisfaction felt in the ownership of the painting of fruit or
in the actual craving or eating of the fruit.

It is evident, therefore, why a man may be artistic without being
religious. There is no more difficulty in understanding why an artist is
not a saint than in knowing that conscience is one thing and acting up
to it another thing. Improvement in art does not always mean improvement
in morals or in religion, any more than to know is to will. Nor, on the
other hand, will the evil of an artist or of his work be evidence against
the divinity of art. The divine origin of conscience and the natural law
is evident in the vice of the sinner as in the virtues of the saint. The
essential difference between art and religion shows also that the school
in which the prophet is Ruskin, the school which finds a religion in the
beauty of world or of art, is incorrect in its teaching. Love and fear
are the mainsprings of action, the incentives to virtue. Beauty may grace
the attraction of good; it cannot take the place of good in virtue and
religion. Estheticism is not asceticism. Francis of Assisi was a poet
and a saint, Francesca da Rimini enjoyed poetry, might have been a poet,
but was not always a saint, and many a Francisco and Francesca may be
found neither artistic nor religious, as many are talented without being
virtuous and virtuous without being talented.

Despite the sad lack of harmony between the beauty of their art and the
virtue of their lives, artists have nevertheless always been revered. The
honor of their art has won them in their lapses a gentleness of treatment
not accorded to less favored mortals. They are fallen angels if they fall.

Does the union of religion and art mean then that the artist must be
a moralist? To moralize is not a function of art as such. I enjoy
the beauty of a tree without any feeling that it conveys a truth or
inculcates a virtue. The artist may transfer the tree to canvas, where I
enjoy it as I did in nature without any accessory implication, informing
or ethical. Joyce Kilmer may put the tree in a poem and with it add
beauty to the truth that, “only God can make a tree.” The psalmist may
put a tree in his sacred hymn and with it add beauty to his praise of
the life of a good man, who shall be “like a tree planted near the
running waters.” Logical truth and moral good are not excluded from art,
although the artist by profession is not a teacher. Modern critics are
often inconsistent and hypocritical in welcoming every dramatist or poet
or novelist who undisguisedly advocates various theories, but will be
withering in their scorn for any one who advocates the ten commandments.
To moralize, to dogmatize, to theorize is not the function of art, and
though these actions are not incompatible with the functions of art, very
rarely in the history of art has it been successful when it undertook to
teach or to preach. Didactic poetry, satire poetry and propaganda drama,
have great difficulty in becoming poetry and remaining poetry.

Religion then is a virtue of the will, resulting in acts of worship;
art, a power of the mind, resulting in various artistic creations.
Religion may remain wholly spiritual, even in its expression, but, though
the mind’s appreciation of beauty may rest on purely spiritual and
intellectual objects, such as theories or virtues or God and heaven,
art must express itself in sensible objects. Even in literature, the
most intellectual of arts, words and pictures of the imagination are
essential. Angels might be conceived as having an art whose sole medium
was spiritual ideas, not so man, whose mind works through imagination.
Aquinas, stressing the intellectual nature of beauty, calls attention
to the fact that while men speak of beautiful sights and beautiful
sounds, they will rarely and only figuratively consider the acts of other
senses, as taste, touch and scent, beautiful. The actions of these senses
are immersed in the material, whereas sight and hearing are closer to
the intellectual and spiritual. Man has not yet succeeded in making a
fine art whose medium would be tastes and touches and fragrances. The
unselfish enjoyment of art cannot be released in objects so material and
so near to the appetites. The sensualist is not an artist in yielding
to sense enjoyment, although he may wish to give his unhallowed ways
an artistic gloss. The one who sees only an apple pie in rosy apples
or senses slumbrous ease in soft velvets and in iridescent silks or
perceives only the perfume in flower and fruit, is not experiencing
esthetic emotions, but rather stirrings of the bodily appetites. If
estheticism is not asceticism, neither is it, on the other hand,
concupiscence or mere sensualism.

Does the connection between art and religion exclude the presentation of
evil in art? Art would be much handicapped if it were restricted entirely
to good objects. Art is a manifestation of man’s intellect and must
act in accord with the nature of that faculty. If evil is artistically
presented, it must be depicted as evil. To present moral evil as a good
is a falsification as repugnant to the mind as would be the painting of
a blue sunrise, of a green moon or of a black-and-tan sea, and as absurd
as the sculpture of a five-legged lion. The enlightened mind rejects
such physical monstrosities, and the enlightened mind, despite the lower
appetites, rejects moral disorders with equal, if not greater, repugnance.

Again, art requires that the evil, the moral ugliness or physical
ugliness, be a necessary and rational part of the presentation. A fact of
nature becomes at once the material of science, because science concerns
itself with unadorned truth. But for a fact of nature to be material of
art, it must be idealized, that is, it must be made an integral part of
the art product. The pleasure of art does not arise from deception but
from illusion which does not deceive. Painted grapes might deceive birds;
but did they deceive men, then the effect would not be that of art but of
reality. The evil or ugly can never be pleasant as long as it is present
and actual. The transfer of evil to the world of art if it becomes an
integral, justified and rationalized part of the illusion, is usually
enough to rob evil of its actuality and unpleasantness.

Sometimes in contemporary realism, with every justification of ugliness
from the art product, there is depression and not true art pleasure,
because we cannot forget the actual world when contemplating the
imaginary world of art. Suppose “Macbeth” or “Œdipus” were really
historical and were acted in the presence of their contemporaries or of
the next generation. Would there be satisfaction and the emotional relief
arising from illusion? Hardly. Memories would be too much lacerated
with the actual to surrender to the illusion of art and to enjoy its
contemplation. Actuality would put back the salt into the tears that else
might have been sweetened by transfer of evil to remote and imaginary
realms. The Greeks and Shakespeare were right in making their tragedies
historical, whereas modern realists are somber with pessimism because
they never forsake the actual.

Art and religion are both concerned with life and so they both must
touch evil and ugliness, unhappily a large part of life. Religion as
a virtue must overcome evil and not permit it to master the will. Art
depicts evil in such a way as not to offend the enlightened mind, by
approval of evil or by the artistically unjustified introduction of
evil or by actual experience of evil. In all these cases the mind would
not experience the true and lasting pleasure of art. The taste of fruit
passes; the contemplation of painted fruit is a joy forever. Art pleasure
is not the playing with toys, as Plato would seem to make it, but the
fine occupation of rational minds, which Aristotle made it, an occupation
worthy of man because art interprets nature and man to himself, because
art exercises man’s rational faculties, because art releases man’s
emotions under conditions where the evil of actual life is removed.
Macbeth and Œdipus in life were saddening spectacles; the echo of that
sadness felt through dramatic representation has high pleasure for the
mind.

The cathartic function of art brings it close to the virtuous and the
divine. What virtue does really, art does ideally, transforming evil into
good. The vicarious sacrifice of Calvary was the catharsis of mankind,
an infinite cleansing, compared with which the vicarious feeling of
dramatically enacted evil is but as a drop to the ocean. Close to the
divine, too, although at the same time infinitely remote, is the creation
of art. Wisdom and love inspired God in His creation, but so also did
the quest of beauty. Aquinas called the universe God’s sermon, and the
universe is a divine picturing and sculpturing and harmonizing. The
artist follows far after, rethinking through finite images the ideals
which filled the thoughts of the Divine Artist.

In idealizing, in creating, is art akin to the divine, and, lastly,
in its disinterestedness is art divine. All appreciation of beauty
is divine. Contemplation will be the occupation of eternity, and
contemplation is the proper and the congenial attitude of the soul
towards beauty. Good inspires love and attracts to union, but when union
has been effected in eternity, the enraptured ecstasy of the beautiful
will be the soul’s unending activity. Beauty is the supreme excellence
of truth, the polish on the granite of fact, the uncloying fascination
arrested upon perfection. In eternity infinite good and infinite truth,
obscured in time, will stream into the soul unclouded and refulgent, and
beauty will grace love and crown wisdom.

The millions of mankind who admire the red of every morning, and the
forests breaking green through the silver mists and the birds in awakened
song rising from the flowers to the brightening sky, these millions
do not begrudge one another such beautiful spectacles, nor are they
mutually jealous as they listen to beautiful sounds. That unselfish,
that unenvious contemplation of beauty marks off man from animals by an
impassable chasm and makes him an image of the self-sufficing Creator,
the source of all beauty, the exemplar of all beauty, whom the Blessed
forever contemplate and forever enjoy, unenvying and unenviously.




