XV

TRUE PRINCIPLES OF HOMERIC CRITICISM


The story of Phidias and his pupil, Alcamenes has often been told. They
competed for a prize in sculpture. The statue of Alcamenes was about
to be chosen because of its exquisite finish when Phidias objected
to any decision until the statues should be put in the high position
they were designed to occupy. At once, the opinions of the judges were
reversed, for the apparently rough lines of Phidias’s creation stood out
in sublime majesty, while the polish of Alcamenes’s was lost when the
statues were raised aloft. The story illustrates a splendid rule of art
which has often been forgotten in the study of Homer. The epics of Homer
were not made for the test-tube and the microscope. They were not made
even for readers; they were composed for listeners. Put them on their
proper pedestals and the minutiæ revealed by the grammarian’s microscope
will be lost in the grand sweep of the story. You would as soon halt
Shakespeare’s _Macbeth_ because of the anachronisms, or condemn Leonardo
da Vinci’s “Last Supper” because of modern masonry in the walls or
carpentry in the table, as apply the philological and archeological tests
of the higher critics to Homer.

Apply the tests of art to Homer and judge him by those. Take the matter
of the contradictions which critics have talked so much about. In many
cases, especially where mythology was concerned, the material the poet
had to handle bristled with inconsistencies and contradictions. Long ago
Aristotle laid down the sensible rule for drama, and it is equally true
for epic poetry, that the poet is not responsible for the improbabilities
in his materials. The sculptor may have flaws in his block of marble; the
painter may have defects in his lead or oil, or pigments; and the epic
poet found contradictions in the fairy stories of mankind which he wove
into the story he sang. That one consideration will sweep away instantly
heaps of higher criticism.

Again, the artist is more taken up with the end than he is with
the means. In the fervor of his composition he wreaks himself upon
expression, he burns to embody his ideal and, engrossed in that, he is
likely to be less observant of the material of his art. The achieving of
the effect is more to him than mathematical accuracy in the use of the
instruments by which he achieves the effect. He makes his hero win his
battle; he may unhappily forget some of the tactics or even the geography
of the battlefield. His object is not to teach the art of warfare or
furnish the topography of the country, but to tell an interesting story
in an interesting way. The _Iliad_ has a wall that vexes many critics.
It was built in the tenth year of the war, which was no time to build a
wall, and was put up simply because Achilles left the field. Besides,
according to these critics the wall appears and disappears strangely.
So the conclusion is: Homer did not build the wall, but some other poet
came along and projected his masonry into the epic. In answer it has been
shown that the wall behaves very well, but, whether it does or not, it
matters little. The poet is not a surveyor or a street commissioner. He
wished to make his story interesting, to make the character of Achilles
prominent, to bring some agreeable variety into what might prove a
monotonous catalog of similar battles. Those are reasons enough for a
poet to build a Chinese wall or reduce it to dust when he does not want
it, or conveniently overlook it in the heat of an imaginary charge.

A story-teller is more concerned to please his hearers than to guard
against inconsistencies which they would never detect as listeners, and
which even close readers did not detect for about thirty centuries. A
work of art is not to be judged as a mass of machinery is, nor is a poem
to be scrutinized with dictionary and grammar as you would a schoolboy’s
exercise. This is the statue of Phidias over again. A stage scene will
differ somewhat from a miniature, and an epic takes liberties with walls
and rivers and even mountains and oceans, liberties which would not be
tolerated in a quatrain. These principles are as obvious as daylight, but
apostles of the obvious are needed in abundance in the harvest fields of
higher criticism.

What is needed for Homer is a study of his art in a broad but not shallow
way, comprehensive and fundamental like Aristotle’s brief discussion.
For the wonderfully analytical mind of Aristotle Homer’s _Iliad_ and
_Odyssey_ were models of unity, because he looked upon them as works of
art, not scrap-heaps of philology and archeology. Put the poems of Homer
on the pedestals for which he made them, for listeners who had to be
entertained and clamored for variety. “It is a trait of Homer,” says a
writer, “constantly to shift the scene. The motive may be weak, but the
eye of the poet was not on the motive, but on the scene; so he not only
shifts the scene but varies the description of the events.” The poet’s
eye, it might be added, is also like the orator’s, fixed steadily on his
audience, and the audience must be relieved even if masonry or geography
suffer.

The paramount principles of variety and growth of interest which govern
every good story hold sway in Homer. Take a staple action of the _Iliad_,
the battles. Homer’s audience wanted fighting, yet jaded listeners
and the artistic poet knew there must be in the fighting variety and
growth of interest. Even in the matter of killing men, which seems to us
unimportant but which would not be to an audience of fighters, Homer has
shown a wonderful variety. A German professor has diagnosed the Homeric
surgery with all the thoroughness of his class. The conclusions may be
found in Seymour’s _Life in the Homeric Age_. The number and variety of
the wounds, the weapons used, the percentages of fatalities, are all
given in full detail. “Hardly could the poet have covered more completely
the possibilities of wounds for the human body if he had proceeded
systematically and mechanically.” Some will have it that Homer was a
surgeon and an army doctor. Certainly the history of anatomy has its
first chapter in the _Iliad_.

But to pass over the variety displayed in the wounds and other smaller
points, consider the actual fighting. For the maneuvers we may refer to
two interesting chapters in Lang’s _World of Homer_, where the variety
and consistency of Homeric warfare are well described and defended
against the dissectionists. The point, however, we are working toward
is the variety shown in even the external circumstances of the warfare.
A closer study than we can afford to give would reveal more variety,
but we may mention the plain, the wall, the river, the night as in the
tenth book, the mist. These are the various circumstances which the poet
introduces into his battles, relieving the monotony and sustaining the
interest. There is no falling off. The different heroes, too, succeed one
another; the victory alternates from one side to the other; the battle
on earth has its echo among the gods. The interest rises. Patroclos
enters the fight, and then his fallen body becomes the center of the
struggle, as the wall and the ships had been before. Something, too, is
left for Achilles. Ferocious as may have been the fighting before, it
becomes a veritable shambles when Achilles enters the fray. Never were
such frightful wounds, never such rivers of blood as may be witnessed in
Book XX “when the black earth ran blood,” “when beneath the great-hearted
Achilles his whole-hooved horses trampled corpses and shields together;
and with blood all the axle-tree below was sprinkled and the rims that
ran around the car, for blood-drops from the horses’ hooves splashed
them and blood-drops from the tires of the wheels. But the son of Peleus
pressed on to win his glory, flecking with gore his irresistible hands.”

Then follows the battle in the river, and finally the battle of the gods
themselves, and after the necessary relief and lull and reawakening of
interest comes the last battle of all and the climax of the poem in the
conflict of Achilles and Hector.

A study of the art of Homer along its great lines will give us the true
principles upon which to judge him. Such a study will put him in the
right perspective. The statue of Phidias will mount on high where its
artist wished to have it enshrined. The _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_ were meant
to cross the bronze threshold of some great palace, “where there was
a gleam as it were of sun or moon through the high roofed hall of a
great-hearted King. Brazen were the walls which ran this way and that
from the threshold to the inmost chamber, and round then was a frieze of
blue and within were seats arrayed against the wall this way and that.”
Then “after the men had put from them the desire of meat and drink,”
they called upon the minstrel. “For minstrels from all men on earth get
their meed of honor and worship; inasmuch as the muse teacheth them the
paths of song and loveth the tribe of minstrels.” “And the minstrel being
stirred by the god began and showed forth his minstrelsy and took up the
tale where it tells how the Argives sailed away.” That was the setting of
the Homeric Epic, and thus speaks one whose “heart had melted at the song
and whose tears wet his cheeks beneath his eyelids.” “Verily it is a good
thing to list to a minstrel, like to the gods in voice. Nay, as for me, I
say there is no more gracious or perfect delight than when a whole people
makes merry, and the men sit orderly at feasts in the halls and listen
to the singer and the tables by them are laden with bread and flesh, and
pours it into cups. This fashion seems to me the fairest thing in the
world.”

There is the place that Homer chose for his matchless poems, and there
they should be judged. The hearts that melt with song are not searching
for digammas or Æolic forms. They want the story, the long voyages and
the strange adventures, the swaying lines of battle and the prowess of
heroes. They look for and recognize the different characters which must
be as varied and as clearly marked as in the life around them. They must
not be surfeited with too much of anything. Voyages and battles must vary
and grow in intensity and be crossed with pictures of nature, brief but
thrilling and immensely relieving,—the lion, the wheat field, the tossing
ocean and the steady downfall of an unending snow storm. With these and
the plot entangling and disentangling, the listeners to Homeric song and
story will not look for that polished smoothness and frigid exactness,
the absence of which vexes the minds of modern Germany. Phidias’ statue
occupies its proper pedestal, and the true judges award to Phidias his
well-deserved prize.




