XVI

THE CHILD-TEST OF LITERATURE


Their elders are too busy these days devising tests for the children. Is
it not time for the children to retort on their testers? “Having pried
and prodded into us to see if we measure up to you, dear elders, let us
now see,” the children may well say, “whether you measure up to us.” A
great philosopher wished to make man the measure of everything. We have
a truer, a divine philosophy, a philosophy all the more persuasive, and
that philosophy makes the child the measure and test of man’s worth
and the arbiter of his eternal destiny. “Whosoever shall not receive
the kingdom of God, as a child, shall not enter it.” The millstone
mooring the scandalizer in the ooze of ocean’s darkest depths and the
angels who see the face of their little one’s Father, these are the
extreme sanctions which guarantee the accuracy of the child-test for the
measurement of man.

The child-test has often been applied to man’s morals. Onan and Sanger,
Sparta and China, Calvin’s unchristian infant damnation and the
Christless infant sanctification of Pelagius, Malthus with his “Decrease
and subtract” and Moses with his “Increase and multiply,” all, from
individuals to nations, are ample evidence that the child is set for the
ruin and resurrection of many in Israel. The child-test is surely potent
in rating the world’s moral morons and moral geniuses.

Can the child-test be applied to man’s art and literature? Recall the
words of Job, “Who shut up the sea with doors, when I made a cloud the
garment thereof and wrapt it in a mist in swaddling bands?” That view of
the sea in the swaddling bands of infancy is a proof of an imagination
looking at the universe with the eyes of the Creator. The child-test
is a measure of the sublimity of Hebrew literature. The revelation of
Genesis gave the literature of the Bible an outlook never reached by
other literatures. As the promise of the Messiah kept a hallowing guard
over the cradles of Israel, so the vision of the Creator blotted out from
the concepts of the Hebrew imagination the crude and monstrous nativities
which make all pagan mythologies hybrid and miscegenetic.

Homer has fewer than others have of these nightmares, but it is not in
them nor in the tinsel sublimity of his divine machinery that Homer has
touched a wider circle of readers than any of his epic brethren. Rather
it is in his unaffected and transparent portrayal of the human nature
we all understand that Homer has set the heart of the world throbbing
faster. Not the celibate Virgil, nor the Puritanic Milton, dissolver
of matrimony, nor yet Dante, idealizer of the maiden Beatrice, gave us
childhood and motherhood as Homer has done. Homer is no sentimentalist,
but he has wider sympathies with mother and child than any author on the
rolls of literature. The mother cow, lowing over its first-born; the
mother dog, growling in defense of its litter; the mother lion, all its
brow wrinkled with the greatest frown ever sketched; the mother bird,
starving and dying for its young, yes, even the mother wasp, solicitous
for its menaced brood (note that, S. P. C. A.!) these are evidences of
Homer’s tenderness. Achilles likens his friend Patroclus to a little
maid fondly catching at her mother’s dress and getting in her way with
persistent tearful pleading till the mother takes her up. In the _Iliad_,
Helen’s sorrow for her abandoned Hermione is a pleasing element in her
repentance. Odysseus proudly styles himself the father of Telemachus;
the mother of Odysseus dies for longing of him, and his father, Laertes,
in the most exquisite of the many recognition scenes of the _Odyssey_,
passes from view in that story, while his long-absent son tells him of
the fruit trees, “which,” says Odysseus, “thou once gavest me for mine
own, and I was begging of thee this and that, being but a child and
following thee through the garden.” We have natural sketches of the
babyhood of his two heroes, Achilles and Odysseus.

Yet, more than all these pictures, stands out in the world’s imagination
Hector’s boy, whose future fate Andromache, after Hector’s death,
details with a mother’s despairing vividness, whose childish terror at
his father’s helmet, while Andromache smiles through her tears, has
brought home to unnumbered thousands the grim specter of war. That scene
has etched itself so deeply into the heart of mankind that it has almost
ruined Homer’s poem, alienating universal sympathy from Achilles to
Hector.

After Homer, the child _motif_ in literature is less in evidence.
Drama, of its nature, has little place for the child except to put a
keener poignancy in tragedy. So Sophocles used the children of Œdipus.
So in his time did Shakespeare with the princes of _Richard III_, with
Marcellus in _Coriolanus_, with Macduff’s sprightly lad, and with others.
Theocritus has a child to furnish an aside for the gossipy Syracusan
dames. Anacreon introduces the counterfeit of childhood in the Cupids,
whose sophisticated conventionality checked invention in Elizabethan
lyrics as it did in art from Pompeii to Rubens and later. Cupids are
symbols, children of the brain, not of the heart, and figure in song and
painting as signs. They have a message for the mind; they do not touch
the feelings, while on the other hand, they free the artist from seeking
in life the expressive significance that Homer gave the child.

Literature had to wait long for the naturalness of Homer to reappear.
Virgil has a little of it in Ascanius, another Cupid, and it is
significant that Virgil’s one outstanding natural touch is found in
the famous Messianic eclogue: _Incipe, parve puer, risu cognoscere
matrem._ As for other Latins, whether it be bachelorship or the erotic
preoccupation of the lyricists, or the supreme power of the father
in Roman customs and law, Latin literature does not mirror for us
prominently the child and mother nor reflect their natural attractiveness
as found in Homer. Well, even Greece seems to have lost the art, and a
new inspiration was needed. That inspiration came with the Divine Child
of Bethlehem.




