III

ART AND HUMAN NATURE


1. THE UNIVERSAL ELEMENT

A serious defect in most modern art movements is that they start from
art; they are modifications of previous art movements. True art movements
start from human nature. When perfection in any art is standardized, when
tradition and conventionality prevail, and the artist has originality
enough to chafe at the restraints of classicism but not originality
enough to reveal finer ideals through classic expression, his temptation
is to rebel at conventionalities and to deem himself original because he
is unconventional. He wishes to be different from other artists and seeks
for the difference by discarding the traditional medium rather than by
improving his own personal message. He prefers to be different and even
original by cutting his ginger-bread into the shape of automobiles and
air-planes instead of going back to mother’s classic make and blending
his ingredients into a new creation, a creation which will make fresh
appeal even in former animal shapes or in the traditional ginger-bread
cart-wheels.

Art is a social institution. If not by the people, art is of the people,
and certainly for the people. When Greek literary art grew conventional
in its different forms, the artists went back to the people for another
medium to be transfigured by art. Ruskin has called architecture a
“glorified roof.” The sonata is a glorified folk melody; epic is
glorified folk lore; and Greek drama is a glorified folk song, as
Elizabethan drama is a glorified folk chronicle. Both dramas have their
roots in the religious services of the people. Homer told us about the
public he had, but the nineteenth century would not trust his word until
Schliemann dug up the great halls where Demodokos and his fellows told
the people their own folk stories in a glorified, artistic form. Greek
lyric and Greek pastoral were as public as Greek oratory, Greek choruses,
temples and statuary. It was left for Roman conquerors to begin the
segregation of art into the cold storage of the modern millionaire and of
the modern museum.

The permanence of Greek art is based upon that public appeal. Art is
long because it embodies nature, and most of all human nature. Homer
has appealed to man, woman and child for thousands of years. His human
nature is our human nature despite external differences of every
kind. Homer himself was aware of the appeal of nature in art. On the
shield of Achilles, he marveled at the field which grew black behind
the plowing, a marvel of Homer’s close study of nature as well as an
expression of his ideal for art. Nature is a language all can understand
and human nature is a language all must and do understand. When lament
was made over the body of Patroklos, the elegy of Briseis stirred all,
“and thereon the women wailed, in semblance for Patroklos, but each
for her own woe.” Similar is the appeal of art where in semblance of
something else, each sees what belongs to self. Aristotle in seeking to
explain the characteristic pleasure of art ascribes it to _mimesis_ or
re-presentation in another medium. Such staging, he says, not only robs
the terrifying of its terrors but enables all to understand and reason
to the nature of each art product. Such understanding and reasoning
mean surely something more than the mere recognition of photographic
accuracy and likeness. If we may press the meaning of the Greek word used
for reason, the process of art enjoyment is similar to the syllogistic
process which involves an appeal to a general statement. The process is
one which recognizes the general in a particular case, as the grief of
Briseis found an echoing grief in every heart.

Whether Aristotle and this interpretation of him is correct or not, it
is evident that art must generalize. Art must select, both by choice of
the artist and by the limitations of his medium. Art does not photograph,
because it has no sensitive plate for its medium. The photographer’s
art largely precedes the camera and consists in selecting that pose
and that expression, out of many, which is yours. The camera is nature,
controlled by mechanism, and is not art. If the photographer or painter
or sculptor photographed you in some passing spasm, we should not
learn and reason that it was you. The spasm was realism and fact, but
it was peculiar and individual; it was not you whom we have known and
generalized from experience. In such a case, Aristotle says shrewdly,
we might get artistic pleasure from the workmanship or colors, that is,
from the medium and the mechanics of art, but we should have no artistic
pleasure from the soul and substance of the art product because the
product found no prototype in our experience, because we could not define
it or generalize it. Art selects. It cannot give everything, and if it
would be true, it must give what all may understand; it must give what is
generally true, and what is generally true of all men is human nature.

Selective idealism has usually the advantage of being intelligible, but
it labors under the disadvantage of becoming merely intelligible. It
gives the truth, but through familiarity the beauty or artistic appeal
of the truth has been dulled and tarnished, or, like the dandelion,
until a Lowell gives it a new luster, its very commonness leaves us
unmoved. We enjoy human nature in Homer because he was the creator of
sleeping winds and of rosy-fingered dawns and of the mother’s smile
alight through tears. A modern who would transfer these same touches to
his own composition would leave us cold. He too must create; he must be
personal, but he must not be individual. Personality is the knowing and
loving principle, and looks to the many with its thoughts and wishes.
Individuality is the principle of separation and isolation and is looking
inward, not outward. When the artist, therefore, creates and gives his
own winds or dawn or mother love, he should speak to us in his own
concrete embodiments of nature, and of human nature, using a language man
understands. If selective idealism tends to become merely intelligible
and unappealing, individualism tends to become unintelligible and to
mystify.

The poet, the novelist, the painter have more depth than silver nitrate
on a photographic plate. Artists do not simply mirror nature; they do
not catch at the odd or freakish. That is photography, not creation.
Horace did not give us a moving picture of a falling tree, but he saw
the humor and human interest of that “sorry log.” Burns did not give
us an anatomical study of the typhus-carrier on a lady’s bonnet in a
kirk, making it crawl upon ourselves and sending us after the kerosene
can and bath tub, but Burns soared away, from that sight with Horatian
humor and Horatian human nature, into the immortal lines, “O wad some
power the giftie gie us.” The artist who confounds the generalized mental
attractiveness found in true art with the shock of nerves or the tickling
of concupiscence or with misguided realism, will not produce things of
beauty. He gets a thrill, but it is not the permanent, undying thrill of
art, not the thing of beauty, which is a joy forever.




