XIV

THE VITALIZER OF THE WORLD


This title is not an advertisement for a patent medicine; it is the
brief statement of an important historical fact. “Every schoolboy knows”
that the revival of learning in Italy came from the vitalizing touch of
Greek. Out of that renaissance, which the Jesuits took over and embodied
in their system of teaching, grew modern scholarship in England through
Linacre, Lilly, Colet and More, the forerunners of the Elizabethans. It
was the beginning of modern scholarship in Germany, through Erasmus, the
friend of these Englishmen, and through Melanchthon, whose name, like
that of Erasmus, marks the power of Greek: out of that renaissance sprang
the rejuvenated civilization of our day. Every schoolboy knows that Greek
brought the modern world to life, but is it as well known or remembered
that Greek has always been vivifying everything it touched?

The civilization of Rome in every part felt the influence of Greece. Rome
conquered the world by force of arms, but itself was humanized and then
humanized the world through Greece. Every modern language today feels
the force of Isocrates and Demosthenes through Cicero, and of Alcæus
and Sappho through Horace, and of Greek tragedy through Seneca and of
Homer through Virgil. When later the barbarians of the north severed
Rome from Greece and the Roman Empire and its civilization lay dead, who
brought the world to life again? “When the accurate knowledge of Latin
was declining in Gaul, even Greek was not unknown in Ireland.”[2] It
was the Irish monks who freshened into flame the blackening embers of
European civilization and began its restoration. The revival was brought
about through the schools of Bobbio and St. Gall, mostly indeed as the
scattered books of their libraries show, by means of Latin literature but
always with the help of Greek, as the same libraries testify. That was
an earlier renaissance in Italy and Switzerland. And who was the leading
figure in the revival in Spain about the same time? It was the Greek
scholars, Isidore of Seville and, a little earlier, Hosius of Cordova,
and, a little later, John of Gerona. Then France began to grope out of
barbarism under the leadership of Charlemagne, resuming close relations
with Greece and importing the Irish monks, Clement and Dungal, and the
English monk, Alcuin. But it was under Charlemagne’s successor, Charles
the Bald, that this new renaissance took on a fresh energy which did not
spend itself before the decline of scholasticism. John Scotus, John
the Irishman, who styled himself in his translation of Dionysius from
the Greek by the title of Erin-born, for a quarter of a century kept
France intellectually alive, and did it chiefly by his Greek. John, the
Erin-born, was the forerunner of scholastic philosophy, which caught
the vital force of Greek through another channel also. When Spain was
conquered by barbarians and lost its civilization, where did its Arabian
conquerors go for the seeds of the new life? The Arabs went to Greece,
gave Aristotle in translation to Europe, and ushered in the golden age
of medieval philosophy. Rightly does Traini (1345), on an altar-piece in
Pisa, picture St. Thomas Aquinas receiving the light of knowledge from
Christ through the Greek New Testament and from Aristotle on his right
and from Plato on his left. As Aquinas combined patristic and scholastic
theology, he merged in his works the twofold Greek influences of Plato
and Aristotle, who were the human aids in each of these theologies.

Pass over several centuries to the time when the Italian renaissance
had grown senile and when scholarship left Spain, Italy and, to a large
extent, France, and found its home in the north. These nations lost
touch with Greek and their scholarship died down, while life moved
northward in the wake of Greek. When F. A. Wolf went to Halle about the
beginning of the nineteenth century, he represented the reaction against
the realism of that day, and “his conflict with the school of useful
knowledge brought into clear relief his ideal of a culture founded on
Greek traditions.”[3] Time has shown that Wolf’s theories of Homeric
authorship are all wrong, but the stimulus he gave to scholarship lasted
all through the nineteenth century, and to no other single influence more
than to Wolf may Germany ascribe its undoubted supremacy in classical
learning during the last century. His inspiration came from the Greek,
and in his vitalizing of Germany he was associated with others who had
felt the same inspiration and were already beginning the influence that
still in a measure persists: Heyne in the classics, Lessing in criticism
and Winckelmann in art.

England’s partial reawakening under Queen Anne saw Bentley, the Greek
scholar, and his contemporary, Pope, translator of the _Iliad_ and
_Odyssey_, and let scholars say what they will about Pope’s translation,
they cannot impugn the fine criticism of his introductions or the
lasting influence for good of his versions. Passing over the prime of
English eloquence, whose living roots, as Goodrich has shown, are in
Greek literature, we come to the fresh memories of our own time and to
the Victorian era. Again it is Greek which vitalizes every branch of
literature, philosophy and art with new and unexpected truth and life.
Without Greek the Victorian revival would not have come about. In poetry
recall Keats, who awoke to life through the reflected glory of Homer;
recall Cowper, translator of Homer, and Byron, who died for Greece,
and Moore, who translated Anacreon, and Landor and Arnold and Tennyson
and Browning, all of whom took substance and form and fire from Greek
sources. In essay-writing you have Brougham, eloquent advocate of Greek
oratory; De Quincey, who could, as his tutor said, at the age of thirteen
harangue a Greek crowd; Macaulay, who, even in manhood, weeps over his
Homer on the streets of London. In art there are Ruskin and Morris and
Pater, who are saturated with Greek thought. Think of statesmanship and
you will recall Lord Derby and Gladstone, political rivals, at one in
their love of Homer; think of criticism, and Lang, Saintsbury, Blackie,
Butcher and Jebb will say that through Greek they have dominated modern
criticism; think of history, and the names of Rawlinson and Grote and
Hallam, Grecians, will come forward in your mind. History! Why, you will
remember that all ancient history has recently been rewritten with the
spade, and it was Schliemann under the spell of Homer who turned the
first sod.

Go over the great names in literature and art, in philosophy, theology
and scripture, in the sciences of history, mathematics, law, government,
and you will find Greek giving life and vigor. Even in the newer sciences
founded on observation and experience, which have come into being within
a century, whenever an observer gets beyond the elementary stage of
research and classification, he will resort to Greece for principles
and intellectual categories just as he borrows the language of Greece
with which to name his discoveries. History shows that every people and
every system of education and every house of learning, when it gives up
Greek, is headed towards inferiority and decay, but when it turns with
fresh endeavor toward Greek it reaches forth to life and to light. Nor
is all this surprising or strained. Our civilization was born and grew
for centuries in Greece. Our Christianity was early translated into the
language of Greece and for centuries spoke and thought chiefly in that
tongue. So then in our minds and souls our youth will ever have been
Greek, and from Greek must ever come, as it has come in the past, the new
blood that will flush with dynamic energy the anemic arteries of cosmos,
the world, and of the microcosm, man.




