VI

ART AND THE DIVINE


2. THE KINSHIP OF ART AND RELIGION

The history of art from its lowest manifestations to its highest gives
evidence of its union and intimacy with religion. The fact is admitted,
and might easily be confirmed by the very way in which religious
movements violently reacted against art. Hebraism knew the power of art
over its followers, and Hebraic antagonism to sculpture and painting
served to give religious impulse freer outlet in Hebrew poetry and
oratory and other literature. The Bible is the supreme illustration of
the influence of religion upon literary art. Islamism opposed art, but
gradually succumbed to its influence at least in architecture. That Islam
has not yielded more to art is an evidence of arrested civilization, as
well as of baser and more sensual religious feelings. Puritanism, the
intensest form of Protestantism, opposed art in all its manifestations,
but Puritanism either diverted art energy to poetry and literature or
provoked excesses by its attempt to check the natural impulses of art,
and Puritanism finally yielded to art. It is clear then that religious
opposition to art serves but to show more strikingly the union of
religion and art. The religion that opposes art must direct the art
impulse into other channels or the religion degenerates. By their nature
religion and art are congenial.

What now is the explanation of this close and continuous union of art
and religion, found everywhere and in all ages? Taine and his school,
led astray by some details in the artist’s subject matter, have tried to
explain art by environment; but environment is an explanation absurd in
itself, and cannon be adequate for an ubiquitous fact which transcends
all environment. The theorists who ascribe the origin of art to play and
the deploying of superfluous energies liken, with Herbert Spencer, the
art impulse to the acts of a kitten playing with a ball. Play may be
partly an excess of energy, but not all energy is artistic, and animal
play is the stirring of appetite, bearing but a slight, superficial
resemblance to man’s early strivings for artistic expression. How many
games are imitative and made more attractive by art! From the very first,
mind enters into early and even child art, and at the last the devotion
of the artists to their ideals in the higher manifestations of art, a
devotion quite unlike play, shows that the art impulse is essentially
different from the instinctive impulse of the kitten, which pounces on a
rat as it pounced on a ball of wool.[1]

Another school, striving to explain the connection between art and
religion, takes a directly opposite view to the play theory. Fear and
magic are, according to these authors, the controlling factors. The
difficulty in this theory is the utterly selfish element in the fear and
magic impulse, whereas the art impulse is disinterested and unselfish.
Besides, religious belief precedes the fear and magic propitiation of
offended powers. The voodoo and the hoodoo mark degradations of religious
impulses. Impulses in harmony with man’s nature may go down as well as
up, and even should we suppose that the unselfish impulse of art, which
finally becomes the evidence and glory of man’s highest civilization,
could be traced back to the sordid details of selfish superstition, why
should such an ugly duckling evolve into a fair swan? Devolution and
degradation are easier than evolution. Why did the art impulse take the
narrow, upward path and shun the broad way down to perdition?

The perfection of the oak must have been in the potency of the acorn. The
oak could not come from a peanut, nor can all the powers of sun, rain
and soil or any other factor of the environment evolve the fruit of the
peanut vine into the majesty of the oak. We can explain by an extrinsic
cause the stunting of an oak or the rotting of an oak, but we cannot
account for the existence of the oak—except by an acorn. We may find
perhaps a thwarted or corrupted art tendency in superstitious fear and
its products, but that element of fear could not write a poem or compose
a sonata or rear a Gothic cathedral. The perfection reached by the art
product must have been in the potency of the first artistic impulse in
germ.

Religion and art were then united potentially in the original art impulse
just as the strength and lofty beauty of the oak were latent in the
acorn. The art impulse is natural to man; it is intellectual. It requires
brains to be artistic, as it requires brains to laugh, and no animal
has done either or will ever do either. The bird in building its nest
displays an intelligence not its own; its nest building is inherited
just as its song is. Jean Fabre’s observations have shown conclusively
the wonders of instinct, coupled with the stupidity of the creature
possessing the instinct. But the earliest scrawl or daub of the child
displays the mind working on matter and the deliberate shaping of means
to an end. All intellectual testers from Simon-Binet to the latest have
found the making or interpreting of pictures a measure of intellectual
power. They are right. Art is rationalized pigments or sounds or words
with their images or some other rationalized material. Dr. James Harvey
Robinson in _Mind in the Making_ says that we are wrong in rationalizing
the past to make up our minds, and how does he show it? By rationalizing
another past for us. The truth is we must rationalize the past, and Dr.
Robinson should induce us, not to stop rationalizing, but to rationalize
correctly and should give us something better than universal skepticism
with which to rationalize. The art tendency is one with the religious
tendency in being rational and intellectual.

Art and religion strive for high ideals; they are disinterested and
unselfish. LaFarge says to Saint Gaudens: “That work is not worthy of
you,” and Saint Gaudens picks up a hammer and smashes the sculpture. That
is an instance paralleling the heroic following of religious ideals with
like sacrifices. Was it fear of bogies or love of their dead which filled
so many tombs with precious articles? Believing in immortality, Egyptians
and Myceneans gave to the dead what was most precious, and what was most
precious was the finest art in the costliest material. Love keeps graves
green: fear erects a crematory.

Art and religion are personal and emotional. Each has its own proper
expression. Of religion the expression is worship and of art it is
concrete embodiment of the ideal, and in both cases the expression is
intimately personal and permeated with feeling. Art is more sensible and
so more emotional because its expression must be presented to the senses
or at least to the imagination. Religion whose primary expression is
an act of the will, need not of its nature be attended with emotion or
external display but it usually is, and feeling and expression commonly
help to the fuller expression of religion. The rapture of art and the
ecstasy of religion, though differing in much, have also much in common.

In their social appeal art and religion are akin. The artist and the
saint have their hours of solitary contemplation. St. Peter at Pentecost,
describing the religious ecstasy of the inspired apostles, cried out:
“These are not drunk as you suppose,” and, continuing, he quoted the
prophet Joel: “Your young men shall see visions and your old men shall
dream dreams.” In the forming of their visions and dreams saint and
artist are alike, though the substance of their visions differ. They
are alike also in their impulse to give their visions expression and to
influence men with them. Religion is apostolic and art is social, and
that is why in history they have gone forth so often hand in hand to
subdue the world. Whole nations had to conspire to erect the Egyptian
pyramids, the tower of Babel, the temples of Israel, of Rome, of Greece
and of the Orient, and the Gothic cathedrals. Only a union of art and
religion could produce such stupendous results. Patriotism and the
state have at times come near to these great effects, when patriotism
or love of country assumed the nature of religion. To produce these
national monuments a lasting cause as well as a cause of wide appeal
was necessary. Here again art and religion are akin. Art is long, and
religion is immortal.

Art reaches its highest and most perfect expression in the sublime. Here
religion does not walk hand in hand with art, but bears art on high and
gives to art some of its own divinity by endowing the artistic expression
with sublimity. The literature of the Bible attained to heights which
writers of other nations could not dream of nor ambition. Genesis sets
poets and all artists upon a lofty eminence. By the revelation of
creation, the imagination and the vision of the artist became coterminous
almost with that of the Creator. Newton’s theory of gravitation which
shepherded the starry hosts of the universe into one obedient flock,
gives us a realization of the effect of Genesis upon the world’s
imagination. The creation _motif_ in literature emancipating man’s
imagination, enlarging the boundaries of vision, and dowering the artist
with sublimity, deserves a treatise by itself and a history worthy of its
greatness.

Art and religion are united in fact, so history teaches; art and religion
are akin, so the study of their attributes reveals. What then is the only
and full explanation of that fact and of that harmony? Philosophers hold
that the only and the full explanation of the harmony subsisting between
the mind and reality, which is called truth, is found in the fact that
both mind and reality are reproductions in creation of God’s truthful
knowledge of Himself. Ethicists hold that the only and full explanation
of the harmony subsisting between the will and law, which is called moral
good, is found in the fact that both will and law are reproductions in
the finite of God’s love of Himself. So philosophers must hold that the
full and only explanation of the harmony subsisting between the soul and
art, which is called the expression of the beautiful, is found in the
fact that like the innate tendency to truth and good, the tendency to
beauty is a reproduction of God’s contemplation of Himself. Creation, as
has often been declared, is a manifestation of the art of God, a mimetic
presentation in finite matter and spirit of the infinite ideal. All
advance in truth and virtue is an approach to divine truth and goodness,
and all true progress in art is an approach to divine beauty. “Filled
with enthusiasm,” says De Wulf in _L’Œuvre d’Art et la Beauté_, “before
the greatness of the artist’s power, Dante Alighieri compares it to that
of Omnipotence:

    “‘Your art like the grand-child of God’

            (_Inferno_, XI, 103).

“Art is the grand-child of God because it is the offspring of man’s
creative power as man himself has come from the hands of God.”




