IX

LOOKING FORWARD IN LITERATURE


The teacher of literature today is looking backward when he should be
looking forward. Greek literature, Latin literature and, to a large
extent, English literature are not orientated; they do not face the
rising sun. It was not so in the Greek schools of Greek literature.
Gorgias and Isocrates taught literature for the morrow, and for practical
and immediately practical purposes. In the Roman schools it was so from
first to last. Recall Cicero’s studies under Greek rhetoricians and
Cicero’s own preachment in the _Archias_ speech. “Shame on those who bury
themselves so deep in literature that they harvest nothing for the good
of all and bring nothing to light for our eyes to look upon.” Recall
Quintilian’s _Institutes of Oratory_, and all the intervening schools
of Rome. Rome had no vocational schools for road-building, but Rome did
have schools of grammar, poetry, rhetoric and philosophy where it trained
leaders with vision and with the power to act. The brains of Rome trained
in literature guided barbarian hands to lay down the roads over which
Christianity traveled and civilization came down to us.

Literature looked forward in every period of the world’s schooling.
Ausonius and Isidore, Alcuin and Petrarch, Boileau and Pope, England and
France, and even Germany until about the middle of the nineteenth century
and America until a little later, kept the literatures of Greece and Rome
orientated to the future by teaching them as arts, by making composition
of literature the goal of the teaching of literature.

Science is ever growing old; history is always being rewritten;
literature is ever young. We know more about Homer’s history than
Longinus knew, but we do not taste the delight of his poetry any better
than Longinus tasted it. “Handing on the torch of learning” is a trite
phrase, but it is literally verified in the true teaching of literature.
Each age adds to the advance of science and information, but art is long.
Literature and art do not belong to the past. Literally and without
figure of speech they are the past living in the present. They are the
flaming torch, kindled in the past, never dimming and never to dim.

Write a history of artists; do not write a history of art. “A thing
of beauty is a joy forever.” The information of science changes
every moment; the appreciation of art once gained is enduring. The
_Encyclopedia Britannica_ has rewritten all its science and history; it
reprints its appreciations of Sophocles by Campbell and of Demosthenes
by Jebb and even of Johnson by Macaulay. Where the cause is the same,
the effect is the same, and so the beauty of Homer’s rosy-fingered dawn
awakens still the same appreciation.

Of literature as a subject of investigation in university or graduate
work there is here no question. The investigator studies the origin, the
development, the history of literature. He looks backward; his purpose
is to amass information and to codify a science. That is not or should
not be the purpose of the teacher in high school and college. He is
educating; he wishes to set in operation and perfect the faculties of
the class before him, to impress upon every faculty its own proper art,
that is, its habitual and excellent way of acting. The school teacher is
concerned with the education of acts; the university lecturer with the
education of facts.

Take the _Ratio Studiorum_ of the Jesuits, a system embodying the
traditions of education and not differing fundamentally from other
systems of its time. The _Ratio Studiorum_ had no history of literature
or lectures on the evolution of literature. It did not approach
literature as a science but as an art. It took the standard authors of
Latin and Greek. Cicero was the staple of every class in Latin because
for nearly every kind of Latinity, history and poetry excepted, he was
a model. Cicero was analyzed, was appreciated, was imitated, that the
student might express himself in writing and speaking as clearly, as
interestingly, as forcibly as Cicero, that the student might be master
of acts of literature, not of facts about literature. That was and is
humanism; that is, making a man a man by equipping all his faculties with
the art proper to each. The humanities were so called because they embody
man. Science is classified nature; literature is nature brought into
touch with man’s personality and transmuted into art, man’s only creation.

You cannot get grapes from thorns or figs from thistles. Every other
subject in the curriculum produces its kind; so should literature.
Mathematics makes mathematicians, chemistry chemists, and physics
physicists. Art should produce artists; literature should result in
literature, in artistic expression, but it is made to produce historians,
biographers, perhaps critics. The history of literature, the evolution
of literature should be put out of high school and college and relegated
to the university or handed over to the lectures on history, leaving the
valuable time of literature for appreciation and expression.

Today we have literature in one class and composition in another
and perhaps rhetoric in another. Departments are the offspring of
universities and the instruments of science. The rational school of
literary expression correlates author, precept and exercise. Information
may be imparted piecemeal and from different sources; it is multitudinous
and capable of division. Formation is one and united; it is the faculty
or power brought to the perfection of self-expression. Art requires a
teacher and unifying of means; science may have a score of lecturers as
its truths are found in a score of books. Let the teacher of literature
therefore take standard literature, make it understood, feel its
personality that students may feel it, note and appreciate its beauty
that others may take fire or at least get heat from the enthusiasm
kindled within him, and then let the teacher see to it that his class
express their own selves as the author expressed himself. Let students
do for Lincoln what Shakespeare did for Julius Cæsar. If they cannot do
a play, perhaps they can do an act; if they cannot create a character,
perhaps they can give one characteristic action; if they cannot write a
description or tell a story, perhaps they can supply a noun for Lincoln
or visualize his deeds in a verb or paint him in an epithet or coin him
in a metaphor. And all this, not for an Elizabethan public, but for the
students’ own public here and now, looking forward, not backward.

Desperate efforts have been made to galvanize literary courses by
lectures on modern novels, current magazines and daily papers. The
lamentable fact is that most recent products are not literature; that
if there is in them art, it has not been made available for students,
as the art of literary classics has been made available by centuries
of criticism, and that, finally, the contents of contemporary writings
are so easy of access and so inviting to the reader and yet often so
ephemeral, that the artistic form is neglected. There is no contemporary
history, neither is there contemporary criticism. Literature, like all
art, must pass beyond the prejudices and passions of the day to be known
and appreciated as art at all. It is for the enlightened teacher of
literature to make the students embody their own experience in the finest
art molds of the past, not distracting them by the multiplicity of modern
literature, but holding up the ideals, like torches, to light the paths
before them and, like expert guides, to direct the trembling steps of
beginners to new goals.

Literature is not the study of words. Grammar or philology is the study
of words. Science dehumanizes everything; it eliminates the personal
equation; it is objective, unimpassioned, impersonal, subordinating
everything to laws and principles. Literature is the opposite in every
respect. It is embodied humanity. Science contains some of man’s
operations; literature enshrines all; not truth alone, but good and
beauty as well; not simply the clear idea, the accurate statement, the
correct conclusion, the consistent reasoning, but also the myriad visions
of the imagination, the subtle analogies, the suggestive creations,
haunting beauties and idealized good. So literature actuates every power
of man whether that power is a constituent part of man’s soul or is a
bodily power whose operation by reaction terminates in man’s soul.

As literature is therefore the whole man, so far as humanity can be
put in language, the understanding of literature, its appreciation and
most of all its creation will make every power of the student operate,
if literature is taught as literature. Such results will not come
automatically; they come when the teacher by true appreciation creates
again before the student the literary masterpiece and when the student
strives to rival the masterpiece in the expression of his own experience
and of his own dawning humanity. Literature is looking forward when it is
making minds think and imaginations imagine and reasons reason and tastes
taste and emotions thrill. Teach literature as an art, which it is; not
as a science, which it is not.




