VIII

THE VISCERAL TEST OF BEAUTY


“What is the prime requisite of a critic?” was the question. “His
sincerity,” said one; “his sympathy,” said a second; “his philosophy,”
said a third, “because everything he says will be ruled by his
principles, even his sincerity and sympathy.” The answer of the third
speaker is pertinent to a symposium printed in the _New Republic_ on the
function of criticism.

It is the common view of the seven writers that criticism is an art and
the critics, artists, but no one, except Mr. Francis Hackett, tries to
show what the label of artist means. Mr. Dickinson Miller, a professor
in a theological seminary, very justly and quite fittingly insists on
the social responsibility of the artist, as one who deals with life.
Mr. Lovett goes to history and prepares the ground for a discussion
of principles by grouping critics in several classes. Mr. Clive takes
the humblest and most practical view of the critic, calling him an
appraiser, a function which Mr. H. L. Mencken vehemently repudiates and
places a chip on his shoulder while belligerently proclaiming himself
impressionistic. He makes one deep remark which would seem to put him in
the same school of esthetics with Mr. Hackett. Presumably with humorous
intent, or perhaps seriously, Mr. Mencken locates the artistic impulse in
“hormones and intestinal flora.” Hormones are secretions of the glands
(we just looked it up!) and “intestinal flora” may mean ferments. Mr.
Mencken is abreast of the times. Graft on a new gland and masticate
yeast, these are the new specifics for all the ills that flesh is heir to.

The other contributors to this interesting symposium, though not, with
the exception of Mr. Hackett, delving as deep as Mr. Mencken, would
appear to be in philosophy individualists and subjectivists. The former
editor of the _Athenæum_, Mr. J. Middleton Murry, accepts the dictum
of Rémy de Gourmont: “Erect personal impressions into laws,” as the
“true motto of a critic.” Mr. Murry is, however, too sensible to accord
to individual impressions undue freedom and with some violence to his
consistency asserts that personal laws stand or fall by their agreement
with common experience and with human nature.

Mr. Morris Cohen puts himself into a fallacious dilemma from which he
does not successfully extricate himself. According to Mr. Cohen, all
critics are led by personal impressions or by the authority of others. He
should know that between the blind feeling of impressionism and the blind
faith of authority there is enlightened reason. Mr. Cohen does not take
the path of reason, but endeavors to escape the horns of his own dilemma
by recourse to pragmatism. He claims, what will be news to historians of
philosophy, that Euclid was the first pragmatist, although in the next
breath Mr. Cohen states that “mathematicians of the nineteenth century
have shown that Euclid’s axioms are mere guesses to be justified by
their consequences in the factual realm.” “Factual realm” seems to mean
the indefinitely remote future of pragmatism where the gold of truth
is separated from meaner elements. Some chosen spirits of the “factual
realm” now assure us that the “self-evident principles” of Euclid are
“guesses.” Mr. Cohen is equipped to write an inside history of philosophy
with some entirely original features. The “factual realm” leads back to
skepticism, and Mr. Cohen is still impaled by his dilemma.

Mr. Francis Hackett makes the most serious attempt to get at the
philosophy of criticism and of art, and attacks at once the question
of the beautiful. It is evidence of his thoroughness that he goes
straightway to the great problem of esthetics, “Can an object be at once
beautiful and evil?” Mr. Hackett answers promptly in the negative, but
then proceeds to confuse the point by going to another and different
question, “Can evil or an ugly object be represented in art?” The answer
to this question is evident. The elopement of Helen, the patricide and
incest of Œdipus, the galleries of Dante’s Inferno and Purgatorio, and
countless other happenings in the world of art, show that the evil
and the ugly have been and may be represented in art. “I can hardly
conceive,” says Mr. Hackett, “an artist as subduing a cancerous object
to an esthetic design.” But why not? Marriage with one’s mother is
more repugnant than a cancer, and yet it was handled successfully by
Sophocles, however repulsive some of his imitators have been in their
details.

The very transfer to the realm of art robs the ugly object of its
actuality and imminence. Surely the ugly and evil have been and may be
represented in art, but such objects may not be represented as beautiful
and good. That were as false and untrue to nature as a centipede cow in a
picture. Perhaps a cancer could not appear in a picture or poem or story
except by suggestion. A stark realism would disgust, but a true artist
might subdue a cancerous object to artistic design as effectively as
Homer subdued in his story the fleas of the dog, Argos, and the dung-heap
where he lay.

Beauty in art would lose one of its charms, the splendor of contrast, did
not admitted ugliness or evil occur in art. Bad art disgusts and so does
badness in art, when badness is approved or when it is projected into art
for purposes not artistic. Mr. Hackett’s real trouble is that he has not
properly isolated the feeling of art awakened by beauty. He thinks that
the esthetic sense is sexual and visceral. If the mouth waters at painted
fruit, would Mr. Hackett call art salival? Human beings are composites,
and external objects while producing their essential and proper effects
may have concomitant effects accidentally brought into being. To admire
the beauty of an apple is an esthetic feeling entirely distinct in cause
and faculty and in operation from the feeling of sensible satisfaction,
anticipated or actual, which comes to the taste-buds, and different again
from any visceral qualms that may arise from associated ideas of unhappy
experience with other apples.

Mr. Hackett has been led astray by not distinguishing the disinterested
emotions of beauty from the selfish emotions of appetite. He calls
beauty, “disinterested satisfaction,” and in that word “disinterested”
he has a fact about beauty, a fact solving his problems, a fact which
has been admitted by every one who has studied the subject, and a fact
which is capable of experimental demonstration at any moment. Professor
Phelps of Yale once called esthetic emotions a spinal thrill; Mr. Mencken
would call them “hormones or intestinal flora”; and Mr. Hackett declares
that “the true sources of esthetic satisfaction and dissatisfaction are
deep in our emotional and visceral life.” The one essential quality of
disinterestedness, found in esthetic satisfaction, shows the absurdity of
all such statements. Bodily emotions are all the outcome of appetites,
and appetites are never disinterested but always self-seeking by their
very nature. They are actuated by good; they tend to an end, an end which
they do not and cannot seek disinterestedly. Even the act of the highest
disinterested love may be akin to the sense of beauty, but it is not as
wholly disinterested because that unselfish love is still seeking good,
and good as such does not come within the purview of beauty at all. It is
impossible to be disinterested towards good or evil.

Mr. Hackett speaks of beauty being a “sensuous satisfaction.” Here again
there is a confusion between beauty of art and other beauty. Art appeals
to the senses because art presents its beauty in concrete embodiments. To
that extent the satisfaction of beauty arises from sensible objects, but
the feeling of beauty transcends mere sensation. “Art is long.” “A thing
of beauty is a joy forever.” The satisfaction of appetite is passing;
the satisfaction of beauty abides. Mr. Hackett does well to seek the
springs of beauty in personality. Personality is an abiding principle
of intellectual beings. The enduring joy of beauty argues to an abiding
principle which bears the dynamic charge of that joy. Beauty supposes a
soul.

“Beauty is a light that may follow any reality whatever and give us the
power to release our emotions happily in the presence of that reality.”
So states Mr. Hackett, and he is right, if he gives the correct meaning
to “emotions.” Light or luster has been recognized from all time as an
objective element of beauty, which has been defined as the light of
truth. Mr. Hackett paraphrases a definition which has been incorrectly
attributed to Plato. Kleutgen has defined beauty as the perfection of
anything resplendently manifested.

Let us hope that Mr. Hackett will remove “visceral” from among the
qualities of beauty and preclude critics from adding a fiftieth
explanation of Aristotle’s _catharsis_ to the forty-nine varieties
already set forth. Wearers of Murphy buttons or those who have lost or
may lose sections of the intestinal tract should be assured in an amended
edition of Mr. Hackett’s esthetics that their sense of beauty has not
been abbreviated or impaired. Sane philosophy is the prime requisite of
true criticism.




PART SECOND

ART IN THE TEACHING OF LITERATURE




