Chapter XII, Educating the Emotions, is a summary of an address given to
the Public School Teachers of Rhode Island.

Other chapters have appeared in _America_, _Catholic World_, _Educational
Review of Washington_, _School Interests_, _Classical Weekly_,
_Magnificat_ and are reproduced through the courtesy of the editors.




APPENDIX




GREEK SPEAKS FOR ITSELF

AN ETYMOLOGICAL PHANTASY[4]


During a period of lethargy I was petrified at a phantom, bounding from
my lexicon, with this cataract of phrases: “Are you Baptist, Methodist,
Presbyterian, Episcopalian, Catholic, or Christian? Without me, you are
anonymous. Do you stigmatize heresy and schism, hypocrisy and blasphemy.
Do you blame schemers against the Mosaic decalog? Do you impose anathemas
in apostates, idolaters and atheists or exorcise the devil and his demons
with their diabolical pomps? Are you zealous for proselytes, and to
baptize neophytes after catechism, and to canonize orthodox martyrs with
halos and emblems, scandalizing frenzied iconoclasts? Then all that is
done through me.

The ecclesiastical sphere is practically mine. I am the architect
of churches, cathedrals and basilicas, from the asphalt base in the
crypts of the catacomb, up to the apse and the chimes in the dome. I am
architect of monasteries for monks and anchorites, and of asylums for
orphans and lepers and maniacs. Mine is the Hierarchy, from the Pope on
his dais with his tiara, to the mitered Bishop in his diocese, and to
the parish priest in his presbytery. Deacons and acolytes, clergy and
laity, Papal encyclicals, diocesan synods, parochial homilies, and all
dogmatic theology, with its mysteries and myriad topics, are mine. The
Bible is mine from Genesis, Exodus, Deuteronomy of the Pentateuch, to
the Paralipomenon and the Psalms, to patriarchs and prophets, to the
Evangelists of Christ, to the Epistles and Apocalypse of His Apostles.
Epiphany, Pentecost, the Parasceve are mine The tunes of the hymns, the
quiring of anthems, the Gregorian tones of the litanies and antiphons are
melodious through me and I composed the canon of liturgy with its symbols.

Go to your home with me. Bushels of anthracite for the chimney, and a
diet of fancied nectar! Chairs and plates and dishes; oysters; butter
and treacle; perch or trout or sardines in olive oil; the aroma of capon
or partridge or pheasant; celery and asparagus and peppers; cherries
and dates and currants, citrons and melons, prunes and quinces and
plums; pumpkins marmalade and pastry; chestnuts and pippins; masses of
purple hyacinths, with lily and crocus, with geraniums and heliotropes,
with narcissus and peony, with asters and orchids and posies of roses.
What zest! Isn’t that a panorama of paradise to tantalize you? Be not
economical or dyspeptic. Masticate beneath your mustache. Let choruses
echo in the parlor with music of organ and guitar, or let there be
anecdotes on the piazza around a bottle of cheering tonic.

I telephone or telegraph for my “auto,” and my machine goes to my
theater or hippodrome. There is on my program the symphony orchestra
with harmonious melodies; or on my program are scenes melancholy with
tragedy, or hilarious with pantomime and melodrama, with comic monolog or
dramatic dialog, with cyclists, gymnasts and acrobats. After the drama or
kinematic photography, with match and lamp you go to attic canopies, and
to the climes of Morpheus. For all these you are to reimburse me with the
treasuries of the purse.

Go with me to the ocean, opposing the stratagems and tactics of barbarous
pirates, to meander by gulf and isthmus and archipelago, nomads through
all climates, charting geography with my nautical atlases, from the
Arctic to the Antarctic through the tropic zone, from Polynesia to its
antipodes. Then for my astronomy! What a panorama through my telescope in
the crystal atmosphere! Above the horizon in the empyrean are my planets
and comets and meteors and galaxies of asteroids.

Without me where is your “zoo” with its panthers and leopards with
dolphin and crocodile and hippopotamus, with lynxes and hyenas, with
ostrich and pelican, with buffalo and dromedary, with ichneumons and
scorpions, with the gigantic elephant and its proboscis and the pygmy
squirrel! Oh, what of my chimerical and utopian “zoo,” with the phenix
and dragon and griffins and chameleons and gorgons and gnomes and
basilisks and sphinxes and hybrids!

But I am not archaic; the scope of my dynamic energy is practical and
not eccentric. Mine are politics, the diadems of monarchs, the scepters
of tyrants, barbarous anarchy and despotic autocracy, the panics of
demagogue and the parliaments of autonomy and democracy. Chemistry and
chemical analysis, physics with phenomena of electricity, acoustics, and
optics, mechanics, botany, geology, entomology, and all the “ologies”
with their technical glossaries; they are mine.

So are all the apothecaries and pharmacies with glycerine and licorice
and creosote and the antidotes for quinsy; for catarrh, dropsy,
neuralgia, and for every “-itis” and “-osis”; emetics for the stomach;
the cathartics, calomel and castor-oil; doses of paregoric for colic;
plasters for imposthumes; arsenic for spasms of epilepsy, and tonics for
anemic arteries; a peptonoic diet for dysentery; oxygen against bronchial
phlegm; bromides for asthma; iodine for pleurisy and parasites; narcotics
to calm hysteria; antipyrin for agonizing rheumatism; antitoxins for
diphtheria and for the deleterious microbes of cholera or typhoid, and
bottles of panaceas.

Anatomy is mine and the surgeon, diagnosing symptoms, charting septic
organs on the diagrams, trepanning the cranium, cauterizing for
hemorrhage, is mine; so are his sponges and syringes and silk and his
styptics, and his prophylactic hygiene, and his anæsthetics, chloroform
and ether, and his antiseptics against bacteria and gangrene, and his
autopsy and his skeletons.

The school is mine with its desks, its programs and schedule and the
scholars, from their alphabet to their diploma, their arithmetic and
geometry, their gymnasiums and athletics, and the school diamond and
amphitheater. Pause before you ostracize me from my schools.

Would you be an essayist, sketching graphic stories or typical
characters; an historian, cataloging the treasures of archives,
and chronicling epochs of catastrophe and calm; or a philosopher,
systematizing theories of Stoics, Hedonists, Peripatetics and
Scholastics; or a poet, composing idylls and madrigals, lyrics and odes
with strophes and the epics with episodes, you are mine. Without me you
have not talents or ideas or paper or ink. Mine are your grammar and
syntax, your syllables, your paragraphs with their commas and colons and
parentheses, your lexicons and encyclopedias and card-catalogs, your
topics and themes for ecstatic rhapsodies or for austere logic, your
fantastic paradoxes and your idiotic theories. ’Tis I who phrase for you
your axioms, caustic criticisms, laconic epigrams, all your irony and
sardonic sarcasm. If your technique is idiomatic, your methods puzzling
or crystal, your tropes are metaphors graphic, your fancies hectic or
anæmic, you are mine. I am your enthusiastic stenographer, jotting down
and synopsizing your ideas and typing them to be stereotyped in your
authentic tomes, whether anonymous or under a pseudonym.

I apologize for my tautologies, for this monotonous labyrinth, for the
phalanx of technicalities and for the etymological mosaic which strangles
your larynx with “ics” and “isms.” Whether it is all abysmal bathos, or
the climax and acme of the practical, I am to blame for it.

But pause before you ostracize me from my schools; pause ere the nemesis
of chaos and disaster is yours; but if you are to be characterized as
adamant and without sympathy, let the poets echo a threnody about my
coffin; let there be a chorus of pæans under the cypress and cedar, the
larch and osier, the myrtle and amaranth, about my cenotaph; let there be
in my cemetery a mausoleum with a monolith, and on it my epitaph:

The Lexicons of Europe Are the Trophies of Greece.




NOTE: THE NATURE OF ESTHETIC ENJOYMENT


Esthetic pleasure or the enjoyment of the beautiful is generally
admitted to be disinterested. Possession and ownership do not enter
into the esthetic act. The ownership of Da Vinci’s “Mona Lisa” is not
an object of indifference or of disinterested attention. Thieves scheme
for the ownership, thousands covet it, guards protect it. But the
enjoyment of “Mona Lisa” is not selfish and exclusive in its nature.
Esthetic enjoyment makes abstraction of possession and of selfish good.
It follows therefore that esthetic enjoyment is a function of man’s
knowledge, not of man’s desires and appetites. The only condition upon
which the appetites, whether bodily or spiritual, can operate is that
they be energized by personal good. Volition may be free, but it cannot
be disinterested. You may enjoy another’s picture; you cannot eat his
dinner, nor can you be indifferent to what you know to be for your good.

Some have asserted that esthetic enjoyment belongs to a special power
apart from both knowledge and appetite. There is however no need of
such power. Certainly beauty must be known to be enjoyed, but is not
the knowledge itself adequate to produce the characteristic effect of
beauty? Is not Aquinas right in saying, “Pulchrum dicitur id cujus
ipsa apprehensio placet” (that is called beautiful which simply by
its perception pleases)? Good, being an end, cannot delight solely by
being perceived; good must be attained. But for beauty, is not its very
perception an enjoyment? The solution of this question will be found in
the nature of enjoyment.

Emotions and feelings, pleasure and pain are easy to understand and
for that reason difficult to express in satisfactory formulas. By its
very nature every faculty of man operating normally has an accompanying
pleasure, while if operating abnormally it has pain. The faculty itself
is therefore the subject of the feeling just as life is inherent in the
organism. Indeed feeling is consciously localized life. The feeling of
the toe is felt by the toe; the joy of seeing is felt by the eye. No
distinct power is required to carry the feeling. So it is with esthetic
emotions. The mind itself feels the delight of beauty. Esthetic enjoyment
is a function of perception.

Does esthetic enjoyment belong to the senses and to the imagination?
Here again there is difference of opinion. It is probable, however, that
sensible perception has no accompanying esthetic pleasure. St. Augustine
appealed to experience and declared that esthetic enjoyment of the
beauty, say, of the sun, was possible, even when the sight suffered pain.
A better reason may be found in the behavior of animals which, though
clothed in beauty, give us no certain evidence of esthetic appreciation
and enjoyment.

Esthetic enjoyment therefore belongs to intellectual cognition. Now the
intellect has many operations. Which one of these carries the esthetic
pleasure or esthetic pain, which one is charged with the vital thrill
that creates and appreciates the world of art? The mind reasons, the mind
judges, the mind apprehends. Esthetic enjoyment belongs to the last.
Judgments and inferences may be objects of esthetic enjoyment; to reason,
to judge may precede or follow or may be even necessary conditions,
but the esthetic act is most probably one of simple apprehension.
There would seem to be general agreement that contemplation is the
characteristic attitude of the mind in the presence of beauty. Aquinas
excludes distinctly the idea of end from beauty. Beauty is a form which
we contemplate. Croce calls the esthetic perception intuition. Theodore
Watts-Dunton seems to be describing the same act when he calls poetry
“the renascence of wonder.” The efforts of reasoning and of judging
appear to be alien to the mental attitude in the presence of beauty.

The simple apprehension is concerned with what is termed ontological
truth, whereas reasoning and judging result in logical truth. Now, just
as esthetic enjoyment abstracts from possession or good, so does it
abstract from the affirmations belonging to the logical truth of judgment
and of rational inference. There is esthetic enjoyment of fiction as
well as of fact. Aristotle long ago saw that although the substance of
art must be the persons, actions and feelings of man, the pleasure found
in the work of art does not arise from its correspondence with reality.
The correspondence with reality gives the satisfaction of logical truth,
of scientific truth, of historical fact. The truth which is the object
of esthetic pleasure in art is the truth of consistency, of realization
of ideal, the truth of reasonable congruity, of plot in a wide sense of
the term. This vision, this dream of the artist, scholastic philosophers
call _causa exemplaris_ or ideal. If we are right in our understanding
of Croce, his intuition is nothing else but the simple apprehension of
the ideal. Esthetic enjoyment comes also, as is clear, from the simple
apprehension of beauty in natural realities where there is no fiction of
art.

To localize the esthetic enjoyment in this way does not determine the
constituent elements of beauty, but clear definitions help to exclude
many false notions of beauty. The ideal of the artist is embodied in his
imagination before it is expressed in its proper medium. The art of man
always must have a medium which can be perceived by the senses. That is
why a vigorous imagination, which stores up and dispenses to its owner
quickly and abundantly of its riches, is so useful to the artist. Through
his imagination the artist is original and personal. The pure thought of
science is abstract and alike in all minds; the artistic vision formed
from individual experience will be different in every one. Therefore no
two artists expressing themselves in the concrete can be alike as no two
scenes of nature are alike in beauty.

Aristotle put the pleasure of art in perception. Art for him is a
_mimesis_, which does not mean an imitation, in the sense of mirroring or
copying. That was Plato’s notion, which Aristotle combated. Art is, in
Aristotle, a power analogous to nature, working like nature in another
and limited world, of sound, of color, of human thoughts. Art is fiction,
a dramatizing, a staging of life, to be judged, not by correspondence
with fact, but by its own plausible and convincing rationalization. No
one has done more for art than Aristotle in his insistence upon the
necessity of cause and effect, of a motivation, sufficient at least for
the artist’s public. Intrinsic unity, the fruit of perfect motivation,
was another necessary requisite in Aristotle’s analysis of art. It is
only when the varied elements of the artist’s imaginative experience
have fused themselves into a unity by having a well-motivated beginning,
middle and end that the mind feels the beauty of its vision.

Universality in art is another fruitful idea of Aristotle. While confined
to his sensible medium, the artist must link up the separate elements
of his vision more closely than in the realm of fact. He will by that
very reason be general and universal because his motivation must approve
itself to all. A moving picture of the death of Cæsar as it really
occurred would be valuable history. It would, however, be individual.
Shakespeare’s death of Cæsar has a beginning, middle and end, and the
spectators see in it the working out of a plot in which every word
and act has been carefully planned and fitted into the design. The
individuating notes are left out, and the death of a Cæsar has universal
appeal.

Artistic creation, motivation, unity, universality, these are great
principles of art formulated by Aristotle and not likely ever to
be superseded. The cognitive idea of beauty and those principles of
Aristotle have been followed in the chapters of this book.

For further discussion of the nature of esthetic pleasure, see author’s
“Art of Interesting,” Chap. V, Interest from Emotions; Chap. XVII, Is
Esthetic Emotion a Spinal Thrill?




A FORWARD-LOOKING LESSON IN LITERATURE

(_To exemplify Chapter IX_)


THE METHOD

THE dry bones in the cold print of this lesson are to be galvanized into
life by a teacher in constant touch with the class and enlisting the
coöperation by questions, by having the passage read aloud, by writing
on the board, by interchanges of ideas, by lively disputes between
individuals. No mere lecture with passive listeners, no mere study period
with a passive overseer, but real teaching, which is a fine conversation,
directed upon select subjects and carried to a destined end under expert
guidance.

All of the technical terms, apprehension, judgment, inference and the
rest are to be omitted. The intelligent use of such terms belongs to
college, although the operations and objects which the terms designate
belong to all grades. Through simple, untechnical questions the whole
truth may be understood by each, and every student may be made to go
through operations which are of daily occurrence and which the student
must make habitual by repeated exercise to insure a mastery of the art of
expression. The teacher is an expert mental director, and, setting before
the class a good passage of literature, he will make them think again
and put in order again and express again what the author has done; he
will make them conceive, arrange and express thoughts of their own with
the excellence which teacher and class have noted and appreciated in the
passage. The teacher of literature will be no lecturer in history or in
philosophy or in mathematics, but will be like the teacher of music or
like the physical trainer, who makes his class go through exercises which
he himself has exemplified and which the class immediately practice to
acquire bodily skill then and for the future.

A passage of poetry is designedly taken in this lesson to show how poetry
can be made to contribute to the art of expression. Literature for some
is history, for others philosophy. These center attention on the facts
or ideas. Literature for others is a dreamy, mysterious thing, which you
must look at with awe, speak about with esoteric rhapsody and carefully
lock up again in a glass case. A forward looking lesson in literature
must know what the passage means, but is usually not concerned with the
origin and past history of the author’s meaning. The forward-looking
lesson will not pretend to solve all the mysteries of art and beauty but
will take out of the clouds and put clearly before the class some point
in the art of expression, a point which will be practical and of everyday
use. Such a lesson will be as decidedly vocational as hammering a nail or
rigging up a radio set or rushing around a gymnasium.

The purpose ever before the literature teacher’s mind is appreciation,
leading to mental action and through repeated action to the art of
expression.

THE LESSON

    The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
      The lowing herd wind slowly o’er the lea,
    The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
      And leaves the world to darkness and to me.


I. ANALYSIS OF THOUGHT

1. _Understanding._—The meaning of each word, the meaning of each line,
the meaning of the whole stanza. This should not be a mere passive
understanding. Students should be made to reëxpress the ideas, not only
by paraphrase in other words but especially by _imaginative realization_.
“For instance,” “Just like what?” are two phrases to be often on the
teacher’s lips. “Have you a heard a curfew?” “Have you heard a knell
tolling?” “Did you ever see in picture or in reality a lowing herd
winding o’er the lea?” A thought illustrated by the thinker’s imagination
is realized fully, is felt as well as grasped, and will persist.

2. _Judgment._—What is the logical subject and logical predicate of each
line and of the whole stanza? That is, what is the author’s chief topic
and what does he say about it? This need not always be the grammatical
subject of the passage. The art of expression is not only apprehending by
vivid understanding, but it is also judging by predication, by affirming
or denying something of the subject. There is not a class of any grade
which cannot profitably exercise itself in clear and concise judgements.
The successive judgements briefly put are: The bell tells the end of day:
the cows return to the barn: the ploughman comes home: I am left alone in
the darkness.

3. _Reasoning._—As as single sentence may be analyzed into a definite
subject and a definite predicate for a judgment, so two or more sentences
may be compared to grasp the relation between them. Poetry does not go
through a process of reasoning. It states thoughts and presents pictures,
permitting the mind to infer. The three pictures in the opening lines
have a common trait which the mind detects: all three pictures are signs
of nightfall. The mind draws an inference which is inductive in nature,
and the whole stanza may be briefly stated: The coming of night leaves me
alone in darkness.

These stages in analyzing the thought are elaborated here. In practice
they may be expedited. Before being read, the judgment and inference
may be presented as problems for solution: What does the writer say in
each line? What one idea is found in the first three lines? What will
be the title, the head-line, the summary of each line and of the whole
stanza?[5]


II. ANALYSIS OF FORM

Form includes not only the words and sentences, their choice and their
arrangement, but also the texture and color of the thoughts and their
modification ending in their perfect expression, as contrasted with
the bare and limited statements already determined. In the study of
literature, words are not merely materials for philologizing, or merely
sentences, free opportunities for grammatical anatomizing with all the
bones properly numbered and labeled. Such analyses look chiefly backward
and are not productive of writers. Language anatomy has its great
utility, but literature, or the art of expression, must look to the
flesh and blood of the thoughts, to the personality, to the imagination,
to the concrete embodiment of the writer’s art. The student will take
up, therefore, the thought already analyzed and note and appreciate how
his author has clothed the ideas, the judgments, the reasoning. He will
reënact the creative process the author went through, and so here, with a
view to expression, he will strive to rival the excellence of Gray, but
will do so with his own thoughts.

_Grading._—At this stage the teacher may point out incidentally many
excellences in the art of expression, but will drill and have practice
on the particular excellence in expression, proper to his class. The
textbook ordinarily determines the grade, but if there is no textbook or
prescribed program, the teacher will determine his own order of matter.

_Right Word._—Let us suppose the teacher is teaching the art of using the
right word (_Model English_, 3), the word which states the thing exactly
in kind. He may center attention on the line:

    The lowing herd wind slowly o’er the lea.

The class will be drilled in the author’s choice of the right word
by considering other possible but less exact combinations, e.g.: A
number of noisy cows went reluctantly along. After this drill, the
class will appreciate what the right word is and be ready for the
expression of their own ideas in right words. They are not to paraphrase
Gray’s meaning. That has already been done, but they are to provide
subject-matter of their own and express it with a like excellence. Did
they continue to speak of cows, they could not better Gray, but if they
speak of bees or bloodhounds or cavalry or autumn leaves or rioters or
anything else that has come under their experience in life or in reading,
they might approach the exactness of Gray in giving the right word for
the sound, for the collection, for the action, for the manner and for the
place.

    _Bees_: the buzzing swarm of bees circled thickly about the
    hive.

    _Bloodhounds_: the baying pack of hounds followed the trail
    eagerly.

    _Cavalry_: the clattering squadron of cavalry galloped swiftly
    along the road.

    _Autumn_: the heaps of rustling leaves were swept into every
    corner by autumn winds.

    _Rioters_: the yelling mob of rioters rushed wildly towards the
    jail.

_Imagination._—Suppose the teacher is giving a lesson in imagination
(“Model English,” Chap. X). If one of the _General Methods_, say
_Reflecting_ (No. 69), is to be taught, then the class must vividly
picture in their imaginations Gray’s stanza. With the help of books on
the desk and with a gesture or two the scene and all its characters may
be _dramatized_. All this suggestively rather than with exact mimicry,
unless there is in question a passage that may be reproduced by the class
in a miniature pageant or play. To test whether the class is actually
imagining, have them quickly number, one after another, the things they
see and hear directly by the words and indirectly suggested by the words.
Or test in another way. Let each draw an outline of the frame of a
picture and show how they would illustrate any line or the whole stanza,
putting numbers on the blank space to locate the details and explaining
to the side what the numbers stand for.

Suppose a _particular method, significant part for the whole_ (No.
73) be the matter of the lesson, then the whole which is expressed by
Gray is “evening,” or “parting day,” pictured by three significant
details—curfew, cows and ploughman. Have the class take an opposite
situation—not evening in a graveyard in preparation for gloomy thoughts,
but morning on the farm looking to a busy, joyous day. Or again, what
significant details will suggest the hush of evening in a city or on
the sea; noon in a factory, closing of school in the afternoon, coming
of winter in December, dawning of spring in April, etc. Interest may be
accentuated if one student gives the details and others imagine what is
the whole suggested. For example: The cock crows a greeting to the rising
sun; the team of horses is hitched to the mowing machine, and soon the
clicking knives lay low the waving grass (farm); the crank is whirled
about with a swift revolution and jerking stop; the low purr of a hidden
engine steals upon the ear and a cloud of dust swallows up the rattling
car (a Ford); a sprig of shamrock graces the lapel of the coat; green
ribbons flaunt gayly above ruddy cheeks, and down the street steps a band
jigging Garryowen (St. Patrick’s Day). In the same way elements of force
or interest, metrical charm or poetic thought and many other points could
be taught from this stanza, according to the grade of the class before
the teacher. Whatever the passage taken, once the grade has been settled,
the artistic drill should be carried through the stages of grasping the
thought definitely, of appreciating it with discrimination, of repeating
the process of creation, of dramatizing the complete product, and finally
of self-expression on the part of the student, striving to rival the
author in the excellence he has studied.




FOOTNOTES


[1] Cf. De Wulf: _L’Œuvre d’Art et la Beauté_, p. 40.

[2] Sandys: _History of Classical Scholarship_, I, 438.

[3] Sandys, III, 54.

[4] This “mosaic of etymology” which I offer is not, I think, simply an
ingenious _tour de force_. It has a significance and a practical value.
It may illustrate the composite nature of the English language; it may
amuse a curious reader; it may enliven a Greek class with the touch of
actuality; it may disclose dim vistas into the distant past through the
medium of everyday language, exemplifying history through common things.
All the words of this phantasy are of Greek origin, except the article,
the pronouns, the prepositions and conjunctions, and a few other small
words: “so, as, then, home, let, go, do, all” and parts of the verb
“to be.” Skeat’s _Etymological Dictionary_ (Student’s edition) is the
authority. The exclusively technical words of modern sciences which are
almost wholly Greek have not, for the most part, been mentioned. It is
needless to remark that the prescriptions of the phantom’s pharmacy are
not authoritative.

This _jeu d’esprit_ has attracted so much attention as to be reprinted
by the American Classical Association and to be noticed by several
metropolitan editors. That attention is the motive for giving the article
permanent position in a book with which a novel plea for Greek has a
certain, though remote, connection.

[5] For analysis of thought, see _Model English_, bk. II, chap. X, by F.
P. Donnelly, S. J. Allyn and Bacon: Boston, New York and Chicago.

