II

ART AND THE INDIVIDUAL


2. VAGARIES OF INDIVIDUALISM

Modern art has not followed Horace very far. It has broken with
conventionality as Horace did with the _clichés_ of Alexandria, but it
has not yet entered upon the path of right philosophy. The _Spoon River
Anthology_, a typical specimen from the individualistic school of what
might be called localists or village gossips, is in the epode-stage of
Horace, the stage of personalities, lubricity and garlic gruesomeness.
Hopes might be entertained that _Spoon River_ and _Main Street_ and other
individualistic photographs would progressively improve with Horace
except for one sad deficiency: Horace had humor and laughed at others,
and even at himself; modern individualists are so heavily armored with
the seriousness of their own views, that they don’t even smile. To
imagine the New Art laughing is impossible; if the New Art had humor
and laughed, it would cease to be New Art and would join the larger
brotherhood of art uncapitalized. Had the new artists a sense of humor,
it would probably be their death sentence. In the course of time they
might catch sight of their own art products, whether of painting or of
poetry.

Is it not an indication of individualism that so many recent novels are
biographies, that the stage is not holding up the mirror to life but
applying the scalpel to an ulcer? The biography or personal views of
Scott and Shakespeare cannot be discovered in their works. The modern
pamphleteer distributes his paradoxes among various mouthpieces whose
only difference is in name, and this is called a play, when it is in
reality propaganda. There are probably now no less than 100,000 college
graduates turning college escapades and flirtations into chapters,
which their authors consider typical of life because the incidents
were individually experienced. And, as the long stories of the day are
biographies or problems and as the drama is a diagnosis of diseases,
in the same way many of the short stories are pathological, but all
are tending to be individualistic. The artist makes his own subjective
experience the full measure of his artistic expression and seems to
imagine that his own peculiarities are good art because he sincerely
expresses what he feels. Individual nature is not human nature.

Aristotle has described poetry as the universal in the concrete. The
“new poets” give the individual in the concrete. Homer, Shakespeare, the
true poets, plumb to the depths of the human heart; they voice ripened
experience and enshrine mellow wisdom, and so appeal to all men of all
times. Much of the new poetry ostentatiously disdains tradition and
rejects the wisdom of the ages in discarding its dress. You may see the
rouge on the cheek and the freckle on the nose, but as far as life and
experience and heart are concerned, most of the new poetry is pitiably
young and callous. Meticulous recording of disconnected and unrelated
novelties is no adequate substitute for the warmth and depth of life
crystallized by the ardent gaze of the true poet out of his experience.
New poetry is contemporaneous with the invention and use of the Kodak and
has all the responsibility and profundity of that instrument.

Individualism has come to such a pass in modern art that everything in
it is resolving itself into pure emotionalism, and that an emotionalism
which does not belong to art at all. Degenerates are the products of
civilization; they are decayed exotics. “The higher the organism, the
more noisome the decay,” a science professor used to say when paying
his respects to diseased metaphysics. As only a believer can blaspheme
luridly, so when an artist goes wrong, he goes wrong hideously. A
pistol in the hands of a marksman gone mad is more destructive than in
the hands of a savage. Colors, sounds, shapes, fair words and gorgeous
imaginings are instruments of degradation and death if they are a finer
veneer over what is false. Individual vagaries and whims, no matter how
unusual, will not have the permanence of art because they are based on no
principles, but devised simply to startle. Degrade the appeal of beauty
to a spinal thrill and your artist will pander to concupiscence.

It is noteworthy that Homer’s worst lapse in story-telling takes place
among the luxurious Phæacians, ancient prototypes of degeneracy. Homer
may have felt justified artistically because he was depicting the
non-Grecian world through whose monsters and marvels Odysseus was passing
and making the first collection of sailors’ yarns. But Homer shocked even
the pagan world and set an unhappy precedent. Lucian and Ovid, Petronius
and Apuleius and the Byzantine eroticists made what was incidental in
Homer their chief concern and practice. They perverted fiction into
calculated suggestiveness.

That depraved and sensual theory of story-telling was, however, more
Aristophanic than Homeric, despite the single unfortunate precedent in
the _Odyssey_. The tradition of Greek and Latin comedy was carried on
by the medieval troubadours and by the story-tellers who catered to the
decadent nobility of Italy and France. They retorted on their clerical
censors and stimulated jaded appetites, substituting in shameless
intrigues priests and nuns for the pagan gods. It was and is the glory
of Scott that he broke away from these evil traditions which made the
novel a hateful thing to our forefathers. Scott deserted the continental
school of novelists and their English imitators, Fielding, Sterne,
Smollett, the last of all Byron. Scott gave up the satirical purposes
which handed on in fiction the vulgar devices of low comedy. He went to
history, to chivalry, to healthy men and women and created romances, not
pathological studies. English, Irish and American fiction for a whole
century yielded to the healthy and bracing impulse of Scott, but the
younger novelists in vogue today in England, Ireland and America have
gone back to the continental type, individual, pathological biographical
problems, forsaking Scott’s revival through balladry of the best Homeric
manner, where men “drank delight of battle with their peers far on the
ringing plains of Troy.”

The individualist must emancipate himself by the contemplation of nature.
Pathological specimens, freakish oddities, all the surface impressions of
the local colorists are not nature any more than a face contorted with a
toothache is a man’s likeness. Such exceptional exhibitions cannot form
the enduring basis of art. Personal experience must be widened by length
of time, by merging into the stream of wisdom, flowing freighted from the
past, or must, in exceptional cases, be won quickly by that intense and
probing comprehension of genius, which seems almost Divine intuition.
Excessive individualism, like the latest fashion, will be quaint and
incongruous on the morrow. Homer lives eternal because through strange
names and strange language and strange costumes we see our own sun and
fields and ocean and sky and put our fingers on a pulse which registers
the beat of a heart throbbing as ours.




