X

UNIFYING EDUCATION THROUGH LITERATURE


Unity is most useful, if not essential, to a satisfactory course of
studies. In the university this unity is effected by the profession which
the student has chosen. His field of concentration in art, literature,
law, medicine, science, engineering or divinity dictates to him his
subjects, and his own earnest choice, together with prescriptions and
examinations, insures unity and thoroughness in concentration courses.

Lecturing is the predominant method of the university because professors
of higher branches are few and students are comparatively numerous.
Lecturing is the weakest and most ineffective of all means of education,
and is only saved from complete failure by the serious purposes of
university students and much more by the sanction of repetitions and
examinations.

In the colleges, however, with the advent of electivism there was no
unifying bond to the studies. University methods of studies and lectures
prevailed where there were no university conditions. Thoroughgoing
electivists, like Dr. Eliot, admitted that the purpose of the college was
a general education or culture, but held that any and every study could
give such general training. President Lowell, Dr. Eliot’s successor,
began to put order into the chaos of extreme electivism. He saw his
coaches on the athletic fields build up expert athletes by a rigidly
prescribed course of training, and proclaimed the analogy between body
and mind, an analogy which would have been all the more cogent had his
philosophy been materialistic like that of Dr. Eliot. The prescribed
examination in one department at the end of four years is the latest
advance of Harvard toward definiteness and unity.

All colleges in America took up electivism to some extent, and even
where studies were still prescribed they adopted in their catalogs the
language and methods of electivism. No longer were there classes, but
everywhere you had courses and departments. One effect of this system
has been to make coördinate and of equal importance many subjects which
had formerly been subordinate. Colleges whose major subject, or field
of concentration, had been language, with other subjects subordinate,
now tended to make every subject a major and every field a field of
concentration. The departmental system has helped to impair unity
of education by disturbing the hierarchy of studies and by removing
all subordination. It does not appear to be feasible to concentrate
on everything. In some cases colleges seem about to give up the
general-training idea and are tending to make their whole course
subservient to a profession, obliging every one to take a pre-medical
course because the American Medical Association is mighty and medical
schools are very exacting.

Formerly high schools and colleges made language or self-expression the
field of concentration, and other subjects, like history, mathematics,
sciences, were kept subordinate. College and high school had then one
purpose, which unified all their studies, as a profession unified
lectures in the university—that purpose was the mastery of the art of
expression. The French lycées, the German gymnasia, the English public
schools, the Jesuit _Ratio Studiorum_, prepared for the university by
making students masters of writing and speaking. The writer and speaker
could express himself; his intellectual faculties could work properly,
and therefore they had received a general training which prepared them
for professional work of a special kind. The field of concentration was
shown in the names of the classes. The teachers were teachers, not of
Latin, Greek, English, but of grammar, of poetry, of oratory, of clear,
interesting, forceful expression.

The departmental system destroys this fine unity or renders it very
difficult of attainment. The departmental system has been perhaps the
chief reason why the classics have been taught as means towards the
acquisition of various sciences rather than as exemplifications of
literary art. It is as literature and as models of perfect expression
that the classics have hitherto survived; as literature and models of
expression they were taught in the days preceding the university system
of departments. Cicero was a model of letter-writing, of essay-writing,
of speech-making. He was chosen with a view to composition; he was graded
with a view to composition.

How can a department teacher preserve the former unity of system, where
all literature was studied with one dominating purpose, self-expression?
If the grade of the class is rhetoric or oratorical expression, will each
department teach its own authors, Greek, Latin and English, following
the same rhetorical precepts in the same order, or will each department
follow its own terminology and its own order, or will, as has happened
everywhere, the teaching of rhetoric be relegated to English or to a
separate professor, leaving Cicero and Demosthenes to be taught as
grammatical documents or historical documents or as legal documents, not
as speeches, not as models of oratorical expression? Will the professor
of Latin teach Virgil as epic poetry, and the professor of Greek teach
Homer as epic poetry, and the professor of English teach Milton as epic
poetry, or will the teaching of poetry be avoided by the Greek and Latin
departments entirely? Cicero and Demosthenes survive because they are
orators; Homer and Virgil live because they are epic poets, but the
departmental system either forgets that fact entirely or has three
professors teaching the same thing with confusion in the order and in
the rules of art. The departmental system, which is a university device
adapted for specialization, makes unity of education extremely difficult,
and has taken all the interest out of literature by teaching it as
everything else but literature!

Besides, as art is the power of doing, and science is chiefly
systematized information, the process of education for doing will be
different from the process of acquiring information. Too many cooks may
spoil the broth because cooking is an art, but too many sign-posts may
not always confuse the traveler. It is far easier to divide information
among various agents and impart it piecemeal than to apportion the
different faculties used in an art to different individuals who will
train them to act together harmoniously. Different teachers may very well
teach the geography of different countries, but it would not be feasible
to let one teacher have the right hand and another the left in teaching
the art of piano-playing.

Omitting the effect of personality, which is paramount in art, as the
history of all religious movements shows it also to have been in the
formation of character and in virtue, one cannot fail to see that
departments cannot well coöperate in giving the formation of art. In
fact, practically the art of composition has ceased to be the field of
concentration in modern high schools and colleges. All literatures,
even English, are taught mostly as sciences. The only wholesome reaction
in modern education against the predominance of science or systematized
information is found in the present vogue for psychological tests.
These are professedly tests of power, not of mere information, and in
them the power of self-expression through language is preëminent. All
the examinations are conditioned by the necessary medium of language,
and by far the greater number of tests are and must always be tests in
linguistic expression.

Language is the only practical measure of intelligence, and if such
tests win favor, they may result in establishing once more the art of
expression as the field of concentration or major subject in high schools
and colleges which give a general education. Language, when taught as an
art, educates the mind, giving it the powers of expression which are the
guaranties of the mind’s adequate education. Professors become teachers
of an art, not lecturers in a science. Perfect unity is found where
the finest models of self-expression in all languages, especially the
classical languages, are directed by one teacher to the mastery of the
art of expression in one’s own language.




