XVII

THE CHRIST-CHILD TEST OF LITERATURE


The influence of the Christ-Child on painting was tremendous and
lasting. A history of Christian art could be written around the Madonna,
and the subject has attracted the notice of many writers, indexed in
art libraries. Alice Meynell has treated the subject attractively and
with her studious insight in the _Children of the Old Masters_. In the
Catacombs, Christian art felt and portrayed the Divine Child and His
Mother. Byzantine ornamentation and mosaics gave the Child a rigid
majesty which veiled His winsomeness, but the master painters came
closer to childhood and brought Madonnas from the walls of crypts and of
cathedrals to the devotional shrine and the chapel, making the Child less
architectural and more natural.

In literature the Christ-Child had equal influence until Puritanism tried
to remove Christmas from the calendar. Drama originated in the liturgy
of Easter and of Christmas, and although Holy Week was more elaborate
and in substance more dramatic, Christmas to Twelfth Night, offering
more incentive to play and song and more holidays, exercised a larger
influence on the stage. In lyric poetry at the beginning of the sixth
century we have already the familiar, intimate and loving contact with
the Christ-Child, which finds its latest expression in Thompson and Tabb.
St. Ita, the Irish saint (480-570), is of their faith and tenderness in
the song of “Isucan,” “Little Jesus,” given in Sigerson’s _Bards of the
Gael and Gall_:

    Jesukin
    Lives my little cell within
    ...
    Jesu of the skies who art
    Next my heart thro’ every night.

The bambino shines through medieval song in Adam of St. Victor and in
other writers of hymns. The Catholic writers of the Renaissance celebrate
the same theme in the revived meters of classicism. Sarbievius, the
Jesuit lyricist of Poland, is full of the Christ-Child, and in his
well-known lines “To the Violet” he calls upon that “dawn of spring” to
crown his “Little Lad” with its flowers in place of the gold and gems and
purple which weighted the Infant. Sarbievius was doing what the painters
did, discarding the Byzantine ornament and convention.

Test Puritanism with the child and it fails; test it with the
Christ-Child, and you will get the ponderous “Hymn to the Nativity” of
Milton, an imperialistic ode which must have gladdened Cromwell. No
familiarity there, no mirthfulness, no Jesukin with violets for crown
jewels, not even Byzantine immobility. Milton does not even doff the
helmet of war, as Hector did; no, he sees

              from Juda’s land
    The dreaded Infant’s hand;
    The rays of Bethlehem blind his [Osiris’] dusky eyes.
    ... Our Babe to show His Godhead true
    Can in His swaddling clothes control the damnèd crew.

A Prince of Peace indeed with a mailed fist! Merry medieval England would
not recognize Jesukin in Miltonic panoply. Fortunately for art it had
attained excellence before the Puritanic blight fell upon the world, but
for literature in the English language we must wait until the nineteenth
century to see the child come to its own. Wordsworth attempted a revival
of Plato’s philosophy and found immortality, if not familiarity, in
childhood when he wrote his “Ode on the Intimations of Immortality.”
Wordsworth took a more fruitful lesson from the Greeks when he went back
to nature in other poems to study childhood. Even before him, Blake,
painter and poet, influenced no doubt by the traditions of painting,
began to see the heart in childhood. The interminable moralizing stories
of Ann and Jane Taylor and of Elizabeth Turner, which date from this
time, are heavy with grown up condescension. E. V. Lucas would have done
better to republish in his _Book of Verses for Children_ the graceful
and humorous lessons of the Greek fables than perpetuate Taylor and
Turner.

After Wordsworth we see the child _motif_ gradually taking a larger place
in the literature of England and America. Despite Francis Thompson’s
vigorous effort in his famous essay, he has not succeeded in making
Shelley pass the child-test. Shelley had no faith, no humility, no
humor, no real tenderness, and even granting him the dreaming power of
childhood, which in Thompson’s essay is largely a reflection of Thompson,
Shelley had not the heard of a child to enter into the Kingdom. Walter
Scott’s friendship for Marjorie Fleming shows that the great poet and
novelist had the necessary qualifications, but no performance comes
now to mind except a lullaby and the glorification of merry England at
Christmas. Swinburne glimpses gleams of a baby’s pink toes and lists to
low laughter of mouths of gold. The child is picturesque for him. Moore,
Byron, Browning, for different reasons, fail in the child-test. Tennyson
touched the surface, although in the “Princess” he came close to the
mystery. Patmore, uxorious and paternal, came closer and even touched the
depths of the child in “Toys.” Longfellow and Whittier were of the same
school.

It was Stevenson, in a _Child’s Garden of Verses_ who brought back into
poetry, as Lewis Carroll did in prose and verse, the natural child
that Homer saw about him, and that painting discerned in the Babe of
Bethlehem. Humor, imagination, sympathy, these were the factors which
discovered the heart of childhood for our modern world. Barry and Belloc
in England, Eugene Field and Riley in America, Earls and “Tom” Daly and
many others have furthered the discoveries. There is no hope for the
child in the “New Poetry” which takes itself too seriously. Who would
hold up the world if the “new poets” started in to mind the baby?

One more element was needed, and sorely needed, to enter fully into
the mystery of the child. That element is faith. Evolution looked on
the child as an epitome of its theory; pedagogy plotted out, weighed
and measured the child and drew up formidable statistics; eugenics
faced the child as though it were a dire microbe, source of poverty,
ignorance, bootlegging, war, pestilence and famines. The modern child
had and still has before it a dismal prospect. It is the camping ground
of the specialist, the experimental laboratory of the theorist, and the
peculiarly delectable victim of physical and moral vivisectionists. Faith
must save the child, faith in the Babe of Bethlehem. Tabb and Thompson
had that faith. They are the counterpart in literature of a St. Anthony
or a St. Stanislaus in life and art. They play with the Child Jesus.
Isucan has come into His own again. Tabb sings in “Out of Bounds”:

    O comrades, let us one and all
    Join in to get Him back his ball!

And Francis Thompson with medieval intimacy asks in “Ex Ore Infantium”:

    And did Thy Mother at the night
    Kiss Thee, and fold the clothes in right?
    And didst Thou feel quite good in bed,
    Kissed, and sweet, and Thy prayers said?

“Look for me in the nurseries of Heaven,” said Thompson. He will surely
be at home there, and Tabb and many another will be with him.




The first seven chapters of this work were given in substance as lectures
at the Champlain Assembly, Cliff Haven, N. Y.

