V

ART AND THE DIVINE


1. RELIGIOUS ORIGIN OF ART

The recent discovery of the tomb of King Tutankhamen has aroused the
interest of the world. The perseverance of the explorer, the variety,
artistic excellence and intrinsic value of the discovery gave the news
a place in the press and signalized the latest triumph of the spade,
which Schliemann converted into the best of historians. Dig in your
back-yard, and you can read its past in the layers before your eyes.
Make a cross-section of the country, and successive deposits will
tell you its story. Lay bare the strata of the earth, and the buried
fossils, the minerals, the gas, the oil, reveal the history of the world.
Grave-digging is the most productive occupation to which science, art and
even commerce can now be vocationally guided.

What was it that enriched the Egyptian tomb and other tombs of the past
in which man was buried? It was religion, and specifically it was belief
in the immortality of the soul. The latest opened tomb repeats the truth
that was manifest in the pyramids of Egypt, which were temples as well
as tombs. The beehive tombs of Mycenæ from which Schliemann actually
shoveled gold ornaments of various kinds were also temples as well as
tombs. The altar-stones in Catholic churches with their tiny _loculi_ for
the relic of a saint keep still the memory of the days when persecuted
Christians found the Catacombs of the dead places of worship as well as
of escape from the persecutor.

The caves of Cro-Magnon and Aurignac and other ancient deposits in France
and Spain have disclosed the earliest evidence of man’s art. The man was
no mean artist, and the coloring and skillful drawing have astonished
every one. Why dark caverns, inaccessible to light, should have been
so decorated has puzzled observers. Reinach calls the pictures early
“magic,” painting of animals to capture them. But there are paintings of
men as well as of bisons and reindeer. Professor Osborne is quoted as
saying that it seems to be art for art’s sake, namely, that the sheer
pleasure of the drawing is its reason. An admission, it would seem, that
the professor has no real explanation to offer. Sir Bertram Windle has
recently asserted the religious origin of these pictures. They would
seem to be the earliest appearance of stained-glass windows. The caves
were temples, and the explanation is confirmed by a comparison with the
beehive tombs of Mycenæ and with the Egyptian tombs. The altar, the
sacrifice, the victims, the food, clothing and other accompaniments
of life, are all evidences of religious feelings and a belief in a
continued existence. The absence of the bodies in these caves may easily
be accounted for. Fleeting time with prowling animals has destroyed
them while it left the pictures on the wall. Art is even longer than
Longfellow imagined.

If the earliest art so far found is religious in origin, these so called
Cro-Magnon or Aurignacian artists exemplify again what is a commonplace
in the history of art. It would be easy to add to the following
statements found under “Art” in Hasting’s _Dictionary of Religion_:
“The religious aspect of art in Egypt includes almost all that is known
of it.” “There is hardly any doubt that the high level of Assyrian and
Babylonian art is due to the deep religious feeling of the two nations.”
“The history of art in Greece is throughout its course intimately
connected with religion.” The fact is beyond all denying. Religion and
art are united, in music and song, from the dances of savages to the
Hebrew psalms and the stateliest liturgies; in painting, from the early
caveman to the modern man; in sculpture, from the crudest icons dug up
at Troy to the idol statues of Greece and Rome, in the lions and bulls
of buried Mycenæ and Crete, of Assyria and Egypt, in the tiny seal
rings, in the ornaments and statuary of our modern churches; in oratory,
from the prayers of the priest in the _Iliad_, to the fulminations of
the prophet and the eloquence of the pulpit; even in civic oratory
we find Demosthenes and Cicero in their sublimest heights touching
upon religious motives; in the poetry of incantation, of oracle, of
revelation, in liturgy and drama; in the little tale of the fable and
in the mighty story of the epic, for the full sweep of which Homer and
Virgil, Dante and Milton must stage their events upon the background of
a Divine Providence; in architecture, from the tombs and temples of the
eastern world, to the temples of the Aztecs and to the Gothic cathedral.

Aquinas gave in his _Summa_ a synthesis of all science; Dante gave in
his _Divina Comedia_ a synthesis of man’s life and destiny; the Gothic
cathedral of the same age gave a synthesis of all the arts in one
structure, exemplifying in fullness and excellence the mutual interaction
of art and religion in the middle ages, where manifestly religion
held sway as never before or since. The Morgan “Collection” in the
Metropolitan Museum of Fine Arts in New York exhibits the dusty wreckage
of that wonderful union of religion and art. No poet’s imagination is
needed to rebuild those fragments into that marvelous structure, under
whose myriad statuary of serious saints and grotesque gargoyles, you pass
through carved portals into the spacious aisles over which arches leap
aspiringly. The painter fascinates you with the story of many colors
in the windows. The weaver hangs other pictures on the rich tapestry
curtaining the walls. The wood-carver is everywhere evoking beauty with
cunning fingers. Music and song in the dramatic and antiphonal liturgy,
the sublime eloquence of the pulpit in turn charm and rest the ears.

The minutest detail is as artistic as the rich magnificence. The missal
on the altar will be a “Book of Kells,” a reflection on illuminated
parchment of the religious and monastic life which produced it, by
its patience, learning, devotion, silent application, and scrupulous
exactness; “examined with a microscope for hours,” says an authority,
“without detecting a false line or irregular interlacement.” Near the
missal of the Gothic cathedral would be found a jeweled chalice, like
that of Ardagh, with three hundred and fifty-four distinct pieces,
classic and rich in all kinds of ornament. Baldwin Brown was surely right
in declaring: “It is probable that nothing more artistically beautiful
has ever been seen than the Gothic cathedral,” and the Gothic cathedral
is the crowning glory of a deeply religious age.




