Chapter XIX).

=Dr. Steinach's Experiments= show the close relationship between
homosexualism and the secretions of the interstitial cells of the
genital glands.

After castrating young rats which, after the operation, remained in
an infantile stage of development, Steinach transplanted into their
inguinal region male or female gonads.

Males into which female gonads had been implanted, developed all the
physical characteristics and all the mannerisms of the female, paid no
attention to females at mating time and, on the contrary, attracted the
rutting males and were attracted to them.

Castrated females in whose body he implanted testicles, showed the
hardier hair growth of males, tried to mate with females and remained
indifferent to males.

Prof. Brandes, director of the Zoological Garden in Darmstadt, has
repeated those experiments on deer with identical results. The female
in which testicles were implanted behaved like a male and grew antlers.
The male's mammary glands grew very fast after the implantation of
female gonads.

It is said that Steinach has successfully transformed homosexuals
into normal men but the last statement of his on the "Histology
of the Gonads in homosexual Men," (Vol. 46, No. 1, Archiv für
Entwickelungsmechanismus der Organismen) contains no mention of such
results.

=Perverse Birds.= If we now turn to experiments reported by William
Craig in the _Journal of Animal Behavior_, we see an apparently
different process at work. Young male birds kept for a year in a cage
with females and away from all males, will at mating time ignore
entirely the females, and offer themselves to males in the mating
position of the female.

The same process is observable in females brought up with males
exclusively.

Imitation in this case seems to give exactly the same results which
Steinach obtained thru castration and transplantation of gonads.

If we now leave the physiologists and consult the psychoanalysts,
Freud, Ferenczi, Stekel and Adler will show us that homosexualism can
be produced by "purely" psychic factors.

=Freud Rejects the Hypothesis of a Third Sex=: "Homosexual men who have
started in our times an energetic action against the legal limitations
of the sexual activity," Freud writes, "are fond of representing
themselves, thru theoretical spokesmen, as evincing a sexual variation,
which may be distinguished from the very beginning, as an intermediate
stage or sex, a third sex. In other words, they maintain that they are
men who are forced by organic determinants originating in the germ
to find in a man the pleasure which they cannot find in a woman. As
much as one would wish to subscribe to their demands, out of humane
considerations, one must nevertheless exercise reserve regarding
their theories which were formulated without regard for the psychic
genesis of homosexuality. Psychoanalysis offers the means to fill the
gap and to put to test the assertions of the homosexuals. It is true
that psychoanalysis has fulfilled that task in only a small number of
people, but all the investigations thus far undertaken have brought the
same surprising results.

"In all our male homosexuals, there was a very intense erotic
attachment to a feminine person, as a rule to the mother, which was
manifested in the very first period of childhood and later entirely
forgotten by the individual. This attachment was produced or favored
by too much love from the mother herself, but was also furthered by
the retirement or absence of the father during the childhood period.
Sadger emphasises the fact that the mothers of his homosexual patients
were often masculine women, or women with energetic traits of character
who were able to crowd out the father from the place allotted to him
in the family. I have sometimes observed the same thing, but I was
more impressed by those cases in which the father was absent from the
beginning or disappeared early so that the boy was altogether under
feminine influence."

"It almost seems that the presence of a strong father would assure for
the son the proper decision in the selection of his love object from
the opposite sex.

"Following this primary stage, a transformation takes place whose
mechanism we know but whose motive forces we have not yet grasped. The
love of the mother cannot continue to develop consciously so that it
merges into repression. The boy represses his love for the mother by
putting himself into her place, by identifying himself with her, and
by taking his own person as a model thru the similarity of which he is
guided in the selection of his love object. He thus becomes homosexual;
as a matter of fact, he returns to the stage of autoerotism, for the
boys whom the growing adult now loves are only substitute persons or
revivals of his own childish person, whom he loves in the same way as
his mother loved him. We say that he finds his love object on the road
to narcism, after the Greek legend of Narcissus to whom nothing was
more pleasing than his own mirrored image.

"Deeper psychological discussions justify the assertion that the person
who becomes homosexual in this manner remains fixed in his unconscious
on the memory of his mother. By repressing the love for his mother, he
conserves the same in his consciousness and henceforth remains faithful
to her. When as a lover he seems to pursue boys, he really thus runs
away from women who could cause him to be faithless to his mother."

=Active and Passive Types.= Ferenczi draws a distinction between the
active and the passive types of homosexuals, that is, between the man
who, in love acts like a woman, in a submissive way, and the man who
loves men as he would women, in an agressive way.

"A man who in his love relations with men feels himself to be a woman,"
he writes, "is inverted in respect to his own ego (homo-erotism thru
subject inversion, or, more shortly, subject-homo-erotism). He feels
himself to be a woman, and this not only in the love relationship but
in all relations of life.

"It is quite otherwise with the true active homosexual. He feels
himself a man in every respect, is as a rule very energetic and active,
and there in nothing effeminate to be discovered in his bodily or
mental organisation. The object of his inclination alone is exchanged,
so that one might call him homo-erotic thru exchange of the love
object, or more shortly, object-homo-erotic.

"A further and striking difference between the subjective and the
objective homo-erotic consists in the fact that the former (the invert)
feels himself attracted by more mature, powerful men, and is on
friendly terms, as a colleague, one might say, with women; the second
type, on the contrary, is almost exclusively interested in young,
delicate boys with an effeminate appearance, but meets a woman with
pronounced antipathy, and not rarely with hatred which is badly or
not at all concealed. The true invert is hardly ever impelled to seek
medical advice, he feels at complete ease in the passive rôle and has
no other wish than that people should put up with his peculiarity and
not interfere with the kind of satisfaction that suits him. He is not
very passionate and chiefly demands from his lover the recognition of
his bodily and other merits.

"The object-homo-erotic, on the other hand, is uncommonly tormented
by the consciousness of his own abnormality; sexual intercourse never
completely satisfies him; he is tortured by qualms of conscience and
overestimates his sexual object to the uttermost.

"The subject-homo-erotic is a member of the intermediate sex, in the
sense of Magnus Hirschfeld and his followers. The object-homo-erotic,
is the victim of an obsessional neurosis."

The distinction between active and passive homosexuals is convenient
but slightly arbitrary. Certain homosexuals are at times passive and
at times active. Both types become at times the victims of obsessions
and seek the help of psychotherapists. Active as well as passive
homosexuals may be married and heterosexually potent.

=The Homosexual Neurosis.= Dr. Wilhelm Stekel of Vienna calls
homosexualism the homosexual neurosis. He summarises the genesis of
homosexualism as follows:

"As a child the homosexual is very precocious sexually and can only
repress his cravings by developing fear, hatred and disgust at the
thought of heterosexual relations. The result of that repression is a
flight from normal into abnormal forms of sexual gratification."

=A Safety Device.= To Adler, homosexualism is a detail of the
neurotic picture, a compromise and a safety device.

"Every neurotic," he writes, "experiences at some time during his
childhood doubts as to whether he will ever attain complete virility.
Giving up the hope of being a real man, is, for a child, synonymous
with being a woman. This carries in its wake a whole cycle of childish
valuations: aggression, activity, power, freedom, wealth, sadism are
male attributes; inhibitions, cowardice, obedience, poverty are female
attributes.

"The child plays for a while a dual part, being submissive to his
parents and teachers but indulging in dreams which express his craving
for independence, freedom and importance.

"This duality in the child's psyche, the forerunner of a split in his
consciousness, can have varying results in later years. The individual
will oscillate between the male and the female poles with a constant
striving toward the unification of those two tendencies.

"The masculine component prevents a complete assumption of the
feminine rôle, the feminine component is an obstacle to complete
virility. Hence a compromise: feminine behavior thru masculine means: a
timid submissive male, masculine masochism, homosexuality. Or masculine
behavior thru feminine devices."

=Above and Below.= A series of comparisons has established itself
in the human mind, owing to the enslavement of the female by the male,
starting with the antithesis: male-female: good and bad, right and
left, HIGH, and LOW, ABOVE and BELOW.

In every female neurotic, according to Adler, there is a refusal to be
a female, that is, to be BELOW (socially as well as sexually).

The female who is inferior in looks or intelligence or position and
cannot either compensate for that inferiority by displaying superiority
in some other way (artistic or scientific accomplishment), or reconcile
herself to her inferior position, wishes consciously and unconsciously
to be a man. Consciously she makes herself as masculine as possible.
Unconsciously, she dreams herself into a male personality, physically,
mentally, socially AND sexually. Her wish to be ABOVE makes her play a
man's part in love as well as in the world's life.

=A Way Out.= Homosexualism is, like every neurotic symptom, a way
out of life's difficulties.

A male homosexual I treated associated the idea of woman with "trouble,
sickness, expense, lack of freedom." "Every" woman was to him a "leg
puller," a "gold digger," a liar, insatiable in her demands, spying on
her husband, constantly suffering from "female trouble."

This man had never been married and his only sexual experiences, which
were of the most ephemeral type, had been gained in the few hours of
his life which he spent with a woman much older than himself, a cabaret
singer and a prostitute. Yet, he was convinced that "women are too much
trouble."

An unconsciously homosexual male who is married, and quite potent and
who consulted me after a serious "breakdown," had a dream in which he
saw himself at the top of a mountain in Africa (flight from reality and
his present environment). Six large negroes (powerful male sexuality)
carried away his wife's coffin, (flight from the sexual partner). A
long line of negroes then walked past him and he felt that as long as
he would be on friendly terms with them, he would not want for anything
(line of least effort).

Female homosexuals who had never had any normal heterosexual
experience ranted along the same line of thought: "A husband is too
much trouble." "The idea of submitting to a brute of a man," "I don't
wish to be a slave to a man," etc.

All this voices what Adler terms the "masculine protest."

=The Escape from Biological Duties.= Kempf also considers homosexualism
as a compromise and a convenient escape from biological duties.

"Heterosexual potency," he writes "judging from the behavior of many
psychopaths and normals of both sexes, varies in its vigor and is never
quite secure from the possibility of disintegration in the face of
depressing influences, such as disease, a frigid, unkind, terrifying,
neurotic or disgusting mate, hopeless economic burdens, fear of
pregnancy, or venereal diseases, social scandals, an inaccessible
or unresponsive love-object, death of the mate or a too fixed
mother-attachment.

The intrigues and usurpations of power by the family of the mate,
suppressing the idealised wishes of the individual, often cause the
regression to the lower level of homo-sexuality, where, at least,
parental sacrifices need not be made."




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                   HOMOSEXUALISM, A NEUROTIC SYMPTOM


The varying views as to the genesis of homosexualism, which I have
attempted to summarise in the preceding chapter, can be easily
reconciled.

Doubts as to one's "completeness" and a craving for safety may, even at
an early age, cause the gonads to remain undeveloped or to develop in
the wrong direction. Craig's pigeons were as completely "perverted" by
the wrong environment as Steinach's rats by surgical operations.

Hirschfeld's intermediate sex, in its concealed forms, that is, when
the individual, upon gross examination, appears normal, may well
be produced by the environment. Freud's Oedipus situation is not
incompatible with Adler's theory of the neurotic constitution.

Gonads are not different from any other glands. Thyroid involvement may
produce fear or, at least, a picture of fear (exophthalmic goitre),
but fear also produces many forms of thyroid involvement (goitre and
exophthalmic goitre were alarmingly frequent in French towns submitted
to bombardment during the world war). A study of psychic impotence
in men and frigidity in women has proved that impotence was mainly
a refusal to be a potent man, frigidity a refusal to be woman in
intercourse. In certain cases, exaggerated cravings for impotence or
frigidity may modify the gonads so completely that they present the
condition Hirschfeld has called typical of the intermediate sex.

Homosexualism can be best understood when viewed as a neurotic
phenomenon, not as a neurosis in itself, but as a detail of the
neurotic attitude to life outlined by Adler. Homosexualism is, in its
last analysis, an organic striving away from life's normal goals.

=A Denial of Life.= Homosexualism cannot be understood unless we
associate it with a denial of life and all its duties. Nor could love
be understood if we tried to dissociate it from its primary sexual goal
which is the acceptance of life with its duties, symbolised by the
procreation of life and the creation of new duties by the individual,
duties which he considers as a source of joy.

=Homosexualism Is Love, Negative Love=, quite as involuntary and
as obsessive as normal, heterosexual, positive love.

A homosexual teacher wrote to Plazek: "A glance at the literature and
art produced by homosexuals as well as insight into actual conditions,
reveals that abnormal love can conjure up the same emotional display as
normal love. Longing, faithfulness, devotion, self sacrifice, blossom
forth in abnormal love as well as in normal love.

"In both, complete communion may be the goal and climax of feelings
which are perhaps among the deepest and finest which mankind can
experience."

=Their Love Letters.= The absolute similarity of heterosexual and
homosexual love in their written expression can be judged by perusing
the sonnets which Michael Angelo wrote to young Tommaso dei Cavalieri
and which could very well have been addressed to a woman.

A sober scientist like Winckelman was carried away by his homosexual
love for Frederick von Berg to the point of writing the following
epistle which might emanate from a lovelorn highschool boy:

"All the names I might call you are not sweet enough and do not do
justice to my love. All the things I might say to you sound too weak
to give voice to my heart and my soul. I love you, my dearest, more
than the whole world and neither time nor circumstances nor age could
ever cause my love to diminish."

=Deeds of Violence.= Homosexual love has led to as many deeds of
violence on the part of disappointed lovers as heterosexual love. The
papers frequently publish without comments stories of the shooting of
a woman by another woman, caused by the fact that the victim was "too
attentive to another woman."

Psychiatrists who can read between the lines recognise in those murders
the result of homosexual jealousy and infidelity.

In that respect the behavior of the two sexes seems slightly different.

"It is well known," remarks Havelock Ellis, "that the part taken
by women generally in open criminality, and especially in crimes
of violence, is small as compared with men. In the homosexual the
conditions are to some extent reversed. Inverted men, in whom a more
or less feminine temperament is so often found, are rarely impelled to
acts of aggressive violence, though they frequently commit suicide.
Inverted women, who may retain their feminine emotionality combined
with some degree of infantile impulsiveness and masculine energy,
present a favorable soil for the seeds of passional crime, under those
conditions of jealousy and allied emotions which must so often enter
the invert's life."

=A Homosexual Tragedy.= In a recent case in Chicago a homosexual woman
shot her former roommate and then seriously wounded herself. They had
roomed together and last fall the victim broke off the life together
because the invert "was too affectionate." The victim went to her
parents' house in the South to get rid of the invert. On her return to
Chicago two months later she was bothered by the invert who insisted
that she room with her. On April 22d she received a letter from the
invert containing a bullet and a threat. Alarmed, she had the invert
arrested, but the invert was discharged on promise she would not annoy
the girl. The invert had a number of swagger sticks, one of which she
carried each day. There is no account of her masculinity of attire. She
wrote poems to her victim and made her presents including a diamond
ring and a diamond studded watch, all of which were returned. There had
been several threats of killing the victim, before the letter came, if
she ended the friendship.

=Women More Homosexual than Men.= Remembering how the mother's fetishes
affect us in the choice of a sexual mate we may expect to find more
homosexualism in woman than in man. The facts bear up our theory.
While the gross forms of homosexualism are less frequent among women,
a thousand mild forms of it are observable in the behavior of even
apparently very normal women.

The sentimental attachments of school girls for certain teachers,
the pleasure which they derive from spending nights with some friend
on whom they have a "crush," the thousand and one bodily caresses
female friends shower on each other, the curiosity they manifest about
each other's physical condition, their frequent bed room or bathroom
conferences, are manifestations of a mild homosexualism, which,
however, do not always lead to overt acts.

=Boastfulness.= Many homosexuals compensate for the scorn meted
out to them by normal individuals with a certain proud boastfulness.

"We are supermen," one hears them say when they find a sympathetic
listener, "we have reached beyond the usual, boresome, bourgeois form
of gratification. Our intellect is nauseated by woman's silliness."

And the females say in their turn: "We are super-women, we have
conquered the fear of man and we are tired of man's boorish ways."

Some of the male homosexuals who are bisexual, that is, can also be
attracted by women, pride themselves over the mentality of the women
they love. "Men have accustomed us to a higher intellectual level and
to a more intelligent form of conversation," a homosexual said to me.

This is naturally a defence mechanism. By demanding extremely high
qualification from the women, homosexuals have a ready excuse for
consorting with men exclusively.

=Famous Homosexuals.= Homosexuals are fond of mentioning all the
men famous in art and letters whose sexual life was inverted: the Greek
philosophers, poets and playwrights of the classic age, Julius Cæsar,
Alexander the Great, Michael Angelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Frederick of
Prussia, Shakespeare, Oscar Wilde, Nietzsche, etc.

=The Nietzsche-Wagner Feud= should be rewritten from a psychiatrist's
point of view. Wagner was to young Nietzsche an attractive, heroic,
father-image. The philosopher never had any real affair of the heart
with a woman. He only indulged in very ephemeral relationships which,
by their disastrous results, drove him further away from women. (Dr.
W. H. White of Washington received the assurance while in Europe that
Nietzsche died of syphilis.) Nietzsche made himself obnoxious to Wagner
by trying to be his press agent. As Wagner, however, a shrewd business
man in his old days, objected to Nietzsche's agnosticism and to his
friendship with certain Jews, Nietzsche, disappointed in his love,
abandoned Wagner and hated him fiercely. He attacked him on every
occasion, his hatred being made the fiercer by the fact that he himself
considered himself as a greater composer, one line in Nietzsche's
letters throws a strange light upon the poor paretic's feelings.
Wagner's "feminine traits" he wrote, finally disgusted him.

=Shall Perverse Love Be Recognized?= Efforts are being made in
various directions at the present day to have homosexual love legally
recognised and given perfect equality with heterosexual love. In
Germany, a number of writers, Von Kupfer, Friedlander and others have
boldly championed that futile attempt.

A cinema film was produced last year (1921) in Berlin depicting the
plight of the homosexual who is unable to control his cravings and
falls a victim to the wiles of a blackmailer. Dr. Magnus Hirschfeld
agreed to impersonate in that production the scientist who attempts to
enlighten the public as to the nature of homosexualism, so as to bring
about a modification of the statute punishing perverts.

=Man's Emancipation.= In 1900, Elizar von Kupfer called upon the men to
proclaim their "independence" from women. "The man who lives in bondage
to women," he wrote, "and who humors her whims, has lost his manhood.
Since woman is emancipating herself, why should not men follow the same
road?"

Illogically enough, Von Kupfer defends the mothers and wives, "flowers
who should not be rooted out of the garden of love." In Schopenhauer's
silly outbursts against woman, however, Von Kupfer sees "a test of
manhood revolting against man's humiliation" and he adds that "it is
only from the closest relation of man to man, adolescent to man, and
adolescent to adolescent, that government and civilisation will derive
real power."

Blüher considers homosexualism as an "essential human trait which must
be granted an outlet with certain restrictions (setting the age of
consent at fourteen and forbidding the use of violence)."

Benedikt Friedlander, in his "Renaissance des Eros Uranios" suggests
"bringing ancient and modern culture into harmony with each other by
reviving the Greek Eros and overthrowing the monopoly which woman has,
of being loved and beautiful."

Removing the legal penalties which punish overt homosexual acts is one
thing. Recognising homosexualism is an entirely different proposition.
Punishing a typhoid fever patient would be absurd, but typhoid fever
sufferers should not be allowed to remain at large without treatment.
Homosexualism is a neurotic trait which should be eradicated, if
possible, by analytic treatment. Hopeless cases, on the other hand
should be protected against their instincts by a form of confinement
which would be neither punitive nor more humiliating than the
confinement imposed upon sufferers from contagious diseases.

=Homosexualism and the War.= Homosexualism has been on the increase
since the war. Stekel reports many gruesome cases of husbands who,
until they went to the barracks and the trenches, where their
unconscious homosexualism found an unusual stimulation, were normal in
their attitude to their wives, and who returned after the armistice
absolutely inverted and unable to give or receive normal gratification.

The bobbed hair craze has many good excuses. Bobbed hair is kept tidy
more easily than long tresses and can be dried quicker after a shampoo.
At the same time, when we consider that the boyish type of women
became fashionable about the same time when short hair did, and that
soon after the war, advertising boards were covered with the praise
of devices enabling women to conceal their natural curves, we must
consider both fashions as symptomatic of an increase in homosexualism.

We might also mention another fashion detail: while dressmakers were
trying their best to obliterate their customers breasts, they would
bare entirely their backs. Anyone familiar with the symbolism and
dreams of homosexuals will understand the import of that style of
dresses.

=Is Homosexualism Necessary?= Dr. Otto Gross, without openly
countenancing homosexualism, holds that a certain proportion of it is
necessary in man's makeup for a mutual understanding of both sexes.

"We can only understand," he writes, "what we have experienced. Unless
a man has a decided feminine trend, he is not likely to understand a
woman, or to live with her harmoniously and vice versa."

A consideration of the purely physical side of love lends a slight
plausibility to that view. Unless a man can clearly imagine love's
pleasure as experienced by a woman, he may not be able to vouchsafe her
complete gratification.

The progress of civilisation certainly demands that men become less
masculine (translate: boorish) and women less feminine (meaning: silly).

We could not tolerate, however, what Friedländer called a Renaissance
of Eros Uranios, leading to the conditions which obtained in Greece
where men, while consorting with other men, were also potent with women.

No parallel can be drawn between Greek culture and modern culture.

Hellenic culture was decidedly masculine, women being solely tools of
lust, or beasts of burden, or means of proliferation. As I will show
in another chapter, one really modern woman can give to the modern
man what Demosthenes sought in three kinds of women, a prostitute, a
concubine and a wife, not to count a male mistress.

=What is Really Needed= is a better understanding of homosexualism
by the public and by the homosexuals. After which, homosexuals, no
longer despised and punished for their obsessive cravings, and no
longer proud of their condition, will be given sympathy and treatment,
voluntary or compulsory. Psychoanalysts will remove their complexes and
lead them toward a positive goal; surgeons, performing on them some
of Steinach's operations, may raise their heterosexual potency to the
point at which no doubt will obsess them any longer.

Those things will avail little, however, until parents watch their
offspring carefully to discover in them the first symptoms of a
homosexual trend and adopt ways and means to prevent the growth of the
neurosis.

We may for convenience quote Hirschfeld's description of the homosexual
child, a very superficial one, indeed, sufficient, however, to cause
the average parent to seek psychological and medical advice before it
is too late and before mental and physical habits have compromised,
perhaps hopelessly, the love life of their children.

"The homosexual boy prefers girls' games, shuns boys' games, is girlish
in disposition and behavior, if not in appearance. People often say
that he is like a girl. He is happy in the company of girls. He has a
psychic fixation on his mother. He is reserved and embarrassed before
other boys. He often becomes unduly attached to a male teacher or a
schoolmate.

"The homosexual girl prefers boys' games, does not care for sewing or
other feminine occupations, is boyish in her disposition, her motions,
often in her appearance. People call her a tomboy. She likes to romp
with boys. She is overattached to her father. She shows embarrassment
in the presence of other girls. She often falls madly in love with a
female teacher or some older woman."




                              CHAPTER XIX

                       CRUELTY AND LOVE. SADISM


In normal individuals the idea of love is inseparably associated with
tenderness, caressing gestures, words or glances, readiness on the part
of either mate to go to extremes in order to enhance the loved one's
enjoyment of the amorous relationship, or to protect him against all
dangers or suffering.

In normal individuals, love and suffering are antithetic terms, love
meaning joy and pleasure, (sexual and egotistical), suffering being
only conceivable when the craving for love is ungratified, when the
lonely lovers are parted by life, when one of them has been robbed by
death of his mate, etc.

=Algolagnists.= There are abnormal human beings, however, known
technically as algolagnists (from algos, pain, and lagneia, enjoyment),
who cannot imagine or enjoy love when it is entirely dissociated from
some form of suffering.

The active algolagnists must inflict some pain, physical or mental,
upon their mate in order to enjoy the pleasures of love to their full
extent. The passive algolagnists only attain the highest degree of
amorous satisfaction when they are submitted by their mate to painful
or humiliating treatment.

Active algolagnists are known more commonly as "sadists," an expression
created by Moreau de Tours. Krafft-Ebing, the most famous writer on
sexual perversions coined for passive algolagnists the expression
"masochists."

The word sadist is derived from the name of Marquis de Sade, a French
pervert of the eighteenth century, whose life and writings well
illustrate the form of love which is constantly associated with acts of
cruelty.

=Donatien Alphonse François de Sade= was born in Paris, June 2 1740,
the offspring of an aristocratic family of Provence. Among his
ancestors was the Laura of Petrarca's sonnets.

At fourteen, he joined a cavalry regiment. He went thru the Seven
Years War during which he witnessed the most ruthless atrocities. On
his return, at the age of twenty-seven, he married, but soon after his
marriage was arrested for some deed of cruelty committed in a house of
prostitution.

His father's death left him heir to an important government position
but his life of excesses gave him little time to attend to his duties.

At twenty-eight, he attracted much attention by a scandal in which he
played a prominent part. He lured a shopkeeper's wife, Rose Keller to a
house in the suburbs of the French capital where he used to hold revels.

Threatening the woman with a pistol, he bound her hands and feet and
whipped her to the blood.

The next morning, Rose Keller managed to free herself, jumped out of
the window and summoned help. De Sade was arrested but the affair was
soon hushed up by powerful friends at the court of Louis the Fifteenth.

That incident is characteristic of sadism in love's relations. His
victim's sufferings supplied De Sade with the artificial stimulation
which normal desire would produce in a normal man.

Soon after this, De Sade eloped to Italy with his wife's sister.

On his way to Italy, he stopped in Marseille and organized an orgy in
the course of which he gorged his guests with candy containing some
poisonous aphrodisiac drug. Two of them died.

This time, a court rendered a death sentence against the murderous
pervert, who eluded the police for a time and was finally confined in
the fortress of Vincennes for thirteen years.

It was said at the time that a woman had been found in a house where
he indulged in all sorts of debauches, unconscious and bleeding from a
hundred scalpel wounds which had severed many veins.

De Sade devoted his enforced leisure to writing. His published works
fill up ten volumes. They contain a description of the most atrocious
sexual cruelties. The author makes a childish attempt at establishing
a "satanic" morality based on the fact that "virtue is always punished
by the world and vice always rewarded." His atheism is no more than a
satanic ritual.

De Sade's literary output, which is devoid of any artistic merit and
is only of interest to the student of abnormal psychology, bears the
stamp of hopeless intellectual inferiority trying to justify itself
by representing the entire world as a combination of a brothel and a
torture chamber and mankind as a herd of blood-thirsty and sex-crazed
lunatics. A sinister autobiography and wish fulfilment.

The revolutionists of 1789 who opened the doors of all jails and insane
asylums gave De Sade his freedom on July 14. He sided politically with
his deliverers but after a while, became suspicious to them and again
spent one year in prison (1793-1794).

=What Bonaparte Thought of Him.= De Sade, who had been very liberal in
presenting free copies of his obscene novels to men prominent in the
days of the Revolution and the Terror, made the mistake of sending a
set of his works to Bonaparte.

The Corsican caused the entire edition to be suppressed and diagnosed
the author very accurately as a murderous pervert, unfit to be at
large. De Sade was committed to an insane asylum where he remained
until his death on December 2, 1814.

Sadism is a morbid phenomenon which remained mysterious until recently,
when the experimental work of physiologists like Cannon, Sherrington
and others, revealed to us the close connection existing between mental
states, muscular tensions and the secretions of ductless glands of the
body.

Adler's "individual psychology" also has thrown much light upon many
morbid actions which are simply attempts at compensation for a feeling
of inferiority. The neurotic, briefly speaking, feels inferior, that
is, afraid of some imaginary danger. He casts about for something
which can be done quickly, simply, with the least effort, and which
will restore his peace and safety by filling him, were it only
temporarily, with a sense of actual or imaginary superiority.

=Glandular Drunkenness.= Wulffen suggests an interpretation of sadism
which is ingenious but unconvincing. He considers every act of violence
as provoked by the faulty functioning of some glands.

He compares the effect of the gonadal hormones (one of the secretions
of the sex glands issuing from the interstitial cells) with that of
alcohol. Alcohol destroys the inhibitions and allows unconscious
cravings of an inacceptable sort to express themselves thru overt acts.

The drunken man loses all shame and all fear, becomes boisterous and,
at times, murderous. Likewise, Wulffen says, oversecretion of the
gonadal hormones creates a sort of sexual drunkenness in the course of
which the individual is forced into violent or cruel behavior.

This would be acceptable if all the sadists were strong healthy
specimens of manhood and womanhood. Most of them, on the contrary, show
plainly signs of glandular insufficiency.

Wulffen's thesis is not confirmed as some writers assume by a study of
the mating habits of many animals. Cocks during the act of mating peck
cruelly the back of the hen's head. Tomcats bite the necks of their
mates. Toads, at times, choke the female to death in their clinging
embrace.

In those acts of animal "cruelty" there is probably another element
to be considered. The tomcat, digging his teeth into the female cat's
neck, may not so much relieve his sadistic impulses as produce in his
mate some welcome sensation of pleasurable pain. We know how willingly
the most rebellious cats allow any one to grab them by the backs of
their necks, making no effort at freeing themselves and apparently
enjoying that partial strangulation. (Remember the aphrodisiac
influence of hanging.)

=Atavism.= Eulenburg considers that sadism is an atavistic trait. "Not
only animals," he says, "but primitive races associate mating with
violence."

The caveman is supposed to have beaten the female he captured into
insensibility before dragging her to his cave.

We do not know, however, whether it was THE caveman or SOME cavemen
who indulged in that practice, the existence of which may be merely
a subject for speculation. It goes without saying that whenever
females were carried off by victorious tribes after armed conflicts the
"wooing" of the captives must have been synonymous with violence and
rape.

Old documents offer many examples of the combination of love and
violence. There is the old legend of Griseldis in which a sadistic man
tested in the cruellest way the woman who was to be his life mate.

The epic poem Gudrun recites one of the prehistoric struggles between
male and female. The unfortunate male in this case is overpowered by
the Nordic Valkyrie who binds him with her girdle and keeps him lashed
to the wall till morning.

The modern honeymoon trip is undoubtedly a survival of the primeval
habit of carrying off the bride.

=Primitive Religions= constantly associate sadism with love. In fact
the Goddess of Love, in the Greek mythology, owed her existence to an
act of sadism. Kronos' male organ, cut off by his Zeus, fell into the
sea, fertilized it, and Aphrodite was born.

Many primitive gods demanded the sacrifice of virgins, primitive
goddesses decapitated or castrated men with whom at times they
consorted. The priests and priestesses of certain religions could only
please their gods by submitting to sexual indignities, the priestesses
of Cybelea prostituting themselves to every one, the priests castrating
themselves.

Some of those acts of violence, however, must be considered from an
entirely different point of view.

=In Primitive Races= real achievement was always associated with
violence. The "real man" was the victorious fighter and killer. Even in
Roman days, gladiator duels terminated with the death of the defeated
man, unless he were a popular ring idol whom the mob saved for further
encounters.

The robber, designated by more flattering names, of course, gained more
glory by stealing goods or gold than the merchant who, in ways more
socially acceptable, accumulated goods and gold.

Civilisation has changed those things. In neurotic states, however,
we always observe a return to archaic modes of action which are more
direct. We nowadays kill off a competitor thru advertising. Instead of
levying tribute on the defeated rival, we compel him to sell out to us
at our price, etc. The neurotic kills or steals, as archaic heroes did.

=Animal Love Fights.= Also, as far as animals are concerned, the
more or less playful fights with which they prelude their mating is
not, as Wulffen suggests, due to gonadal drunkenness. On the contrary,
it is meant to produce a stronger outpouring of gonadal secretions in
both male and female, thereby increasing the energy of the male and
assuring the pregnancy of the female.

Fights preceding animal mating increase, among other things, the
secretions of the adrenal cortex which impart to all the muscles (among
them the sexual muscles) a considerable tension.

Let us bear in mind that physiological detail while interpreting the
fact that many neurotics are only potent sexually with women who resist
them. We see how a certain amount of struggle, producing perhaps slight
anger (and possibly leading to acts of violence), would strengthen the
sexual faculties of the weak neurotic and enable him to possess his
mate. From that type of neurotic, who requires glandular excitement of
the adrenal type, to the sadist, typified by the famous Marquis, and
up to the Ripper who disembowels his victims we see merely a series
of gradations in glandular insufficiency, not as Wulffen said, in
glandular hyper-secretion.

=A Neurotic Trait.= Furthermore, sadism should not be considered
as a phenomenon of purely sexual character. Sadism is merely a detail
of the neurotic make up. It is one of the neurotic short cuts whereby
an inferior individual acquires a temporary superiority.

The section foreman who takes pleasure in driving his men at a killing
pace, the detective engaged daily in the task of man hunting, the
so-called "strict" parent who beats his children, the surgeon who never
tires of performing operations, the futile reformer who is constantly
trying to deprive some one of some form of enjoyment, the jealous
husband who deprives his wife of many pleasures, the jealous wife who
relishes the thought that her husband is giving up his club or his
former associates for her sake, are sadists, some of them partly normal
and useful, some of them morbid or ridiculous.

=The Mob.= Sadism is one of the great "mob characteristics." Why do we
run to fires and to the scene of an accident? To help? No. To enjoy the
sight of some one's life or property being destroyed. If our impulses
were humane or charitable we should be relieved, nay exultant, when we
learn that the conflagration has only destroyed a curtain or a shade,
when we see the man bowled over by a taxi getting up and walking away,
little the worse for the experience.

Notice on the contrary the indignation of the average man when the fire
"does not amount to anything", when the "victim" of an accident escapes
unharmed.

=Is the Male More Cruel?= It has been said that sadism was a masculine
trait, masochism a feminine characteristic. Like the majority of
generalisations on the subject of sex differences, it is inaccurate.

Man, the hunter, is more aggressive in love, but his aggressiveness
need not include cruelty. His strength, in modern life, is put to quite
a different use, to protect the weaker female, not to overwhelm her.

Woman is supposed to be more submissive but mythology, legend and
history present to us thousands of cases in which the female of the
human species betrayed many sadistic instincts, not infrequently
associated with her love activities. Even in the animal world, while
we behold males apparently submitting the female to much suffering,
we find not a few cases, for instance in the insect world, of females
killing or even devouring their mate immediately after the love
communion.




                              CHAPTER XX

                 LOVE THAT CRAVES SUFFERING. MASOCHISM


The man whom Krafft-Ebing selected as the typical masochist, Leopold
von Sacher-Masoch, was born in Lemberg, January 27, 1836.

He was extremely frail in infancy and childhood. He compensated for
his physical inferiority thru unusual mental activity, for at the
age of nineteen he won his degree of doctor of law. At twenty he was
appointed instructor in German history at an university. At the age
of twenty-five he was the author of several books of history. He then
turned to fiction, first of the historical and then of the purely
psychological type.

A morbid tendency was observable in his very first books, a tendency
which became more and more marked and which led him to write almost
exclusively descriptions of perverse love entanglements.

He showed a decided preference for delineating cruel, mannish types of
women and incredibly weak types of men.

As in the case of Marquis de Sade, we observe here a strange
parallelism between the man's writings and his own biography.

Sacher-Masoch's first love was a woman much older than himself, Anna
von Kattowitz, who for four years humiliated, insulted and victimised
him in every possible way, finally running away with a Russian
adventurer.

Then he met Princess Bogdanoff for whom he abandoned temporarily his
professional and literary ambitions. She took him to Italy where he
was compelled to serve her as a secretary and valet. He enjoyed the
relationship, but the princess soon tired of him.

His next liaison was with Baroness Fanny Pistor, with whom he had his
picture taken once in the following position: she seated on a sofa and
clad in furs, he kneeling at her feet on the floor.

Then came Baroness Reizenstein, whom he could not love very long for
she refused to satisfy his morbid craving for physical torture and
humiliating treatment and, besides, was homosexual.

Then he became engaged to a young artist, Miss Bauerfeld, of Graz.

Soon after, however, he met an ugly, mannish hysterical person, Vanda
Dunayef, who gratified better his perverse leanings and compelled him
to break his engagement. A child was born of their union and in 1873
they were married. They traveled from town to town, apparently unable
to find peace anywhere, and she finally left him to elope with a
reporter from the Paris Figaro.

Sacher-Masoch secured a divorce and married again, this time a motherly
type of woman, Hulda Meister, retired with her to the small village of
Lindheim and died there on March 9, 1895.

A few incidents of his life describe well his perversion.

=Love of the Whip.= Once, according to Havelock Ellis, in the
course of an innocent romp in which the whole household took part,
Sacher-Masoch asked his wife to whip him. She refused. Then he
suggested the maid should do it.

His wife did not take this seriously, but he had the servant whip
him to his full enjoyment. When his wife urged that it would not be
possible to keep the maid after this, Sacher-Masoch agreed and she was
discharged.

He constantly found pleasure in placing his wife in awkward or
compromising circumstances, a pleasure she was too normal to share.

This led to much domestic unhappiness. Against her wish he persuaded
her to whip him with whips to which nails were attached. This he
claimed was a literary stimulus.

Dr. Eulenburg tells of a young woman with whom Sacher-Masoch
corresponded for a while and to whom he wrote that "his greatest joy
would be to be whipped by a woman." Later on, Sacher-Masoch met her in
Vienna and asked her to don a fur coat and to whip him. She however,
pretended to treat the matter as a joke, and dismissed him.

His numerous books of fiction present over and over again the same
theme: the domineering woman, "clad in furs," who tortures a weak
helpless man.

We behold in Sacher-Masoch a clear case of physical weakness and
glandular insufficiency. His endocrines, in particular his adrenals and
gonads, required the actual stimulation of pain (whipping) before they
could react properly to a sexual stimulus.

It is a curious coincidence that among all forms of stimulation used
to accelerate the gait of beasts of burden or draft horses, the whip
is the most commonly used the world over and that, on the other hand,
perverts of the masochist type have, the world over and at every age
of history, more frequently resorted to the whip to torture themselves
than to any other means of physical punishment.

=The Masochist is Like a Weak or Tired Horse.= Why does whipping
make a horse go faster? Not merely on account of the fear or pain which
the beast experiences, but because that fear and pain MAKE HIM STRONGER.

The adrenalin liberated by the fear-and-pain-producting stimulus
stiffens every muscle in his body and his strength is doubled.

This is why frightened animals or insane people in a panic can perform
feats of strength of which they would be absolutely incapable in a
normal state.

Masochism is much more, however, than an organic attempt at
compensating for glandular inferiority and acquiring in a morbid
way increased sexual potency. It is a neurotic expedient whereby an
inferior man or woman compensates for his or her weakness thru more
weakness.

By belittling themselves, by disparaging their own ability,
masochist lovers can take advantage of their mate, let him bear all
responsibilities.

=Shoe Fetishism.= We understand from that point of view the meaning of
the shoe fetishism which Krafft-Ebing has noticed in male masochists.
In fact Hirschfeld states that every male shoe fetish is a masochist.

To the masochist, the shoe, especially the high buttoned shoe, is
symbolical of woman's power, of her ruthless cruelty. He sees himself
trod on by that shoe, he imagines that shoe pressing on his neck,
pinning his head to the ground.

Curiously enough, long gloves seem to arouse the same ideas in the mind
of the male masochist. Both shoes and gloves are found in the dreams or
visions of neurotics, symbolizing the female organs.

A masochist wrote once: "The gloved hand of a woman, altho like her
foot, smaller and prettier than a man's, can wield the whip powerfully
over her slave whose greatest joy consists then in kissing his
mistress's shoes while submitting to that punishment."

=Craving for Humiliation.= The masochist welcomes every form
of humiliation and not infrequently derives great pride from his
"patience," "tolerance," "self-sacrifice," "martyrlike resignation" etc.

Like Sacher-Masoch himself, some men, husbands or lovers, (pimps,
cadets, etc.) have been known to enjoy the sight of their wife or
mistress in another man's arms.

Hirschfeld was consulted by a woman whose husband compelled her at
frequent intervals to have relations with a man in his own house. He
would invite a business associate for dinner and then leave his wife to
explain that he had been suddenly called out of town.

The guest and his wife would dine together. Wine would flow freely
and she would coquettishly goad the man into making advances to her.
Concealed in the next room, the husband would watch thru a peep hole
the proceedings which ended with a passionate scene.

It was only after beholding that humiliating sight that the masochistic
husband could enjoy his wife's embraces.

A man who consulted me confessed to me that he was absolutely impotent
with his own wife or with any unmarried woman. It was only with married
women that he felt perfectly virile. The thought of his mistress in
her husband's arms was the only thing that could arouse him physically.

Many neurotics of the masochistic type have dreams of being school
children punished by a masculine female teacher. Those dreams, be
they night or day dreams, are always associated with erotic thoughts.
Remember Jean Jacques Rousseau enjoying viciously the spankings which
mademoiselle Lambercier gave him when a child.

Masochists, male or female, are often very anxious to perform menial or
disgusting tasks for the person they love, thus placing themselves in a
subordinate, protected, position and at the same time, claiming a great
deal of credit for their devotion.

=Masochistic Fancies.= The male masochist, eager to place himself
in the position of safety toward his mate, not infrequently imagines
himself to be an animal and asks to be treated as such. Greek antiquity
has bequeathed to us the story of Aristotle the philosopher, allowing
a prostitute to ride on his back, whipping him like a horse, while he
would crawl about on all fours.

Medical literature contains many descriptions of establishments where
male masochists are submitted to voluntary torture thru various
appliances.

The ascetics who in the Middle Ages whipped themselves, wore hair cloth
studded with sharp nails, etc., to manifest their love to God or the
Virgin, the Russian Skooptsy who mutilate themselves to please God, are
religious examplaries of masochistic love.

The Christian ideal of suffering and renunciation as a means of
conquering everlasting happiness is also purely masochistic.

Suffering, be it physical or mental (remorse), assures to them in the
end, well-being (glandular well-being) and enables them to reach Heaven
(will-to-be-above).

=Are Women Masochistic?= I denied in the preceding chapter the
frequently heard assertion that sadism in a typically masculine trait.
I would deny quite as emphatically that masochism is peculiarly
feminine, a view held by many sadists, as an attempted justification of
their cruel perversion.

Oscar Wilde, a bisexual, stated once that of all the masculine traits
it was cruelty which women appreciated most. To his morbid mind cruelty
meant power. It is power of course which woman, disabled several times
in her life by pregnancy and lactation, seeks in the man with whom she
mates. He must be a good fighter and a good hunter, not, however,
merely to capture her and brutalise her, but on the contrary, to
protect her and feed her.

The sadist Kurnberger in his novel, "The Castle of Horrors" also bids
us believe that man's greatest victory, appreciated as such by woman,
consists in making a woman suffer, in bringing tears to her eyes, in
outtalking and outwitting her, "a victory compared to which," he says,
"Marengo and Austerlitz look like thirty cents."

And the sadistic Nietzsche puts in the mouth of an old woman in his
"Zarathustra" the following statement: "when you go to women, don't
forget to take your whip."

Other sadists remind us of the Russian woman's wail that her husband's
love must be cooling off, because he hasn't beaten her in an age.
Barring a number of exceptions, the fact remains that masochism in
women is as abnormal as masochism in men, or sadism in men or women.

=Women Who Enjoy a Beating.= There are women who enjoy unconsciously
being beaten by their husbands, much as they may resent the outrage
consciously.

They are in every case hypothyroid and hypoadrenal types in whom the
distribution of energy and the emergency production of energy are very
subnormal. Nothing but a violent stimulus, physical or mental, whipping
or insult, can make them feel strong and active.

The dreams of those women, like those of masochistic men, are often of
the nightmarish type. They suffer in their night visions all sorts of
torture. Analysis brings out the fact that every detail of those dreams
is associated with energy, achievement, etc.

De Sade's wife belonged evidently to the masochistic type. She remained
faithful to him to the end in spite of his perverse life, his prison
record and the fact that he deceived her with her own sister. Her life
of sorrow must have vouchsafed her, after all, a good many masochistic
compensations of the neurotic variety.

=Famous Women Sadists.= As against the assumption that "all" women
are masochists, we may mention many famous women sadists, several
Byzantine and Roman Empresses, Frankish queens, two Russian empresses,
the treatment meted out by women to Theroigne de Méricourt, tortured
publicly by the Jacobine women in 1793, not to mention legendary
characters like the Amazons and mythological goddesses who killed or
tortured their lovers.

Sadism and masochism in love are pathological disturbances due to a
neurotic attempt on the part of an inferior individual to dominate the
sexual partner thru violence or weakness, and to assure himself against
defeat in the sexual relationship.

=The Freudian Suggestion= that the sadist identifies himself with
the powerful and apparently, brutal father, the masochist identifying
himself with the weaker and submissive mother, applies to a too
restricted number of cases to be of positive help in understanding the
nature of those two perversions. Even when that explanation seems to
fit the case, we must, nevertheless, fall back upon the Adlerian view
of the neurotic temperament in order to understand why a child decides
to identify himself with one parent instead of the other.




                              CHAPTER XXI

               WHAT LOVE OWES TO SADISTS AND MASOCHISTS


Love that inflicts suffering and love which craves suffering are
travesties on love, for normal love gives joy and craves joy.

Yet, it may be that a too perfect adaption, one vouchsafing constantly
to the mates the security they seek in each other's arms would soon
pall on them. They might not remain attached to each other any longer
than the animals who, in the majority of species, part as soon as they
have fulfilled their biological mission.

A perfectly normal couple might die of boredom. What makes animals,
when they have not been slightly perverted by contact with human
beings, so uninteresting, is their absolute normality.

A very slight touch of "perversion" in at least one of the mates, seems
necessary if the novelty of the relationship is not to wear off too
soon. Maybe I should not say perversion, but perverseness.

The normal husband who would die rather than hurt his life mate cannot
compete with the romantic, lover, a little mysterious, unreliable,
suspected of flirting with other women, who "keeps a woman guessing,"
pretends at times to be indifferent and has to be won over and over
again.

The normal husband whose affection is taken for granted and who always
says the proper thing at the proper time, remembers all anniversaries
and celebrates them officially, pales in comparison with a tender,
masochistic lover, whom every unkind gesture seems to wound deeply,
whose affection is tinged with a melancholy longing, who treasures
little sentimental memories which his earnestness makes at times rather
poignant.

=The Sadistic Lover= carries a woman off her feet by the daredevil
things he may indulge in when away from her. The masochist touches
deeply the motherly chord in her by the acts of kindness and devotion
he may perform for others, by his charitable or professional activities.

=The Vamp.= How much the world, especially the world of art, owes
to the slightly sadistic, "vampish" woman, who, if she is endowed
with much physical beauty sets, a little cruelly, all the males
competing for her favors. How many flaming poems of passion, what
priceless canvasses, statutes and monuments has she conjured up out of
her admirers' minds. Even the perverse female beasts of the Italian
Renaissance made love infinitely romantic.

On the other hand, what worshipful tenderness meets even the memory
of the patient Aude who silently closed her eyes and died when Roland
was brought home dead, of Solvejg, waiting with saintly resignation
for the return of the rover Peer Gynt. Of course the sadistic braggart
earns much hatred and the whimpering masochistic male much scorn. The
sadistic vamp gets shot by jealous lovers and the clinging masochistic
vine is called a pest. To the lovers who are not unbearably normal
and whose slight pituitary instability causes them to do and say the
unexpected, love owes its poetry, the love life its charm and its
inspirational power.

All other things being equal, when a slightly sadistic male, seeking
as his mate the image of a pliant mother, meets a slightly masochistic
female who seeks the image of the powerful, domineering father, there
are many chances that the match will, for a long period of time, retain
its original qualities.

The sadistic female, on the other hand soon emasculates the masochistic
male. Sadistic mates and masochistic mates land in the divorce court,
the former throwing at each other charges of cruelty, the latter, for
unfaithfulness of one or both mates, who seek in adultery relief from
the monotony of their too peaceful existence.




                             CHAPTER XXII

                        LOVE AMONG THE ARTISTS


Frequent are the divorces in the artistic world. Platitudinous
moralisers explain that fact with the stupid statement that the morals
of the stage are "loose." Like the Freudians, they always seek in sex
the origin of every disturbance in human life.

Sex in the life of an artist, however, plays an infinitely less
important part than egotism, the desire to be above.

The so-called normal man, who works, eats, sleeps, reproduces himself,
and, at his death leaves the world exactly as he found it is probably
subnormal.

He differs very little from the animals who do exactly the same things
in the same way and seem perfectly pleased with the endless repetition
of an immutable life ritual.

=Dissatisfaction= is really the element which we must consider when
we try to draw a line of cleavage between men and the animals.
Dissatisfaction breeds either neurosis or creation.

The dissatisfied person, devoid of intellectual resources, either
commits a crime or kills himself or goes off into another world thru
the door that leads into insanity.

The dissatisfied person gifted with powers of self-expression, makes
the world in which he lives better, more beautiful or more comfortable.
That sort of achievement presupposes a certain amount of healthy
sadism, the courage to criticise, to offer suggestions, to force the
products of one's mind upon the community, to say "look at me, I am
perfect or, at least, better than you."

Every budding actor assumes unconsciously that he can delineate a rôle
better than the other histrionic lights of his time; every new novelist
must assume that he can tell a story more attractively than his readers
could picture it to themselves, etc., etc.

The artist who is willing to yield, soon relapses into the ranks of
the business men. Whoever panders to the popular taste of his time
may derive therefrom financial advantages but very little egotistical
gratification.

The real artist must know that he is right and must not be, therefore,
soft clay to be moulded by any one else's desires.

How then could the artist obtain lasting happiness from any form of
love relationship?

=The Male Artist=, if married to a submissive, masochistic wife, may
live happily with her for a time. Egotists, male or female, however,
need flattery. Familiarity breeds contempt. Flattery must come from a
constantly changing source or lose its power, as drugs do when we grow
accustomed to them.

Flattery coming from a pretty woman whose attraction has not been
weakened by daily contact will soon lead the artist husband into
forbidden paths. Unless endowed with the wisdom of the musician's wife
in "The Concert," his wife will soon be granted a divorce on the ground
of his too obvious infidelity.

Woe to the male artist who takes unto himself a female artist for his
wife. As I said in the preceding chapter, sadist plus sadist equals
divorce suit for cruelty alleged by both parties. In this type of
matrimonial castastrophy, the fault lies more frequently with the wife
than with the husband.

=Female Artists= are more unbearable than male artists. They are more
touchy, more easily offended and angered, more apt to suspect the
people in their environment of harboring veiled hostility. The reason
for that state of things is not far to seek.

Women require infinitely more flattery than men do. Not that a craving
for attention is by any means a typically feminine trait. That craving
has been forced upon them by the masculine domination.

We have made woman inferior to man politically, socially, economically,
we have, as Adler would word it, put her "below." Until we allow her
to rise to man's level, she will never feel safe and will constantly
require assurances of her superiority, at least, from the men who fancy
her looks and enjoy her company.

=The Woman Who Accomplishes Things= in this world, who, in spite
of woman's handicap in her dealings with the world, wins recognition
as a painter, sculptor, writer, singer, etc., feels, and justly so,
that she deserves more credit for her accomplishment than a man
would. Winning power in a man's world is for the woman who reaches
that aim ethically, that is, without bartering her sexual favors for
success, as difficult as it would be for a Jew to arrive in a bigoted
Christian community, for a negro to establish his prestige in a white
anglo-saxon environment.

Having reached the top after much fighting, she never feels as secure
as a man would under similar circumstances. Her ego is steadily on the
defensive and whatever interferes with her ego maximation appears to
her dangerous and hateful.

The female artist who marries a male artist will soon become jealous
of him. Every bit of publicity he receives is something which he has
stolen from her, which he should, she thinks, if he loved her enough,
have renounced in her favor.

The female artist who marries a man incapable of artistic achievement,
may be violently attracted to him sexually. Her egotism, on the other
hand, prompts her to disparage him and to scorn his judgment of
her. However much he may admire her, his praise lacks weight in her
estimation. He is not a member of the enchanted circle.

A word from "one in the know", insignificant as he may be, will bring a
smile to her lips, a flash of pleasure in her eyes, which will cut her
mate to the quick. I have observed many a time an angry tension in the
face of the business husband of some actress or singer when she would
visibly gloat over the not too disinterested praise of some trashy
professional.

=Flattery.= The artist is at the mercy of the flattery lavished on
him or her by a fellow artist and absolutely blind to the flatterer's
ulterior motives. A great musician who died recently was an easy victim
to every budding musician who would sycophantically sing his praises.
The mere statement "if I could ever hope to sing a few notes like you"
enabled any young exploiter who could approach him to negotiate a
"loan."

For the reasons I have mentioned in the preceding pages, the woman
artist is even more easily victimised, financially or sentimentally
than the male artist.

Sexual jealousy wrecks the unions of artists with non-professional
mates. Sexual jealousy and professional jealousy make the union of two
artists a very problematical expedient for the attainment of happiness.

Fortunately, very few heartbreaks result from the steady grinding of
the divorce mills in concert land, opera land or stageland.

The egotistical artist loves himself more than he could ever love
any other human being. Separation from his life mate does not mean
loneliness to him. He remains in his own company, to his mind, the best
company on earth. And furthermore his egotism tells him, and rightly so
in the majority of cases, that being as wonderful as he is, he cannot
fail to meet soon "the great love" of his life. And he will probably
embark upon another experiment with the same optimism and with the same
results.




                             CHAPTER XXIII

              THE PERSONALITY BEHIND THE FETISHES. GLANDS


A man selects a mate because he finds in her fetishes the assurance
of safety which those fetishes portended when observed in the
appearance of his affectionate, devoted, self-sacrificing mother, whose
intelligence and wisdom he never doubted when he was, let us say, ten
or fifteen and she was thirty or thirty-five.

And likewise, a woman expects, consciously or unconsciously, that
certain physical characteristics which once indicated, when observed
in her father's appearance, power, protection, a gainful occupation,
sympathy and understanding, etc., will mean exactly the same thing when
she finds them reproduced totally or in part in a male human being of
the marriageable age.

=The Parent-Child Relationship=, involving at first boundless devotion
on the part of the strong parent to the helpless nursling, infant
and child, and later, complete submission of the growing child and
adolescent to the older and, supposedly world-wiser, parent, has very
little, if anything, in common with the relationship of mate to mate.

Sex plays no conscious part in the parent-child relationship.

It does not tinge every action and every thought of the two parties
concerned. The secret cravings or the secret repulsion it may
awaken never distort consciously the judgments passed by parents on
their children, children on their parents. Of neurotic unconscious
distortions of judgment there is a plenty. Never, however, does the
strife narrow down to this: "He or she does not satisfy me sexually,"
"he or she humiliates me sexually by being attracted to others," "he or
she is an obstacle to my complete sexual gratification with another,"
etc., sources of open hostility of the most painfully conscious kind
between mates.

The mother who satisfied our egotism became to us beautiful and
perfect. The female who employs the same means our mother did, to
win us, but who cannot arouse us sexually, never appears to us very
attractive physically or mentally.

On the other hand we are apt to disregard, temporarily at least, the
mental deficiencies of the man or woman who gives us the most complete
sexual gratification.

From this it will be easily understood that choosing a mate _solely_ on
the strength of his or her fetishes, is likely, unless the union be of
the most ephemeral kind, to lead to profound disappointment.

It behooves us then to determine accurately what every fetish means
and what sort of personality is actually to be found associated with a
certain set of physical characteristics.

For I repeat, a man's or woman's personality is to be studied, not
in their attitude to their offspring, (for the most savage beast is
transformed by the paternal or maternal instinct into a marvel of
tenderness, kindness and patience), but in their relation to the social
herd and to their sexual mate.

Until the study of the ductless glands was given the importance we
attach to it today, the word personality denoted a set of attitudes
which many psychologists considered as mainly voluntary and amenable
to "moral suasion" and other forms of pedagogical approach of the
individual. When we read the works of Freud, Jung, Adler, Ferenczi and
their disciples, we never receive an intimation of the rôle which the
endocrines may play in moulding the human personality.

=Modern Endocrinologists= on the other hand, seem as indifferent
to psychology as the psychoanalysts of yesterday were to neurology and
endocrinology. Some of them assume that the personality IS the glands
and that our glands alone shape our thinking and our actions.

Both views are narrow and unsatisfactory. The personality is made up
primarily of an _organism_ which outward influences can or cannot
influence easily. Pleasure and pain then shape that organism thru
the memories which they leave in it in the form of infinitely small
modifications of our autonomic nervous system. That system, in its
turn, develops, thru constant stimulation, certain glands or allows
them to remain undeveloped thru lack of stimulation or thru negative
stimulation.

Some of those glands may, thru mere accident of growth, have been
already overdeveloped or stunted at birth. Individuals free from
complexes, however, may easily reestablish the balance of cravings
and social inhibitions which threatens at times to be upset by an
overdeveloped or underdeveloped gland. Complex-ridden individuals on
the other hand, use their glandular inferiority unconsciously as a
scapegoat for absurd or morbid behavior.

=Reciprocal Influence.= We cannot say, therefore, that our behavior
is _dictated_ by our glands, but it is influenced by them and
reciprocally, our behavior influences our glands. As I said in a
previous chapter, hyperthyroidism creates fear, but fear may also
create hyperthyroidism. Overdevelopment of the sexual apparatus creates
a predisposition to sexual overactivity, but sexual thoughts also have
a tendency to provoke unusual sexual activity.

There is one thing, however, for which the secretions of our ductless
glands are mainly responsible, and which is most important to consider
in a study of fetishes. They determine the shape, color and consistency
of many parts of our body, such as complexion, hair, teeth, skeletal
frame and growth.

A glance at a human body enables one to determine as accurately as an
autopsy would, the size of a person's thyroid, adrenals, etc.

As the development of those glands corresponds to the social and sexual
behavior of the individual, a review of the various bodily fetishes
from the endocrinological point of view will be helpful to the average
reader.

In order not to use too many technical terms we shall consider only
four of the endocrine glands, the pituitary, the thyroid, the adrenals
and the gonads.

=The Pituitary Gland= is a small body, the size of a pea, located
in the Turkish saddle (sella turcica), at the base of the brain and
closely behind the root of the nose. Some have called it a brain within
the brain with a miniature skull of its own within the skull.

The pituitary regulates the rhythms of the body, from the bony growth
of the skeleton to the rate of the heart and respiration, from the
periods of sleep and waking time to the periods of menstruation.

If a part of the pituitary of a dog is removed, the animal becomes
sleepy, fat, perverse in its sex cravings; puppies cease to grow when
submitted to such an operation; autopsy of many human dwarfs has
shown that their pituitary was undeveloped. People whose pituitary is
insufficient in its action have a tendency to lose their hair, have
a very dry skin, a dull mentality, sometimes suffer from epilepsy
and crave sugar in large quantities. They are generally obese, the
fat accumulating on the lower abdomen and the feet and ankles. Louis
Berman in his excellent book on the endocrines "Glands regulating the
Personality," presents as a perfect likeness of the "hypopituitary
type" the Fat Boy of the Pickwick Papers whose emloyment with Mr.
Wardle consisted in alternate sleeping and eating.

I will quote from Berman's book a description of the opposite type, the
individual in whom the pituitary gland is too active.

"If the overaction begins in childhood or adolescence, that is, before
puberty, there results a great elongation of the bones, so that a giant
is the consequence.... If the overaction happens after puberty, when
the long bones have set and can not grow longer, a peculiar, diffuse
enlargement of the individual occurs, especially of his hands and feet
and head. The nose, ears, lips and eyes get larger and coarser. All
those people are rather big and tall to begin with, heavy jawed, burly,
with overhanging eyebrows and an aggressive manner. Rabelais' most
famous character, Gargantua, belongs to the group. We recruit more drum
majors than prime ministers from among those people."

The pituitary has a strong influence on sexual activities. Young
animals whose pituitary has been surgically damaged will not be able to
reproduce themselves when reaching adulthood. Feeding pituitary glands
to hens on the other hand, causes them to lay thirty per cent more eggs
than they would naturally.

=The Thyroid= is a transformer of energy. It is a large reddish
mass located in front and on both sides of the trachea, consisting of
two lobes connected by a bridge of the same tissue.

The thyroid activates the fires of the body. An active thyroid means
life at "concert pitch." A sluggish thyroid means a slow, negative
existence.

To a poor thyroid correspond a pasty complexion, watery eyes with heavy
lids, a depressed pug nose, large ears, thin hair, scanty eyebrows and
eyelashes, short, brittle nails, irregular, bad teeth, broad, pudgy
hands and feet, generally cold.

With an overactive thyroid we observe a high color, sleeplessness,
restlessness, a tendency to lose weight, emotionalism, profuse
perspiration, bright, large eyes, good white teeth.

=The Adrenal Glands= are about the size of a bean and located on top of
the kidneys. They secrete adrenin which, when poured into the blood,
causes muscular tension, accelerates the heart beats and the breathing
rate, dilates the pupil and produces fear or anger according to the
relative size of the core (medulla) or envelop (cortex) of the adrenals.

In timid animals (and women) the cortex is thin, in courageous animals
(and men) the cortex is rather thick. According to the thickness of
your cortex you shall, in an emergency, resort to either fight or
flight.

A man with a thin cortex looks feminine, a woman with a thick cortex
looks mannish.

The adrenals control the color of the skin, the growth of hair, the
size of the canine teeth and the color of the teeth. To good adrenals
correspond an olive complexion, much hair on the body, rather yellowish
teeth and strong canines. The bearded lady of the circus is a woman
with overdeveloped adrenals and a thick cortex.

Weak adrenals go with cold extremities, a hairless body, poor canines,
lack of ambition, discouragement, fatigability, etc.

=The Gonads or Sex Glands=, testes in man, ovaries in woman,
affect thru the secretions of their interstitial cells, the pitch of
the voice, the growth of pubic hair, the size of the breasts, the
distribution of fat.

Good gonads mean masculine looking men and feminine looking women.
Poor gonads mean feminine looking men, hairless and with overdeveloped
breasts, talking in a high-pitched voice, with a tendency to obesity
and laziness (eunuchs); scrawny looking women who may later in
life grow abnormally fat, with, in their youth, flat chests, scanty
menstruation, etc.

Healthy gonads also retard senility. Gonads whose interstitial cells
have been rehabilitated by the Steinach operation bring a new youth to
the organism, mentally and physically.

Other glands, the thymus, pancreas, parathyroid, pineal body also
play an important part in shaping the human body and with it the
personality. The limits of this book do not allow me, however, to
discuss them even superficially.




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                        GLANDULAR PERSONALITIES


I stated in the preceding chapter that to every degree of glandular
development there corresponds a certain set of physical characteristics
which, in the love life, may be transformed into fetishes, (beautiful
features, laymen call them), which are necessary to arouse sexual
desire in one's mate, but which are not necessarily attractive to any
one else.

Those physical characteristics are, in turn, the tangible evidence of
the presence of certain mental attitudes and predispositions.

Individuals seeking in the love union, not merely a passing
gratification of their erotism, but a lifelong arrangement, gratifying
both the physical and the mental aspects of the organism, should be
trained to recognise the presence or absence of characteristics which
would make such an arrangement a lasting pleasure or a lasting torture.

For instance, the woman who falls in love with a man because her
fetishism requires a short, round, plump, man, with a good head of
hair but hairless limbs, must not expect him to ever grow into a
fighter, a good provider or even a companion of placid moods.

A man of that type is capricious, unstable, unresisting, and prefers
the gentler arts to any form of competitive struggle.

Likewise a man who picks out a woman for his mate because she has
pretty, doll-like features, is "cute" and slight, has a soft skin,
white and pink, must not expect to live peacefully with her on a farm,
or even on Main Street or in a distant suburb.

That type of woman grows easily emotional, is constantly in search of
new excitement and new pleasures. It is only at forty that she will
become more settled (and rotund), retaining, however, a certain jollity
of disposition.

=The Olive Skinned Dark Haired Type=, and the freckled, red haired
are very much alike. Both have a low forehead, hair is plentiful all
over the body, thick and coarse. Their canines are long and sharp.

Men and women of that type are good fighters, more easily angered
than scared; they are generally successful, with a tendency to
slave-driving. In the face of great difficulties, of painful
disappointment, however, they are prone to turn embittered and cranky.

People of this type who show large birth marks are likely to be
imbalanced and irritable. They may at times give the impression of
being weak and lazy, altho their minds may be extremely active.

=The Tall Type=, with strong frame, firm muscles, generous hands and
feet, a thick skin, oval face, head flattened at the sides, thick
eyebrows, prominent eyes, placed rather wide apart, large nose, square
chin, large upper middle incisors, heavy joints, hairy legs and arms,
is characterised by intelligence and self-control. At times that type
has a tendency to be a little calculating if not sordid.

=The Lean Type= with clean-cut features, thick hair, thick, long
eyebrows, big, keen eyes, sometimes slightly protruding, well developed
white teeth and a very masculine or very feminine mouth, according
to sex, is active, restless, a live wire, emotional and likely to be
easily prostrated by an unexpected defeat. Men and women of that type
have a tendency to be sleepless and to do too much planning at night
instead of resting peacefully.

=The Short, Obese, Sallow Type=, with a high forehead, scanty eyebrows,
deep set, narrow eyes, irregular teeth that decay early, with poor
circulation, cold and blue hands and feet, is rather "animal" and lacks
self-control.

=The Slender Type=, with narrow waist line, rounded limbs, long
chest, (which in women may carry poorly developed breasts), very white,
hairless skin, delicate features, silky hair, childish teeth, flat
feet, knock-knees, may be at times very brilliant, but is generally
queer, eccentric, irresponsible, perverse, dishonest. That type is
observed in many petty thieves, prostitutes, drug addicts, suicides.

Those are the most striking physical types. They present hundreds of
shadings and combinations.

=Environment.= The last mentioned type, if reared and kept in a
comfortable environment, among people of slightly lax behavior, of
artistic inclinations, exposed to none of life's onslaughts, may do
very well, and be considered by his associates as sensitive, gentle and
likeable. It is the pressure of social and economic conditions which
cause him to seek safety in theft (quick acquisition of wealth), drug
stupor, (escape from reality, perversion, escape from biological duties
connected with a normal sex life), or suicide, (return to the fetal
stage and escape from life).

Those people are children who can only thrive in the nursery.

Even as infant mortality depends solely upon the family income, the
death rate being five times as high in poor as in wealthy families, the
stability and social charm of almost any glandular type depends upon
the social pressure that type has to bear.

Almost any type is bearable, if not lovable, in a comfortable
environment requiring little planning and no fighting.

One of the details of the social pressure is, of course, the attempts
at repression or modification to which a personality may be subjected
by the life mate. The fault lies in this case, not so much with the
type in itself, however inferior it may be, as with the incurable
optimist who attempts the impossible task of changing a human
personality.

In other words, it might be said, that in an environment which exerts
no pressure on the individual, that is, where there is abundance of
wealth and comfort, one can select a mate with bad fetishes, that is,
indicative of weakness, while those less favored financially must lay
greater stress on fetishes denoting strength and fighting ability.

=What Teeth Indicate.= Fraenkel and Kaplan have pointed to the teeth as
indicators of the general glandular condition of the individual and of
his probable mental and physical powers. Good middle incisors indicate
good thyroid and pituitary, hence strength and balance.

Good lateral incisors indicate sexual power; good canines indicate
strong adrenals, hence good fighting ability.

Lack of any of those teeth, or their stunted growth, gives naturally,
the contrary indication as to make up and character.

One must not forget either that certain fetishes are superficial and
likely to disappear early in life. Blondes may turn into brunettes;
sveltness may yield to invading obesity, altho this last change is to
be blamed more on the individual's stupidity than upon his glandular
condition; a white skin may become yellow, etc.

Preference should, therefore, be given, when in doubt, to more durable
fetishes, stature, strength, general appearance, attitude, which are
less likely to change with the years.

=Matrimonial Engineers.= Here is a new field for educators; there
may grow from this very new knowledge a new profession, that of the
matrimonial engineer, who will diagnose the chances of happiness two
human beings may have, if they decide to associate their destinies.

Much has to be studied and experimented upon before any one can
consider himself qualified to pass final judgments upon the decisions
to which love leads couples.

"However" as Berman writes, "the fact remains that, though we are only
upon the first rungs of the ladder, we are on the ladder. We possess a
new way of looking upon humanity, a fresh transforming light upon these
strange phenomena, ourselves. Of the ugly achievements of that dreadful
century, the nineteenth, the most illuminating was the discovery of
itself as the ape-parvenu. Yes, we are all animals now, it said to
itself, and set its teeth in the cut-throat game of survival. But there
was no understanding in that evil motto of a disillusioned heart. The
ape-parvenu, desperately lonely and secretive, has still to understand
itself....

"Personality embraces much more than merely the psychic attributes. It
is not the least important of the lessons of endocrine analysis that
here is no soul, and no body either. Rather a soul-body or body-soul,
or the patterns of the living flame. The closer tracking of the
internal secretions leads us into the secrets of the living flame, why
it lives and how it lives, the strange diversities of its coloring and
music and the odd variations in its energy, vitality and longevity.
Why it flickers, why it flares and glares, spurts, flutters, burns hard
or soft, orange-blue or yellow."




                              CHAPTER XXV

                         LOVE AND MOTHER LOVE


Is the perfect mother a perfect wife? Is the perfect mother, in every
case, the result of mental perfection and ethical superiority? Or is
there a hidden strife between love and motherhood? Is mother love
always the enchanting image presented to us by poets and intimidated
sons? Or is it an alloy of higher qualities, biological necessity and
egotistical neurotic cravings?

I do not intend to settle all those problems within the limits of a
short chapter, but rather to point out some of the morbid components of
mother love which a psychoanalyst detects in his women patients, and
which, exaggerated in the neurotic, exist to a slight degree in every
woman.

=Sex Cravings and Motherhood Cravings= are so closely related that few
psychologists have ever dreamt of dissociating them for the purpose of
study. The average moralist, who prefers cheap popularity to scientific
accuracy, excuses the existence of sex cravings only on one condition,
that they become absolutely subservient to motherhood cravings.

The birth control agitation which is making such rapid headway at the
present day, on the other hand, means, in part, that while motherhood
may be the consequence of unregulated sex activities, it is not, for
all women, their conscious motive.

Why is it that some women with an erotic disposition and a voluptuous
physique, fear pregnancy while other women, apparently indifferent to
men, crave motherhood?

Physiology does not give us a very satisfactory answer to this
question. Endocrinologists tell us that sex cravings are determined
by the ovaries and motherhood cravings by the posterior part of the
pituitary gland, but this leaves us exactly where we were when we
started out.

=Pregnancy and Health.= All physiologists will agree with the statement
that in a normal, complex free woman, a type which unfortunately,
the complexity of our civilization does not allow us to behold very
frequently, pregnancy is accompanied by an unusual activity of all
the organism, imparting to the female a sense of great power and,
consequently, of well-being, mental and physical. The adrenals work
at high pressure to produce the muscular tone necessary in gestation.
The thyroid is called upon to transform more and more of the electric
current produced by the brain cells. New glands of a temporary nature
develop in the woman's body, regulating her life functions more
accurately and imparting to her a feeling of dreamy happiness and
relaxation.

After delivery, another part of her body enters into activity, her
mammary glands, so closely related to the genitals that any stimulation
of either region finds a strong echo in the other. Many are the women
in whom lactation produces intensely erotic feelings affording them at
times full gratification.

=Fear of Pregnancy.= Unfortunately, civilisation has surrounded
motherhood with so many complications, social, ethical, financial,
sentimental, etc., that in very few women, indeed, is that biological
process an unmixed pleasure, dissociated from all pain and anxiety.

Vomiting, which expresses the female's disgust for her condition, or
her mate or the offspring; cramplike tensions, expressing her worries
about her appearance, her anxious thought of financial or social
consequences; anxiety states, affecting the adrenals, which discolor
her face (pregnancy mask), make pregnancy hideous in many cases.

Even the process of parturition seems to have become more painful and
dangerous with advancing civilisation.

Any one who has seen, for instance, Mexican women barely interrupting
their labor in the fields to give birth to a child, and resuming their
tasks an hour later, must realise that autosuggestion has much to do
with the physical disability of the civilised woman in child bed.

In spite of the complexities of modern life, the female organism which
is not affected by fear complexes, must expect a pleasure premium from
pregnancy, lactation and other duties of motherhood. This would supply
us with an organic basis for the mother's attachment to her offspring
which is observable almost in every animal species.

That a number of women may be found who hate their children owing to
the suffering to which unwelcome motherhood and difficult parturition
have subjected them, is easily understandable. In fact we face a
vicious circle. The unwelcome pregnancy will be an unpleasant one,
followed almost unavoidably by painful delivery, etc.

=When Mother Love is Lacking= or when a mother hates a very young
child, the psychologist must look for morbid unconscious influences
which analysis should remove as soon as possible.

Stekel, the Viennese analyst, tells of a woman who was very fond of
three of her daughters but, for some mysterious reason, detested the
fourth one. Analysis revealed that she imagined she saw every one of
her husband's faults reproduced and magnified in the unfortunate child.

She also imagined that she loved her husband very deeply.

The year when the unloved child was conceived, however, she had fallen
in love with another man, a young poet. She remained "technically
faithful" to her husband, altho, when in his arms, it was always the
poet to whom she was giving herself.

She hoped sentimentally that the forthcoming child would look like
her platonic lover but the little girl reproduced with striking
faithfulness her father's features.

Unwilling to accept her dislike of her husband, the romantic mother had
transferred it to the child who served as a scapegoat in various ways.

=Frigid Wives.= We often observe a great craving for motherhood in
frigid wives.

Let us not rehash on this occasion the poetical and silly statement
that the frigid woman is one whose love has been spiritualised and can
only find an outlet thru her children.

The frigid woman is a cripple or a neurotic. Either she was born with
poorly developed genitals or she was made abnormal by the unconscious
fear of yielding to man's domination, or by a morbid sense of sin due
to asceticism, or by painful or humiliating sex experiences before or
after marriage.

Her craving for motherhood is not infrequently the hypocritical
expression of her desire for intercourse, which her puritan training
would otherwise make lewd and sinful. It is, at times, a desire for
the superiority which age and bodily size will give her over infants,
helpless and inarticulate.

This is why, in a good many cases, a perfect mother makes a detestable
wife. Unable to dominate her husband she craves children whom she can
dominate with a minimum of bodily strength and mental effort, and she
devotes all her time and care to them.

When the children grow up and develop independent personalities, the
neurotic mother often loses her interest in them. How many times have
we heard women (and men) remark that children should remain "babies,"
that young children are far more lovable than adolescents, etc.

=Mother and Father Love= differ in several respects.

Fathers look upon their children, especially their sons, as a visible
proof of their virile power. In their sons they see their own image,
the more attractive to them as they are more egotistical.

The weak, infirm or unsuccessful son, however, receives little love at
the hands of his father. He is not a credit to his progenitor.

No mother, on the other hand, seems to neglect a cripple or idiotic
child. Be it male or female, it is a human being which she can dominate
easily. The more neurotic she is, the more she will idolise the
ill-favored child.

=Mothers Always Adore Their Sons=, young and old, for they behold
in them males whom they can easily dominate.

And fathers love their daughters, young or old, for similar reasons.

The relations of aging mothers and growing daughters, however, are
almost invariably tinged with a certain hostility, overt or concealed,
according to the women's habits, training, manners, etc.

=Girls at the Flapper Stage= who resent the attraction which their
mothers still wield over younger men, constantly remind them of their
age and bid them to behave in a way more in keeping with their mature
years.

The flapper's mother on the other hand, who sees her daughter gradually
monopolising the attention of men callers, reminds the girl with
monotonous regularity that she is only a child and bids her to behave
as befits her tender years.

The mother resents her daughter's fresh beauty, the daughter, her
mother's experience in dealing with males.

Both watch each other closely, protecting each other's modesty and
virtue and trying to make each other's life as uninteresting and
uneventful as possible.

The girl becomes an ethical critic on her mother's smoking or gowns.
The mother blossoms into a puritan who allows her daughter no freedom
and seems to have entirely forgotten her own girlhood years.

The strife lasts until the daughter is old enough to have her own
circle of friends and no longer needs a chaperone. After which mother
and daughter, if matched intellectually, may once more become friends.

=Repressed Hatred.= I have treated a number of neurotic mothers who
seemed to be obsessed by their adoration of their children. That
exaggerated tenderness was, as I mentioned in another chapter, a cover
for death wishes directed toward those children.

Some never allowed knives to be left in evidence in the house, some did
not dare to carry their children in their arms on the stairs, while
boarding trains, or while near open windows.

One never dared to administer a medicine to her little girl "for fear
of making a mistake and poisoning her." One did not dare to bathe her
child for fear of drowning him "accidentally" in the tub.

Neurotic women who do not wish to become mothers and rebel against
motherhood, (which some of them consider as a symbol of woman's
inferior role), often compensate for their lack of love by an almost
criminal indulgence and weakness toward their children.

Unable to give them genuine love, they pretend to idolise them and are
apparently unable to deny any of their wishes. This, in last analysis,
is simply a total indifference to the little ones' welfare. That type
of mother spoils her children and makes them unfit to face life and its
emergencies.

Her extravagant adulation, her outbursts of artificial tenderness,
however, do not always deceive the children themselves who feel
automatically, thru nervous and muscular imitation, the tensions of
their mother's body. The little son of the woman who was obsessed
by the fear of drowning him (and who compensated for her murderous
cravings by showering the wildest caresses upon him), could not be
prevailed upon to ever go near the water until her obsessions, of
which, he, of course, had no conscious knowledge, had been removed by
psychoanalytic treatment.

Neurotic mother love trains children for a neurotic life.




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                    SHOULD WINTER MATE WITH SPRING?


This is the poetical way in which many newspaper editors have been
introducing to their readers accounts of two recent incidents which,
at the time of writing (this chapter), keep headline writers busy. One
of the news items is the idyll of an heiress, still in her teens, who
has made up her mind to marry a man of fifty or thereabout. The other
is the heartbreak of a seventy year old husband, deserted by his twenty
year old wife.

The mating of winter and spring is a daily occurrence, both seasons
being divided up about equally between the two sexes. The two unnatural
matches which I mentioned above, however, stand in a class by
themselves.

Many a young idler, gifted with good looks, has managed to play on
the erotic feelings of some woman in her dotage and to annex a goodly
portion of her wealth. Many an attractive girl, seeking the line of
least effort, has been known to prefer a union with a silly old man to
the daily struggle for existence.

=Disinterested Brides.= In the two cases under discussion, on the other
hand, no suspicion of sordidness could be cast on the bride-that-was or
on the bride-to-be.

Both are wealthy, one of them immensely so. The bridegroom to be is, if
not a poor man, at least in very modest circumstances.

A genuine love match in both cases. But the genuineness of love did
not prevent a catastrophe in one case and will probably bring about a
catastrophe in the other case as well.

In both cases, the men are probably normal and yielding to the very
natural attraction of youth combined with beauty and refinement.

Both women, however, are abnormal, altho one of them, the runaway wife,
may have regained her normality and awakened from her absurd dream.

Both are, or were, the victims of a fixation of the most acute type, on
the father image indicating a morbid neurotic disposition.

Such unions can hardly ever hold out any promise of lasting happiness.

=The Case of Wagner.= There is, of course, the famous example of Wagner
who, at fifty-seven carried off the beautiful wife of Hans von Bülow,
almost thirty years his junior, and lived happily with her until his
death. But Wagner was at the time a marvelous example of physical and
mental activity, energy and creative power. In no way, barring his
facial appearance, could he suggest age or decay to his young wife. He
remained to the last a romantic figure.

The glamor, however, which may surround a successful composer with a
picturesque past, is not likely to dazzle in any way the bride of a
riding master or of a New England manufacturer.

=A Parent Fixation=, as I explained in the chapters on the Family
Romance and on Incest, is the more acute as it drives its victim to
seek a closer duplicate of the parent type.

The man who seeks a woman for his mate because his mother was a woman
is influenced by the most normal and biologically valuable of mother
fixations. The race would come to an end but for that form of fixation.

The son of a blonde mother who cannot love a woman unless she is also
a blonde, is less normal and less free in his choice of a mate than
the preceding type. He is inhibited by childhood memories, but then,
education and civilisation are little more than inhibitions caused by
childhood memories. That type simply marries in "his set" and can lead
an otherwise very normal life.

He, however, who is irresistibly attracted by a woman exactly like his
mother, not only as far as appearance, but also as far as age goes,
is a childish, regressive neurotic, seeking the safety of childhood
conditions and obsessed at times by unconscious incestuous cravings.

=The Rock of Physical Incompatibility= is often one on which such
adventures are shipwrecked. A very young woman, ignorant of the sex
life and its problems, unable to realise its meaning before marriage,
may develop immediately after her union to an elderly man a very
passionate temperament.

Either she will repress her cravings for physical love, which her too
mature mate is unable to gratify, and she will develop anxiety states
or hysteria.

Or she will be too healthy to repress her desires, and her
disappointment may change her love into scorn, especially when
conversation with other women or a clever suitor opens her eyes to what
is lacking in her life.

A separation, sometimes complicated by the usual triangle situation,
may become unavoidable.

There are cases in which both mates are frankly neurotic and were drawn
together as invalids and weak-minded often are, by the similarity of
their predicament.

=The Plight of Two Neurotics.= Both of them may, as I observed it
once, seek safety in a mock-incestuous relationship, the older mate,
seeking safety in a union with an immature human being, the younger
mate in a union with the parent image. In one case which I have in
mind, the husband, fifty-five years old, had been several times on the
verge of exposure for unlawful "liberties" he took with very young
girls. The wife, a few days after her father's death, married the old
man who had been her father's associate and who had tried to seduce her
when she was barely ten.

She visited me when a new scandal in which her husband became
implicated caused her to leave him. She was considerably "mixed up"
for, while young men had begun to attract her, she felt extremely
self-conscious in their presence and could only enjoy herself in the
company of elderly men who, in turn, reminded her too much of the
nightmare thru which she had lived for two years.

A pious Catholic, she solved the conflict prematurely, before I had
time to bring insight into her mind, by fleeing from all sorts of men
and into a convent.

Other cases have a less tragic history: A young woman of twenty-eight
who had never been happy with her husband, (thirty), took advantage of
the numberless opportunities war work and war drives gave to women, to
become faithless to her husband. She had four short-lived affairs with
men twice her age, then "broke down" when her husband secured a divorce
for adultery. Analysis gave her insight into her father fixation which
was not very deep and might never have driven her into overt acts but
for the unusual conditions in which she found herself.

She is now happily remarried to a man of her age.

=What the Community Says.= Mates whose ages are out of proportion,
are often thrown into deep discord by the pressure of the community's
criticism. They might thrive on a desert island or on a farm or, as in
the case of an explorer I knew, when surrounded almost continuously by
an "inferior" race whose opinion they can easily disregard.

The community's smiles or open disapproval, on the other hand, are a
heavy burden, especially for the more neurotic mate, who is likely to
feel very self-conscious in everything he or she does.

The too young wife and the too young husband may at first smile when
hotel clerks, shopkeepers, chauffeurs, etc., allude to their aged
mate as "your father" or "your mother." After a while, a feeling
of embarrassment will get the best of their sense of humor. Shame
and humiliation will soon set in when those mistakes are repeated
frequently. When the ego is wounded by love complications, unless the
individual is a pronounced masochist, love fares very badly.

It turns into hatred for the mate causing the humiliating remarks, as
unconscious incest ideas gradually break into consciousness and provoke
protective measures, critical attitudes, disgust, etc.

In one case which came under my observation, the community's criticisms
worked as effectively as psychoanalytic treatment would have.

=Having Her Fixation-Fling.= A young woman married to a man of her age,
but discontented and frigid, had a passing liaison with an elderly
man, which exposed her to many jeers on the part of her associates who
suspected it.

She was very intelligent and well acquainted with psychoanalytical
literature and only consulted me to make sure of her correct diagnosis
of her own case.

She did the proper thing under the circumstances, confessed a part of
the truth to her husband, went away with him for a while and has been
happy with him ever since. She had had her "fixation fling" as she
called it, had sown her neurotic wild oats and ridden herself of a
morbid element which may never bother her again.

This sort of solution, however, is one which is neither scientific nor
safe, for the person affected by a fixation of that morbid sort is at
the mercy of a recurrence of it, should life's problems compel him to
seek once more the line of exaggerated safety and regression to the
childish level of conduct.

=Physical Results.= If matches between the young and old were
successful physically and otherwise, they would be extremely beneficial
to the older mate. Normal sexual stimulation, far from driving the aged
to an early grave, as old time puritans have taught us, is probably the
most potent factor of rejuvenation.

The Steinach operation which enables the hormone-producing cells of the
gonads to overdevelop at the expense of the seminiferous cells, seems,
when successful, to confer new youth upon the entire organism.

Lorand, Stekel, Hufeland and others hold that sexual activity in the
old, when it is possible, is conducive to longevity.

Lorand mentions many interesting cases in which remarriage at
incredibly advanced ages seemed in no way to curtail one's life span.
Thomas Parré, who died at 162, was arrested for assault at 102 and
married again at 120. The Dane Drackenberg, who died at 150, married at
111 a woman of 60, became a widower at 130, and tried to woo a young
peasant girl who, however, refused to accept him.

Peter Albrecht, who died at 123, married again at 80 and had seven
children. Gurgon Duglas, who died at 120, married at 85 and had 8
children, the youngest one being born when the father was 103. Baron
Baravicion dès Capelles died at 104, having had four wives, the last
one whom he married when 80.

Lorand adds that, according to his observations, old people with an
erotic temperament have a better chance of survival than "cold blooded"
ones.

Hufeland says that married people live much longer than the unmarried
and that no bachelor was ever known to reach a ripe age.

The sudden bloom and general appearance of rejuvenation of old maids
finally finding a mate, of widows who remarry and of neglected wives
who give themselves to a potent lover, is a good physiological argument
why winter should try to seek the violent stimulation of a union with
spring.

=The Fate of the Younger Mate.= The younger mate, however, can
hardly hope to escape unscathed when going thru such an experience.

The old are benefited because their muscles, nerves, glands, etc.,
imitate the attitudes and behavior of the younger mate's organs and
become accordingly younger.

The same process of imitation is at work in the younger mate and the
damage done to him or her is naturally great, altho not always obvious
at first.

His or her younger organism, less experience-laden, and hence more
elastic and more responsive, adapts itself more quickly to the ways of
old age than old age adapts itself to the ways of youth.

Even in cases when the gratification seems to be mutual, the damage
done to the younger mate reveals itself thru neurotic disturbances.

A man of thirty-five consulted for anxiety states, nightmares,
"nervous" gastric troubles, etc.

He had been living since his twentieth year with a woman twenty years
his senior, in fact, a friend and schoolmate of his mother's.

He called her Mama and she called him Sonny. While, according to his
statements, their sexual life was absolutely normal and satisfying, the
repressed incest-fear lurking in his unconscious betrayed itself thru a
nightmare which disturbed his sleep with alarming frequency:

"I am at the foot of marble stairs. A female figure is standing at the
top, a relative, perhaps my mother. She extends her hand to me to help
me up the stairs, but that hand is so weak that it cannot hold me and
then I am frightened by a powerful male figure, a man in authority,
perhaps my father, coming toward me from the side."

Altho the man was physically satisfied, the split in his unconscious
made him very irritable, restless and an unpleasant companion for his
"mama" to whom he made endless scenes for trifling reasons.

=King David.= In Biblical days when King David grew old,[2] his
ministers besought themselves of the following remedy: they found a
young virgin and "let her lie in his bosom" in the hope that the dying
man might be revived by her contact. Even that availed nothing.

In our days, however, we have come to prize human life and happiness
more highly and young virgins shall not be sacrificed, being the new
generation and the future, to the welfare of some modern King David who
is the past.

The young women in our midst, virgins or others, whom a morbid
obsession draws to the bosom of some King David must be saved from the
winter chill that awaits them. Modern psychology holds the key opening
for them the door to freedom and normal love.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                             NEGATIVE LOVE


The only form of love which is positive is complete love, which
gratifies both the physical and the mental aspects of the organism
and which, besides, is human and, hence, recognises and admits the
relativity of all things human.

Any form of love which excludes either the physical or the mental
relationship of male and female, is incomplete and, therefore, abnormal.

All the puritanical rant to the contrary notwithstanding, platonic
love and prostitution are on the same biological level, as morbid and
unnatural one as the other.

Prostitution only gratifies the body more or less completely and
starves the mind, causing the mental aspect of the love craving to
become stunted or perverse.

Platonic love gratifies the intellect more or less completely,
rather less than more, for it offers few egotistical rewards, but it
starves the body and leads it into adopting morbid forms of craving
gratification.

=A Clean Life.= Many a patient has declared proudly to me that he led
a "clean life." A few days later, after losing his selfconsciousness
in my presence, he would gradually confess to a terrible "struggle"
against his "animal" instincts. Which meant, that at irregular
intervals, self-gratification would give him, in a morbid day dream,
the woman whose love he craved; or a pollution dream would allow
him, in the unconsciousness and ethical irresponsibility of sleep,
to make up for his privations by indulging in imaginary promiscuous
cohabitation.

This is in too many cases, the seamy side of a platonic love affair,
when one or both of the mates is not naturally unsexed but unsexes
himself thru what he or she calls will-power and which analysis reveals
to be conscious or unconscious fear.

This is the meaning of love plus continence. In the majority of cases
its damage stops there. In a few cases, however, especially when the
sex cravings of one of the mates have been so successfully repressed
that they are no longer experienced consciously, symbolical nightmares
of the most exhausting kind, hysterical disturbances during the
waking hours, compulsions and obsessions of all sorts, reveal to the
psychoanalyst that lava is boiling under the apparently extinct cone of
a safe volcano.

The platonic individual, like the puritan, is either oversexed or
undersexed.

The oversexed must surround themselves with protective measures lest
their violent cravings may lead them into socially punishable acts. The
simplest neurotic expedient is to utter a complete denial, whenever
possible a public one, of the existence of sexual cravings, and then to
be forced by one's statements into living up to an absurd self-imposed
standard.

=Utterances and Conduct.= This at times results in most grotesque
conflicts between utterance and conduct. We see for instance the
much married Mrs. Eddy who as the witty Theodore Schroeder remarked,
had many more husbands than children, stating that the pleasures of
the flesh "are always wrong unless the physiologic factor can be
excluded from consciousness" (a rather cryptic sentence) and also that
"generation rests on no sexual basis."

Thy hysteric whose volcanic outbursts supply her with a morbid sexual
relief for which she rejects all responsibility, for she is unconscious
at the time is generally in her private and public life a woman of
great repressions and perfect behavior, likely to sneer at every
mention of a sex urge.

In other cases, platonic love is an attempt at creating an artificial
value thru destroying a natural, biological human function.

=Oracles and Prophecies.= In ancient times it was observed that
people deprived of any sexual gratification made at times mysterious
utterances which were considered as an emanation of some divine
intelligence.

Those utterances were nothing but hysterical ravings, accepted as
oracles, prophecies, etc.

Our praise of continence, practiced even when it is unnecessary, (as in
the case of lawfully married mates), is, after all, a survival of such
superstitious beliefs based on misunderstood morbid phenomena.

Modern science, especially the new science of endocrinology, has shown
that to every display of sexual activity corresponds an outpouring of
hormonic secretions which benefits the entire system.

=Can We Save Our Vital Force?= Once upon a time it was assumed that
continence enabled people to save their "vital force," to preserve the
"resources of their body."

We know now that the gonads produce two secretions, one which would
pass out of the body in any event, and one which flows directly in the
blood and is the only one which can benefit the organism.

The various puritanical theories as to the great value of continence
had been shaken many times by evidence from the biography of all the
great writers, artists, philosophers, inventors and other men and women
who have left the world much enriched by their creative labor and at
the same time indulged freely in the pleasures of the flesh.

=Sublimation.= Endocrinology strikes now the last blow at those
theories, one of which by the way, was Freud's romantic hypothesis of
the "sublimation."

Freud believed that sexual energy could be diverted towards social ends
of greater value and non-sexual in character. This is scientifically
absurd, as it disregards the dualism of glandular secretions. The
outward secretions cannot be "saved" and the inner secretions which are
beyond our control flow directly into the blood stream.

I have shown in another book, "Sex Happiness" that the platonic man
is either the victim of his ignorance of sex matters and of ascetic
superstitions which modern physiology can no longer countenance, or a
physiologically deficient individual.

The heroes of Beresford's "God's Counterpoint" and of May Sinclair's
"The Romantic" whom I analised in "Sex Happiness" correspond to the
first and the second of those types, respectively.

=The Sexless.= There are men and women, of course, of the hypogonadal
type, undersexed or sexless, who are capable of deep affection for a
person of the opposite sex. That such an affection never culminates
in complete physical communion is easily understood. Sexual failures
discourage the weaker friend from risking any more experiments likely
to result in humiliation.

The sexless man is practically a woman, and like certain homosexuals,
treats women as members of his own sex. He may make a pleasant,
delicate, safe companion, but no woman should allow herself to care for
him.

=Frigid Women= who never experience any thrill in their husband's
embrace and hence consider the physical communion as an indecent
act forgivable in a husband only, as it is a part of the marriage
arrangement, may love a man very deeply and yet never feel the urge to
surrender their body to him.

Here again we have to deal with ignorance or neurosis or both.

The frigid woman, as I explained elsewhere is generally a neurotic,
(perhaps made so by unpleasant first sexual experiences and her mate's
failure to awaken her normal erotism), who is afraid of life, of its
biological duties, of responsibility, of submission to a man's will,
etc., and burdened with some unconscious incest fixation on her father,
or homosexual fixation on her mother, etc.

Her platonic attitude in love is due to numberless unconscious fears
which are a strong bulwark against temptation.

=Ideal Love.= Another form of negativism in love which receives no
little amount of praise at the hands of the romantically silly and of
the ill-informed, is the quest of the ideal love.

We meet men and women, sometimes of mature years, who tell us with a
great deal of pride that they never married because they could not find
the "right mate."

I will not deny that in rare cases this may be considered a perfectly
valid reason, pointing to no morbid disposition on the part of the
unwillingly single person. Marriage might have implied mating with a
member of an erotically indifferent race, African or Asiatic; isolation
in a remote farming community where a refined woman could only select
a mate from among primitive laborers, or in mining regions like some
Alaska camps, where the only women available at times are prostitutes.

Barring such "legitimate" exceptions, which to my mind, imply however,
a suspicious indifference to securing a mate, the seeker for an ideal
mate is almost always neurotic.

=Protective Measures.= By setting his goal very high, he is
protected against the danger of finding a mate and assuming life's
responsibilities, increased as they would be by normal sexual
activities.

This is done in various ways, thru exaggerated social expectations, or
thru unreasonable economic demands, or through morbid criticism of the
possible mate.

A working girl may set her heart on marrying none but a Prince Charming
who could by no chance whatsoever be attracted by her appearance or her
manners, unless he himself were a neurotic seeking safety in a union
with a socially inferior mate (students marrying waitresses, etc.).
Newspapers publish enough news of such matches to supply the neurotic
woman with a reasonable rationalisation of her fear of matrimony.

Some poor, unattractive young man may likewise decide never to marry
unless he may secure as his bride a woman whom her social position
makes unattainable. Here again, unions of heiresses with menials supply
the rationalisation.

Some unattractive women may make such financial demands on the man
seeking their affection that no one will have the courage to tempt them
away from their single-blessedness.

=Lovers of the Absolute.= There are individuals of a much more
pathological type still, who refuse to recognise and accept the
relativity of all things human, who seek absolute beauty, perfection,
intelligence, understanding, sympathy in their future mate and who grow
discouraged and depressed when they unavoidably discover flaws in every
companion of the opposite sex.

In certain cases that obsession of the perfect detail is a symptom of
insanity.

Cartoonists have often amused themselves and us by representing famous
men and women with their features so distorted that their distant
likeness to some animal is emphasized.

I have observed the same distortion in neurotics to whom that delusion
brought no humorous enjoyment but on the contrary deep suffering.

=A Troublesome Patient.= One of my patients a handsome young man of
twenty-six, had had very ephemeral affairs with several women and left
them abruptly when he suddenly discovered in their features a likeness
to certain animals, pigs, dogs, monkeys, etc. After which he could
never be prevailed upon to see them again.

One morning he called on me, announcing coolly that he had decided to
shoot me. I invited him to sit down and discuss his plans more fully
before carrying them out, and also to mention some of his reasons for
that somewhat radical decision.

He explained to me, with his right hand annoyingly buried in his
coat pocket, that he had been in love for a few weeks, with a very
attractive girl. Recently, he had noticed something in her profile
which distantly resembled a pig's snout. The night before, while he
was in her company, he suddenly saw her head transformed into a pig's
head. He fled from her rooms in terror and disgust and, attributing his
"clear insight into her true nature" to my psychoanalytic teachings,
had decided to save others from my baneful influence by killing me.

As is usually the case with maniacs, a quiet conversation cast doubts
in his mind. I told him that I did not approve of his plans which
might, however, be excellent, but that, as I was really a biased
adviser in that matter, he should discuss them with an impartial third
party. He then decided to call on Dr. Everett Dean Martin who advised
him to take a rest cure and escorted him to Bellevue Hospital.

The poor boy's transfer to the State Asylum has put an end to his
search for the ideal love. That search was a disguised flight from
women and love, his delusion was an effective measure of protection
against temptation.

Nothing but the absolute could satisfy him in a woman. Relativity was
abhorrent to him.

Every seeker for the ideal love has gone a few steps along the road
which led my poor patient into the house of the living dead.

=Higher Aspirations.= Neurotics of that type are plausible for they
compensate for their fear and their inferiority with a pride based upon
"higher aspirations," "greater delicacy of feelings," "an aristocratic
nature" or the tell-tale statement that "their mother's beautiful
character," "their father's noble nature" makes every man or woman
appear very inferior in their eyes.

Proud of certain characteristics of theirs which they cannot help
having, they childishly display an egotism and selfishness which makes
them at times very ridiculous, for it says indirectly: "Nobody is
quite good enough for me."

When the search for ideal love results in nervous states due to
egotistical starvation, psychoanalysis can help greatly by giving the
neurotic insight into the fear of life or the parent-fixation which is
at the bottom of his romantic aspirations.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                        THE NEW WOMAN AND LOVE


How will love fare at the hands of the new woman? The old forms of
love will naturally be as unbearable to her as the steel corsets of a
forgotten generation. Yet the problem is not so very pressing, for the
truly new woman is still an almost insignificant factor, numerically
speaking, in every community.

Even in the professions and trades of a distinctly masculine character
which woman has recently invaded, we meet constantly the mock-modern
person, who under a veneer of modernity, still harbors all the
superstitions, and exhibits all the mannerisms of the "old fashioned"
woman.

Being old-fashioned in love, as in every other activity of life,
presents a great temptation to the lazy, the unintelligent, the
neurotic.

It is an excuse for all sorts of unethical forms of conduct, for
failure or inactivity, and yet carries with itself a deceptive air of
mock refinement and distinction.

The woman who boasts of being old fashioned can misbehave and retain
for years her husband's or her environment's confidence in her purity.
Being old fashioned, she is assumed by all to be a little "simple" and
"silly" at times, but unlikely to ever cross certain boundaries. At the
same time, she can pass cruel judgments on all the trangressors who
have not been as shrewd or lucky as she.

As a basis for a discussion of the extent to which love will affect the
modern woman and modern woman affect love, I shall select the picture
drawn by George Bernard Shaw in McCall's Magazine for October 1920 of
the woman of the new generation.

"=What Women Had to Do Recently=," Shaw writes, "was not to repudiate
their femininity but to assert its social value, not to ape masculinity
but to demonstrate its insufficiency. This was the point of my play
Candida in which it is made quite plain that the husband's masculine
career would go to pieces without the wife's feminine activity.

"As refinement was supposed to be proper to women and roughness proper
to men fifty years ago, the great increase in companionship between
men and women during that period was bound either to refine the
men or roughen the women. It has done both. The feminine refinement
which was only silliness disguised by affection has gone; and women
are hardier and healthier, and the stock sizes of their clothes are
larger in consequence. The masculine vigor that was only boorishness,
slovenliness and neglect of person and clothes has fled before feminine
criticism.

"=But the Generalisation That Women are Refined and Men Rough by
Nature= is a superficial one, holding good only when, as often happens,
the man's occupation is rougher than the woman's. The natural woman
cannot afford to be as fastidious as the natural man; if she shirked
all the unpleasantness that he escapes, the race would perish. As a
matter of fact, there are coarse women and coarse men, refined women
and refined men; and there is no reason to suppose that the proportions
differ in the two sexes.

"=There is, However, a Rebellion against Nature= in the matter of
the very unequal share of the burden of reproduction which falls to
men and women in civilized communities. I say civilized communities
advisedly, because the extremely artificial life of the modern lady
has the effect of making her natural functions pathological. Whether
the rebellion has been going on ever since ladies were invented I do
not know, because history is silent on the subject, as it is on so
many specifically feminine subjects. But I can testify that among
women brought up amid the feminist movement of the second half of the
nineteenth century there was a revolt against maternity which went
deeper than that revolt against excessive maternity which has led
to birth control. These more thoroughgoing rebels objected to the
whole process, from the occasional event itself to the more permanent
conditions it imposes. It is easy to dismiss this as monstrous and
silly, but the modern conception of creative evolution forbids us to
dismiss any development as impossible if it becomes the subject of an
aspiration.

"There is no limit to the truth of the old saying that where there is a
will there is a way, and though for the moment a refusal to accept the
existing conditions of reproduction would mean race suicide, the rebels
against nature may be the pioneers of evolutionary changes which may
finally dispose of the less pleasant incidents of nutrition, and make
reproduction a process external to the parents in its more burdensome
phases, as it now is in many existent species."

=The Entrance of Woman into Commercial Life= has trained her no longer
to expect something for nothing (exchangeable) and to realize that a
bargain, to be satisfactory, an agreement, to be lasting, must be based
on mutual advantages to both parties.

Love, with the old fashioned, began with a struggle of wits between the
sexes, the man trying to conquer without granting any advantages to the
defeated, woman trying to wear out her opponent and make him yield more
and more advantages before she finally "paid up."

On one side, fear of financial burdens, at the other end, fear of
desertion and pregnancy, suspicion and cruelty.

The sex struggle with its disgusting features of hypocrisy, pretence,
duplicity, misrepresentation, denial of biological facts, etc., has
yielded to an agreement, much as the robber system of past ages has
been replaced by commercial transactions which leave no hatred and no
desire for vengeance in their wake.

=Was It a Sacrifice?= The old-fashioned woman, wife or mistress,
assuming the position of the conquered and defeated, claimed infinite
privileges as an offset to what she has "given up," "sacrificed,"
"yielded." She humiliated her conqueror by pretending that
his body or his caresses were not the equal of hers, and that she only
submitted to his desire, without much pleasure, compelled by his "low
instincts."

The modern woman, conversant with the facts of sex, and no longer
having to create an artificial value for her body based on disregard
of biological facts, since her activities, mental and physical, now
command a definite price on the market place, seeks a partner with whom
she will exchange caresses leading, as she recognises without silly
shame, to mutual gratification.

=The Pursuit.= The old-fashioned woman, who always assumed the
passive role in life and who, supposedly indifferent to the pleasures
of the flesh, ran away, actually or figuratively, from the brutal
pursuer, played a preposterous dual part in the pre-love skirmishes.
Who has never encountered the woman who wears in a public place some
dress which reveals a great deal of her bust, and yet who pretends to
be offended if some man stares at what she has exposed in order to
attract his stare?

The modern woman whose worth is determined, not by the male's
eroticism in her presence, but by her accomplishments, can afford to be
frank, honest, if not, at times, aggressive, in the love search.

=The Passing of Respectable Prostitution.= The old-fashioned woman,
having created the artificial value of womanhood as such, indulged in
a mild, genteel form of prostitution, which, having no consequences
likely to impose a burden on the community, (pregnancy, childbirth)
never was criticised very severely. She sold her company for meals,
theatre tickets, comfortable transportation, flowers, trinkets. Now and
then, developing a streak of fairness and honesty, she would grant the
man she exploited small privileges of a superficial kind. But the real
old-fashioned girl was of the absolutely sordid type, who could allow a
more or less repellent suitor to spend considerable sums to amuse her
but would express genuine indignation at the thought that the man could
be as sordid as she was, and expect some caresses in return.

The modern woman, made independent financially by her non-sexual
activities, can remove from her love all taint of even mild
commercialism, returning favors in kind, or accepting presents, no
longer as a bribe, but as a token of affection on the part of a man she
loves.

=The Abettor of Ethical Sins.= The old fashioned wife was in many more
cases than superficial thinking would cause us to imagine, a more
dangerous corrupter of public and private morality than the prostitute.

Numerically the wife predominates. The prostitute constitutes a very
small minority of the population of large cities and does not thrive in
small town, villages or farming communities.

Louis Berman, who is generally very indifferent to psychology, makes a
very valuable remark in his book on glands: "Consider," he writes, "the
unimportance of a collective purpose to the woman whose career is the
mate and then the mate's career."

Which means that the woman who takes up wifehood as a profession has
no social morality. Her husband is her oyster and the world must in
turn be her husband's oyster. She knows only one thing: that she must
support her mate in anything he does so long as his activities, be they
even immoral or criminal, provide food and shelter for her and her
children. She cares not what he does as long as he "succeeds."

She founds her estimate of success upon visible accomplishment. Getting
"theirs," to her is preferable to getting "there." She, in short, is
a foe to the world, as the world is the foe her mate has set out to
capture and rob.

She willingly sells his ethics to buy success and, at the same time,
is loud in her denunciation of public, self-confessed prostitutes. She
would not prostitute herself but she lightheartedly prostitutes her
mate.

The modern woman can in an emergency help her husband financially and
thus enable him to follow the dictates of social ethics. She will
thereby earn deeper love and respect from him than by any willingness
to stand by him in crooked deals.

=Health Versus Sickness.= To the old fashioned wife, weakness and
sickness were invaluable assets. Sickness excused laziness and
capriciousness. Sickness was a bait for petting and at the same time,
a protection against unwelcome physical intimacies. Her menstruation
became a mysterious, offensive, painful process which debarred her from
many careers she never thought of entering, saved her from duties she
was only too glad to shirk. Undismayed by the sight of professional
women, singers, actresses, dancers, divers, etc., who not only never
seemed disabled by the "dreaded" period but also held a distinct
fascination to males "in spite" of their lack of neurotic femininity,
she prided herself in living up to Michelet's asinine description of
woman, "an invalid twelve times unclean."

The modern woman seeking accomplishment of the positive type, scorns
the negative superiority which sickness and invalidism assure to
neurotics. She has acquired a more scientific knowledge of sex matters
and the superstitious fears surrounding menstruation no longer affect
her.

From my own clinical experience, I am compelled to agree heartily with
Dr. Josephine A. Jackson and Helen M. Salisbury, who in their very fine
and practical book "Outwitting our Nerves" state that "ninety-five
out of a hundred cases of painful menstruation are caused by fear and
expectation of pain."

=The Passing of the Doll.= The modern woman, active, self reliant,
honest and healthy, will force out of existence a type which has lent
much picturesque charm to social gatherings and to pictorial art, the
doll type of woman, prettiness incarnate, of rose leaf charm, unfit for
any biological function except the mild lovemaking, not so much of a
husband, as of a lover. Tuberculous poets and composers of the Musset
and Chopin type, affected pictorial artists like Helleu, will deplore
her disappearance. Man, put at his ease by the modern woman, who does
not require constant protection, mental and physical, will find the
doll "too much trouble."

Only the very stupid and unmanly man will cultivate her for she will
not throw his physical shortcomings into too striking relief and it
will not require any mental exertion on his part to converse with her.

=The Passing of the Flirt.= The flirt is doomed. The flirt is a
rather unintelligent woman with a mild prostitution complex. She has
been trained from infancy to consider a woman's career as successful
when the woman fastens to herself a breadwinner whom she holds by his
physical desire of her body. Having never acquired any market value
outside of the sexual field, she must constantly test her powers and
reassure herself by leading all sorts and conditions of men, for whom
she may never experience even the slightest fancy, into consequential
overt acts revealing that she has awakened their eroticism.

Anyone will do, provided she reads in his eyes the verdict: I am still
attractive.

The terror of growing old is not so overwhelming to the modern woman
who has acquired a non-sexual market value. She tests herself thru
positive accomplishment, leadership, principally, and does not need to
keep her eye constantly on the sex thermometer.

=Modesty, Old and New.= Knowledge which dispels physical ghosts
and a positive self-valuation based on accomplishment will cause the
modern woman to discard the old fashioned modesty which was supposed to
be her greatest attraction, and which husbands, while being obviously
attracted by immodest women, encouraged in their wives as a bulwark
against the advances of other men.

Havelock Ellis in his "Impressions and Comments" contrasts cleverly
thru two striking illustrations the old-fashioned type, worshipping
at the altar of false modesty, and the modern type, who is no longer
ashamed of her body or her sex:

"In one of my books I had occasion to mention the case, communicated
to me, of a woman in Italy who preferred to perish in the flames,
when the house was on fire, rather than shock her modesty by coming
out of it without her clothes. So far as it has been within my power
I have always sought to place bombs beneath the world in which that
woman lived, so that it might altogether go up in flames. I read of
a troop ship torpedoed in the Mediterranean and almost immediately
sunk within sight of land. A nurse was still on deck. She proceeded
to strip, saying to the men about her: 'Excuse me, boys, I must save
the Tommies.' She swam around and saved a dozen of them. That woman
belongs to my world. Now and again I have come across the like, sweet
and feminine and daring women who have done things as brave as that,
and even much braver because more complexly difficult and always I feel
my heart swinging like a censer before them, going up in a perpetual
fragrance of love and adoration.

"I dream of a world in which the spirits of women are flames stronger
than fire, a world in which modesty has become courage and yet remains
modesty, a world in which women are as unlike men as ever they were
in the world I sought to destroy, a world in which women shine with a
loveliness of self-revelation as enchanting as ever the old legends
told, and yet a world which would immeasurably transcend the old world
in the self sacrificing passion of human service."

Thus far I have presented the silver lining of what some timid persons
call the cloud of modernism in love.

To be perfectly fair and honest, I must now mention the cloud itself,
altho, like all clouds, it will soon blow away or resolve itself into
a few drops of water, tears, perhaps, also of a temporary nature.

=The Unadapted Woman.= The sudden rise of women in certain fields
of activity has left quite a number of them unpleasantly unadapted.

Certain positions, well filled by women, and which pay rather high
salaries, demand but a modicum of intellectual development, little
culture or manners.

The women who fill them, and who generally come from the working class,
financially well off, accustomed to expensive clothes and to respectful
treatment on the part of their coworkers or employers, are loath to
enter a married relationship or even a liaison, with men of their
social set, that is, having the same culture or lack of culture, for
those men are financially lower and lack certain manners which they
expect to find in their environment.

A husband of the working class type could not, in case of pregnancy,
give such a woman the comfort which she now craves. Motherhood would
deprive her, temporarily at least, from an income which nothing could
replace.

Nor could she become subservient to a husband after being very
independent and having become slightly snobbish on account of the
attentions she has received from men financially superior to her.

Some of those women whom I have known, and whose profession I shall
not mention to avoid references of an odious character, sought mates,
legitimate or illegitimate, out of their class, taking for husbands or
lovers unsuccessful professional men in need of help.

The results of those matches were anything but encouraging.

The male prostitutes who accepted such arrangements, either showed
plainly their scorn of their unintellectual mate or left her as soon as
success in their chosen field made them independent of their working
class wife or mistress.

=The Proud Husband.= Many men drawing even small salaries, are
absolutely unwilling to marry a woman engaged in a gainful occupation.
This is due either to hidden jealousy, some men imagining that daily
contact with other men is bound to jeopardise a woman's morals, or to
silly pride and panicky fear of "what THEY will say." I have heard many
donkeys telling me that they do not wish "people" to think that they
cannot support their wives.

The cloud hovering over the modern woman and which may, at times, cast
a shadow on her love life, will be blown away as soon as culture
spreads to all social classes of the population owing to the increase
and systematisation of leisure, and as soon as the old fashioned male
has been consigned to his last resting place or analised out of his
foolish neurotic notions.




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                             BIRTH CONTROL


Modern love, as I have endeavored to show in the preceding chapters is
infinitely more complex than love was in the past. When woman was meant
to obey and serve, when feudalism or any other rigid caste system set
clear-cut boundaries to each individual's range of development, there
was less unrest among women just as there was less unrest among slaves.
And both the mediaeval slave and the mediaeval women were probably
absolute bores.

Unrest is growth and complexity is the obvious evidence of growth.

Love stirrings among the amoebae are probably similar to those
experienced by human beings. Nature probably puts a premium of pleasure
on the cleavage of the unicellular animal which reproduces itself by
dividing itself in two, by issuing forth another cell, as it does on
the human male when his gonads liberate spermatozoa.

But the amoeba's love feelings are extremely simple and lead to
no complication for they imply no enduring companionship, no
responsibilities to a mate nor to the "offspring."

=What We Expect of the Modern Woman.= The modern woman who is expected
to be, not merely a sexual mate but a social and intellectual mate as
well, a companion in our athletic diversions, a comrade-at-arms in the
world's battles, and many other things, can no longer allow chance to
interrupt her developmental strivings, to handicap her in the friendly
race she is running with the mate of her choice for intellectual
accomplishment by unexpected, unwelcome, inconvenient pregnancy and
child bearing.

Every child claims two years of its mother's life and it seems
reasonable that the mother should have something to say as to what
number that chapter will bear in her biography.

As only the very weak-minded or very hypocritical offer as a remedy for
frequent pregnancy male continence, we shall not even consider for one
minute such an absurd, abnormal, biologically immoral solution.

=The Only Solution.= The only other solution which has ever been
proposed is a system of sexual enlightenment which will enable a
woman to prevent pregnancy until such time when she feels that she can
in justice to herself and to her offspring bear a child, and will,
further, enable her to have an abortion performed when, in spite of all
contraceptive measures, pregnancy has begun.

This solution has been adopted by the entire civilised world, and in
fact, I might say that the degree of civilisation of a race or nation
can be accurately gauged by the number of individuals within that race
or nation practicing birth control.

With very few exceptions, a large family betokens stupidity, poverty
and ignorance. It is the poor, the stupid and the ignorant who are
burdened with children and, in turn, that burden keeps them stupid,
poor and ignorant. A vicious circle which seems hard to break.

=The Human Milch Cow.= Many a time when beholding some miserable
female from the slums wrecked by repeated childbearing, dwarfed in
mind, deformed in body, I have felt that sexual relations between her
and her mate had probably reached the level at which they could only by
an unusual stretch of one's imagination, be even distantly connected
with love. To her and to her mate, every embrace, except after the
onset of pregnancy, meant added suffering, added expense, further
physical degradation and decay.

Since the "nice" people, however, know the remedy and apply it, why
bother any longer? Because, while normally intelligent men and women
know how to avoid pregnancy and to whom to turn when an accident
happens, the greatest uncertainty about contraception obsesses their
minds and panicky fears bring about many catastrophes when the
unwelcome fruit must be removed from the mother's body.

Thousands of men and woman, enlightened in the mysteries of
contraception by some one who is little less ignorant than themselves,
are chilled in their enjoyment of lawful love by the thought of
possible danger.

Many women accept their husbands caresses in fear and trembling and
many, imagining that there is a close connection between orgasm and
pregnancy succeed in making themselves frigid, which leads to neurotic
disturbances in the wife and unhappiness for both mates. Many husbands
never dare to "let themselves go" unless it be in the arms of a
prostitute who is "wise" and can "take care of herself." Many a woman
has deceived her husband because a wise "man of the world" assured her
that she ran no risk of pregnancy in his arms.

=The Nightmare of Abortion.= And, if in spite of all, an
"accident" happens, what is the mental state of the woman who calls
at the "unethical" practitioner's office? While such an operation
practiced with a modicum of skill may be harmless, the dread fear of
possible consequences is quite able to kill the woman.

Fear may bring forth any morbid symptom, from an embolus to violent
suppuration.

Fear, on the other hand, on which the advocates of suppressive measures
rely, hardly ever leads anyone to continence or prevents any one from
resorting to abortion.

Legal obstacles to contraceptive education attain only one result. They
make married love risky and unpleasant, kill many a young woman and, in
the case of neurotic mothers, allow one morbid generation to bring into
this world another morbid generation.

=The Plight of the Neurotic Woman.= Many neurotic women imagine that
they hate their husbands and rationalise that hatred by bringing up
many absurd, imaginary charges against them. To them their husbands
symbolise pregnancy.

Many neurotic mothers, who did not wish to bear another child, often
compensate for their lack of real love for the unwelcome child by an
absurd, exaggerated tenderness which spoils the child or develops
morbid fears (the fear they might hurt or kill the child, fear as to
the child's health or welfare) which wreck the child's mental balance
and not infrequently land the mother in a sanatarium.

A neurotic woman I treated was obsessed by the fear that she might
some day kill her husband and children. Several years ago she had had
an abortion performed by a midwife whom she did not trust. Septic
poisoning set in and she hovered between life and death for several
months. A great fear of death drove her into reading many religious
books. She came to the conclusion that she had committed a murder.

But her husband, having impregnated her, was more guilty than she,
for he was the cause of it all. Hence, her insane logic added, he and
she would be better off dead than leading a sinful life. She should,
therefore, kill him and kill herself. Furthermore, her children being
the offspring of murderers, must be themselves tainted with criminal
tendencies and should also be saved from a life of crime. When she was
brought to me she had attempted to kill the entire family by turning
on the gas faucets all over the house about two o'clock in the morning.

The lawmakers who prevented that woman from having an operation
performed legally, (which would remove the fear of crime) safely, by a
reputable practitioner, (which would remove the fear of consequences),
openly, (which would remove the fear of social ostracism), would
have been responsible for the death of several people, had she not
accidentally awakened her husband by upsetting a chair on her way back
to her bed.

There are thousands of neurotics, suffering from a feeling of
inferiority, who are unfit to become mothers until their morbidity has
been cured by psychotherapy, and who, if allowed to bear children, will
train a new generation to behave in a negative, neurotic, socially
baneful way.

=The Children of Neurotic Mothers=, in whom the fear and hatred of
sex and love is rampant, will some day become prostitutes or puritans,
both of them degrading love equally.

I cannot follow Freud when he states that every neurosis has its root
in a failure of the love life, but some of the artificial obstacles
created by a stupid puritanical civilisation between man and the
full realisation of his sexual goal have not infrequently wrecked a
life which, neurotically oriented as it was, might have gone on, in a
socially tolerable way, for years and perhaps until the individual's
death.

Difficulties due to the use of improper or misunderstood contraceptive
appliances, the terrors of pregnancy, actual or expected, the fear
of abortion, the sufferings following abortion in a complex-ridden
organism, have too often upset a balance which at best was precarious.

=Birth Control and Indulgence.= Certain critics of birth control
attack it on the ground that it would lead to "overindulgence" of the
sex relationship. Those people are generally unprepossessing, worn,
individuals who are trying to compensate for their sexual weakness by
making a virtue out of an unavoidable inferiority. Their opposition to
what they call "overindulgence" (one thing which nature hardly ever
allows, barring rare morbid cases of priapism) is grotesque in the case
of married couples.

More unions are wrecked by underindulgence due to fear, ignorance of
the mates or inhibitions on the part of one or both, than to indulgence
of the normal kind.

Anything which prevents or discourages the normal exchange of sexual
caresses between those legally entitled to each others enjoyment is
pernicious, antisocial and antibiological for, as Grace Potter writes:

"Mating has to do with other creation than that of new human beings. It
has to do with every kind of creation--a new state, a poem, a picture,
a great bridge, a happier world. Mating is concerned with repeopling
the world but also with regeneration of the individual, opening his
capacities to growth. Who shall say that the one is not as important
as the other? If the second were not as important as the first there
would have been hardly any advance in human culture. Of all the errors
incident to the development of human beings, in their struggle to
attain a consciousness that makes them more than animals, none has had
wider ill-effects than our misuse of love.

"There are two equally unfortunate attitudes toward love which perhaps
grow out of each other. The one is the puritan attitude and the other
is the vulgar one. The puritan attitude is that sex impulses are
somehow vile and so, altho they give pleasure, must be denied. The
vulgar attitude takes it for granted that sex impulses are vile but as
they are pleasant are to be accepted. The one tends to deny physical
values to love. This is suppression. The other tends to deny tender
values to love. That is suppression also. They have neither one known
love. And finally the puritan becomes incapable of tenderness and the
vulgar becomes equally incapable of physical expression. It is not a
beautiful picture.

"The healthy attitude is this: The sex impulse is not degrading any
more than any other impulse is. It is a force as gravity is a force.
Those human beings achieve beauty and harmony who correlate sexual
impulses harmoniously with all their other impulses."[3]

"In spite of the age-long teachings that sex life in itself is
unclean," Margaret Sanger writes in "Woman and the New Race," the
world has been moving to a realization that A GREAT LOVE BETWEEN A MAN
AND A WOMAN IS A HOLY THING freighted with great responsibilities for
spiritual growth. The fear of unwanted children removed, the assurance
that she will have a sufficient amount of time in which to develop
her love life to its greatest beauty, with its comradeship in many
fields--these will lift woman by the very soaring quality of her
innermost self to spiritual heights that few have attained. Then the
coming of the eagerly desired children will but enrich life in all its
avenues, rather than enslave and impoverish it as do unwanted ones
to-day.

"What healthier grounds for the growth of sound morals could possibly
exist than the ample spiritual life of the woman just depicted? Free
to follow the feminine spirit, which dwells in the sanctuary of her
nature, she will, in her daily life, give expression to that high
idealism which is the fruit of that spirit when it is unhampered and
unviolated.

"The love for her mate will flower in beauty of deeds that are pure
because they are the natural expression of her physical, mental and
spiritual being. The love for desired children will come to blossom in
a spirituality that is high because it is free to reach the heights.

"=The Moral Force of Woman's Nature Will be Unchained=, and of its own
dynamic power will uplift her to a plane unimagined by those holding
fast to the old standards of church morality. Love is the greatest
force of the universe; freed of its bonds of submission and unwanted
progeny, it will formulate and compel of its own nature observance to
standards of purity far beyond the highest conception of the average
moralist."

=The Passing of the Double Standard.= "Birth Control in
philosophy and practice," Margaret Sanger writes in "THE PIVOT
OF CIVILIZATION," is the destroyer of the dualism in the
old sex code. It denies that the only purpose of sexual activity
is procreation; it also denies that sex should be reduced to the
level of sensual lust or that woman should permit herself to be the
instrument of its satisfaction. In increasing and differentiating her
love demands, woman must elevate sex into another sphere, whereby
it may subserve and enhance the possibility of individual and human
expression. Man will gain in this no less than woman; for in the
age-old enslavement of woman he has enslaved himself; and in the
liberation of womankind, all of humanity will experience the joys of a
newer and fuller freedom."




                              CHAPTER XXX

                    THE PASSING OF HUSBAND WORSHIP


While thousands of healthy people, men and women, rejoice over the fact
that woman of the modern type is coming to the fore, there are many
"calamity howlers," male and female, who bid us pause and consider the
direful consequences which they fear (that is, hope), this new stage in
the development of mankind will bring to the world.

Dr. Arabella Kenealy in "Feminism and Sex Extinction" forebodes the
passing of whatever is masculine in the male. Her arguments are not
very logical but they are interesting. She believes that "two fates
await woman unless she rids herself of contempt for functions and
duties purely hers, feminism and feministicism. She is handicapped
every month for two or three days by weakness or pain. The craze to do
men's work will result in man's emasculation.

"The desire to figure in legislation far from stiffening the manly
caliber of weak men will still further enervate them. Members
of either sex are not capable of doing their best work while in
association. Sex rivalries are excited. Sex ascendency is created.
Man inherits from his mother some of woman's apprehension, foresight
and altruism as required to present woman's bent and viewpoint. More
of it would be superfluous. The numerical preponderance of women must
ultimately swamp masculine initiative in state affairs unless the
political functions of the sexes are separated."

Why the process should be more baneful for men than it has been for
women who, for countless generations have been decidedly "swamped in
state affairs" is not very evident.

=Is Man's Virility Declining?= An editorial writer in the New York
Medical Journal also foresees degeneration ahead unless the male
retains his mastery: "The yielding by man to the other sex of masculine
essential rights and obligations is a symptom of declining virility,
physical and mental."

Another medical writer sounds a different alarm: "Overworked woman
may impair the constitutional vigor of man, while she works with
him. She is kept up by nervous excitement, by strong tea or drugs.
In short, woman is fussy. In a stress of work she will work on with
crimson cheeks and growing irritation, while man will put on his hat
and calmly resort to the nearest lunch room. Women by their eternal
high pressure as heads of departments are making nervous wrecks of
themselves."

Finally there comes Havelock Ellis, usually less panicky, who thinks
he has noticed a distinct degeneration in the young man of today.
"These weak-chinned, neurotic young men are no match at all for the
heavy-jawed resolute young women feminist methods are creating. The
yielding to women of masculine rights is a symptom of declining
virility. Equality in all things yielded, pride in himself, in his
work, gone, he will descend to the state of the decadent savage who
keeps as many wives to work for him as their work for him enables him
to keep."

=There is Undue Pessimism in All Those Warnings.= Woman has not become
brutish as some writers claim, nor has man become effeminate. Woman
has simply gained a clearer knowledge of her latent powers and the war
has provided her with a touchstone for her physical resistance and
endurance.

The work woman had to do during the war, which she had never suspected
she could do, for until then it had been considered as man's work, has
not "masculinised" her but it has rid many "delicate flowers" of their
morbid belief in the fragile character of their constitution.

Male man is not in danger of passing out of existence but one variety
of man is doomed, the type which has always wished to mate with the two
types of women which, in the preceding chapter, I declared doomed, the
doll and the flirt.

 =The Wise Husband.= That almost extinct species is the type of husband
 who speakes of HIS wife, who knows "women" and what is "good" for
 them, the home Jehovah, all-knowing and all-powerful, who must be
 served and obeyed, who, on his return from work must find his wife
 ready to entertain him if so he wishes, or to plunge back into the
 depths of the kitchen if his mood so requires, the husband who knows
 that he is the aim and goal of his wife's existence.

A ridiculous old man, abandoned by his too young wife, made to the
reporters a statement betraying sadly the infinite conceit of that
type: "She will return to me because I love her so."

A most unprepossessing man was bewailing in my office the fact that his
wife had grown sexually indifferent to him. I advised him not to compel
her to have intercourse with him against her will, especially as he
was diseased. He naïvely remarked: "But she is my wife."

That type of husband, in other words, considers a wife as a chattel,
to be submitted to any sort of legal indignity because she is "only a
female." He may force motherhood upon her to demonstrate his doubtful
virility or to protect his jealous egotism. He would accept with
enthusiasm Goldschmidt's theories which I presented for what they were
worth in the chapter on Virginity, and according to which, woman is
soft wax and characterless, waiting to be shaped into a personality by
her husband's caresses.

Scientific investigators of a more reliable type than Goldschmidt and
who avoid drawing "yellow" conclusions from their labors, have supplied
the reading world with facts which should cause the Jehovah husband to
fear for his lofty position.

=Is the Male Indispensable?= Jacques Loeb and others have demonstrated
that as far as the physical results of love, the continuance of the
race, is concerned, the male may not be absolutely indispensable.

Loeb had shown that almost anything which causes the protoplasm of the
egg to separate itself from its membrane is sufficient to introduce
"life" into that curious organism which until then only holds
possibilities of life.

Nature, in order to produce one individual demands two principles, one
male and one female principle. She must have one egg which is modified
by some product of the male organism, pollen or sperm.

=Modern Scientists Have Beaten Nature at Her Own Game= of
creation; they have taken one egg, the female principle and proceeded
to fertilise that egg without any male product whatsoever.

The experiment has only been made on low forms of animal life, sea
urchins and the like, but the egg of the sea urchin is not different in
any essential respect from the egg of the human species.

By taking unfecundated eggs and placing them for two minutes in a
mixture of sea water and acetic, or butyric, or valerianic acid, then
placing them back in sea water and twenty minutes later, immersing
them for about an hour in hypertonic sea water or sugar solution, and
finally returning them to sea water, Loeb was able to bring to life
young larvæ. A French scientist, Delage, repeating the same experiments
managed to keep those larvæ alive until the time of their sexual
maturity.

Loeb also succeeded in fertilising eggs by placing them in the blood
serum of cows, sheep, pigs or rabbits.

Mathews has fertilised some by shaking them gently for a period of time.

=Twins To Order.= Loeb and others have gone further even than that
and produced not only single individuals but twins, triplets, etc.

The secrets of nature's laboratory are being revealed more and more
clearly from day to day.

The conceited fathers who imagine that the bringing into life of twins
is a symptom of their powerful virility must learn that a mere chemical
phenomenon called _osmosis_ is responsible for the over-fertility of
some wives.

Remove from sea water sea urchin's eggs and place them for fifteen
minutes or so in ordinary water. The density of water being lower than
that of sea water, the eggs will absorb a great deal of water and burst
open. A drop of protoplasm will come out at the break in the membrane.
Replace the exploded egg into sea water and two larvæ will hatch out of
it. Separate the two portions of the exploded egg and the twins will be
as healthy as tho they had been allowed to grow for a while in Siamese
style.

By repeating the experiment, Loeb has produced not only twins but
triplets and quadruplets, all normal and growing out of the same egg
which was only meant originally to produce one urchin.

One can understand how a variation in the pressure of the liquids
surrounding the human egg may lead to the same result.

While scientists have created living beings by using the female
principles as a basis, they have not thus far attained any results by
experimenting with the male principle alone.

=The Mother is the Race= apparently and the stubbornness of man
in claiming and fighting for the principle of masculine superiority
is apparently due to his obscure feeling that after all he is not
indispensable.

The more vociferous the claim, the weaker generally the basis for that
claim. In certain forms of insanity, the more the organism is destroyed
by disease the more extravagant the statements are which the insane man
makes about himself, claiming power, wealth, health, youth, beauty, etc.

At least one animal species, the bees, have placed the male on that
footing. The male bee represents a convenient and pleasant means of
bringing about the fecundation of the eggs. After his chemical part
has been played, however, no one takes him seriously and his official
existence ends. Certain spiders and other insects consider the male in
the same light, some of them killing and eating the male as soon as his
fecundating activities have come to an end.

The feminine domination, if it should ever implant itself into our
world would undoubtedly lead to the absurdities, the exaggerations and
the repressions which are the result of our man made civilisation.

=Matriarchal Communities of the Past= in which the woman was the
head of the family and probably of the state and matriarchial groups of
Tibet have not left visible tokens of their worth as a family system.
As they preceded the present family system however, it may be that
all traces of their achievements have been obliterated by time. The
Tibetan experiment may have been blighted by unfavorable geographical
conditions and rendered as barren as the Mongolian patriarchal
experiments in a neighboring part of the world.

Man as a means of fecundation is not likely to be discarded by normal
women but his prestige is likely to decrease as the secret of his
mysterious power becomes better known.

The passing of the smug, self satisfied Jehovah husband, a neurotic in
every case, is in sight and his passing will facilitate the adaptation
of some of the inadapted women I mentioned in the preceding chapter,
some of whom fail to find love, and some of whom do not dare to seek it.

=The Successful Modern Woman is Rather Conceited.= Some of the things I
said about female artists applies in a great measure to the woman who
in business or in a profession has managed to make her mark.

After struggling years for a certain object which she has at last
attained, she is naturally loath to surrender her personality to the
average husband of the self-styled masculine type.

She at times resorts to homosexualism in an effort to retain her
independence and yet satisfy her love cravings without submitting to a
domination which she feels to be unjustified.

=The Terrors of The Climateric.= The passing of the Jehovah husband
will also ease a process of woman's (and man's) life which has to this
day held countless terrors to the uninitiated, the climacteric.

To the old-fashioned and the gullible woman, the change of life meant
the end of life as a female. The stupid man, who is constantly
endeavoring to subdue his mate thru disparagement and kills speedily
her youth, her enthusiasm and her hopes by repeating constantly the
trashy "At your age, my dear," is in a great measure responsible for
transforming that harmless phenomenon into a painful crisis, mental and
physical.

The crisis of the "Dangerous Age," to use Karin Michaelis's expression,
is generally due to the clash of a weak masochistic female with a weak
and sadistic male, a clash in which, owing to age and the staleness of
the mates, affection has no redeeming, consoling physical features.

=The Masculine Man is in No Danger of Passing Away= and he will for
ever be as attractive to woman as the feminine woman is to him.

As Shaw said, what has been killed in men by the growth of feminism is
"not masculinity but boorishness," a characteristic, not of the strong
but of the weak, who is trying to compensate for his weakness and to
conceal it. What has been killed in woman is not feminine sweetness but
overfeminine silliness which woman used as a deceptive weapon against
the domineering male.

In a world which grants equal opportunities to men and women, no
husband will be able to justify or excuse his treatment of a woman
by saying "She is my wife." He will have to remain her lover in order
to hold her. No wife will be able to make the home hideous and, at
the same time, brandish over her husband's head the certificate of
enslavement called a marriage license. She will have, in order to
compete with the free women whose personality will impose itself upon
her environment, to remain his mistress.

Every step ahead which the world takes fortunately proves a new step
which love takes in the direction of completeness and freedom from
sordidness and ugliness.




                             CHAPTER XXXI

                    PERFECT MATRIMONIAL ADJUSTMENTS


While marriage, regardless of whatever form it may assume, has always
been mentioned in this book as unavoidably related to love, we must
not blink the fact that marriage and love are two absolutely different
things forced into frequent association by social and economic
necessity.

Love is an involuntary and compulsory craving which draws a male and a
female into the closest possible union for the purpose of mutual sexual
gratification, generally followed by conception and reproduction.

=Marriage a Compromise.= Marriage on the other hand is merely a
compromise between the positive individual cravings which demand the
most complete and frequent gratification of the love urge, regardless
of its consequences, and the negative feeling which causes the
community to shirk all possible responsibilities incurred by the
individual, among others, the support of pregnant or lactating females
and of helpless infants.

Unless the community owns mother and child and can exploit their labor
or receive their cash value (slavery system), it demands that their
owner, the impregnator of the woman and procreator of the child, supply
food and shelter for both.

Marriage is also a compromise between two individual cravings which may
not be synchronised, as the male's desire for the female may subside
before her desire for him does, or reciprocally.

Through the institution of marriage the community protects itself
against new burdens directly by penalties (sentences against wife
deserters or those who abandon children) and indirectly by protecting
the mates against their own cravings for whose duration they are not
responsible (laws against bigamy or adultery, etc.).

=Considering the Artificial Character of the Marriage Union=, and
at the same time the psychological importance of its durability as far
as the mental health of the off-spring is concerned, one of the most
pressing duties of the community (and one which it never performs),
should be to devise all the possible ways and means whereby the sex
cravings of both mates could be helped to retain their freshness and
strength as long as possible.

=Attractiveness an Asset.= The first thought which should be forced
into the minds of modern men and women is that attractiveness is a
positive asset not only to woman but to man. In classic Greece, a
man could not be merely good, he had to be beautiful too. By "good"
the Greek meant "fit" but in the compound word which implied both
qualities, _kalos_, beauty came first.

Cravings being awakened and kept alive by certain fetishes, the
individual should be trained to recognize his and his mate's fetishism
and to make all possible efforts to retain, if necessary by artificial
means, the fetishes which lead to the awakening of erotism between him
and his mate.

=The Average Man or Woman of Forty is a Sorry Sight.= Yet a
little intelligence would compel them to retain or regain the physical
idiosyncrasies they exhibited at the time of their marriage.

Too many women consider it sinful to devote much time to their physical
appearance and the care of their body. In a man, any attempt to make
himself attractive is considered in stupid middle-class circles as a
stigma of effeminacy.

The "pretty" man has always been despised by men and women, and
endocrinology has confirmed their judgment by revealing to us that he
is a glandular weakling. Between the pretty man and the attractive man,
however, there is a far cry.

While the American movies, generally speaking, are catering to the
weak-minded and the unimaginative, they have, in their search for a
bait where-with to catch audiences, rendered mankind a signal service
by starring the kind of man which would have passed muster in ancient
Greece, beautiful and fit.

=Athletic, if not Acrobatic, Movie Idols= present to the female part
of the audience a complex of physical qualities which women will
gradually demand from their mates. It is regrettable that women
should not attend prize fights in large numbers, for the sight of the
godlike participants in those affrays would force them to institute
enlightening comparisons between professional fighters and the average
male.

Besides retaining or regaining their fetishes, human beings should make
a special effort not to let those fetishes lose their power.

=The Worst Foe of Married Happiness.= Balzac in his "Physiology of
Marriage" says that the married have to wage a constant fight with a
monster which devours everything: Habit. Every stimulus, as we know,
pleasant or unpleasant, loses its power when applied continuously or
too frequently.

It is only for the first minute or so that the ice cold shower causes
our naked skin to tingle with excitement. As soon as the reaction sets
in and the capillaries fill with red blood, the pleasant sensation of
the water needles becomes dulled.

After holding our hand for a minute in hot water, we no longer
realise the high temperature of the liquid and in order to continue
to experience the feeling of heat we must continually raise the
temperature of the water.

And likewise we may grow so accustomed to one source of erotic
stimulation that we become indifferent to it.

=Friendship May Survive the Death of Sexual Love=, provided the sex
desire has died in both mates at the same time. When desire dies off in
the wife first and is not replaced by aversion, the situation may be
very simple for she can still satisfy her more ardent mate and derive
some gratification therefrom.

When the man's desire dies first, on the other hand, there may arise
unpleasant complications. A man may be impotent with a woman whom he
loves tenderly but no longer desires sexually and yet be potent with
some other woman to whom he is not completely "accustomed."

Jealousy on the part of the wife may then prevent the advent of the
platonic friendship which is not uncommon between old married mates,
altho Montaigne denies the possibility of its existence.

Modern mates, conscious of that danger, have now and then devised ways
and means to combat Balzac's monster.

Not so long ago a well-known woman writer announced that she was
planning to marry a certain man with whom, however, she did not intend
to live day after day. The experiment has many chances of success if
jealousy does not complicate the situation.

I suggested to reporters last summer, when two famous artists parted
company, that their union might have been of longer duration if one of
them had lived at the Plaza while the other was stopping at the St.
Regis.

=Married People Should Separate for Periods of Variable Duration= in
order that a fresh stimulation may emanate from their fetishes when
they meet again. By leading more individual lives and having separate
sets of friends, they would, besides, bring to each other a new sort
of mental pabulum and stimulation day after day. Conversation becomes
futile and unnecessary between a husband and wife who always pay and
receive calls together, attend the same spectacles and hence always see
the same side of life. Now and then we read of couples who separate
and a few years later remarry. Those few years spent apart from each
other mean for both new experiences which enrich their mind and their
conversation and make them again interesting to each other.

=The Play Function of Love.= Another factor which the monstrous
hypocrisy of puritanism makes very difficult to discuss openly and
honestly and which wrecks many promising unions is the ignorance, more
common than we suspect among married couples, of what Maurice Parmelee
in his "Personality and Behavior" has called the Play Function of Love,
a term which has been given a broader meaning by Havelock Ellis in an
article for the _Medical Review of Reviews_ for March 1921.

The average man or woman is tragically ignorant of the mission of sex.

The average man, as Ellis writes, has two aims: "to prove that he is a
man and to relieve a sexual tension.

"He too often considers himself, from traditional habits, as the active
partner in love and his own pleasure as the prime motive of the sex
communion.

"His wife, naturally adopts the complementary attitude, regards herself
as the passive partner and her pleasure as negligible.

"She has not mastered the art of love, with the result that her
whole nature remains ill-developed and unharmonized, and that she
is incapable of bringing her personality (having indeed no achieved
personality to bring) to bear effectively on the problems of society
and the world around her."

I have described in "Sex Happiness" the tragedies which result from
that form of ignorance, especially the tragedy of the unsatisfied wife,
her restlessness, her gradual dislike of her mate, her curiosity as to
what feelings she might experience if married to another man, when some
other man seems to awaken her erotism, and then the dilemma, repression
leading to neurosis, or indulgence leading into the divorce court.

=Psychoanalysis to the Rescue.= "In this matter," Ellis writes,
"we may learn a lesson from the psychoanalysts of today without
any implication that psychoanalysis is necessarily a desirable or
even possible way of attaining the revelation of love. The wiser
psychoanalysts insist that the process of liberating the individual
from outer and inner influences that repress or deform his energies and
impulses is effected by removing the inhibitions on the free play of
his nature.

"It is a process of education in the true sense, not of the suppression
of natural impulses nor even of the instillation of sound rules and
maxims for their control, not of the pressing in but of the leading out
of the individual's special tendencies.

"It removes inhibitions, even inhibitions that were placed upon the
individual, or that he consciously or unconsciously placed upon
himself, with the best moral intentions, and by so doing it allows a
larger and freer and more natively spontaneous morality to come into
play.

"It has this influence above all in the sphere of sex, where such
inhibitions have been most powerfully laid on the native impulses,
where the natural tendencies have been most surrounded by taboos and
terrors, most tinged with artificial stains of impurity and degradation
derived from alien and antiquated traditions.

"Thus the therapeutical experience of the psychoanalysts reinforce
the lessons we learn from physiology and psychology and the intimate
experiences of life."

=Wounded Egotism.= Love in marriage is endangered from another quarter:
The greatest foe of sexual desire, as I have stated several times in
this book, is wounded egotism.

A perfect matrimonial adjustment does not mean the modification of
either mate's personality. We have seen in the chapters on glands that
the normal personality is practically inadaptable, that is, nothing
short of serious sickness or a surgical operation can transform an
active person into a sluggish one and vice versa.

It is only the neurotic personality which can be adapted by the removal
of certain unconscious fears which prevent it from attaining social and
biological balance and happiness.

All psychoanalysis does in such cases is to teach the patient to accept
everything which is biologically normal in his personality.

We must then have an absolute respect for personality in ourselves
and others. We must find a socially acceptable outlet for all our
idiosyncrasies, a difficult, but never impossible task.

Lack of an outlet means a neurotic disturbance. The so-called
adaptable people are those who succeed in repressing temporarily their
cravings and denying their existence, a result which they attain at
the cost of much suffering to themselves and, indirectly, to their
environment.

=Democracy in the Home= is the prerequisite of every perfect
matrimonial adjustment.

The autocratic government of the home by a male bully of a female nag
leads to either a revolution (divorce) or to the destruction of human
material after a bitter strife, (neurotic ailments).

The bullied wife and the henpecked husband fill the offices of
neurologists, gynaecologists, psychoanalysts and sexologists. This is
the way in which the wounded ego of the defeated mate avenges itself.

The defeated mate becomes sexually disabled.

The results of maladjustment of the mates are strikingly summed up by
Kempf in his monumental work "Psychopathology":

"Upon marriage a subtle if not overt struggle occurs between the mates
for the dominant position in the contract. The big, aggressive wife
and the timid, little husband attest to the importance of organic
superiority in the adjustment, but the average marriage does not show
such organic differences. The sadistic or masochistic husband and the
masochistic or sadistic wife will certainly adjust to please their
reciprocating cravings, no matter what influence this may have upon
their children, and a sadistic wife and sadistic husband, although both
are cruel in their pleasures, will divorce each other on the charge
of the other being cruel; but it is the commonplace adjustment which
interests us most, because it is most predominant.

"Nature places an unerring punishment upon the woman, who, by
incessantly using every whim, scheme or artifice, finally succeeds
in dominating her husband. By forcing him to submit to her thousand
and one demands and coercions, within a few years, he unconsciously
becomes a submissive type and loses his sexual potency with her as the
love-object. If he does not have secret love interests which stimulate
him to strive for power, he finally loses his initiative and sexual
potency completely and must live always at a commonplace level, the
servant of more virile men: the counterpart of the subdued impotent
males of the animal herd.

"His more aggressive, selfish mate, if periodically heterosexually
erotic, will become neurotic if her moral restraints are insurpassable,
or seek a new mate whom she will again attempt to subdue. Never is she
able to realise that her selfishness makes her sexually unattractive.
The psychopathologist meets many such women whose husbands have evaded
domination by secretly depending upon the affections of another more
suitably adjusted woman."

In "The New Horizon in Love and Life," Mrs. Havelock Ellis writes "It
is more than probable that the evolved relationship of the future will
be monogamy--but a monogamy wider and more beautiful than the present
caricature of it, as the sea is wider and more delicious than a duck
pond.

"The lifelong, faithful love of one man for one woman is the exception
and not the rule. The law of affinity being as subtle and as
indefinable as the law of gravitation, we may, by and by, find it worth
while to give it its complete opportunity in those realms where it can
manifest itself most potently. We are on the wrong bridge if we imagine
that laxity is the easiest way to freedom. The bridge which will bear
us must be strong enough to support us while experiments are tried.

"What is the gospel in this matter of sexual emancipation for men
and women in the new world where love has actually come of age? It
is surely the complete economic independence of women. While man
is economically free and woman still a slave, either physically,
financially or spiritually, mankind as a whole must act as if
blindness, maimness and deafness constituted health.

"The complete independence of husband and wife is the gospel of the new
era of marriage. This is the actual matter which philosophers, parents,
philanthropists and pioneers so often ignore when teaching the new
ideals of morality. When a woman is kept by a man she is not a free
individuality either as child, wife or mistress. Imagine for a moment
a man kept by a woman as women are kept by men and a sense of humor
illuminates the absurdity of the situation between any class of evolved
human beings."

As a clever patient of mine whom I regret I cannot mention by name said
one day: "married happiness, to be lasting, requires more than sexual
cooperation of both mates, it must resolve itself into cooperative
egotism."

[Footnote 1: See Mary Sinclair's "The Life and Death of Harriet Freau."]

[Footnote 2: Kings. I, 1-2.]

[Footnote 3: Birth Control Review, April 1922.]


                                THE END




                                 INDEX


  Abortion, 295

  Active homosexuals, 167

  Adler, 32, 41, 71, 115, 130, 132, 141, 142, 170, 192, 211, 225

  Adrenals, 230

  Adrenin, 6

  Algolagnists, 188

  Androgynes, 160

  Animal love fights, 196

  "Animal" types, 87

  Antifetishes, 24, 25

  Aphrodite, 195

  Aristotle, 207

  Atavism, 194

  Attractiveness, 317

  Auditory sensations, 57


  Baby talk, 57

  Balzac, 318

  Basogas, 43

  Bees in love, 52, 53

  Beresford, 267

  Berman, Dr. Louis, 228

  Bernhardt, Sarah, 100

  Bloch, Iwan, 88

  Blood relations, 47

  Bonaparte, 192

  Bored wives, 89

  Boredom, 212

  Bottle-fed men, 20

  Bovary, Madame, 91

  Brain, cells, 16
    function of the, 7
    operations on a dog's, 13

  Breast-fed men, 20

  Brothers and sisters, 78

  Brutus, 82

  Business women, 279


  Cæsar, 180

  Calf love, 54

  Cannon, 10

  Chicago Vice Report, 108

  Childish behavior, 158

  Choice, meaning of, 11, 12

  Cigar smoking, 59

  Clean lives, 264

  Climacteric, 312

  Community's criticism, 256

  Contraception, 294

  Conversation, 321

  Cooperative egotism, 328

  Copepods, behavior of, 15

  Craig's Birds, 40

  Crile, 63

  Cybela, 196


  Dark Types, 234

  Darwin, 45

  Death dreams, 75

  Death wishes, 73, 74

  Delage, 308

  Deluded martyrs, 81

  Delusional jealousy, 147

  Democracy in the home, 325

  Demosthenes, 83

  Descartes, 162

  Displacement upward, 6

  Dissatisfied people, 216

  Divorces in the art world, 221

  Doll type, 284

  Don Juan, 92, 94, 139

  Double standard, 302

  Ductless glands, 225

  Duncan, Isadora, 100


  Economic exhibitionism, 69

  Eddy, Mary Baker, 265

  Effeminacy, 317

  Ego rampant, 139

  Electrical exchanges, 60, 63

  Ellis, Havelock, 88, 177, 286, 305, 321

  Ellis, Mrs. Havelock, 327

  Endocrinologists, 226

  Environment, 236

  Erotropism, 4

  Ethical prostitution, 113

  Eulenburg, Albert, 162, 194


  Fatherhood cravings, 69

  Fear of accidents, 76

  Fear of woman, 114

  Female artists, 218

  Feminine refinement, 277

  Ferenczi, 148 sqq.

  Fetishes, list of, 19, 20
    feminine, 21
    masculine, 21
    non-physical, 24, 25

  Fiji Islands, 42

  First Night, the right of the, 68

  Fixation, parent, 30, 31, sqq.

  Flappers, 247, 248

  Flattery, 218, 219, 220

  Flirt, the, 285

  Foot Fetishism, 18, 22
    symbolism, 24

  Forel 134

  Frazer, 44

  Freud, 23, 24, 31, 42, 49, 62, 140, 164, 165, 211, 225, 267, 297

  Friedlander, Benedikt, 183

  Friendship, 319

  Frigid wives, 245

  Frink, 137


  Galvanotropism, 4

  Genesis, 43

  Gerontophilia, 24

  Getting even, 90

  Glands, 34

  Glandular drunkenness, 193

  Glandular insufficiency, 203

  Glove fetishism, 205

  Goldschmidt, Jules, 116

  Gonads, 231

  Greek Gods, 156

  Griseldis, 195

  Gross, Dr. Otto, 184


  Habit, 310

  Hair Fetishism, 17, 26, 27

  Heart, physiology of the, 5

  Heredity, 34

  Hirschfeld, Magnus, 158, 186

  Hirth, George, 88, 89

  Holding hands, 60

  Homosexual tragedies, 179

  Husbands and lovers, 141


  Ideal Love, 269

  Identification mania, 35, 36

  Imitation, 33

  Immodest modesty, 127

  Impotence, 26

  Inbreeding, 44

  Incest fear, 42

  Independent women, 281

  Infidelity, 85

  Institution children, 101


  Jack the Ripper, 197

  Jealousy and impotence, 137

  Jesus, 67

  Jung, 32, 33, 225


  Kempf, 173, 325

  Kenealy, Dr. Arabella, 303

  King David, 261

  Kiss, 60, 61

  Krafft-Ebing, 162

  Kronos, 195


  Lean types, 235

  Leonardo da Vinci, 180

  Lesbian Love, 156

  Loeb, Jacques, 307 sqq.

  Lombroso, 105

  Lorand, 259

  Love, a compulsion, 10

  Lover, the successful, 52
    the unsuccessful, 53

  Lovers of the absolute, 271


  Male artists, 218

  Male lovers, 156

  Male prostitutes, 109

  Marriage, a compromise, 315

  Masculine protest, 130

  Masked Sadism, 154

  Masoch, Leopold von Sacher, 200 sqq.

  Masochistic husbands, 206

  Matriarchal communities, 311

  Matrimonial Engineers, 238

  Messalina, 94

  Metatropism, 161

  Michael Angelo, 176

  Michaelis, Karin, 313

  Michelet, 284

  Milch cows, 293

  Milk, 59

  Mind, seat of the, 6, 7

  Mobs, 198

  Moreau de Tours, 189

  Movie Idols, 318

  Movies, 57


  Naked male dancers, 123

  Narcism, 167

  Negative Love, 176

  Negro Haters, 79

  Nerve memory, 8

  Nerves, 50

  Neurotic frigidity, 70

  Neurotic Life Plan, 33

  Neurotic motherliness, 71

  Neurotic mothers, 249, 296

  Nietzsche, 180

  Nurses, 39


  Obscene talkers, 132

  Obsessions, 27

  Oedipus Complex, 30

  Old fashioned women, 275

  Oracles, 266

  Organism, unity of, 49, 50, 51


  Paranoiacs, 147

  Parent-Child Relationship, 223

  Parmelee, Maurice, 321

  Passive homosexuals, 167

  Perfect Mothers, 246

  Personality, 239

  Personality, respect for the, 324

  Perverse birds, 164

  Phototropism, 3

  Physical incompatibility, 254

  Pimps, 109

  Pituitary, 228

  Plato, 155

  Platonic love, 63

  Play function of love, 321

  Plural love, 84

  Polyandry, 84

  Potter, Grace, 299

  Preferences, 39

  Pregnancy and Health, 242

  Priapism, 84

  Primal horde, 45

  Primitive races, 42

  Prize fights, 318

  Prohibition, 81

  Projection, 153

  Proud husbands, 289

  Psychoanalysis, 322

  Puritanical males, 129


  Rebellion against nature, 277

  Reformers, 80

  Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 207

  Rules for husbands, 134


  Sade, Marquis de, 189 sqq.

  Sadistic lovers, 213

  Sadistic mates, 215

  Sadzer, 166

  Safety devices, 170

  Safety symbols, 97

  Sallow Type, 235

  Sanger, Margaret, 300 sqq.

  Sapho, 155

  Savages, modesty among, 123

  Schneider, Kurt, 105

  Schopenhauer, 182

  Schroeder, Theodore, 265

  Sea urchins, 308

  Self love, 67

  Sensuality, 107

  Sexless jealousy, 140

  Sexless persons, 208

  Sexual Libido, 65

  Shaw, G. B., 276 sqq.

  Shoe fetishism, 18, 22, 205
    symbolism, 24

  Sight, 56

  Sinclair, May, 268

  Skooptsy, 208

  Slender types, 236

  Smell, 58

  Social pressure, 237

  Socrates, 155

  Sour grapes, 77

  Steinach, 163 sqq.

  Stekel, Wilhelm, 128, 160, 170, 183

  Sublimation, 267

  Suggestive draperies, 125

  Suttee custom, 142

  Syphilophobiacs, 80


  Tall types, 235

  Taste, 59

  Teeth, 237

  Telegony, 116

  Test of love, 75

  Third sex, 158 sqq.

  Thyroid, 230

  Touch, 60

  Transvestites, 159

  Triplets, 310

  Twins, 309

  Type, parent, 39


  Ultrafeminine, 93

  Unadapted women, 288

  Uniform fetishism, 25


  Vamps, 213

  Varietism, 84

  Vital Force, 266

  Vomiting, in pregnancy, 243

  Von Kupfer, 181, 182


  Wagner, 252

  Walker, Dr. Mary, 160

  War prisoners, 70

  Whipping, 202

  Wifehood, a profession, 282

  Wilde, Oscar, 180

  Will-to-be-the-first, 115

  Winckelman, 176

  Wise husbands, 306

  Women Sadists, 210

  Women who enjoy a beating, 209

  Wounded egotism, 324

  Wulffen, 193





End of Project Gutenberg's Psychoanalysis and Love, by AndrÃ© Tridon



