CHAPTER V

CIVILIZATION AND THEORIES OF THE UNIVERSE


The regeneration of our theory of the universe and the restoration of
civilization. A reflective theory of the universe; rationalism and
mysticism. The optimistic-ethical theory as a theory of civilization.
The regeneration of our ideas by reflection about the meaning of life.

The greatest of all the spirit’s tasks is to produce a theory of the
universe (_Weltanschauung__(_*_)_), for in such a theory all the
ideas, convictions and activities of an age have their roots, and it
is only when we have arrived at one which is compatible with
civilization that we are capable of holding the ideas and convictions
which are the conditions of civilization in general.

What is meant by a theory of the universe? It is the content of the
thoughts of society and the individuals which compose it about the
nature and object of the world in which they live, and the position
and the destiny of mankind and of individual men within it. What
significance have the society in which I live and I myself in the
world? What do we want to do in the world, what do we [pg 081] hope to
get from it, and what is our duty to it? The answer given by the
majority to these fundamental questions about existence decides what
the spirit is in which they and their age live.

Is not this putting too high the value of a theory of the universe?

At present, certainly, the majority do not, as a rule, attain to any
properly thought-out theory, nor do they feel the need of deriving
their ideas and convictions from such a source. They are in tune, more
or less, with all the tones which pervade the age in which they live.

But who are the musicians who have produced these tones? They are the
personalities who have thought out theories of the universe, and drawn
from them the ideas, more or less valuable, which are current amongst
us to-day. In this way all thoughts, whether those of individuals or
those of society, go back ultimately, in some way or other, to a
theory of the universe. Every age lives in the consciousness of what
has been provided for it by the thinkers under whose influence it
stands.

Plato was wrong in holding that the philosophers of a State should
also be its governors. Their supremacy is a different and a higher one
than that which consists in taking cognizance of laws and ordinances
and giving effect to official authority. [pg 082] They are the
officers of the general staff who sit in the background thinking out,
with more or less clearness of vision, the details of the battle which
is to be fought. Those who play their part in the public eye are the
subordinate officers who, for their variously sized units, convert the
general directions of the staff into orders of the day: namely, that
the forces will start at such and such a time, move in this or that
direction, and occupy this or that point. Kant and Hegel have
commanded millions who had never read a line of their writings, and
who did not even know that they were obeying their orders.

Those who command, whether it be in a large or a small sphere, can
only carry out what is already in the thought of the age. They do not
build the instrument on which they have to play, but are merely given
a seat at it. Nor do they compose the piece they have to play; it is
simply put before them, and they cannot alter it; they can only
reproduce it with more or less skill and success. If it is
meaningless, they cannot do much to improve it, but neither, if it is
good, can they damage it seriously.

To the question, then, whether it is personalities or ideas which
decide the fate of an age, the answer is that the age gets its ideas
from personalities. If the thinkers of a certain period produce a
worthy theory of the universe, then ideas pass into currency [pg 083]
which guarantee progress; if they are not capable of such production,
then decadence sets in in some form or other. Every theory of the
universe draws after it its own special results in history.

The fall of the Roman Empire in spite of that empire’s having over it
so many rulers of conspicuous ability, may be traced ultimately to the
fact that ancient philosophy produced no theory of the universe with
ideas which tended to that empire’s preservation. With the rise of
Stoicism, as the definitive answer of the philosophic thought of
antiquity, the fate of the world down to the Middle Ages was decided.
The idea of resignation, noble idea as it is, could not ensure
progress in a world-wide empire. The efforts of its strongest emperors
were useless. The yarn with which they had to weave was rotten.

In the eighteenth century, under the rule, in most places, of
insignificant rococo-sovereigns and rococo-ministers, a progressive
movement began among the nations of Europe which was unique in the
history of the world. Why? The thinkers of the Illuminati and of
rationalism produced a worthy theory of the universe from which worthy
ideas were spread among mankind.

But when history began to shape itself in accordance with these ideas,
the thought which had [pg 084] produced the progress came to a halt,
and we have now a generation which is squandering the precious
heritage it has received from the past, and is living in a world of
ruins, because it cannot complete the building which that past began.
Even had our rulers and statesmen been less short-sighted than they
actually were, they would not in the long run have been able to avert
the catastrophe which burst upon us. Both the inner and the outer
collapse of civilization were latent in the circumstances produced by
the prevalent view of the universe. The rulers, small and great alike,
did not [nothing but] act in accordance with the spirit of the age.

With the disappearance of the influence exerted by the _Aufklärung_,
rationalism, and the serious philosophy of the early nineteenth
century, the seeds were sown of the world-war to come. Then began to
disappear also the ideas and convictions which would have made
possible a solution on right lines of the controversies which arise
between nations.

Thus the course of events brought us into a position in which we had
to get along without any real theory of the universe. The collapse of
philosophy and the rise and influence of scientific modes of thought
made it impossible to arrive at an idealist theory which should
satisfy thought. Moreover, our age is poorer in deep thinkers than
perhaps any preceding one. There were a few [pg 085] strong spirits
who, with varied knowledge, and with devoted efforts, offered the
world some patchwork thought; there were some dazzling comets; but
that was all that was granted us. Their products in the way of world
theories were good enough to interest a circle of academic culture, or
to delight a few believing followers, but the people as a whole were
entirely untouched.

We began, therefore, to persuade ourselves that it was, after all,
possible to get through without any theory of the universe. The
feeling that we needed to stir ourselves up to ask questions about the
world and life, and to come to a decision upon them, gradually died
away. In the unreflective condition to which we had surrendered
ourselves, we took, to meet the claims of our own life and the
nation’s life, the chance ideas provided by our feeling for reality.
During more than a generation and a half we had proof enough and to
spare that the theory which is the result of absence of theory is the
most worthless of all, involving not only ruin to the spiritual life,
but ruin universal. For where there is no general staff to think out
its plan of campaign for any generation its subordinate officers lead
it, as in actual warfare so in the sphere of ideas, from one
profitless adventure to another.

The reconstruction of our age, then, can begin [pg 086] only with a
reconstruction of a theory of the universe. There is hardly anything
more urgent in its claim on us than this which seems to be so far off
and abstract. Only when we have made ourselves at home again in the
solid thought-building of a theory which can support a civilization,
and when we take from it, all of us in co-operation, ideas which can
stimulate our life and work, only then can there again arise a society
which shall possess ideals with magnificent aims and be able to bring
these into effective agreement with reality. It is from new ideas that
we must build history anew.

For individuals as for the community, life without a theory of things
is a pathological disturbance of the higher capacity for
self-direction.

       *       *       *       *       *

What conditions must a theory of the universe fulfil to enable it to
create a civilization?

First, and defined generally, it must be the product of thought.
Nothing but what is born of thought and addresses itself to thought
can be a spiritual power affecting the whole of mankind. Only what has
been well turned over in the thought of the many, and thus recognized
as truth, possesses a natural power of conviction which will work on
other minds and will continue to be effective. Only where there is a
constant appeal to the need [pg 087] of a reflective view of things
are all man’s spiritual capacities called into activity.

Our age has a kind of artistic prejudice against a reflective theory
of the universe. We are still children of the Romantic movement to a
greater extent than we realize. What that movement produced in
opposition to the _Aufklärung_ and to rationalism seems to us valid
for all ages against any theory that would found itself solely on
thought. In such a theory of the universe we can see beforehand the
world dominated by a barren intellectualism, convictions governed by
mere utility, and a shallow optimism, which together throw a wet
blanket over all human genius and enthusiasm.

In a great deal of the opposition which it offered to rationalism the
reaction of the early nineteenth century was right. Nevertheless it
remains true that it despised and distorted what was, in spite of all
its imperfections, the greatest and most valuable manifestation of the
spiritual life of man that the world has yet seen. Down through all
circles of cultured and uncultured alike there prevailed at that time
a belief in thought and a reverence for truth. For that reason alone
that age stands higher than any which preceded it, and much higher
than our own.

At no price must the feelings and phrases of [pg 088] Romanticism be
allowed to prevent our generation from forming a clear conception of
what reason really is. It is no dry intellectualism which would
suppress all the manifold movements of our inner life, but the
totality of all the functions of our spirit in their living action and
interaction. In it our intellect and our will hold that mysterious
intercourse which determines the character of our spiritual being.
These fundamental ideas which it produces contain all that we can feel
or imagine about our destiny and that of mankind, and give our whole
being its direction and its value. The enthusiasm which comes from
thought has the same relation to that which rises from the cauldron of
feeling as the wind which sweeps the heights has to that which eddies
about between the hills. If we venture once more to seek help from the
light of reason, we shall no longer keep ourselves down at the level
of a generation which has ceased to be capable of enthusiasm, but
shall follow the deep and noble passion inspired by great and sublime
ideals. This will so fill and expand our being that that by which we
now live will seem to be merely a petty kind of excitement, and will
disappear.

Rationalism is more than a movement of thought which realized itself
at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth
centuries. It is a necessary phenomenon in all normal spiritual life.
[pg 089] All real progress in the world is in the last analysis
produced by rationalism.

It is true that the intellectual productions of the period which we
designate historically as the rationalistic are incomplete and
unsatisfactory, but the principle, which was then established, of
basing our views of the universe on thought and thought alone, is
valid for all time. Even if the tree’s earliest fruit did not ripen
perfectly, the tree itself remains, nevertheless, the tree of life for
the life of our spirit.

All the movements that have claimed to take the place of rationalism
stand far below it in the matter of achievement. From speculative
thought, from history, from feeling, from æsthetics, from science,
they tried to construct a theory of the universe, grubbing at
haphazard in the world around them instead of excavating
scientifically. Rationalism alone chose the right place for its
digging, and dug systematically, according to plan. If it found only
metal of small value, that was because, with the means at its
disposal, it could not go deep enough. Impoverished and ruined as we
are because we sought as mere adventurers, we must make up our minds
to sink another shaft in the ground where rationalism worked, and to
go down through all the strata to see whether we cannot find the gold
which must certainly be there.

[pg 090]

To think out to the end a theory of the universe which has been
produced by thought—that is the only possible way of finding our
bearings amid the confusion of the world of thought to-day.

Philosophical, historical, and scientific questions with which it was
not capable of dealing overwhelmed the earlier rationalism like an
avalanche, and buried it in the middle of its journey. The new
rational theory of the universe must work its way out of this chaos.
Leaving itself freely open to the whole influence of the world of
fact, it must explore every path offered by reflection and knowledge
in its effort to reach the ultimate meaning of being and life, and to
see whether it can solve some of the riddles which they present.

The ultimate knowledge, in which man recognizes his own being as a
part of the All, belongs, they say, to the realm of mysticism, by
which is meant that he does not reach it by the method of ordinary
reflection, but somehow or other lives himself into it.

But why assume that the road of thought must suddenly stop at the
frontier of mysticism? It is true that pure reason has hitherto called
a halt whenever it came into this neighbourhood, for it was unwilling
to go beyond the point at which it could still exhibit everything as
part of a smooth, logical plan. Mysticism, on its side, always
depreciated [pg 091] pure reason as much as it could, to prevent at
all costs the idea from gaining currency that it was in any way bound
to give an account to reason. And yet, although they refuse to
recognize each other, the two belong to each other.

It is in reason that intellect and will, which in our nature are
mysteriously bound up together, seek to come to a mutual
understanding. The ultimate knowledge that we strive to acquire is
knowledge of life, which intellect looks at from without, will from
within. Since life is the ultimate object of knowledge, our ultimate
knowledge is necessarily our thinking experience of life, but this
does not lie outside the sphere of reason, but within reason itself.
Only when the will has thought out its relation to the intellect, has
come, as far as it can, into line with it, has penetrated it, and in
it become logical, is it in a position to comprehend itself, so far as
its nature allows this, as a part of the universal will-to-live and a
part of being in general. If it merely leaves the intellect on one
side, it loses itself in confused imaginings, while the intellect,
which, like the rationalism of the past, will not allow that in order
to understand life it must finally lose itself in thinking experience,
renounces all hope of constructing a deep and firmly based theory of
the universe.

[pg 092]

Thus reflection, when pursued to the end, lead somewhere and somehow
to a living mysticism which is for all men everywhere a necessary
element of thought.

Doubts whether the mass of men can ever attain to that level of
reflection about themselves and the world which is demanded by a
reflective theory of the universe, are quite justifiable if the man of
to-day is taken as an example of the race. But he, with his diminished
need of thought, is a pathological phenomenon.

In reality there is given in the mental endowment of the average man a
capacity for thought which to the individual makes the creation of a
reflective theory of things of his own not only possible, but under
normal conditions even a necessity. The great movements of
illumination in ancient and modern times help to maintain the
confident belief that there is in the mass of mankind a power of
thought on fundamentals which can be roused to activity. This belief
is strengthened by observation of mankind and intercourse with the
young. A fundamental impulse to reflect about the universe stirs us
during those years in which we begin to think independently. Later on
we let it languish, even though feeling clearly that we thereby
impoverish ourselves and become less capable of what is good. We are
like springs of water which no longer run [pg 093] because they have
not been watched and have gradually become choked with rubbish.

More than any other age has our own neglected to watch the thousand
springs of thought; hence the drought in which we are pining. But if
we only go on to remove the rubbish which conceals the water, the
sands will be irrigated again, and life will spring up where hitherto
there has been only a desert.

Certainly there are guides and the guided in the department of
world-theories, as in others. So far the independence of the mass of
men remains a relative one. The question is only whether the influence
of the guides leads to dependence or independence. The latter brings
with it a development in the direction of truthfulness; the former
means the death of that virtue.

Every being who calls himself a man is meant to develop into a real
personality within a reflective theory of the universe which he has
created for himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

But of what character must the theory be if ideas and convictions
about civilization are to be based on it?

That theory of the universe is optimistic which [pg 094] gives
existence the preference as against non-existence and thus affirms
life as something possessing value in itself. From this attitude to
the universe and to life results the impulse to raise existence, in so
far as our influence can affect it, to its highest level of value.
Thence originates activity directed to the improvement of the living
conditions of individuals, of society, of nations and of humanity,
from which spring the external achievements of civilization, the
lordship of spirit over the powers of nature, and the higher social
organization.

Ethics is the activity of man directed to secure the inner perfection
of his own personality. In itself it is quite independent of whether
the theory of the universe is pessimistic or optimistic. But its
sphere of action is contracted or widened according as it appears in
connection with a theory of the first or the second type.

In the determinist-pessimistic theory of the universe, as we have it
in the thought of the Brāhmans or of Schopenhauer, ethics has nothing
whatever to do with the objective world. It aims solely at securing
the self-perfection of the individual as this comes to pass in inner
freedom and disconnection from the world and the spirit of the world.

But the scope of ethics is extended in proportion [pg 095] as it
develops and strengthens a connection with a theory of the universe
which is affirmative toward the world and life. Its aim is now the
inner perfection of the individual and at the same time the direction
of his activity so as to take effect on other men and on the objective
world. It is true that in face of the objective world and its spirit
ethics no longer holds itself up to man as an aim in itself. By its
means man is to become capable of acting among men and in the world as
a higher and purer force, and thus to do his part towards the
actualization of the ideal of general progress.

Thus the optimistic-ethical theory of the universe works in
partnership with ethics to produce civilization. Neither is capable of
doing so by itself. Optimism supplies confidence that the
world-process has somehow or other a spiritual-sensible aim, and that
the improvement of the general relations of the world and of society
promotes the spiritual-moral perfection of the individual. From ethics
is derived ability to develop the purposive state of mind necessary to
produce action on the world and society and to cause the co-operation
of all our achievements to secure the spiritual and moral perfection
of the individual which is the final end of civilization.

Once we have recognized that the energies which spring out of a theory
of the universe, and impel us to [pg 096] create a civilization, are
rooted in the ethical and the optimistic, we get light on the question
why and how our ideals of civilization got worn out. This question is
not to be answered by good or bad analogies from nature. The decisive
answer is that they got worn out because we had not succeeded in
establishing the ethical and optimistic elements on a sufficiently
firm foundation.

If we should analyse the process in which the ideas and convictions
that produce civilization reveal themselves, it would be found that
whenever an advance has been registered, either the optimist or the
ethical element in the theory of the universe has proved more
attractive than usual, and has had as its consequence a progressive
development. When civilization is decaying there is the same chain of
causation, but it works negatively. The building is damaged or falls
in because the optimist element or the ethical, or both, give way like
a weak foundation. No amount of inquiry will give any other reason for
the changes. All imaginable ideas and convictions of that character
spring from optimism and the ethical impulse. If these two pillars are
strong enough, we need have no fears about the building.

The future of civilization depends, therefore, on whether it is
possible for thought to reach a theory of the universe which will have
a more secure and [pg 097] fundamental hold on optimism and the
ethical impulse than its predecessors have had.

       *       *       *       *       *

We Westerners dream of a theory of the universe which corresponds to
our impulse to action and at the same time justifies it. We have not
been able to formulate such a theory definitely. At present we are in
the state of possessing merely an impulse without any definite
orientation. The spirit of the age drives us into action without
allowing us to attain any clear view of the objective world and of
life. It claims our toil inexorably in the service of this or that
end, this or that achievement. It keeps us in a sort of intoxication
of activity so that we may never have time to reflect and to ask
ourselves what this restless sacrifice of ourselves to ends and
achievements really has to do with the meaning of the world and of our
lives. And so we wander hither and thither in the gathering dusk
formed by lack of any definite theory of the universe like homeless,
drunken mercenaries, and enlist indifferently in the service of the
common and the great without distinguishing between them. And the more
hopeless becomes the condition of the world in which this adventurous
impulse to action and progress ranges to and fro, the more bewildered
[pg 098] becomes our whole conception of things and the more
purposeless and irrational the doings of those who have enlisted under
the banner of such an impulse.

How little reflection is present in the Western impulse to action
becomes evident when this tries to square its ideas with those of the
Far East. For thought in the Far East has been constantly occupied in
its search for the meaning of life, and forces us to consider the
problem of the meaning of our own restlessness, the problem which we
Westerners burke so persistently. We are utterly at a loss when we
contemplate the ideas which are presented to us in Indian thought. We
turn away from the intellectual presumption which we find there. We
are conscious of the unsatisfying and incomplete elements in the ideal
of cessation from action. We feel instinctively that the
will-to-progress is justified not only in its aspect as directed to
the spiritual perfection of personality, but also in that which looks
towards the general and material.

For ourselves we dare to allege that we adventurers, who take up an
affirmative attitude toward the world and toward life, however great
and even ghastly our mistakes may be, can yet show not only greater
material, but also greater spiritual and ethical, contributions than
can those who lie under the ban of a theory of the universe
characterized by cessation from action.

[pg 099]

And yet, all the same, we cannot feel ourselves completely justified
in the face of these strange Eastern theories. They have in them
something full of nobility which retains its hold on us, even
fascinates us. This tinge of nobility comes from the fact that these
convictions are born of a search for a theory of the universe and for
the meaning of life. With us, on the other hand, activist instincts
and impulses take the place of a theory of the universe. We have no
theory affirming the world and life to oppose to the negative theory
of these thinkers, no thought which has found a basis for an
optimistic conception of existence to oppose to this other, which has
arrived at a pessimistic conception.

The reawakening of the Western spirit must thus begin by our people,
educated and simple alike, becoming conscious of their lack of a
theory of the universe and feeling the horror of their consequent
position. We can no longer be satisfied to make shift with substitutes
for such a theory. What is the basis of the will-to-activity and
progress which impels both to great actions and to terrible deeds, and
which tries to keep us from reflection? We must bend all our energies
to the solution of this problem.

There is only one way in which we can hope to emerge from the
meaningless state in which we are [pg 100] now held captive into one
informed with meaning. Each one of us must turn to contemplate his own
being, and we must all give ourselves to co-operative reflection so as
to discover how our will to action and to progress may be
intellectually based on the way in which we interpret our own lives
and the life around us, and the meaning which we give to these.

The great revision of the convictions and ideals in which and for
which we live will only take place when, by constantly proclaiming
them, we have given currency among our contemporaries to ideas and
thoughts other and better than those by which they are dominated at
the moment. Only thus will the many come to reflect about the meaning
of life and to reorientate, revise and make over again their ideals of
action and of progress, asking themselves whether these have a meaning
in accord with that which we attribute to our life itself. This
personal reflection about final and elemental things is the one and
only reliable way of measuring values. My willing and doing have real
meaning and value only in proportion as the aims which action sets
before itself can be justified as being in direct accord with my
interpretation of my own and of other life. All else, however much it
may pass current as approved by tradition, usage, and public opinion,
is vain and dangerous.

It seems, indeed, a matter for scorn and derision [pg 101] that we
should urge men to anything so remote as a return to reflection about
the meaning of life at a time when the sufferings and the follies of
the nations have become so intense and so extended, when unemployment
and poverty and starvation are rife, when power is being dissipated on
all sides in the most shameless and senseless way, and when organized
human life is dislocated in every direction. But only when the general
population begins to reflect in this way will forces come into being
which will be able to effect something to counterbalance all this ruin
and misery. Whatever other measures it is attempted to carry out will
have doubtful and altogether inadequate results.

When in the spring the withered grey of the pastures gives place to
green, this is due to the millions of young shoots which sprout up
freshly from the old roots. In like manner the revival of thought
which is essential for our time can only come through a transformation
of the opinions and ideals of the many brought about by individual and
universal reflection about the meaning of life and of the world.

But are we sure of being able to think out that affirmation of the
world and of life, which is such a powerful impulse in us, into a
theory of the world and of life from which a stream of energy
productive [pg 102] of intelligible life and action may convincingly
and constantly proceed? How are we to succeed in doing what the spirit
of the Western world during past generations has in vain toiled to
accomplish?

Even if thought, once more awakened, should only attain to an
incomplete and unsatisfying theory of the universe, yet this, as the
truth to which we have ourselves worked through, would be of more
value than a complete lack of any theory at all, or, alternatively,
than any sort of authoritative theory to which, neglecting the demands
of true thought, we cling on account of its supposed intrinsic value
without having any real and thorough belief in it.

The beginning of all spiritual life of any real value is courageous
faith in truth and open confession of the same. The most profound
religious experience, too, is not alien to thought, but must be
capable of derivation from this if it is to be given a true and deep
basis. Mere reflection about the meaning of life has already value in
itself. If such reflection should again come into being amongst us,
the ideals, born of vanity and of suffering, which now flourish in
rank profusion like evil weeds among the convictions of the generality
of people, would infallibly wither away and die. How much would
already be accomplished towards our salvation from our present
circumstances if only we would all give up three minutes every evening
to gazing up into the infinite [pg 103] world of the starry heavens
and meditating on it, or if in taking part in a funeral procession we
would reflect on the enigma of life and death, instead of engaging in
thoughtless conversation as we follow behind the coffin! The ideals,
born of folly and suffering, of those who make public opinion and
direct public events, would have no more power over men if they once
began to reflect about eternity and mortality, existence and
dissolution, and thus learnt to distinguish between true and false
standards, between those which possess real value and those which do
not. The old-time rabbis used to teach that the kingdom of God would
come if only the whole of Israel would really keep a single Sabbath
simultaneously! How much more is it true that the injustice and
violence and untruth, which are now bringing so much disaster on the
human race, would lose their power if only a single real trace of
reflection about the meaning of the world and of life should appear
amongst us!

But is there not a danger in challenging men with this question about
the meaning of life and in demanding that our impulse to action should
justify and clarify itself in such reflection as that of which we have
spoken? Shall we not lose, in acceding to this demand, some
irreplaceable element of naïve enthusiasm?

[pg 104]

We need not thus be anxious as to how strong or how weak our impulse
to action will prove to be when it shall have arrived, as the result
of intellectual reflection, at an interpretation of life. Only that
has real meaning for life which is given as an element of our
interpretation of life. It is not the quantity, but the quality, of
activity that really matters. What is needed is that our
will-to-action should become conscious of itself and should cease to
work blindly.

But perhaps, it may be objected, we shall end in the resignation of
agnosticism, and shall be obliged to confess that we cannot discover
any meaning in the universe or in life.

If thought is to set out on its journey unhampered, it must be
prepared for anything, even for arrival at intellectual agnosticism.
But even if our will-to-action is destined to wrestle endlessly and
unavailingly with an agnostic view of the universe and of life, still
this painful disenchantment is better for it than persistent refusal
to think out its position at all. For this disenchantment does, at any
rate, mean that we are clear as to what we are doing.

There is, however, no necessity whatever for such an attitude of
resignation. We feel that a position of affirmation regarding the
world and life is something which is in itself both necessary and
valuable. Therefore it is at least likely that a foundation can be [pg
105] found for it in thought. Since it is an innate element of our
will-to-live, it must be possible to comprehend it as a necessary
corollary to our interpretation of life. Perhaps we shall have to look
elsewhere than we have done hitherto for the real basis of that theory
of the universe which carries with it affirmation of the world and of
life. Previous thought imagined that it could deduce the meaning of
life from its interpretation of the universe. It may be that we shall
be obliged to resign ourselves to abandon the problem of the
interpretation of the universe and to find the meaning of our life in
the will-to-live as this exists in ourselves.

The ways along which we have to struggle toward the goal may be veiled
in darkness, yet the direction in which we must travel is clear. We
must reflect together about the meaning of life; we must strive
together to attain to a theory of the universe affirmative of the
world and of life, in which the impulse to action which we experience
as a necessary and valuable element of our being may find
justification, orientation, clarity and depth, may receive a fresh
access of moral strength, and be retempered, and thus become capable
of formulating, and of acting on, definite ideals of civilization,
inspired by the spirit of true humanitarianism.




FOOTNOTES


* _Weltanschauung_. Translated ‘theory of the universe’ throughout the
first part and elsewhere in this preface.

* Translated “world-view” throughout the second part of these
Lectures.


TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

The formatting of both the .htm and .txt files followed that of two
similar books, The Quest of the Historical Jesus and The Mystery of
the Kingdom of God, already in Project Gutenberg.

In the .txt version I have used utf8 encoding and the following
markers:

1. italic text surrounded by _
2. footnote references in the form
_(_number_)_

I have included page numbers in the format [pg xxx] for both .htm and
.txt.

I made several hyphenation choices, mostly forced by de-hyphenation at
the ends of lines:

1. world-theory
2. overcoming
3. self-regarding
4. never-concentrated
5. over-organization
6. over-valuation
7. self-importance
8. rococo-ministers
9. non-existence

In addition, on page 5 of the .pdf file on Internet Archive, the
display of this page was corrupted in my copy. As pointed out by
an editor, this has been corrected in the current version at Internet
Archive.

On page 84 the word “not” in the sentence:

“The rulers, small and great alike, did not act in accordance with
the spirit of the age.”

was changed to “[nothing but]”. The original German is:

“Die kleinen und die großen Regierenden taten nichts anderes, als daß
sie im Geiste der Zeit handelten.”

Google Translate (4/25/2025) renders this as:

“The small and the big rulers did nothing other than act in the spirit
of the times.”

The printed sentence in the book is either a typo or a mis-translation.
It does not fit the sense of the author who means that the rulers
themselves are not to blame for the collapse of civilization but rather
it is the fault of the “spirit of the age”.





