Chapter XV
The Excised “My’s”


I HAVE quoted in all ninety-seven passages, as near as I can make them,
in which Mr. Darwin claimed the theory of descent, either expressly by
speaking of “my theory” in such connection that the theory of descent
ought to be, and, as the event has shown, was, understood as being
intended, or by implication, as in the opening passages of the “Origin of
Species,” in which he tells us how he had thought the matter out without
acknowledging obligation of any kind to earlier writers.  The original
edition of the “Origin of Species” contained 490 pp., exclusive of index;
a claim, therefore, more or less explicit, to the theory of descent was
made on the average about once in every five pages throughout the book
from end to end; the claims were most prominent in the most important
parts, that is to say, at the beginning and end of the work, and this
made them more effective than they are made even by their frequency.  A
more ubiquitous claim than this it would be hard to find in the case of
any writer advancing a new theory; it is difficult, therefore, to
understand how Mr. Grant Allen could have allowed himself to say that Mr.
Darwin “laid no sort of claim to originality or proprietorship” in the
theory of descent with modification.

Nevertheless I have only found one place where Mr. Darwin pinned himself
down beyond possibility of retreat, however ignominious, by using the
words “my theory of descent with modification.” {202a}  He often, as I
have said, speaks of “my theory,” and then shortly afterwards of “descent
with modification,” under such circumstances that no one who had not been
brought up in the school of Mr. Gladstone could doubt that the two
expressions referred to the same thing.  He seems to have felt that he
must be a poor wriggler if he could not wriggle out of this; give him any
loophole, however small, and Mr. Darwin could trust himself to get out
through it; but he did not like saying what left no loophole at all, and
“my theory of descent with modification” closed all exits so firmly that
it is surprising he should ever have allowed himself to use these words.
As I have said, Mr. Darwin only used this direct categorical form of
claim in one place; and even here, after it had stood through three
editions, two of which had been largely altered, he could stand it no
longer, and altered the “my” into “the” in 1866, with the fourth edition
of the “Origin of Species.”

This was the only one of the original forty-five my’s that was cut out
before the appearance of the fifth edition in 1869, and its excision
throws curious light upon the working of Mr. Darwin’s mind.  The
selection of the most categorical my out of the whole forty-five, shows
that Mr. Darwin knew all about his my’s, and, while seeing reason to
remove this, held that the others might very well stand.  He even left
“On my _view_ of descent with modification,” {203a} which, though more
capable of explanation than “my theory,” &c., still runs it close;
nevertheless the excision of even a single my that had been allowed to
stand through such close revision as those to which the “Origin of
Species” had been subjected betrays uneasiness of mind, for it is
impossible that even Mr. Darwin should not have known that though the my
excised in 1866 was the most technically categorical, the others were in
reality just as guilty, though no tower of Siloam in the shape of
excision fell upon them.  If, then, Mr. Darwin was so uncomfortable about
this one as to cut it out, it is probable he was far from comfortable
about the others.

This view derives confirmation from the fact that in 1869, with the fifth
edition of the “Origin of Species,” there was a stampede of my’s
throughout the whole work, no less than thirty out of the original
forty-five being changed into “the,” “our,” “this,” or some other word,
which, though having all the effect of my, still did not say “my”
outright.  These my’s were, if I may say so, sneaked out; nothing was
said to explain their removal to the reader or call attention to it.
Why, it may be asked, having been considered during the revisions of 1861
and 1866, and with only one exception allowed to stand, why should they
be smitten with a homing instinct in such large numbers with the fifth
edition?  It cannot be maintained that Mr. Darwin had had his attention
called now for the first time to the fact that he had used my perhaps a
little too freely, and had better be more sparing of it for the future.
The my excised in 1866 shows that Mr. Darwin had already considered this
question, and saw no reason to remove any but the one that left him no
loophole.  Why, then, should that which was considered and approved in
1859, 1861, and 1866 (not to mention the second edition of 1859 or 1860)
be retreated from with every appearance of panic in 1869?  Mr. Darwin
could not well have cut out more than he did—not at any rate without
saying something about it, and it would not be easy to know exactly what
say.  Of the fourteen my’s that were left in 1869, five more were cut out
in 1872, and nine only were allowed eventually to remain.  We naturally
ask, Why leave any if thirty-six ought to be cut out, or why cut out
thirty-six if nine ought to be left—especially when the claim remains
practically just the same after the excision as before it?

I imagine complaint had early reached Mr. Darwin that the difference
between himself and his predecessors was unsubstantial and hard to grasp;
traces of some such feeling appear even in the late Sir Charles Lyell’s
“Principles of Geology,” in which he writes that he had reprinted his
abstract of Lamarck’s doctrine word for word, “in justice to Lamarck, in
order to show how nearly the opinions taught by him at the beginning of
this century resembled those now in vogue among a large body of
naturalists respecting the infinite variability of species, and the
progressive development in past time of the organic world.” {205a}  Sir
Charles Lyell could not have written thus if he had thought that Mr.
Darwin had already done “justice to Lamarck,” nor is it likely that he
stood alone in thinking as he did.  It is probable that more reached Mr.
Darwin than reached the public, and that the historical sketch prefixed
to all editions after the first six thousand copies had been sold—meagre
and slovenly as it is—was due to earlier manifestation on the part of
some of Mr. Darwin’s friends of the feeling that was afterwards expressed
by Sir Charles Lyell in the passage quoted above.  I suppose the removal
of the my that was cut out in 1866 to be due partly to the Gladstonian
tendencies of Mr. Darwin’s mind, which would naturally make that
particular my at all times more or less offensive to him, and partly to
the increase of objection to it that must have ensued on the addition of
the “brief but imperfect” historical sketch in 1861; it is doubtless only
by an oversight that this particular my was not cut out in 1861.  The
stampede of 1869 was probably occasioned by the appearance in Germany of
Professor Haeckel’s “History of Creation.”  This was published in 1868,
and Mr. Darwin no doubt foresaw that it would be translated into English,
as indeed it subsequently was.  In this book some account is given—very
badly, but still much more fully than by Mr. Darwin—of Lamarck’s work;
and even Erasmus Darwin is mentioned—inaccurately—but still he is
mentioned.  Professor Haeckel says:—

“Although the theory of development had been already maintained at the
beginning of this century by several great naturalists, especially by
Lamarck and Goethe, it only received complete demonstration and causal
foundation nine years ago through Darwin’s work, and it is on this
account that it is now generally (though not altogether rightly) regarded
as exclusively Mr. Darwin’s theory.” {206a}

Later on, after giving nearly a hundred pages to the works of the early
evolutionists—pages that would certainly disquiet the sensitive writer
who had cut out the “my” which disappeared in 1866—he continued:—

“We must distinguish clearly (though this is not usually done) between,
firstly, the theory of descent as advanced by Lamarck, which deals only
with the fact of all animals and plants being descended from a common
source, and secondly, Darwin’s theory of natural selection, which shows
us _why_ this progressive modification of organic forms took place” (p.
93).

This passage is as inaccurate as most of those by Professor Haeckel that
I have had occasion to examine have proved to be.  Letting alone that
Buffon, not Lamarck, is the foremost name in connection with descent, I
have already shown in “Evolution Old and New” that Lamarck goes
exhaustively into the how and why of modification.  He alleges the
conservation, or preservation, in the ordinary course of nature, of the
most favourable among variations that have been induced mainly by
function; this, I have sufficiently explained, is natural selection,
though the words “natural selection” are not employed; but it is the true
natural selection which (if so metaphorical an expression is allowed to
pass) actually does take place with the results ascribed to it by
Lamarck, and not the false Charles-Darwinian natural selection that does
not correspond with facts, and cannot result in specific differences such
as we now observe.  But, waiving this, the “my’s,” within which a little
rift had begun to show itself in 1866, might well become as mute in 1869
as they could become without attracting attention, when Mr. Darwin saw
the passages just quoted, and the hundred pages or so that lie between
them.

I suppose Mr. Darwin cut out the five more my’s that disappeared in 1872
because he had not yet fully recovered from his scare, and allowed nine
to remain in order to cover his retreat, and tacitly say that he had not
done anything and knew nothing whatever about it.  Practically, indeed,
he had not retreated, and must have been well aware that he was only
retreating technically; for he must have known that the absence of
acknowledgment to any earlier writers in the body of his work, and the
presence of the many passages in which every word conveyed the impression
that the writer claimed descent with modification, amounted to a claim as
much when the actual word “my” had been taken out as while it was allowed
to stand.  We took Mr. Darwin at his own estimate because we could not
for a moment suppose that a man of means, position, and education,—one,
moreover, who was nothing if he was not unself-seeking—could play such a
trick upon us while pretending to take us into his confidence; hence the
almost universal belief on the part of the public, of which Professors
Haeckel and Ray Lankester and Mr. Grant Allen alike complain—namely, that
Mr. Darwin is the originator of the theory of descent, and that his
variations are mainly functional.  Men of science must not be surprised
if the readiness with which we responded to Mr. Darwin’s appeal to our
confidence is succeeded by a proportionate resentment when the peculiar
shabbiness of his action becomes more generally understood.  For myself,
I know not which most to wonder at—the meanness of the writer himself, or
the greatness of the service that, in spite of that meanness, he
unquestionably rendered.

If Mr. Darwin had been dealing fairly by us, when he saw that we had
failed to catch the difference between the Erasmus-Darwinian theory of
descent through natural selection from among variations that are mainly
functional, and his own alternative theory of descent through natural
selection from among variations that are mainly accidental, and, above
all, when he saw we were crediting him with other men’s work, he would
have hastened to set us right.  “It is with great regret,” he might have
written, “and with no small surprise, that I find how generally I have
been misunderstood as claiming to be the originator of the theory of
descent with modification; nothing can be further from my intention; the
theory of descent has been familiar to all biologists from the year 1749,
when Buffon advanced it in its most comprehensive form, to the present
day.”  If Mr. Darwin had said something to the above effect, no one would
have questioned his good faith, but it is hardly necessary to say that
nothing of the kind is to be found in any one of Mr. Darwin’s many books
or many editions; nor is the reason why the requisite correction was
never made far to seek.  For if Mr. Darwin had said as much as I have put
into his mouth above, he should have said more, and would ere long have
been compelled to have explained to us wherein the difference between
himself and his predecessors precisely lay, and this would not have been
easy.  Indeed, if Mr. Darwin had been quite open with us he would have
had to say much as follows:—

“I should point out that, according to the evolutionists of the last
century, improvement in the eye, as in any other organ, is mainly due to
persistent, rational, employment of the organ in question, in such
slightly modified manner as experience and changed surroundings may
suggest.  You will have observed that, according to my system, this goes
for very little, and that the accumulation of fortunate accidents,
irrespectively of the use that may be made of them, is by far the most
important means of modification.  Put more briefly still, the distinction
between me and my predecessors lies in this;—my predecessors thought they
knew the main normal cause or principle that underlies variation, whereas
I think that there is no general principle underlying it at all, or that
even if there is, we know hardly anything about it.  This is my
distinctive feature; there is no deception; I shall not consider the
arguments of my predecessors, nor show in what respect they are
insufficient; in fact, I shall say nothing whatever about them.  Please
to understand that I alone am in possession of the master key that can
unlock the bars of the future progress of evolutionary science; so great
an improvement, in fact, is my discovery that it justifies me in claiming
the theory of descent generally, and I accordingly claim it.  If you ask
me in what my discovery consists, I reply in this;—that the variations
which we are all agreed accumulate are caused—by variation. {209a}  I
admit that this is not telling you much about them, but it is as much as
I think proper to say at present; above all things, let me caution you
against thinking that there is any principle of general application
underlying variation.”

This would have been right.  This is what Mr. Darwin would have had to
have said if he had been frank with us; it is not surprising, therefore,
that he should have been less frank than might have been wished.  I have
no doubt that many a time between 1859 and 1882, the year of his death,
Mr. Darwin bitterly regretted his initial error, and would have been only
too thankful to repair it, but he could only put the difference between
himself and the early evolutionists clearly before his readers at the
cost of seeing his own system come tumbling down like a pack of cards;
this was more than he could stand, so he buried his face, ostrich-like,
in the sand.  I know no more pitiable figure in either literature or
science.

As I write these lines (July 1886) I see a paragraph in _Nature_ which I
take it is intended to convey the impression that Mr. Francis Darwin’s
life and letters of his father will appear shortly.  I can form no idea
whether Mr. F. Darwin’s forthcoming work is likely to appear before this
present volume; still less can I conjecture what it may or may not
contain; but I can give the reader a criterion by which to test the good
faith with which it is written.  If Mr. F. Darwin puts the distinctive
feature that differentiates Mr. C. Darwin from his predecessors clearly
before his readers, enabling them to seize and carry it away with them
once for all—if he shows no desire to shirk this question, but, on the
contrary, faces it and throws light upon it, then we shall know that his
work is sincere, whatever its shortcomings may be in other respects; and
when people are doing their best to help us and make us understand all
that they understand themselves, a great deal may be forgiven them.  If,
on the other hand, we find much talk about the wonderful light which Mr.
Charles Darwin threw on evolution by his theory of natural selection,
without any adequate attempt to make us understand the difference between
the natural selection, say, of Mr. Patrick Matthew, and that of his more
famous successor, then we may know that we are being trifled with; and
that an attempt is being again made to throw dust in our eyes.




