Chapter XI
The Way of Escape


TO sum up the conclusions hitherto arrived at.  Our philosophers have
made the mistake of forgetting that they cannot carry the rough-and-ready
language of common sense into precincts within which politeness and
philosophy are supreme.  Common sense sees life and death as distinct
states having nothing in common, and hence in all respects the antitheses
of one another; so that with common sense there should be no degrees of
livingness, but if a thing is alive at all it is as much alive as the
most living of us, and if dead at all it is stone dead in every part of
it.  Our philosophers have exercised too little consideration in
retaining this view of the matter.  They say that an amœba is as much a
living being as a man is, and do not allow that a well-grown, highly
educated man in robust health is more living than an idiot cripple.  They
say he differs from the cripple in many important respects, but not in
degree of livingness.  Yet, as we have seen already, even common sense by
using the word “dying” admits degrees of life; that is to say, it admits
a more and a less; those, then, for whom the superficial aspects of
things are insufficient should surely find no difficulty in admitting
that the degrees are more numerous than is dreamed of in the somewhat
limited philosophy which common sense alone knows.  Livingness depends on
range of power, versatility, wealth of body and mind—how often, indeed,
do we not see people taking a new lease of life when they have come into
money even at an advanced age; it varies as these vary, beginning with
things that, though they have mind enough for an outsider to swear by,
can hardly be said to have yet found it out themselves, and advancing to
those that know their own minds as fully as anything in this world does
so.  The more a thing knows its own mind the more living it becomes, for
life viewed both in the individual and in the general as the outcome of
accumulated developments, is one long process of specialising
consciousness and sensation; that is to say, of getting to know one’s own
mind more and more fully upon a greater and greater variety of subjects.
On this I hope to touch more fully in another book; in the meantime I
would repeat that the error of our philosophers consists in not having
borne in mind that when they quitted the ground on which common sense can
claim authority, they should have reconsidered everything that common
sense had taught them.

The votaries of common sense make the same mistake as philosophers do,
but they make it in another way.  Philosophers try to make the language
of common sense serve for purposes of philosophy, forgetting that they
are in another world, in which another tongue is current; common sense
people, on the other hand, every now and then attempt to deal with
matters alien to the routine of daily life.  The boundaries between the
two kingdoms being very badly defined, it is only by giving them a wide
berth and being so philosophical as almost to deny that there is any
either life or death at all, or else so full of common sense as to refuse
to see one part of the body as less living than another, that we can hope
to steer clear of doubt, inconsistency, and contradiction in terms in
almost every other word we utter.  We cannot serve the God of philosophy
and the Mammon of common sense at one and the same time, and yet it would
almost seem as though the making the best that can be made of both these
worlds were the whole duty of organism.

It is easy to understand how the error of philosophers arose, for, slaves
of habit as we all are, we are more especially slaves when the habit is
one that has not been found troublesome.  There is no denying that it
saves trouble to have things either one thing or the other, and indeed
for all the common purposes of life if a thing is either alive or dead
the small supplementary residue of the opposite state should be neglected
as too small to be observable.  If it is good to eat we have no
difficulty in knowing when it is dead enough to be eaten; if not good to
eat, but valuable for its skin, we know when it is dead enough to be
skinned with impunity; if it is a man, we know when he has presented
enough of the phenomena of death to allow of our burying him and
administering his estate; in fact, I cannot call to mind any case in
which the decision of the question whether man or beast is alive or dead
is frequently found to be perplexing; hence we have become so accustomed
to think there can be no admixture of the two states, that we have found
it almost impossible to avoid carrying this crude view of life and death
into domains of thought in which it has no application.  There can be no
doubt that when accuracy is required we should see life and death not as
fundamentally opposed, but as supplementary to one another, without
either’s being ever able to exclude the other altogether; thus we should
indeed see some things as more living than others, but we should see
nothing as either unalloyedly living or unalloyedly non-living.  If a
thing is living, it is so living that it has one foot in the grave
already; if dead, it is dead as a thing that has already re-entered into
the womb of Nature.  And within the residue of life that is in the dead
there is an element of death; and within this there is an element of
life, and so _ad infinitum_—again, as reflections in two mirrors that
face one another.

In brief, there is nothing in life of which there are not germs, and, so
to speak, harmonics in death, and nothing in death of which germs and
harmonics may not be found in life.  Each emphasizes what the other
passes over most lightly—each carries to its extreme conceivable
development that which in the other is only sketched in by a faint
suggestion—but neither has any feature rigorously special to itself.
Granted that death is a greater new departure in an organism’s life, than
any since that _congeries_ of births and deaths to which the name
embryonic stages is commonly given, still it is a new departure of the
same essential character as any other—that is to say, though there be
much new there is much, not to say more, old along with it.  We shrink
from it as from any other change to the unknown, and also perhaps from an
instinctive sense that the fear of death is a _sine quâ non_ for physical
and moral progress, but the fear is like all else in life, a substantial
thing which, if its foundations be dug about, is found to rest on a
superstitious basis.

Where, and on what principle, are the dividing lines between living and
non-living to be drawn?  All attempts to draw them hitherto have ended in
deadlock and disaster; of this M. Vianna De Lima, in his “Exposé Sommaire
des Théories transformistes de Lamarck, Darwin, et Haeckel,” {150a} says
that all attempts to trace _une ligne de démarcation nette et profonde
entre la matière vivante et la matière inerte_ have broken down. {150b}
_Il y a un reste de vie dans le cadavre_, says Diderot, {150c} speaking
of the more gradual decay of the body after an easy natural death, than
after a sudden and violent one; and so Buffon begins his first volume by
saying that “we can descend, by almost imperceptible degrees, from the
most perfect creature to the most formless matter—from the most highly
organised matter to the most entirely inorganic substance.” {150d}

Is the line to be so drawn as to admit any of the non-living within the
body?  If we answer “yes,” then, as we have seen, moiety after moiety is
filched from us, till we find ourselves left face to face with a tenuous
quasi immaterial vital principle or soul as animating an alien body, with
which it not only has no essential underlying community of substance, but
with which it has no conceivable point in common to render a union
between the two possible, or give the one a grip of any kind over the
other; in fact, the doctrine of disembodied spirits, so instinctively
rejected by all who need be listened to, comes back as it would seem,
with a scientific _imprimatur_; if, on the other hand, we exclude the
non-living from the body, then what are we to do with nails that want
cutting, dying skin, or hair that is ready to fall off?  Are they less
living than brain?  Answer “yes,” and degrees are admitted, which we have
already seen prove fatal; answer “no,” and we must deny that one part of
the body is more vital than another—and this is refusing to go as far
even as common sense does; answer that these things are not very
important, and we quit the ground of equity and high philosophy on which
we have given ourselves such airs, and go back to common sense as unjust
judges that will hear those widows only who importune us.

As with the non-living so also with the living.  Are we to let it pass
beyond the limits of the body, and allow a certain temporary overflow of
livingness to ordain as it were machines in use?  Then death will fare,
if we once let life without the body, as life fares if we once let death
within it.  It becomes swallowed up in life, just as in the other case
life was swallowed up in death.  Are we to confine it to the body?  If
so, to the whole body, or to parts?  And if to parts, to what parts, and
why?  The only way out of the difficulty is to rehabilitate contradiction
in terms, and say that everything is both alive and dead at one and the
same time—some things being much living and little dead, and others,
again, much dead and little living.  Having done this we have only got to
settle what a thing is—when a thing is a thing pure and simple, and when
it is only a _congeries_ of things—and we shall doubtless then live very
happily and very philosophically ever afterwards.

But here another difficulty faces us.  Common sense does indeed know what
is meant by a “thing” or “an individual,” but philosophy cannot settle
either of these two points.  Professor Mivart made the question “What are
Living Beings?” the subject of an article in one of our leading magazines
only a very few years ago.  He asked, but he did not answer.  And so
Professor Moseley was reported (_Times_, January 16, 1885) as having said
that it was “almost impossible” to say what an individual was.  Surely if
it is only “almost” impossible for philosophy to determine this,
Professor Moseley should have at any rate tried to do it; if, however, he
had tried and failed, which from my own experience I should think most
likely, he might have spared his “almost.”  “Almost” is a very dangerous
word.  I once heard a man say that an escape he had had from drowning was
“almost” providential.  The difficulty about defining an individual
arises from the fact that we may look at “almost” everything from two
different points of view.  If we are in a common-sense humour for
simplifying things, treating them broadly, and emphasizing resemblances
rather than differences, we can find excellent reasons for ignoring
recognised lines of demarcation, calling everything by a new name, and
unifying up till we have united the two most distant stars in heaven as
meeting and being linked together in the eyes and souls of men; if we are
in this humour individuality after individuality disappears, and ere
long, if we are consistent, nothing will remain but one universal whole,
one true and only atom from which alone nothing can be cut off and thrown
away on to something else; if, on the other hand, we are in a subtle
philosophically accurate humour for straining at gnats and emphasizing
differences rather than resemblances, we can draw distinctions, and give
reasons for subdividing and subdividing, till, unless we violate what we
choose to call our consistency somewhere, we shall find ourselves with as
many names as atoms and possible combinations and permutations of atoms.
The lines we draw, the moments we choose for cutting this or that off at
this or that place, and thenceforth the dubbing it by another name, are
as arbitrary as the moments chosen by a South-Eastern Railway porter for
leaving off beating doormats; in each case doubtless there is an
approximate equity, but it is of a very rough and ready kind.

What else, however, can we do?  We can only escape the Scylla of calling
everything by one name, and recognising no individual existences of any
kind, by falling into the Charybdis of having a name for everything, or
by some piece of intellectual sharp practice like that of the shrewd but
unprincipled Ulysses.  If we were consistent honourable gentlemen, into
Charybdis or on to Scylla we should go like lambs; every subterfuge by
the help of which we escape our difficulty is but an arbitrary
high-handed act of classification that turns a deaf ear to everything not
robust enough to hold its own; nevertheless even the most scrupulous of
philosophers pockets his consistency at a pinch, and refuses to let the
native hue of resolution be sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,
nor yet fobbed by the rusty curb of logic.  He is right, for assuredly
the poor intellectual abuses of the time want countenancing now as much
as ever, but so far as he countenances them, he should bear in mind that
he is returning to the ground of common sense, and should not therefore
hold himself too stiffly in the matter of logic.

As with life and death so with design and absence of design or luck.  So
also with union and disunion.  There is never either absolute design
rigorously pervading every detail, nor yet absolute absence of design
pervading any detail rigorously, so, as between substances, there is
neither absolute union and homogeneity, not absolute disunion and
heterogeneity; there is always a little place left for repentance; that
is to say, in theory we should admit that both design and chance, however
well defined, each have an aroma, as it were, of the other.  Who can
think of a case in which his own design—about which he should know more
than any other, and from which, indeed, all his ideas of design are
derived—was so complete that there was no chance in any part of it?  Who,
again, can bring forward a case even of the purest chance or good luck
into which no element of design had entered directly or indirectly at any
juncture?  This, nevertheless, does not involve our being unable ever to
ascribe a result baldly either to luck or cunning.  In some cases a
decided preponderance of the action, whether seen as a whole or looked at
in detail, is recognised at once as due to design, purpose, forethought,
skill, and effort, and then we properly disregard the undesigned element;
in others the details cannot without violence be connected with design,
however much the position which rendered the main action possible may
involve design—as, for example, there is no design in the way in which
individual pieces of coal may hit one another when shot out of a sack,
but there may be design in the sack’s being brought to the particular
place where it is emptied; in others design may be so hard to find that
we rightly deny its existence, nevertheless in each case there will be an
element of the opposite, and the residuary element would, if seen through
a mental microscope, be found to contain a residuary element of _its_
opposite, and this again of _its_ opposite, and so on _ad infinitum_, as
with mirrors standing face to face.  This having been explained, and it
being understood that when we speak of design in organism we do so with a
mental reserve of _exceptis excipiendis_, there should be no hesitation
in holding the various modifications of plants and animals to be in such
preponderating measure due to function, that design, which underlies
function, is the fittest idea with which to connect them in our minds.

We will now proceed to inquire how Mr. Darwin came to substitute, or try
to substitute, the survival of the luckiest fittest, for the survival of
the most cunning fittest, as held by Erasmus Darwin and Lamarck; or more
briefly how he came to substitute luck for cunning.




