XX

DESERT GOLD

A SUMMER day dawned on Forlorn River, a beautiful, still, hot, golden
day with huge sail clouds of white motionless over No Name Peaks and
the purple of clear air in the distance along the desert horizon.

Mrs. Belding returned that day to find her daughter happy and the past
buried forever in two lonely graves.  The haunting shadow left her
eyes.  Gale believed he would never forget the sweetness, the wonder,
the passion of her embrace when she called him her boy and gave him her
blessing.

The little wrinkled padre who married Gale and Nell performed the
ceremony as he told his beads, without interest or penetration, and
went his way, leaving happiness behind.

"Shore I was a sick man," Ladd said, "an' darn near a dead one, but I'm
agoin' to get well.  Mebbe I'll be able to ride again someday. Nell, I
lay it to you.  An' I'm agoin' to kiss you an' wish you all the joy
there is in this world.  An', Dick, as Yaqui says, she's shore your
Shower of Gold."

He spoke of Gale's finding love--spoke of it with the deep and wistful
feeling of the lonely ranger who had always yearned for love and had
never known it.  Belding, once more practical, and important as never
before with mining projects and water claims to manage, spoke of Gale's
great good fortune in finding of gold--he called it desert gold.

"Ah, yes.  Desert Gold!" exclaimed Dick's father, softly, with eyes of
pride.  Perhaps he was glad Dick had found the rich claim; surely he
was happy that Dick had won the girl he loved. But it seemed to Dick
himself that his father meant something very different from love and
fortune in his allusion to desert gold.


That beautiful happy day, like life or love itself, could not be wholly
perfect.

Yaqui came to Dick to say good-by.  Dick was startled, grieved, and in
his impulsiveness forgot for a moment the nature of the Indian.  Yaqui
was not to be changed.

Belding tried to overload him with gifts.  The Indian packed a bag of
food, a blanket, a gun, a knife, a canteen, and no more. The whole
household went out with him to the corrals and fields from which
Belding bade him choose a horse--any horse, even the loved Blanco
Diablo.  Gale's heart was in his throat for fear the Indian might
choose Blanco Sol, and Gale hated himself for a selfishness he could
not help.  But without a word he would have parted with the treasured
Sol.

Yaqui whistled the horses up--for the last time.  Did he care for them?
It would have been hard to say.  He never looked at the fierce and
haughty Diablo, nor at Blanco Sol as he raised his noble head and rang
his piercing blast.  The Indian did not choose one of Belding's whites.
He caught a lean and wiry broncho, strapped a blanket on him, and
fastened on the pack.

Then he turned to these friends, the same emotionless, inscrutable dark
and silent Indian that he had always been.  This parting was nothing to
him.  He had stayed to pay a debt, and now he was going home.

He shook hands with the men, swept a dark fleeting glance over Nell,
and rested his strange eyes upon Mercedes's beautiful and agitated
face.  It must have been a moment of intense feeling for the Spanish
girl.  She owed it to him that she had life and love and happiness. She
held out those speaking slender hands.  But Yaqui did not touch them.
Turning away, he mounted the broncho and rode down the trail toward the
river.

"He's going home," said Belding.

"Home!" whispered Ladd; and Dick knew the ranger felt the resurging
tide of memory.  Home--across the cactus and lava, through solemn
lonely days, the silent, lonely nights, into the vast and red-hazed
world of desolation.

"Thorne, Mercedes, Nell, let's climb the foothill yonder and watch him
out of sight," said Dick.

They climbed while the others returned to the house.  When they reached
the summit of the hill Yaqui was riding up the far bank of the river.

"He will turn to look--to wave good-by?" asked Nell.

"Dear he is an Indian," replied Gale.

From that height they watched him ride through the mesquites, up over
the river bank to enter the cactus.  His mount showed dark against the
green and white, and for a long time he was plainly in sight.  The sun
hung red in a golden sky.  The last the watchers saw of Yaqui was when
he rode across a ridge and stood silhouetted against the gold of desert
sky--a wild, lonely, beautiful picture. Then he was gone.

Strangely it came to Gale then that he was glad.  Yaqui had returned to
his own--the great spaces, the desolation, the solitude--to the trails
he had trodden when a child, trails haunted now by ghosts of his
people, and ever by his gods.  Gale realized that in the Yaqui he had
known the spirit of the desert, that this spirit had claimed all which
was wild and primitive in him.

Tears glistened in Mercedes's magnificent black eyes, and Thorne kissed
them away--kissed the fire back to them and the flame to her cheeks.

That action recalled Gale's earlier mood, the joy of the present, and
he turned to Nell's sweet face.  The desert was there, wonderful,
constructive, ennobling, beautiful, terrible, but it was not for him as
it was for the Indian.  In the light of Nell's tremulous returning
smile that strange, deep, clutching shadow faded, lost its hold
forever; and he leaned close to her, whispering: "Lluvia
d'oro"--"Shower of Gold."










