XII

THE CRATER OF HELL

THE trail led along a gigantic fissure in the side of the crater, and
then down and down into a red-walled, blue hazed labyrinth.

Presently Gale, upon turning a sharp corner, was utterly amazed to see
that the split in the lava sloped out and widened into an arroyo.  It
was so green and soft and beautiful in all the angry, contorted red
surrounding that Gale could scarcely credit his sight. Blanco Sol
whistled his welcome to the scent of water.  Then Gale saw a great
hole, a pit in the shiny lava, a dark, cool, shady well. There was
evidence of the fact that at flood seasons the water had an outlet into
the arroyo.  The soil appeared to be a fine sand, in which a reddish
tinge predominated; and it was abundantly covered with a long grass,
still partly green.  Mesquites and palo verdes dotted the arroyo and
gradually closed in thickets that obstructed the view.

"Shore it all beats me," exclaimed Ladd.  "What a place to hole-up in!
We could have hid here for a long time.  Boys, I saw mountain sheep,
the real old genuine Rocky Mountain bighorn.  What do you think of
that?"

"I reckon it's a Yaqui hunting-ground," replied Lash.  "That trail we
hit must be hundreds of years old.  It's worn deep and smooth in iron
lava."

"Well, all I got to say is--Beldin' was shore right about the Indian.
An' I can see Rojas's finish somewhere up along that awful hell-hole."

Camp was made on a level spot.  Yaqui took the horses to water, and
then turned them loose in the arroyo.  It was a tired and somber group
that sat down to eat.  The strain of suspense equaled the wearing
effects of the long ride.  Mercedes was calm, but her great dark eyes
burned in her white face.  Yaqui watched her.  The others looked at her
with unspoken pride.  Presently Thorne wrapped her in his blankets, and
she seemed to fall asleep at once.  Twilight deepened.  The campfire
blazed brighter.  A cool wind played with Mercedes's black hair, waving
strands across her brow.

Little of Yaqui's purpose or plan could be elicited from him.  But the
look of him was enough to satisfy even Thorne.  He leaned against a
pile of wood, which he had collected, and his gloomy gaze pierced the
campfire, and at long intervals strayed over the motionless form of the
Spanish girl.

The rangers and Thorne, however, talked in low tones.  It was
absolutely impossible for Rojas and his men to reach the waterhole
before noon of the next day.  And long before that time the fugitives
would have decided on a plan of defense.  What that defense would be,
and where it would be made, were matters over which the men considered
gravely.  Ladd averred the Yaqui would put them into an impregnable
position, that at the same time would prove a death-trap for their
pursuers.  They exhausted every possibility, and then, tired as they
were, still kept on talking.

"What stuns me is that Rojas stuck to our trail," said Thorne, his
lined and haggard face expressive of dark passion.  "He has followed us
into this fearful desert.  He'll lose men, horses, perhaps his life.
He's only a bandit, and he stands to win no gold.  If he ever gets out
of here it 'll be by herculean labor and by terrible hardship.  All for
a poor little helpless woman--just a woman! My God, I can't understand
it."

"Shore--just a woman," replied Ladd, solemnly nodding his head.

Then there was a long silence during which the men gazed into the fire.
Each, perhaps, had some vague conception of the enormity of Rojas's
love or hate--some faint and amazing glimpse of the gulf of human
passion.  Those were cold, hard, grim faces upon which the light
flickered.

"Sleep," said the Yaqui.

Thorne rolled in his blanket close beside Mercedes.  Then one by one
the rangers stretched out, feet to the fire.  Gale found that he could
not sleep.  His eyes were weary, but they would not stay shut; his body
ached for rest, yet he could not lie still.  The night was so somber,
so gloomy, and the lava-encompassed arroyo full of shadows.  The dark
velvet sky, fretted with white fire, seemed to be close.  There was an
absolute silence, as of death.  Nothing moved--nothing outside of
Gale's body appeared to live.  The Yaqui sat like an image carved out
of lava.  The others lay prone and quiet.  Would another night see any
of them lie that way, quiet forever?  Gale felt a ripple pass over him
that was at once a shudder and a contraction of muscles.  Used as he
was to the desert and its oppression, why should he feel to-night as if
the weight of its lava and the burden of its mystery were bearing him
down?

He sat up after a while and again watched the fire.  Nell's sweet face
floated like a wraith in the pale smoke--glowed and flushed and smiled
in the embers.  Other faces shone there--his sister's--that of his
mother.  Gale shook off the tender memories.  This desolate wilderness
with its forbidding silence and its dark promise of hell on the
morrow--this was not the place to unnerve oneself with thoughts of love
and home.  But the torturing paradox of the thing was that this was
just the place and just the night for a man to be haunted.

By and by Gale rose and walked down a shadowy aisle between the
mesquites.  On his way back the Yaqui joined him. Gale was not
surprised.  He had become used to the Indian's strange guardianship.
But now, perhaps because of Gale's poignancy of thought, the contending
tides of love and regret, the deep, burning premonition of deadly
strife, he was moved to keener scrutiny of the Yaqui.  That, of course,
was futile.  The Indian was impenetrable, silent, strange.  But
suddenly, inexplicably, Gale felt Yaqui's human quality.  It was aloof,
as was everything about this Indian; but it was there.  This savage
walked silently beside him, without glance or touch or word.  His
thought was as inscrutable as if mind had never awakened in his race.
Yet Gale was conscious of greatness, and, somehow, he was reminded of
the Indian's story.  His home had been desolated, his people carried
off to slavery, his wife and children separated from him to die.  What
had life meant to the Yaqui?  What had been in his heart?  What was now
in his mind?  Gale could not answer these questions.  But the
difference between himself and Yaqui, which he had vaguely felt as that
between savage and civilized men, faded out of his mind forever.  Yaqui
might have considered he owed Gale a debt, and, with a Yaqui's austere
and noble fidelity to honor, he meant to pay it.  Nevertheless, this
was not the thing Gale found in the Indian's silent presence.
Accepting the desert with its subtle and inconceivable influence, Gale
felt that the savage and the white man had been bound in a tie which
was no less brotherly because it could not be comprehended.

Toward dawn Gale managed to get some sleep.  Then the morning broke
with the sun hidden back of the uplift of the plateau.  The horses
trooped up the arroyo and snorted for water.  After a hurried breakfast
the packs were hidden in holes in the lava.  The saddles were left
where they were, and the horses allowed to graze and wander at will.
Canteens were filled, a small bag of food was packed, and blankets made
into a bundle.  Then Yaqui faced the steep ascent of the lava slope.

The trail he followed led up on the right side of the fissure, opposite
to the one he had come down.  It was a steep climb, and encumbered as
the men were they made but slow progress.  Mercedes had to be lifted up
smooth steps and across crevices.  They passed places where the rims of
the fissure were but a few yards apart. At length the rims widened out
and the red, smoky crater yawned beneath.  Yaqui left the trail and
began clambering down over the rough and twisted convolutions of lava
which formed the rim. Sometimes he hung sheer over the precipice.  It
was with extreme difficulty that the party followed him.  Mercedes had
to be held on narrow, foot-wide ledges.  The choya was there to hinder
passage. Finally the Indian halted upon a narrow bench of flat, smooth
lava, and his followers worked with exceeding care and effort down to
his position.

At the back of this bench, between bunches of choya, was a niche, a
shallow cave with floor lined apparently with mold.  Ladd said the
place was a refuge which had been inhabited by mountain sheep for many
years.  Yaqui spread blankets inside, left the canteen and the sack of
food, and with a gesture at once humble, yet that of a chief, he
invited Mercedes to enter.  A few more gestures and fewer words
disclosed his plan.  In this inaccessible nook Mercedes was to be
hidden.  The men were to go around upon the opposite rim, and block the
trail leading down to the waterhole.

Gale marked the nature of this eyrie.  It was the wildest and most
rugged place he had ever stepped upon.  Only a sheep could have climbed
up the wall above or along the slanting shelf of lava beyond.  Below
glistened a whole bank of choya, frosty in the sunlight, and it
overhung an apparently bottomless abyss.

Ladd chose the smallest gun in the party and gave it to Mercedes.

"Shore it's best to go the limit on bein' ready," he said, simply. "The
chances are you'll never need it.  But if you do--"

He left off there, and his break was significant.  Mercedes answered
him with a fearless and indomitable flash of eyes.  Thorne was the only
one who showed any shaken nerve.  His leave-taking of his wife was
affecting and hurried.  Then he and the rangers carefully stepped in
the tracks of the Yaqui.

They climbed up to the level of the rim and went along the edge. When
they reached the fissure and came upon its narrowest point, Yaqui
showed in his actions that he meant to leap it.  Ladd restrained the
Indian.  They then continued along the rim till they reached several
bridges of lava which crossed it.  The fissures was deep in some parts,
choked in others.  Evidently the crater had no direct outlet into the
arroyo below.  Its bottom, however, must have been far beneath the
level of the waterhole.

After the fissure was crossed the trail was soon found.  Here it ran
back from the rim.  Yaqui waved his hand to the right, where along the
corrugated slope of the crater there were holes and crevices and
coverts for a hundred men.  Yaqui strode on up the trail toward a
higher point, where presently his dark figure stood motionless against
the sky.  The rangers and Thorne selected a deep depression, out of
which led several ruts deep enough for cover.  According to Ladd it was
as good a place as any, perhaps not so hidden as others, but freer from
the dreaded choya.  Here the men laid down rifles and guns, and,
removing their heavy cartridge belts, settled down to wait.

Their location was close to the rim wall and probably five hundred
yards from the opposite rim, which was now seen to be considerably
below them.  The glaring red cliff presented a deceitful and baffling
appearance.  It had a thousand ledges and holes in its surfaces, and
one moment it looked perpendicular and the next there seemed to be a
long slant.  Thorne pointed out where he thought Mercedes was hidden;
Ladd selected another place, and Lash still another.  Gale searched for
the bank of choya he had seen under the bench where Mercedes's retreat
lay, and when he found it the others disputed his opinion. Then Gale
brought his field glass into requisition, proving that he  was right.
Once located and fixed in sight, the white patch of choya, the bench,
and the sheep eyrie stood out from the other features of that rugged
wall.  But all the men were agreed that Yaqui had hidden Mercedes where
only the eyes of a vulture could have found her.

Jim Lash crawled into a little strip of shade and bided the time
tranquilly.  Ladd was restless and impatient and watchful, every little
while rising to look up the far-reaching slope, and then to the right,
where Yaqui's dark figure stood out from a high point of the rim.
Thorne grew silent, and seemed consumed by a slow, sullen rage.  Gale
was neither calm nor free of a gnawing suspense nor of a waiting wrath.
But as best he could he put the pending action out of mind.

It came over him all of a sudden that he had not grasped the stupendous
nature of this desert setting.  There was the measureless red slope,
its lower ridges finally sinking into white sand dunes toward the blue
sea.  The cold, sparkling light, the white sun, the deep azure of sky,
the feeling of boundless expanse all around him--these meant high
altitude.  Southward the barren red simply merged into distance.  The
field of craters rose in high, dark wheels toward the dominating peaks.
When Gale withdrew his gaze from the magnitude of these spaces and
heights the crater beneath him seemed dwarfed.  Yet while he gazed it
spread and deepened and multiplied its ragged lines.  No, he could not
grasp the meaning of size or distance here.  There was too much to stun
the sight. But the mood in which nature had created this convulsed
world of lava seized hold upon him.

Meanwhile the hours passed.  As the sun climbed the clear, steely
lights vanished, the blue hazes deepened, and slowly the glistening
surfaces of lava turned redder.  Ladd was concerned to discover that
Yaqui was missing from his outlook upon the high point.  Jim Lash came
out of the shady crevice, and stood up to buckle on his cartridge belt.
His narrow, gray glance slowly roved from the height of lava down along
the slope, paused in doubt, and then swept on to resurvey the whole
vast eastern dip of the plateau.

"I reckon my eyes are pore," he said.  "Mebbe it's this damn red glare.
Anyway, what's them creepin' spots up there?"

"Shore I seen them.  Mountain sheep," replied Ladd.

"Guess again, Laddy.  Dick, I reckon you'd better flash the glass up
the slope."

Gale adjusted the field glass and began to search the lava, beginning
close at hand and working away from him.  Presently the glass became
stationary.

"I see half a dozen small animals, brown in color.  They look like
sheep.  But I couldn't distinguish mountain sheep from antelope."

"Shore they're bighorn," said Laddy.

"I reckon if you'll pull around to the east an' search under that long
wall of lava--there--you'll see what I see," added Jim.

The glass climbed and circled, wavered an instant, then fixed steady as
a rock.  There was a breathless silence.

"Fourteen horses--two packed--some mounted--others without riders, and
lame," said Gale, slowly.

Yaqui appeared far up the trail, coming swiftly.  Presently he saw the
rangers and halted to wave his arms and point.  Then he vanished as if
the lava had opened beneath him.

"Lemme that glass," suddenly said Jim Lash.  "I'm seein' red, I tell
you.... Well, pore as my eyes are they had it right.  Rojas an' his
outfit have left the trail."

"Jim, you ain't meanin' they've taken to that awful slope?" queried
Ladd.

"I sure do.  There they are--still comin', but goin' down, too."

"Mebbe Rojas is crazy, but it begins to look like he--"

"Laddy, I'll be danged if the Greaser bunch hasn't vamoosed.  Gone out
of sight!  Right there not a half mile away, the whole caboodle--gone!"

"Shore they're behind a crust or have gone down into a rut," suggested
Ladd.  "They'll show again in a minute.  Look sharp, boys, for I'm
figgerin' Rojas 'll spread his men."

Minutes passed, but nothing moved upon the slope.  Each man crawled up
to a vantage point along the crest of rotting lava.  The watchers were
careful to peer through little notches or from behind a spur, and the
constricted nature of their hiding-place kept them close together.
Ladd's muttering grew into a growl, then lapsed into the silence that
marked his companions.  From time to time the rangers looked
inquiringly at Gale.  The field glass, however, like the naked sight,
could not catch the slightest moving object out there upon the lava.  A
long hour of slow, mounting suspense wore on.

"Shore it's all goin' to be as queer as the Yaqui," said Ladd.

Indeed, the strange mien, the silent action, the somber character of
the Indian had not been without effect upon the minds of the men.  Then
the weird, desolate, tragic scene added to the vague sense of mystery.
And now the disappearance of Rojas's band, the long wait in the
silence, the boding certainty of invisible foes crawling, circling
closer and closer, lent to the situation a final touch that made it
unreal.

"I'm reckonin' there's a mind behind them Greasers," replied Jim. "Or
mebbe we ain't done Rojas credit... If somethin' would only come off!"

That Lash, the coolest, most provokingly nonchalant of men in times of
peril, should begin to show a nervous strain was all the more
indicative of a subtle pervading unreality.

"Boys, look sharp!" suddenly called Lash.  "Low down to the left--mebbe
three hundred yards.  See, along by them seams of lava--behind the
choyas.  First off I thought it was a sheep.  But it's the Yaqui!...
Crawlin' swift as a lizard!  Can't you see him?"

It was a full moment before Jim's companions could locate the Indian.
Flat as a snake Yaqui wound himself along with incredible rapidity.
His advance was all the more remarkable for the fact that he appeared
to pass directly under the dreaded choyas.  Sometimes he paused to lift
his head and look.  He was directly in line with a huge whorl of lava
that rose higher than any point on the slope. This spur was a quarter
of a mile from the position of the rangers.

"Shore he's headin' for that high place,"  said Ladd.  "He's goin' slow
now.  There, he's stopped behind some choyas.  He's gettin' up--no,
he's kneelin'.... Now what the hell!"

"Laddy, take a peek at the side of that lava ridge," sharply called
Jim.  "I guess mebbe somethin' ain't comin' off.  See!  There's Rojas
an' his outfit climbin'.  Don't make out no hosses.... Dick, use your
glass an' tell us what's doin'.  I'll watch Yaqui an' tell you what his
move means."

Clearly and distinctly, almost as if he could have touched them, Gale
had Rojas and his followers in sight.  They were toiling up the rough
lava on foot.  They were heavily armed.  Spurs, chaps, jackets, scarfs
were not in evidence.  Gale saw the lean, swarthy faces, the black,
straggly hair, the ragged, soiled garments which had once been white.

"They're almost up now," Gale was saying.  "There!  They halt on top.
I see Rojas.  He looks wild.  By ----! fellows, an Indian!... It's a
Papago.  Belding's old herder!... The Indian points--this way--then
down.  He's showing Rojas the lay of the trail."

"Boys, Yaqui's in range of that bunch," said Jim, swiftly.  "He's
raisin' his rifle slow--Lord, how slow he is!... He's covered some one.
Which one I can't say.  But I think he'll pick Rojas."

"The Yaqui can shoot.  He'll pick Rojas," added Gale, grimly.

"Rojas--yes--yes!" cried Thorne, in passion of suspense.

"Not on your life!"  Ladd's voice cut in with scorn.  "Gentlemen, you
can gamble Yaqui 'll kill the Papago.  That traitor Indian knows these
sheep haunts.  He's tellin' Rojas--"

A sharp rifle shot rang out.

"Laddy's right," called Gale.  "The Papago's hit--his arm falls--There,
he tumbles!"

More shots rang out.  Yaqui was seen standing erect firing rapidly at
the darting Mexicans.  For all Gale could make out no second bullet
took effect.  Rojas and his men vanished behind the bulge of lava.
Then Yaqui deliberately backed away from his position. He made no
effort to run or hide.  Evidently he watched cautiously for signs of
pursuers in the ruts and behind the choyas.  Presently he turned and
came straight toward the position of the rangers, sheered off perhaps a
hundred paces below it, and disappeared in a crevice.  Plainly his
intention was to draw pursuers within rifle shot.

"Shore, Jim, you had your wish.  Somethin' come off," said Ladd. "An'
I'm sayin' thank God for the Yaqui!  That Papago 'd have ruined us.
Even so, mebbe he's told Rojas more'n enough to make us sweat blood."

"He had a chance to kill Rojas," cried out the drawn-faced, passionate
Thorne.  "He didn't take it!... He didn't take it!"

Only Ladd appeared to be able to answer the cavalryman's poignant cry.

"Listen, son," he said, and his voice rang.  "We-all know how you feel.
An' if I'd had that one shot never in the world could I have picked the
Papago guide.  I'd have had to kill Rojas.  That's the white man of it.
But Yaqui was right.  Only an Indian could have done it.  You can
gamble the Papago alive meant slim chance for us.  Because he'd led
straight to where Mercedes is hidden, an' then we'd have left cover to
fight it out... When you come to think of the Yaqui's hate for
Greasers, when you just seen him pass up a shot at one--well, I don't
know how to say what I mean, but damn me, my som-brer-ro is off to the
Indian!"

"I reckon so, an' I reckon the ball's opened," rejoined Lash, and now
that former nervous impatience so unnatural to him was as if it had
never been.  He was smilingly cool, and his voice had almost a
caressing note.  He tapped the breech of his Winchester with a sinewy
brown hand, and he did not appear to be addressing any one in
particular.  "Yaqui's opened the ball.  Look up your pardners there,
gents, an' get ready to dance."

Another wait set in then, and judging by the more direct rays of the
sun and a receding of the little shadows cast by the choyas, Gale was
of the opinion that it was a long wait.  But it seemed short. The four
men were lying under the bank of a half circular hole in the lava.  It
was notched and cracked, and its rim was fringed by choyas.  It sloped
down and opened to an unobstructed view of the crater.  Gale had the
upper position, fartherest to the right, and therefore was best
shielded from possible fire from the higher ridges of the rim, some
three hundred yards distant.  Jim came next, well hidden in a crack.
The positions of Thorne and Ladd were most exposed.  They kept sharp
lookout over the uneven rampart of their hiding-place.

The sun passed the zenith, began to slope westward, and to grow hotter
as it sloped.  The men waited and waited.  Gale saw no impatience even
in Thorne.  The sultry air seemed to be laden with some burden or
quality that was at once composed of heat, menace, color, and silence.
Even the light glancing up from the lava seemed red and the silence had
substance.  Sometimes Gale felt that it was unbearable.  Yet he made no
effort to break it.

Suddenly this dead stillness was rent by a shot, clear and stinging,
close at hand.  It was from a rifle, not a carbine.  With startling
quickness a cry followed--a cry that pierced Gale--it was so thin, so
high-keyed, so different from all other cries.  It was the involuntary
human shriek at death.

"Yaqui's called out another pardner," said Jim Lash, laconically.

Carbines began to crack.  The reports were quick, light, like sharp
spats without any ring.  Gale peered from behind the edge of his
covert.  Above the ragged wave of lava floated faint whitish clouds,
all that was visible of smokeless powder.  Then Gale made out round
spots, dark against the background of red, and in front of them leaped
out small tongues of fire.  Ladd's .405 began to "spang" with its
beautiful sound of power.  Thorne was firing, somewhat wildly Gale
thought.  Then Jim Lash pushed his Winchester over the rim under a
choya, and between shots Gale could hear him singing: "Turn the lady,
turn--turn the lady, turn!... Alaman left!... Swing your pardners!...
Forward an' back!... Turn the lady, turn!"  Gale got into the fight
himself, not so sure that he hit any of the round, bobbing objects he
aimed at, but growing sure of himself as action liberated something
forced and congested within his breast.

Then over the position of the rangers came a hail of steel bullets.
Those that struck the lava hissed away into the crater; those that came
biting through the choyas made a sound which resembled a sharp ripping
of silk.  Bits of cactus stung Gale's face, and he dreaded the flying
thorns more than he did the flying bullets.

"Hold on, boys," called Ladd, as he crouched down to reload his rifle.
"Save your shells.  The greasers are spreadin' on us, some goin' down
below Yaqui, others movin' up for that high ridge.  When they get up
there I'm damned if it won't be hot for us.  There ain't room for all
of us to hide here."

Ladd raised himself to peep over the rim.  Shots were now scattering,
and all appeared to come from below.  Emboldened by this he rose
higher.  A shot from in front, a rip of bullet through the choya, a
spat of something hitting Ladd's face, a steel missile hissing
onward--these inseparably blended sounds were all registered by Gale's
sensitive ear.

With a curse Ladd tumbled down into the hole.  His face showed a great
gray blotch, and starting blood.  Gale felt a sickening assurance of
desperate injury to the ranger.  He ran to him calling: "Laddy!  Laddy!"

"Shore I ain't plugged.  It's a damn choya burr.  The bullet knocked it
in my face.  Pull it out!"

The oval, long-spiked cone was firmly imbedded in Ladd's cheek. Blood
streamed down his face and neck.  Carefully, yet with no thought of
pain to himself, Gale tried to pull the cactus joint away.  It was as
firm as if it had been nailed there.  That was the damnable feature of
the barbed thorns:  once set, they held on as that strange plant held
to its desert life.  Ladd began to writhe, and sweat mingled with the
blood on his face.  He cursed and raved, and his movements made it
almost impossible for Gale to do anything.

"Put your knife-blade under an' tear it out!" shouted Ladd, hoarsely.

Thus ordered, Gale slipped a long blade in between the imbedded thorns,
and with a powerful jerk literally tore the choya out of Ladd's
quivering flesh.  Then, where the ranger's face was not red and raw, it
certainly was white.

A volley of shots from a different angle was followed by the quick ring
of steel bullets striking the lava all around Gale. His first idea, as
he heard the projectiles sing and hum and whine away into the air, was
that they were coming from above him.  He looked up to see a number of
low, white and dark knobs upon the high point of lava.  They had not
been there before.  Then he saw little, pale, leaping tongues of fire.
As he dodged down he distinctly heard a bullet strike Ladd.  At the
same instant he seemed to hear Thorne cry out and fall, and Lash's
boots scrape rapidly away.

Ladd fell backward still holding the .405.  Gale dragged him into the
shelter of his own position, and dreading to look at him, took up the
heavy weapon.  It was with a kind of savage strength that he gripped
the rifle; and it was with a cold and deadly intent that he aimed and
fired.  The first Greaser huddled low, let his carbine go clattering
down, and then crawled behind the rim.  The second  and third jerked
back.  The fourth seemed to flop up over the crest of lava.  A dark arm
reached for him, clutched his leg, tried to drag him up.  It was in
vain.  Wildly grasping at the air the bandit fell, slid down a steep
shelf, rolled over the rim, to go hurtling down out of sight.

Fingering the hot rifle with close-pressed hands, Gale watched the sky
line along the high point of lava.  It remained unbroken. As his
passion left him he feared to look back at his companions, and the cold
chill returned to his breast.

"Shore--I'm damn glad--them Greasers ain't usin' soft-nose bullets,"
drawled a calm voice.

Swift as lightning Gale whirled.

"Laddy!  I thought you were done for," cried Gale, with a break in his
voice.

"I ain't a-mindin' the bullet much.  But that choya joint took my
nerve, an' you can gamble on it.  Dick, this hole's pretty high up,
ain't it?"

The ranger's blouse was open at the neck, and on his right shoulder
under the collar bone was a small hole just beginning to bleed.

"Sure it's high, Laddy," replied Gale, gladly.  "Went clear through,
clean as a whistle!"

He tore a handkerchief into two parts, made wads, and pressing them
close over the wounds he bound them there with Ladd's scarf.

"Shore it's funny how a bullet can floor a man an' then not do any
damage," said Ladd.  "I felt a zip of wind an' somethin' like a pat on
my chest an' down I went.  Well, so much for the small caliber with
their steel bullets.  Supposin' I'd connected with a .405!"

"Laddy, I--I'm afraid Thorne's done for," whispered Gale.  "He's lying
over there in that crack.  I can see part of him.  He doesn't move."

"I was wonderin' if I'd have to tell you that.  Dick, he went down hard
hit, fallin', you know, limp an' soggy.  It was a moral cinch one of us
would get it in this fight; but God!  I'm sorry Thorne had to be the
man."

"Laddy, maybe he's not dead," replied Gale.  He called aloud to his
friend.  There was no answer.

Ladd got up, and, after peering keenly at the height of lava, he strode
swiftly across the space.  It was only a dozen steps to the crack in
the lava where Thorne had fallen head first.  Ladd bent over, went to
his knees, so that Gale saw only his head.  Then he appeared rising
with arms round the cavalryman.  He dragged him across the hole to the
sheltered corner that alone afforded protection.  He had scarcely
reached it when a carbine cracked and a bullet struck the flinty lava,
striking sparks, then singing away into the air.

Thorne was either dead or unconscious, and Gale, with a contracting
throat and numb heart, decided for the former.  Not so Ladd, who probed
the bloody gash on Thorne's temple, and then felt his breast.

"He's alive an' not bad hurt.  That bullet hit him glancin'.  Shore
them steel bullets are some lucky for us.  Dick, you needn't look so
glum. I tell you he ain't bad hurt.  I felt his skull with my finger.
There's no hole in it.  Wash him off an' tie--  Wow! did you get the
wind of that one?  An' mebbe it didn't sing off the lava!... Dick, look
after Thorne now while I--"

The completion of his speech was the stirring ring of the .405, and
then he uttered a laugh that was unpleasant.

"Shore, Greaser, there's a man's size bullet for you.  No slim,
sharp-pointed, steel-jacket nail!  I'm takin' it on me to believe
you're appreciatin' of the .405, seein' as you don't make no fuss."

It was indeed a joy to Gale to find that Thorne had not received a
wound necessarily fatal, though it was serious enough.  Gale bathed and
bound it, and laid the cavalryman against the slant of the bank, his
head high to lessen the probability of bleeding.

As Gale straightened up Ladd muttered low and deep, and swung the heavy
rifle around to the left.  Far along the slope a figure moved.  Ladd
began to work the lever of the Winchester and to shoot.  At every shot
the heavy firearm sprang up, and the recoil made Ladd's shoulder give
back.  Gale saw the bullets strike the lava behind, beside, before the
fleeing Mexican, sending up dull puffs of dust.  On the sixth shot he
plunged down out of sight, either hit or frightened into seeking cover.

"Dick, mebbe there's one or two left above; but we needn't figure much
on it," said Ladd, as, loading the rifle, he jerked his fingers quickly
from the hot breech.  "Listen!  Jim an' Yaqui are hittin' it up lively
down below.  I'll sneak down there.  You stay here an' keep about half
an eye peeled up yonder, an' keep the rest my way."

Ladd crossed the hole, climbed down into the deep crack where Thorne
had fallen, and then went stooping along with only his head above the
level.  Presently he disappeared.  Gale, having little to fear from the
high ridge, directed most of his attention toward the point beyond
which Ladd had gone.  The firing had become desultory, and the light
carbine shots outnumbered the sharp rifle shots five to one.  Gale made
a note of the fact that for some little time he had not heard the
unmistakable report of Jim Lash's automatic. Then ensued a long
interval in which the desert silence seemed to recover its grip.  The
.405 ripped it asunder--spang--spang--spang. Gale fancied he heard
yells.  There were a few pattering shots still farther down the trail.
Gale had an uneasy conviction that Rojas and some of his band might go
straight to the waterhole. It would be hard to dislodge even a few men
from that retreat.

There seemed a lull in the battle.  Gale ventured to stand high, and
screened behind choyas, he swept the three-quarter circle of lava with
his glass.  In the distance he saw horses, but no riders. Below him,
down the slope along the crater rim and the trail, the lava was bare of
all except tufts of choya.  Gale gathered assurance.  It looked as if
the day was favoring his side.  Then Thorne, coming partly to
consciousness, engaged Gale's care.  The cavalryman stirred and moaned,
called for water, and then for Mercedes.  Gale held him back with a
strong hand, and presently he was once more quiet.

For the first time in hours, as it seemed, Gale took note of the
physical aspect of his surroundings.  He began to look upon them
without keen gaze strained for crouching form, or bobbing head, or
spouting carbine.  Either Gale's sense of color and proportion had
become deranged during the fight, or the encompassing air and the
desert had changed.  Even the sun had changed.  It seemed lowering,
oval in shape, magenta in hue, and it had a surface that gleamed like
oil on water.  Its red rays shone through red haze. Distances that had
formerly been clearly outlined were now dim, obscured.  The yawning
chasm was not the same.  It circled wider, redder, deeper.  It was a
weird, ghastly mouth of hell.  Gale stood fascinated, unable to tell
how much he saw was real, how much exaggeration of overwrought
emotions.  There was no beauty here, but an unparalleled grandeur, a
sublime scene of devastation and desolation which might have had its
counterpart upon the burned-out moon.  The mood that gripped Gale now
added to its somber portent an unshakable foreboding of calamity.

He wrestled with the spell as if it were a physical foe.  Reason and
intelligence had their voices in his mind; but the moment was not one
wherein these things could wholly control.  He felt life strong within
his breast, yet there, a step away, was death, yawning, glaring, smoky,
red.  It was a moment--an hour for a savage, born, bred, developed in
this scarred and blasted place of jagged depths and red distances and
silences never meant to be broken.  Since Gale was not a savage he
fought that call of the red gods which sent him back down the long ages
toward his primitive day.  His mind combated his sense of sight and the
hearing that seemed useless; and his mind did not win all the victory.
Something fatal was here, hanging in the balance, as the red haze hung
along the vast walls of that crater of hell.

Suddenly harsh, prolonged yells brought him to his feet, and the
unrealities vanished.  Far down the trails where the crater rims closed
in the deep fissure he saw moving forms.  They were three in number.
Two of them ran nimbly across the lava bridge.  The third staggered far
behind.  It was Ladd.  He appeared hard hit.  He dragged at the heavy
rifle which he seemed unable to raise.  The yells came from him.  He
was calling the Yaqui.

Gale's heart stood still momentarily.  Here, then, was the catastrophe!
He hardly dared sweep that fissure with his glass. The two fleeing
figures halted--turned to fire at Ladd.  Gale recognized the foremost
one--small, compact, gaudy.  Rojas! The bandit's arm was outstretched.
Puffs of white smoke rose, and shots rapped out.  When Ladd went down
Rojas threw his gun aside and with a wild yell bounded over the lava.
His companion followed.

A tide of passion, first hot as fire, then cold as ice, rushed over
Gale when he saw Rojas take the trail toward Mercedes's hiding-place.
The little bandit appeared to have the sure-footedness of a mountain
sheep.  The Mexican following was not so sure or fast.  He turned back.
Gale heard the trenchant bark of the .405.  Ladd was kneeling.  He shot
again--again.  The retreating bandit seemed to run full into an
invisible obstacle, then fell lax, inert, lifeless.  Rojas sped on
unmindful of the spurts of dust about him.  Yaqui, high above Ladd, was
also firing at the bandit.  Then both rifles were emptied.  Rojas
turned at a high break in the trail.  He shook a defiant hand, and his
exulting yell pealed faintly to Gale's ears.  About him there was
something desperate, magnificent.  Then he clambered down the trail.

Ladd dropped the .405, and rising, gun in hand, he staggered toward the
bridge of lava.  Before he had crossed it Yaqui came bounding down the
slope, and in one splendid leap he cleared the fissure. He ran beyond
the trail and disappeared on the lava above.  Rojas had not seen this
sudden, darting move of the Indian.

Gale felt himself bitterly powerless to aid in that pursuit.  He could
only watch.  He wondered, fearfully, what had become of Lash.
Presently, when Rojas came out of the cracks and ruts of lava there
might be a chance of disabling him by a long shot. His progress was now
slow.  But he was making straight for Mercedes's hiding-place.  What
was it leading him there--an eagle eye, or hate, or instinct?  Why did
he go on when there could be no turning back for him on that trail?
Ladd was slow, heavy, staggering on the trail; but he was relentless.
Only death could stop the ranger now.  Surely Rojas must have known
that when he chose the trail.  From time to time Gale caught glimpses
of Yaqui's dark figure stealing along the higher rim of the crater. He
was making for a point above the bandit.

Moments--endless moments dragged by.  The lowering sun colored only the
upper half of the crater walls.  Far down the depths were murky blue.
Again Gale felt the insupportable silence.  The red haze became a
transparent veil before his eyes.  Sinister, evil, brooding, waiting,
seemed that yawning abyss.  Ladd staggered along the trail, at times he
crawled.  The Yaqui gained; he might have had wings; he leaped from
jagged crust to jagged crust; his sure-footedness was a wonderful thing.

But for Gale the marvel of that endless period of watching was the
purpose of the bandit Rojas.  He had now no weapon.  Gale's glass made
this fact plain.  There was death behind him, death below him, death
before him, and though he could not have known it, death above him.  He
never faltered--never made a misstep upon the narrow, flinty trail.
When he reached the lower end of the level ledge Gale's poignant doubt
became a certainty.  Rojas had seen Mercedes.  It was incredible, yet
Gale believed it.  Then, his heart clamped as in an icy vise, Gale
threw forward the Remington, and sinking on one knee, began to shoot.
He emptied the magazine.  Puffs of dust near Rojas did not even make
him turn.

As Gale began to reload he was horror-stricken by a low cry from
Thorne.  The cavalryman had recovered consciousness.  He was half
raised, pointing with shaking hand at the opposite ledge.  His
distended eyes were riveted upon Rojas.  He was trying to utter speech
that would not come.

Gale wheeled, rigid now, steeling himself to one last forlorn
hope--that Mercedes could defend herself.  She had a gun.  He doubted
not at all that she would use it.  But, remembering her terror of this
savage, he feared for her.

Rojas reached the level of the ledge.  He halted.  He crouched. It was
the act of a panther.  Manifestly he saw Mercedes within the cave.
Then faint shots patted the air, broke in quick echo. Rojas went down
as if struck a heavy blow.  He was hit. But even as Gale yelled in
sheer madness the bandit leaped erect. He seemed too quick, too supple
to be badly wounded.  A slight, dark figure flashed out of the cave.
Mercedes!  She backed against the wall.  Gale saw a puff of
white--heard a report.  But the bandit lunged at her.  Mercedes ran,
not to try to pass him, but straight for the precipice.  Her intention
was plain.  But Rojas outstripped her, even as she reached the verge.
Then a piercing scream pealed across the crater--a scream of despair.

Gale closed his eyes.  He could not bear to see more.

Thorne echoed Mercedes's scream.  Gale looked round just in time to
leap and catch the cavalryman as he staggered, apparently for the steep
slope.  And then, as Gale dragged him back, both fell. Gale saved his
friend, but he plunged into a choya.  He drew his hands away full of
the great glistening cones of thorns.

"For God's sake, Gale, shoot!  Shoot!  Kill her!  Kill her!...
Can't--you--see--Rojas--"

Thorne fainted.

Gale, stunned for the instant, stood with uplifted hands, and gazed
from Thorne across the crater.  Rojas had not killed Mercedes.  He was
overpowering her.  His actions seemed slow, wearing, purposeful. Hers
were violent.  Like a trapped she-wolf, Mercedes was fighting. She
tore, struggled, flung herself.

Rojas's intention was terribly plain.

In agony now, both mental and physical, cold and sick and weak, Gale
gripped his rifle and aimed at the struggling forms on the ledge.  He
pulled the trigger.  The bullet struck up a cloud of red dust close to
the struggling couple.  Again Gale fired, hoping to hit Rojas, praying
to kill Mercedes.  The bullet struck high. A third--fourth--fifth time
the Remington spoke--in vain! The rifle fell from Gale's racked hands.

How horribly plain that fiend's intention!  Gale tried to close his
eyes, but could not.  He prayed wildly for a sudden blindness--to faint
as Thorne had fainted.  But he was transfixed to the spot with eyes
that pierced the red light.

Mercedes was growing weaker, seemed about to collapse.

"Oh, Jim Lash, are you dead?" cried Gale.  "Oh, Laddy!... Oh, Yaqui!"

Suddenly a dark form literally fell down the wall behind the ledge
where Rojas fought the girl.  It sank in a heap, then bounded erect.

"Yaqui!" screamed Gale, and he waved his bleeding hands till the blood
bespattered his face.  Then he choked.  Utterance became impossible.

The Indian bent over Rojas and flung him against the wall. Mercedes,
sinking back, lay still.  When Rojas got up the Indian stood between
him and escape from the ledge.  Rojas backed the other way along the
narrowing shelf of lava.  His manner was abject, stupefied.  Slowly he
stepped backward.

It was then that Gale caught the white gleam of a knife in Yaqui's
hand.  Rojas turned and ran.  He rounded a corner of wall where the
footing was precarious.  Yaqui followed slowly.  His figure was dark
and menacing.  But he was not in a hurry.  When he passed off the ledge
Rojas was edging farther and farther along the wall.  He was clinging
now to the lava, creeping inch by inch.  Perhaps he had thought to work
around the buttress or climb over it.  Evidently he went as far as
possible, and there he clung, an unscalable wall above, the abyss
beneath.

The approach of the Yaqui was like a slow dark shadow of gloom. If it
seemed so to the stricken Gale what must it have been to Rojas?  He
appeared to sink against the wall.  The Yaqui stole closer and closer.
He was the savage now, and for him the moment must have been glorified.
Gale saw him gaze up at the great circling walls of the crater, then
down into the depths. Perhaps the red haze hanging above him, or the
purple haze below, or the deep caverns in the lava, held for Yaqui
spirits of the desert, his gods to whom he called.  Perhaps he invoked
shadows of his loved ones and his race, calling them in this moment of
vengeance.

Gale heard--or imagined he heard--that wild, strange Yaqui cry.

Then the Indian stepped close to Rojas, and bent low, keeping out of
reach.  How slow were his motions!  Would Yaqui never--never end it?...
A wail drifted across the crater to Gale's ears.

Rojas fell backward and plunged sheer.  The bank of white choyas caught
him, held him upon their steel spikes.  How long did the dazed Gale sit
there watching Rojas wrestling and writhing in convulsive frenzy?  The
bandit now seemed mad to win the delayed death.

When he broke free he was a white patched object no longer human, a
ball of choya burrs, and he slipped off the bank to shoot down and down
into the purple depths of the crater.



