XI

ACROSS CACTUS AND LAVA

BLANCO SOL showed no inclination to bend his head to the alfalfa which
swished softly about his legs.  Gale felt the horse's sensitive, almost
human alertness.  Sol knew as well as his master the nature of that
flight.

At the far corner of the field Yaqui halted, and slowly the line of
white horses merged into a compact mass.  There was a trail here
leading down to the river.  The campfires were so close that the bright
blazes could be seen in movement, and dark forms crossed in front of
them.  Yaqui slipped out of his saddle.  He ran his hand over Diablo's
nose and spoke low, and repeated this action for each of the other
horses.  Gale had long ceased to question the strange Indian's
behavior.  There was no explaining or understanding many of his
manoeuvers.  But the results of them were always thought-provoking.
Gale had never seen horse stand so silently as in this instance; no
stamp--no champ of bit--no toss of head--no shake of saddle or pack--no
heave or snort!  It seemed they had become imbued with the spirit of
the Indian.

Yaqui moved away into the shadows as noiselessly as if he were one of
them.  The darkness swallowed him.  He had taken a parallel with the
trail.  Gale wondered if Yaqui meant to try to lead his string of
horses by the rebel sentinels.  Ladd had his head bent low, his ear
toward the trail.  Jim's long neck had the arch of a listening deer.
Gale listened, too, and as the slow, silent moments went by his faculty
of hearing grew more acute from strain.  He heard Blanco Sol breathe;
he heard the pound of his own heart; he heard the silken rustle of the
alfalfa; he heard a faint, far-off sound of voice, like a lost echo.
Then his ear seemed to register a movement of air, a disturbance so
soft as to be nameless.  Then followed long, silent moments.

Yaqui appeared as he had vanished.  He might have been part of the
shadows.  But he was there.  He started off down the trail leading
Diablo.  Again the white line stretched slowly out.  Gale fell in
behind.  A bench of ground, covered with sparse greasewood, sloped
gently down to the deep, wide arroyo of Forlorn River. Blanco Sol shied
a few feet out of the trail.  Peering low with keen eyes, Gale made out
three objects--a white sombrero, a blanket, and a Mexican lying face
down.  The Yaqui had stolen upon this sentinel like a silent wind of
death.  Just then a desert coyote wailed, and the wild cry fitted the
darkness and the Yaqui's deed.

Once under the dark lee of the river bank Yaqui caused another halt,
and he disappeared as before.  It seemed to Gale that the Indian
started to cross the pale level sandbed of the river, where stones
stood out gray, and the darker line of opposite shore was visible.  But
he vanished, and it was impossible to tell whether he went one way or
another.  Moments passed.  The horses held heads up, looked toward the
glimmering campfires and listened. Gale thrilled with the meaning of it
all--the night--the silence--the flight--and the wonderful Indian
stealing with the slow inevitableness of doom upon another sentinel.
An hour passed and Gale seemed to have become deadened to all sense of
hearing. There were no more sounds in the world.  The desert was as
silent as it was black.  Yet again came that strange change in the
tensity of Gale's ear-strain, a check, a break, a vibration--and this
time the sound did not go nameless.  It might have been moan of wind or
wail of far-distant wolf, but Gale imagined it was the strangling
death-cry of another guard, or that strange, involuntary utterance of
the Yaqui.  Blanco Sol trembled in all his great frame, and then Gale
was certain the sound was not imagination.

That certainty, once for all, fixed in Gale's mind the mood of his
flight.  The Yaqui dominated the horses and the rangers. Thorne and
Mercedes were as persons under a spell.  The Indian's strange silence,
the feeling of mystery and power he seemed to create, all that was
incomprehensible about him were emphasized in the light of his slow,
sure, and ruthless action.  If he dominated the others, surely he did
more for Gale--colored his thoughts--presage the wild and terrible
future of that flight.  If Rojas embodied all the hatred and passion of
the peon--scourged slave for a thousand years--then Yaqui embodied all
the darkness, the cruelty, the white, sun-heated blood, the ferocity,
the tragedy of the desert.

Suddenly the Indian stalked out of the gloom.  He mounted Diablo and
headed across the river.  Once more the line of moving white shadows
stretched out.  The soft sand gave forth no sound at all. The
glimmering campfires sank behind the western bank.  Yaqui led the way
into the willows, and there was faint swishing of leaves; then into the
mesquite, and there was faint rustling of branches.  The glimmering
lights appeared again, and grotesque forms of saguaros loomed darkly.
Gale peered sharply along the trail, and, presently, on the pale sand
under a cactus, there lay a blanketed form, prone, outstretched, a
carbine clutched in one hand, a cigarette, still burning, in the other.

The cavalcade of white horses passed within five hundred yards of
campfires, around which dark forms moved in plain sight.  Soft pads in
sand, faint metallic tickings of steel on thorns, low, regular
breathing of horses--these were all the sounds the fugitives made, and
they could not have been heard at one-fifth the distance. The lights
disappeared from time to time, grew dimmer, more flickering, and at
last they vanished altogether.  Belding's fleet and tireless steeds
were out in front; the desert opened ahead wide, dark, vast.  Rojas and
his rebels were behind, eating, drinking, careless. The somber shadow
lifted from Gale's  heart.  He held now an unquenchable faith in the
Yaqui.  Belding would be listening back there along the river. He would
know of the escape.  He would tell Nell, and then hide her safely. As
Gale accepted a strange and fatalistic foreshadowing of toil, blood,
and agony in this desert journey, so he believed in Mercedes's ultimate
freedom and happiness, and his own return to the girl who had grown
dearer than life.


A cold, gray dawn was fleeing before a rosy sun when Yaqui halted the
march at Papago Well.  The horses were taken to water, then led down
the arroyo into the grass.  Here packs were slipped, saddles removed.
Mercedes was cold, lame, tired, but happy.  It warmed Gale's blood to
look at her.  The shadow of fear still lay in her eyes, but it was
passing.  Hope and courage shone there, and affection for her ranger
protectors and the Yaqui, and unutterable love for the cavalryman.  Jim
Lash remarked how cleverly they had fooled the rebels.

"Shore they'll be comin' along," replied Ladd.

They built a fire, cooked and ate.  The Yaqui spoke only one word:
"Sleep."  Blankets were spread.  Mercedes dropped into a deep slumber,
her head on Thorne's shoulder.  Excitement kept Thorne awake.  The two
rangers dozed beside the fire.  Gale shared the Yaqui's watch.  The sun
began to climb and the icy edge of dawn to wear away.  Rabbits bobbed
their cotton tails under the mesquite.  Gale climbed a rocky wall above
the arroyo bank, and there, with command over the miles of the
back-trail, he watched.

It was a sweeping, rolling, wrinkled, and streaked range of desert that
he saw, ruddy in the morning sunlight, with patches of cactus and
mesquite rough-etched in shimmering gloom.  No Name Mountains split the
eastern sky, towering high, gloomy, grand, with purple veils upon their
slopes.  They were forty miles away and looked five. Gale thought of
the girl who was there under their shadow.

Yaqui kept the horses bunched, and he led them from one little park of
galleta grass to another.  At the end of three hours he took them to
water.  Upon his return Gale clambered down from his outlook, the
rangers grew active.  Mercedes was awakened; and soon the party faced
westward, their long shadows moving before them. Yaqui led with Blanco
Diablo in a long, easy lope.  The arroyo washed itself out into flat
desert, and the greens began to shade into gray, and then the gray into
red.  Only sparse cactus and weathered ledges dotted the great low roll
of a rising escarpment. Yaqui suited the gait of his horse to the lay
of the land, and his followers accepted his pace.  There were canter
and trot, and swift walk and slow climb, and long swing--miles up and
down and forward.  The sun soared hot.  The heated air lifted, and
incoming currents from the west swept low and hard over the barren
earth.  In the distance, all around the horizon, accumulations of dust
seemed like ranging, mushrooming yellow clouds.

Yaqui was the only one of the fugitives who never looked back. Mercedes
did it the most.  Gale felt what compelled her, he could not resist it
himself.  But it was a vain search.  For a thousand puffs of white and
yellow dust rose from that backward sweep of desert, and any one of
them might have been blown from under horses' hoofs.  Gale had a
conviction that when Yaqui gazed back toward the well and the shining
plain beyond, there would be reason for it.  But when the sun lost its
heat and the wind died down Yaqui took long and careful surveys
westward from the high points on the trail.  Sunset was not far off,
and there in a bare, spotted valley lay Coyote Tanks, the only
waterhole between Papago Well and the Sonoyta Oasis.  Gale used his
glass, told Yaqui there was no smoke, no sign of life; still the Indian
fixed his falcon eyes on distant spots looked long.  It was as if his
vision could not detect what reason or cunning or intuition, perhaps an
instinct, told him was there.  Presently in a sheltered spot, where
blown sand had not obliterated the trail, Yaqui found the tracks of
horses.  The curve of the iron shoes pointed westward. An intersecting
trail from the north came in here.  Gale thought the tracks either one
or two days old.  Ladd said they were one day. The Indian shook his
head.

No farther advance was undertaken.  The Yaqui headed south and traveled
slowly, climbing to the brow of a bold height of weathered mesa.  There
he sat his horse and waited.  No one questioned him. The rangers
dismounted to stretch their legs, and Mercedes was lifted to a rock,
where she rested.  Thorne had gradually yielded to the desert's
influence for silence.  He spoke once or twice to Gale, and
occasionally whispered to Mercedes.  Gale fancied his friend would soon
learn that necessary speech in desert travel meant a few greetings, a
few words to make real the fact of human companionship, a few short,
terse terms for the business of day or night, and perhaps a stern order
or a soft call to a horse.

The sun went down, and the golden, rosy veils turned to blue and shaded
darker till twilight was there in the valley.  Only the spurs of
mountains, spiring the near and far horizon, retained their clear
outline.  Darkness approached, and the clear peaks faded.  The horses
stamped to be on the move.

"Malo!" exclaimed the Yaqui.

He did not point with arm, but his falcon head was outstretched, and
his piercing eyes gazed at the blurring spot which marked the location
of Coyote Tanks.

"Jim, can you see anything?" asked Ladd.

"Nope, but I reckon he can."

Darkness increased momentarily till night shaded the deepest part of
the valley.

Then Ladd suddenly straightened up, turned to his horse, and muttered
low under his breath.

"I reckon so," said Lash, and for once his easy, good-natured tone was
not in evidence.  His voice was harsh.

Gale's eyes, keen as they were, were last of the rangers to see tiny,
needle-points of light just faintly perceptible in the blackness.

"Laddy!  Campfires?" he asked, quickly.

"Shore's you're born, my boy."

"How many?"

Ladd did not reply; but Yaqui held up his hand, his fingers wide. Five
campfires!  A strong force of rebels or raiders or some other desert
troop was camping at Coyote Tanks.

Yaqui sat his horse for a moment, motionless as stone, his dark face
immutable and impassive.  Then he stretched wide his right arm in the
direction of No Name Mountains, now losing their last faint traces of
the afterglow, and he shook his head.  He made the same impressive
gesture toward the Sonoyta Oasis with the same somber negation.

Thereupon he turned Diablo's head to the south and started down the
slope.  His manner had been decisive, even stern.  Lash did not
question it, nor did Ladd.  Both rangers hesitated, however, and showed
a strange, almost sullen reluctance which Gale had never seen in them
before.  Raiders were one thing, Rojas was another; Camino del Diablo
still another; but that vast and desolate and unwatered waste of cactus
and lava, the Sonora Desert, might appall the stoutest heart.  Gale
felt his own sink--felt himself flinch.

"Oh, where is he going?" cried Mercedes.  Her poignant voice seemed to
break a spell.

"Shore, lady, Yaqui's goin' home," replied Ladd, gently.  "An'
considerin' our troubles I reckon we ought to thank God he knows the
way."

They mounted and rode down the slope toward the darkening south.

Not until night travel was obstructed by a wall of cactus did the
Indian halt to make a dry camp.  Water and grass for the horses and
fire to cook by were not to be had.  Mercedes bore up surprisingly; but
she fell asleep almost the instant her thirst had been allayed.  Thorne
laid her upon a blanket and covered her. The men ate and drank.  Diablo
was the only horse that showed impatience; but he was angry, and not in
distress.  Blanco Sol licked Gale's hand and stood patiently.  Many a
time had he taken his rest at night without a drink.  Yaqui again bade
the men sleep. Ladd said he would take the early watch; but from the
way the Indian shook his head and settled himself against a stone, it
appeared if Ladd remained awake he would have company.  Gale lay down
weary of limb and eye.  He heard the soft thump of hoofs, the sough of
wind in the cactus--then no more.

When he awoke there was bustle and stir about him.  Day had not yet
dawned, and the air was freezing cold.  Yaqui had found a scant bundle
of greasewood which served to warm them and to cook breakfast.
Mercedes was not aroused till the last moment.

Day dawned with the fugitives in the saddle.  A picketed wall of cactus
hedged them in, yet the Yaqui made a tortuous path, that, zigzag as it
might, in the main always headed south.  It was wonderful how he
slipped Diablo through the narrow aisles of thorns, saving the horse
and saving himself.  The others were torn and clutched and held and
stung.  The way was a flat, sandy pass between low mountain ranges.
There were open spots and aisles and squares of sand; and hedging rows
of prickly pear and the huge spider-legged ocatillo and hummocky masses
of clustered bisnagi.  The day grew dry and hot.  A fragrant wind blew
through the pass.  Cactus flowers bloomed, red and yellow and magenta.
The sweet, pale Ajo lily gleamed in shady corners.

Ten miles of travel covered the length of the pass.  It opened wide
upon a wonderful scene, an arboreal desert, dominated by its pure light
green, yet lined by many merging colors.  And it rose slowly to a low
dim and dark-red zone of lava, spurred, peaked, domed by volcano cones,
a wild and ragged region, illimitable as the horizon.

The Yaqui, if not at fault, was yet uncertain.  His falcon eyes
searched and roved, and became fixed at length at the southwest, and
toward this he turned his horse.  The great, fluted saguaros, fifty,
sixty feet high, raised columnal forms, and their branching limbs and
curving lines added a grace to the desert.  It was the low-bushed
cactus that made the toil and pain of travel.  Yet these thorny forms
were beautiful.

In the basins between the ridges, to right and left along the floor of
low plains the mirage glistened, wavered, faded, vanished--lakes and
trees and clouds.  Inverted mountains hung suspended in the lilac air
and faint tracery of white-walled cities.

At noon Yaqui halted the cavalcade.  He had selected a field of bisnagi
cactus for the place of rest.  Presently his reason became obvious.
With long, heavy knife he cut off the tops of these barrel-shaped
plants.  He scooped out soft pulp, and with stone and hand then began
to pound the deeper pulp into a juicy mass.  When he threw this out
there was a little water left, sweet, cool water which man and horse
shared eagerly.  Thus he made even the desert's fiercest growths
minister to their needs.

But he did not halt long.  Miles of gray-green spiked walls lay between
him and that line of ragged, red lava which manifestly he must reach
before dark.  The travel became faster, straighter. And the glistening
thorns clutched and clung to leather and cloth and flesh.  The horses
reared, snorted, balked, leaped--but they were sent on.  Only Blanco
Sol, the patient, the plodding, the indomitable, needed no goad or
spur.  Waves and scarfs and wreaths of heat smoked up from the sand.
Mercedes reeled in her saddle.  Thorne bade her drink, bathed her face,
supported her, and then gave way to Ladd, who took the girl with him on
Torre's broad back.  Yaqui's unflagging purpose and iron arm were
bitter and hateful to the proud and haughty spirit of Blanco Diablo.
For once Belding's great white devil had met his master.  He fought
rider, bit, bridle, cactus, sand--and yet he went on and on,
zigzagging, turning, winding, crashing through the barbed growths. The
middle of the afternoon saw Thorne reeling in his saddle, and then,
wherever possible, Gale's powerful arm lent him strength to hold his
seat.

The giant cactus came to be only so in name.  These saguaros were
thinning out, growing stunted, and most of them were single columns.
Gradually other cactus forms showed a harder struggle for existence,
and the spaces of sand between were wider.  But now the dreaded,
glistening choya began to show pale and gray and white upon the rising
slope.  Round-topped hills, sunset-colored above, blue-black below,
intervened to hide the distant spurs and peaks.  Mile and mile long
tongues of red lava streamed out between the hills and wound down to
stop abruptly upon the slope.

The fugitives were entering a desolate, burned-out world.  It rose
above them in limitless, gradual ascent and spread wide to east and
west.  Then the waste of sand began to yield to cinders.  The horses
sank to their fetlocks as they toiled on.  A fine, choking dust blew
back from the leaders, and men coughed and horses snorted.  The huge,
round hills rose smooth, symmetrical, colored as if the setting sun was
shining on bare, blue-black surfaces. But the sun was now behind the
hills.  In between ran the streams of lava.  The horsemen skirted the
edge between slope of hill and perpendicular ragged wall.  This red
lava seemed to have flowed and hardened there only yesterday.  It was
broken sharp, dull rust color, full of cracks and caves and crevices,
and everywhere upon its jagged surface grew the white-thorned choya.

Again twilight encompassed the travelers.  But there was still light
enough for Gale to see the constricted passage open into a wide, deep
space where the dull color was relieved by the gray of gnarled and
dwarfed mesquite.  Blanco Sol, keenest of scent, whistled his welcome
herald of water.  The other horses answered, quickened their gait.
Gale smelled it, too, sweet, cool, damp on the dry air.

Yaqui turned the corner of a pocket in the lava wall.  The file of
white horses rounded the corner after him.  And Gale, coming last, saw
the pale, glancing gleam of a pool of water beautiful in the twilight.


Next day the Yaqui's relentless driving demand on the horses was no
longer in evidence.  He lost no time, but he did not hasten.  His
course wound between low cinder dunes which limited their view of the
surrounding country.  These dunes finally sank down to a black floor as
hard as flint with tongues of lava to the left, and to the right the
slow descent into the cactus plain.  Yaqui was now traveling due west.
It was Gale's idea that the Indian was skirting the first sharp-toothed
slope of a vast volcanic plateau which formed the western half of the
Sonora Desert and extended to the Gulf of California.  Travel was slow,
but not exhausting for rider or beast.  A little sand and meager grass
gave a grayish tinge to the strip of black ground between lava and
plain.

That day, as the manner rather than the purpose of the Yaqui changed,
so there seemed to be subtle differences in the others of the party.
Gale himself lost a certain sickening dread, which had not been for
himself, but for Mercedes and Nell, and Thorne and the rangers.  Jim,
good-natured again, might have been patrolling the boundary line.  Ladd
lost his taciturnity and his gloom changed to a cool, careless air.  A
mood that was almost defiance began to be manifested in Thorne.  It was
in Mercedes, however, that Gale marked the most significant change.
Her collapse the preceding day might never have been.  She was lame and
sore; she rode her saddle sidewise, and often she had to be rested and
helped; but she had found a reserve fund of strength, and her mental
condition was not the same that it had been.  Her burden of fear had
been lifted. Gale saw in her the difference he always felt in himself
after a few days in the desert.  Already Mercedes and he, and all of
them, had begun to respond to the desert spirit. Moreover, Yaqui's
strange influence must have been a call to the primitive.

Thirty miles of easy stages brought the fugitives to another waterhole,
a little round pocket under the heaved-up edge of lava. There was
spare, short, bleached grass for the horses, but no wood for a fire.
This night there was question and reply, conjecture, doubt, opinion,
and conviction expressed by the men of the party. But the Indian, who
alone could have told where they were, where they were going, what
chance they had to escape, maintained his stoical silence.  Gale took
the early watch, Ladd the midnight one, and Lash that of the morning.

The day broke rosy, glorious, cold as ice.  Action was necessary to
make useful benumbed hands and feet.  Mercedes was fed while yet
wrapped in blankets.  Then, while the packs were being put on and
horses saddled, she walked up and down, slapping her hands, warming her
ears.  The rose color of the dawn was in her cheeks, and the wonderful
clearness of desert light in her eyes.  Thorne's eyes sought her
constantly.  The rangers watched her.  The Yaqui bent his glance upon
her only seldom; but when he did look it seemed that his strange,
fixed, and inscrutable face was about to break into a smile.  Yet that
never happened.  Gale himself was surprised to find how often his own
glance found the slender, dark, beautiful Spaniard.  Was this because
of her beauty? he wondered.  He thought not altogether.  Mercedes was a
woman.  She represented something in life that men of all races for
thousands of years had loved to see and own, to revere and debase, to
fight and die for.

It was a significant index to the day's travel that Yaqui should keep a
blanket from the pack and tear it into strips to bind the legs of the
horses.  It meant the dreaded choya and the knife-edged lava.  That
Yaqui did not mount Diablo was still more significant. Mercedes must
ride; but the others must walk.

The Indian led off into one of the gray notches between the tumbled
streams of lava.  These streams were about thirty feet high, a rotting
mass of splintered lava, rougher than any other kind of roughness in
the world.  At the apex of the notch, where two streams met, a narrow
gully wound and ascended.  Gale caught sight of the dim, pale shadow of
a one-time trail.  Near at hand it was invisible; he had to look far
ahead to catch the faint tracery. Yaqui led Diablo into it, and then
began the most laborious and vexatious and painful of all slow travel.

Once up on top of that lava bed, Gale saw stretching away, breaking
into millions of crests and ruts, a vast, red-black field sweeping
onward and upward, with ragged, low ridges and mounds and spurs leading
higher and higher to a great, split escarpment wall, above which dim
peaks shone hazily blue in the distance.

He looked no more in that direction.  To keep his foothold, to save his
horse, cost him all energy and attention.  The course was marked out
for him in the tracks of the other horses.  He had only to follow.  But
nothing could have been more difficult.  The disintegrating surface of
a lava bed was at once the roughest, the hardest, the meanest, the
cruelest, the most deceitful kind of ground to travel.

It was rotten, yet it had corners as hard and sharp as pikes. It was
rough, yet as slippery as ice.  If there was a foot of level surface,
that space would be one to break through under a horse's hoofs.  It was
seamed, lined, cracked, ridged, knotted iron.  This lava bed resembled
a tremendously magnified clinker.  It had been a running sea of molten
flint, boiling, bubbling, spouting, and it had burst its surface into a
million sharp facets as it hardened.  The color was dull, dark, angry
red, like no other red, inflaming to the eye.  The millions of minute
crevices were dominated by deep fissures and holes, ragged and rough
beyond all comparison.

The fugitives made slow progress.  They picked a cautious, winding way
to and fro in little steps here and there along the many twists of the
trail, up and down the unavoidable depressions, round and round the
holes.  At noon, so winding back upon itself had been their course,
they appeared to have come only a short distance up the lava slope.

It was rough work for them; it was terrible work for the horses. Blanco
Diablo refused to answer to the power of the Yaqui.  He balked, he
plunged, he bit and kicked.  He had to be pulled and beaten over many
places.  Mercedes's horse almost threw her, and she was put upon Blanco
Sol.  The white charger snorted a protest, then, obedient to Gale's
stern call, patiently lowered his noble head and pawed the lava for a
footing that would hold.

The lava caused Gale toil and worry and pain, but he hated the choyas.
As the travel progressed this species of cactus increased in number of
plants and in size.  Everywhere the red lava was spotted with little
round patches of glistening frosty white.  And under every bunch of
choya, along and in the trail, were the discarded joints, like little
frosty pine cones covered with spines. It was utterly impossible always
to be on the lookout for these, and when Gale stepped on one, often as
not the steel-like thorns pierced leather and flesh.  Gale came almost
to believe what he had heard claimed by desert travelers--that the
choya was alive and leaped at man or beast.  Certain it was when Gale
passed one, if he did not put all attention to avoiding it, he was
hooked through his chaps and held by barbed thorns.  The pain was
almost unendurable.  It was like no other.  It burned, stung,
beat--almost seemed to freeze.  It made useless arm or leg. It made him
bite his tongue to keep from crying out. It made the sweat roll off
him.  It made him sick.

Moreover, bad as the choya was for man, it was infinitely worse for
beast.  A jagged stab from this poisoned cactus was the only thing
Blanco Sol could not stand.  Many times that day, before he carried
Mercedes, he had wildly snorted, and then stood trembling while Gale
picked broken thorns from the muscular legs.  But after Mercedes had
been put upon Sol Gale made sure no choya touched him.

The afternoon passed like the morning, in ceaseless winding and
twisting and climbing along this abandoned trail.  Gale saw many
waterholes, mostly dry, some containing water, all of them
catch-basins, full only after rainy season.  Little ugly bunched
bushes, that Gale scarcely recognized as mesquites, grew near these
holes; also stunted greasewood and prickly pear.  There was no grass,
and the choya alone flourished in that hard soil.

Darkness overtook the party as they unpacked beside a pool of water
deep under an overhanging shelf of lava.  It had been a hard day. The
horses drank their fill, and then stood patiently with drooping heads.
Hunger and thirst appeased, and a warm fire cheered the weary and
foot-sore fugitives.  Yaqui said, "Sleep."  And so another night passed.


Upon the following morning, ten miles or more up the slow-ascending
lava slope, Gale's attention was called from his somber search for the
less rough places in the trail.

"Dick, why does Yaqui look back?" asked Mercedes.

Gale was startled.

"Does he?"

"Every little while," replied Mercedes.

Gale was in the rear of all the other horses, so as to take, for
Mercedes's sake, the advantage of the broken trail.  Yaqui was leading
Diablo, winding around a break.  His head was bent as he stepped slowly
and unevenly upon the lava.  Gale turned to look back, the first time
in several days.  The mighty hollow of the desert below seemed wide
strip of red--wide strip of green--wide strip of gray--streaking to
purple peaks.  It was all too vast, too mighty to grasp any little
details.  He thought, of course, of Rojas in certain pursuit; but it
seemed absurded to look for him.

Yaqui led on, and Gale often glanced up from his task to watch the
Indian.  Presently he saw him stop, turn, and look back.  Ladd did
likewise, and then Jim and Thorne.  Gale found the desire irresistible.
Thereafter he often rested Blanco Sol, and looked back the while.  He
had his field-glass, but did not choose to use it.

"Rojas will follow," said Mercedes.

Gale regarded her in amaze.  The tone of her voice had been
indefinable.  If there were fear then he failed to detect it.  She was
gazing back down the colored slope, and something about her, perhaps
the steady, falcon gaze of her magnificent eyes, reminded him of Yaqui.

Many times during the ensuing hour the Indian faced about, and always
his followers did likewise.  It was high noon, with the sun beating hot
and the lava radiating heat, when Yaqui halted for a rest.  The place
selected was a ridge of lava, almost a promontory, considering its
outlook.  The horses bunched here and drooped their heads.  The rangers
were about to slip the packs and remove saddles when Yaqui restrained
them.

He fixed a changeless, gleaming gaze on the slow descent; but did not
seem to look afar.

Suddenly he uttered his strange cry--the one Gale considered
involuntary, or else significant of some tribal trait or feeling. It
was incomprehensible, but no one could have doubted its potency.  Yaqui
pointed down the lava slope, pointed with finger and arm and neck and
head--his whole body was instinct with direction.  His whole being
seemed to have been animated and then frozen.  His posture could not
have been misunderstood, yet his expression had not altered.  Gale had
never seen the Indian's face change its hard, red-bronze calm.  It was
the color and the flintiness and the character of the lava at his feet.

"Shore he sees somethin'," said Ladd.  "But my eyes are not good."

"I reckon I ain't sure of mine," replied Jim.  "I'm bothered by a dim
movin' streak down there."

Thorne gazed eagerly down as he stood beside Mercedes, who sat
motionless facing the slope.  Gale looked and looked till he hurt his
eyes.  Then he took his glass out of its case on Sol's saddle.

There appeared to be nothing upon the lava but the innumerable dots of
choya shining in the sun.  Gale swept his glass slowly forward and
back.  Then into a nearer field of vision crept a long white-and-black
line of horses and men.  Without a word he handed the glass to Ladd.
The ranger used it, muttering to himself.

"They're on the lava fifteen miles down in an air line," he said,
presently.  "Jim, shore they're twice that an' more accordin' to the
trail."

Jim had his look and replied:  "I reckon we're a day an' a night in the
lead."

"Is it Rojas?" burst out Thorne, with set jaw.

"Yes, Thorne.  It's Rojas and a dozen men or more," replied Gale, and
he looked up at Mercedes.

She was transformed.  She might have been a medieval princess embodying
all the Spanish power and passion of that time, breathing revenge,
hate, unquenchable spirit of fire.  If her beauty had been wonderful in
her helpless and appealing moments, now, when she looked back
white-faced and flame-eyed, it was transcendant.

Gale drew a long, deep breath.  The mood which had presaged pursuit,
strife, blood on this somber desert, returned to him tenfold.  He saw
Thorne's face corded by black veins, and his teeth exposed like those
of a snarling wolf.  These rangers, who had coolly risked death many
times, and had dealt it often, were white as no fear or pain could have
made them.  Then, on the moment, Yaqui raised his hand, not clenched or
doubled tight, but curled rigid like an eagle's claw; and he shook it
in a strange, slow gesture which was menacing and terrible.

It was the woman that called to the depths of these men.  And their
passion to kill and to save was surpassed only by the wild hate which
was yet love, the unfathomable emotion of a peon slave.  Gale marveled
at it, while he felt his whole being cold and tense, as he turned once
more to follow in the tracks of his leaders.  The fight predicted by
Belding was at hand.  What a fight that must be!  Rojas was traveling
light and fast.  He was gaining. He had bought his men with gold, with
extravagant promises, perhaps with offers of the body and blood of an
aristocrat hateful to their kind.  Lastly, there was the wild, desolate
environment, a tortured wilderness of jagged lava and poisoned choya, a
lonely, fierce, and repellant world, a red stage most somberly and
fittingly colored for a supreme struggle between men.

Yaqui looked back no more.  Mercedes looked back no more.  But the
others looked, and the time came when Gale saw the creeping line of
pursuers with naked eyes.

A level line above marked the rim of the plateau.  Sand began to show
in the little lava pits.  On and upward toiled the cavalcade, still
very slowly advancing.  At last Yaqui reached the rim.  He stood with
his hand on Blanco Diablo; and both were silhouetted against the sky.
That was the outlook for a Yaqui.  And his great horse, dazzlingly
white in the sunlight, with head wildly and proudly erect, mane and
tail flying in the wind, made a magnificent picture.  The others toiled
on and upward, and at last Gale led Blanco Sol over the rim.  Then all
looked down the red slope.

But shadows were gathering there and no moving line could be seen.

Yaqui mounted and wheeled Diablo away.  The others followed. Gale saw
that the plateau was no more than a vast field of low, ragged circles,
levels, mounds, cones, and whirls of lava.  The lava was of a darker
red than that down upon the slope, and it was harder than flint.  In
places fine sand and cinders covered the uneven floor.  Strange
varieties of cactus vied with the omnipresent choya. Yaqui, however,
found ground that his horse covered at a swift walk.

But there was only an hour, perhaps, of this comparatively easy going.
Then the Yaqui led them into a zone of craters.  The top of the earth
seemed to have been blown out in holes from a few rods in width to
large craters, some shallow, others deep, and all red as fire.  Yaqui
circled close to abysses which yawned sheer from a level surface, and
he appeared always to be turning upon his course to avoid them.

The plateau had now a considerable dip to the west.  Gale marked the
slow heave and ripple of the ocean of lava to the south, where high,
rounded peaks marked the center of this volcanic region.  The uneven
nature of the slope westward prevented any extended view, until
suddenly the fugitives emerged from a rugged break to come upon a
sublime and awe-inspiring spectacle.

They were upon a high point of the western slope of the plateau. It was
a slope, but so many leagues long in its descent that only from a
height could any slant have been perceptible.  Yaqui and his white
horse stood upon the brink of a crater miles in circumference, a
thousand feet deep, with its red walls patched in frost-colored spots
by the silvery choya.  The giant tracery of lava streams waved down the
slope to disappear in undulating sand dunes. And these bordered a
seemingly endless arm of blue sea.  This was the Gulf of California.
Beyond the Gulf rose dim, bold mountains, and above them hung the
setting sun, dusky red, flooding all that barren empire with a sinister
light.

It was strange to Gale then, and perhaps to the others, to see their
guide lead Diablo into a smooth and well-worn trail along the rim of
the awful crater.  Gale looked down into that red chasm. It resembled
an inferno.  The dark cliffs upon the opposite side were veiled in blue
haze that seemed like smoke.  Here Yaqui was at home.  He moved and
looked about him as a man coming at last into his own.  Gale saw him
stop and gaze out over that red-ribbed void to the Gulf.

Gale devined that somewhere along this crater of hell the Yaqui would
make his final stand; and one look into his strange, inscrutable eyes
made imagination picture a fitting doom for the pursuing Rojas.



