The Project Gutenberg eBook of Desert Gold
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Desert Gold

Author: Zane Grey


        
Release date: April 1, 1996 [eBook #502]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/502








DESERT GOLD

A ROMANCE OF THE BORDER


BY

ZANE GREY




CONTENTS


 Prologue

     I.  Old Friends
    II.  Mercedes Castaneda
   III.  A Flight Into The Desert
    IV.  Forlorn River
     V.  A Desert Rose
    VI.  The Yaqui
   VII.  White Horses
  VIII.  The Running of Blanco Sol
    IX.  An Interrupted Siesta
     X.  Rojas
    XI.  Across Cactus and Lava
   XII.  The Crater of Hell
  XIII.  Changes at Forlorn River
   XIV.  A Lost Son
    XV.  Bound In The Desert
   XVI.  Mountain Sheep
  XVII.  The Whistle of a Horse
 XVIII.  Reality Against Dreams
   XIX.  The Secret of Forlorn River
    XX.  Desert Gold




D E S E R T  G O L D



PROLOGUE


I

A FACE haunted Cameron--a woman's face.  It was there in the white
heart of the dying campfire; it hung in the shadows that hovered over
the flickering light; it drifted in the darkness beyond.

This hour, when the day had closed and the lonely desert night set in
with its dead silence, was one in which Cameron's mind was thronged
with memories of a time long past--of a home back in Peoria, of a woman
he had wronged and lost, and loved too late.  He was a prospector for
gold, a hunter of solitude, a lover of the drear, rock-ribbed
infinitude, because he wanted to be alone to remember.

A sound disturbed Cameron's reflections.  He bent his head listening. A
soft wind fanned the paling embers, blew sparks and white ashes and
thin smoke away into the enshrouding circle of blackness.  His burro
did not appear to be moving about.  The quiet split to the cry of a
coyote.  It rose strange, wild, mournful--not the howl of a prowling
upland beast baying the campfire or barking at a lonely prospector, but
the wail of a wolf, full-voiced, crying out the meaning of the desert
and the night.  Hunger throbbed in it--hunger for a mate, for
offspring, for life.  When it ceased, the terrible desert silence smote
Cameron, and the cry echoed in his soul. He and that wandering wolf
were brothers.

Then a sharp clink of metal on stone and soft pads of hoofs in sand
prompted Cameron to reach for his gun, and to move out of the light of
the waning campfire.  He was somewhere along the wild border line
between Sonora and Arizona; and the prospector who dared the heat and
barrenness of that region risked other dangers sometimes as menacing.

Figures darker than the gloom approached and took shape, and in the
light turned out to be those of a white man and a heavily packed burro.

"Hello there," the man called, as he came to a halt and gazed about
him.  "I saw your fire.  May I make camp here?"

Cameron came forth out of the shadow and greeted his visitor, whom he
took for a prospector like himself.  Cameron resented the breaking of
his lonely campfire vigil, but he respected the law of the desert.

The stranger thanked him, and then slipped the pack from his burro.
Then he rolled out his pack and began preparations for a meal. His
movements were slow and methodical.

Cameron watched him, still with resentment, yet with a curious and
growing interest.  The campfire burst into a bright blaze, and by its
light Cameron saw a man whose gray hair somehow did not seem to make
him old, and whose stooped shoulders did not detract from an impression
of rugged strength.

"Find any mineral?" asked Cameron, presently.

His visitor looked up quickly, as if startled by the sound of a human
voice.  He replied, and then the two men talked a little. But the
stranger evidently preferred silence.  Cameron understood that.  He
laughed grimly and bent a keener gaze upon the furrowed, shadowy face.
Another of those strange desert prospectors in whom there was some
relentless driving power besides the lust for gold! Cameron felt that
between this man and himself there was a subtle affinity, vague and
undefined, perhaps born of the divination that here was a desert
wanderer like himself, perhaps born of a deeper, an unintelligible
relation having its roots back in the past.  A long-forgotten sensation
stirred in Cameron's breast, one so long forgotten that he could not
recognize it.  But it was akin to pain.



II

When he awakened he found, to his surprise, that his companion had
departed.  A trail in the sand led off to the north.  There was no
water in that direction.  Cameron shrugged his shoulders; it was not
his affair; he had his own problems.  And straightway he forgot his
strange visitor.

Cameron began his day, grateful for the solitude that was now unbroken,
for the canyon-furrowed and cactus-spired scene that now showed no sign
of life.  He traveled southwest, never straying far from the dry stream
bed; and in a desultory way, without eagerness, he hunted for signs of
gold.

The work was toilsome, yet the periods of rest in which he indulged
were not taken because of fatigue.  He rested to look, to listen, to
feel.  What the vast silent world meant to him had always been a
mystical thing, which he felt in all its incalculable power, but never
understood.

That day, while it was yet light, and he was digging in a moist
white-bordered wash for water, he was brought sharply up by hearing the
crack of hard hoofs on stone.  There down the canyon came a man and a
burro.  Cameron recognized them.

"Hello, friend," called the man, halting.  "Our trails crossed again.
That's good."

"Hello," replied Cameron, slowly.  "Any mineral sign to-day?"

"No."

They made camp together, ate their frugal meal, smoked a pipe, and
rolled in their blankets without exchanging many words.  In the morning
the same reticence, the same aloofness characterized the manner of
both.  But Cameron's companion, when he had packed his burro and was
ready to start, faced about and said:  "We might stay together, if it's
all right with you."

"I never take a partner," replied Cameron.

"You're alone; I'm alone," said the other, mildly.  "It's a big place.
If we find gold there'll be enough for two."

"I don't go down into the desert for gold alone," rejoined Cameron,
with a chill note in his swift reply.

His companion's deep-set, luminous eyes emitted a singular flash. It
moved Cameron to say that in the years of his wandering he had met no
man who could endure equally with him the blasting heat, the blinding
dust storms, the wilderness of sand and rock and lava and cactus, the
terrible silence and desolation of the desert. Cameron waved a hand
toward the wide, shimmering, shadowy descent of plain and range.  "I
may strike through the Sonora Desert.  I may head for Pinacate or north
for the Colorado Basin.  You are an old man."

"I don't know the country, but to me one place is the same as another,"
replied his companion.  For moments he seemed to forget himself, and
swept his far-reaching gaze out over the colored gulf of stone and
sand.  Then with gentle slaps he drove his burro in behind Cameron.
"Yes, I'm old.  I'm lonely, too.  It's come to me just lately.  But,
friend, I can still travel, and for a few days my company won't hurt
you."

"Have it your way," said Cameron.

They began a slow march down into the desert.  At sunset they camped
under the lee of a low mesa.  Cameron was glad his comrade had the
Indian habit of silence.  Another day's travel found the prospectors
deep in the wilderness.  Then there came a breaking of reserve,
noticeable in the elder man, almost imperceptibly gradual in Cameron.
Beside the meager mesquite campfire this gray-faced, thoughtful old
prospector would remove his black pipe from his mouth to talk a little;
and Cameron would listen, and sometimes unlock his lips to speak a
word.  And so, as Cameron began to respond to the influence of a desert
less lonely than habitual, he began to take keener note of his comrade,
and found him different from any other he had ever encountered in the
wilderness. This man never grumbled at the heat, the glare, the driving
sand, the sour water, the scant fare.  During the daylight hours he was
seldom idle.  At night he sat dreaming before the fire or paced to and
fro in the gloom.  He slept but little, and that long after Cameron had
had his own rest.  He was tireless, patient, brooding.

Cameron's awakened interest brought home to him the realization that
for years he had shunned companionship.  In those years only three men
had wandered into the desert with him, and these had left their bones
to bleach in the shifting sands.  Cameron had not cared to know their
secrets.  But the more he studied this latest comrade the more he began
to suspect that he might have missed something in the others.  In his
own driving passion to take his secret into the limitless abode of
silence and desolation, where he could be alone with it, he had
forgotten that life dealt shocks to other men.  Somehow this silent
comrade reminded him.

One afternoon late, after they had toiled up a white, winding wash of
sand and gravel, they came upon a dry waterhole.  Cameron dug deep into
the sand, but without avail.  He was turning to retrace weary steps
back to the last water when his comrade asked him to wait.  Cameron
watched him search in his pack and bring forth what appeared to be a
small, forked branch of a peach tree.  He grasped the prongs of the
fork and held them before him with the end standing straight out, and
then he began to walk along the stream bed.  Cameron, at first amused,
then amazed, then pitying, and at last curious, kept pace with the
prospector.  He saw a strong tension of his comrade's wrists, as if he
was holding hard against a considerable force.  The end of the peach
branch began to quiver and turn.  Cameron reached out a hand to touch
it, and was astounded at feeling a powerful vibrant force pulling the
branch downward.  He felt it as a magnetic shock.  The branch kept
turning, and at length pointed to the ground.

"Dig here," said the prospector.

"What!" ejaculated Cameron.  Had the man lost his mind?

Then Cameron stood by while his comrade dug in the sand.  Three feet he
dug--four--five, and the sand grew dark, then moist.  At six feet water
began to seep through.

"Get the little basket in my pack," he said.

Cameron complied, and saw his comrade drop the basket into the deep
hole, where it kept the sides from caving in and allowed the water to
seep through.  While Cameron watched, the basket filled.  Of all the
strange incidents of his desert career this was the strangest.
Curiously he picked up the peach branch and held it as he had seen it
held.  The thing, however, was dead in his hands.

"I see you haven't got it," remarked his comrade.  "Few men have."

"Got what?" demanded Cameron.

"A power to find water that way.  Back in Illinois an old German used
to do that to locate wells.  He showed me I had the same power. I can't
explain.  But you needn't look so dumfounded.  There's nothing
supernatural about it."

"You mean it's a simple fact--that some men have a magnetism, a force
or power to find water as you did?"

"Yes.  It's not unusual on the farms back in Illinois, Ohio,
Pennsylvania.  The old German I spoke of made money traveling round
with his peach fork."

"What a gift for a man in the desert!"

Cameron's comrade smiled--the second time in all those days.

They entered a region where mineral abounded, and their march became
slower.  Generally they took the course of a wash, one on each side,
and let the burros travel leisurely along nipping at the bleached
blades of scant grass, or at sage or cactus, while they searched in the
canyons and under the ledges for signs of gold.  When they found any
rock that hinted of gold they picked off a piece and gave it a chemical
test.  The search was fascinating.  They interspersed the work with
long, restful moments when they looked afar down the vast reaches and
smoky shingles to the line of dim mountains. Some impelling desire, not
all the lure of gold, took them to the top of mesas and escarpments;
and here, when they had dug and picked, they rested and gazed out at
the wide prospect.  Then, as the sun lost its heat and sank lowering to
dent its red disk behind far-distant spurs, they halted in a shady
canyon or likely spot in a dry wash and tried for water.  When they
found it they unpacked, gave drink to the tired burros, and turned them
loose.  Dead mesquite served for the campfire.  While the strange
twilight deepened into weird night they sat propped against stones,
with eyes on the dying embers of the fire, and soon they lay on the
sand with the light of white stars on their dark faces.

Each succeeding day and night Cameron felt himself more and more drawn
to this strange man.  He found that after hours of burning toil he had
insensibly grown nearer to his comrade.  He reflected that after a few
weeks in the desert he had always become a different man. In
civilization, in the rough mining camps, he had been a prey to unrest
and gloom.  But once down on the great billowing sweep of this lonely
world, he could look into his unquiet soul without bitterness. Did not
the desert magnify men?  Cameron believed that wild men in wild places,
fighting cold, heat, starvation, thirst, barrenness, facing the
elements in all their ferocity, usually retrograded, descended to the
savage, lost all heart and soul and became mere brutes.  Likewise he
believed that men wandering or lost in the wilderness often reversed
that brutal order of life and became noble, wonderful, super-human.  So
now he did not marvel at a slow stir stealing warmer along his veins,
and at the premonition that perhaps he and this man, alone on the
desert, driven there by life's mysterious and remorseless motive, were
to see each other through God's eyes.

His companion was one who thought of himself last.  It humiliated
Cameron that in spite of growing keenness he could not hinder him from
doing more than an equal share of the day's work.  The man was mild,
gentle, quiet, mostly silent, yet under all his softness he seemed to
be made of the fiber of steel.  Cameron could not thwart him.
Moreover, he appeared to want to find gold for Cameron, not for
himself.  Cameron's hands always trembled at the turning of rock that
promised gold; he had enough of the prospector's passion for fortune to
thrill at the chance of a strike.  But the other never showed the least
trace of excitement.

One night they were encamped at the head of a canyon.  The day had been
exceedingly hot, and long after sundown the radiation of heat from the
rocks persisted.  A desert bird whistled a wild, melancholy note from a
dark cliff, and a distant coyote wailed mournfully. The stars shone
white until the huge moon rose to burn out all their whiteness.  And on
this night Cameron watched his comrade, and yielded to interest he had
not heretofore voiced.

"Pardner, what drives you into the desert?"

"Do I seem to be a driven man?"

"No. But I feel it.  Do you come to forget?"

"Yes."

"Ah!" softly exclaimed Cameron.  Always he seemed to have known that.
He said no more.  He watched the old man rise and begin his nightly
pace to and fro, up and down.  With slow, soft tread, forward and back,
tirelessly and ceaselessly, he paced that beat. He did not look up at
the stars or follow the radiant track of the moon along the canyon
ramparts.  He hung his head.  He was lost in another world.  It was a
world which the lonely desert made real. He looked a dark, sad,
plodding figure, and somehow impressed Cameron with the helplessness of
men.

Cameron grew acutely conscious of the pang in his own breast, of the
fire in his heart, the strife and torment of his passion-driven soul.
He had come into the desert to remember a woman.  She appeared to him
then as she had looked when first she entered his life--a golden-haired
girl, blue-eyed, white-skinned, red-lipped, tall and slender and
beautiful. He had never forgotten, and an old, sickening remorse
knocked at his heart.  He rose and climbed out of the canyon and to the
top of a mesa, where he paced to and fro and looked down into the weird
and mystic shadows, like the darkness of his passion, and farther on
down the moon track and the glittering stretches that vanished in the
cold, blue horizon.  The moon soared radiant and calm, the white stars
shone serene.  The vault of heaven seemed illimitable and divine.  The
desert surrounded him, silver-streaked and black-mantled, a chaos of
rock and sand, silent, austere, ancient, always waiting.  It spoke to
Cameron.  It was a naked corpse, but it had a soul.  In that wild
solitude the white stars looked down upon him pitilessly and pityingly.
They had shone upon a desert that might once have been alive and was
now dead, and might again throb with life, only to die.  It was a
terrible ordeal for him to stand alone and realize that he was only a
man facing eternity.  But that was what gave him strength to endure.
Somehow he was a part of it all, some atom in that vastness, somehow
necessary to an inscrutable purpose, something indestructible in that
desolate world of ruin and death and decay, something perishable and
changeable and growing under all the fixity of heaven.  In that
endless, silent hall of desert there was a spirit; and Cameron felt
hovering near him what he imagined to be phantoms of peace.

He returned to camp and sought his comrade.

"I reckon we're two of a kind," he said.  "It was a woman who drove me
into the desert.  But I come to remember.  The desert's the only place
I can do that."

"Was she your wife?" asked the elder man.

"No."

A long silence ensued.  A cool wind blew up the canyon, sifting the
sand through the dry sage, driving away the last of the lingering heat.
The campfire wore down to a ruddy ashen heap.

"I had a daughter," said Cameron's comrade.  "She lost her mother at
birth.  And I--I didn't know how to bring up a girl.  She was pretty
and gay.  It was the--the old story."

His words were peculiarly significant to Cameron.  They distressed him.
He had been wrapped up in his remorse.  If ever in the past he had
thought of any one connected with the girl he had wronged he had long
forgotten.  But the consequences of such wrong were far-reaching.  They
struck at the roots of a home.  Here in the desert he was confronted by
the spectacle of a splendid man, a father, wasting his life because he
could not forget--because there was nothing left to live for.  Cameron
understood better now why his comrade was drawn by the desert.

"Well, tell me more?" asked Cameron, earnestly.

"It was the old, old story.  My girl was pretty and free.  The young
bucks ran after her.  I guess she did not run away from them. And I was
away a good deal--working in another town.  She was in love with a wild
fellow.  I knew nothing of it till too late.  He was engaged to marry
her. But he didn't come back.  And when the disgrace became plain to
all, my girl left home.  She went West.  After a while I heard from
her.  She was well--working--living for her baby.  A long time passed.
I had no ties.  I drifted West.  Her lover had also gone West.  In
those days everybody went West.  I trailed him, intending to kill him.
But I lost his trail.  Neither could I find any trace of her.  She had
moved on, driven, no doubt, by the hound of her past.  Since then I
have taken to the wilds, hunting gold on the desert."

"Yes, it's the old, old story, only sadder, I think," said Cameron; and
his voice was strained and unnatural.  "Pardner, what Illinois town was
it you hailed from?"

"Peoria."

"And your--your name?" went on Cameron huskily.

"Warren--Jonas Warren."

That name might as well have been a bullet.  Cameron stood erect,
motionless, as men sometimes stand momentarily when shot straight
through the heart.  In an instant, when thoughts resurged like blinding
flashes of lightning through his mind, he was a swaying, quivering,
terror-stricken man.  He mumbled something hoarsely and backed into the
shadow.  But he need not have feared discovery, however surely his
agitation might have betrayed him.  Warren sat brooding over the
campfire, oblivious of his comrade, absorbed in the past.

Cameron swiftly walked away in the gloom, with the blood thrumming
thick in his ears, whispering over and over:

"Merciful God!  Nell was his daughter!"



III

As thought and feeling multiplied, Cameron was overwhelmed.  Beyond
belief, indeed, was it that out of the millions of men in the world two
who had never seen each other could have been driven into the desert by
memory of the same woman.  It brought the past so close.  It showed
Cameron how inevitably all his spiritual life was governed by what had
happened long ago.  That which made life significant to him was a
wandering in silent places where no eye could see him with his secret.
Some fateful chance had thrown him with the father of the girl he had
wrecked. It was incomprehensible; it was terrible.  It was the one
thing of all possible happenings in the world of chance that both
father and lover would have found unendurable.

Cameron's pain reached to despair when he felt this relation between
Warren and himself.  Something within him cried out to him to reveal
his identity.  Warren would kill him; but it was not fear of death that
put Cameron on the rack.  He had faced death too often to be afraid.
It was the thought of adding torture to this long-suffering man.  All
at once Cameron swore that he would not augment Warren's trouble, or
let him stain his hands with blood.  He would tell the truth of Nell's
sad story and his own, and make what amends he could.

Then Cameron's thought shifted from father to daughter.  She was
somewhere beyond the dim horizon line.  In those past lonely hours by
the campfire his fancy had tortured him with pictures of Nell. But his
remorseful and cruel fancy had lied to him.  Nell had struggled upward
out of menacing depths.  She had reconstructed a broken life.  And now
she was fighting for the name and happiness of her child.  Little Nell!
Cameron experienced a shuddering ripple in all his being--the physical
rack of an emotion born of a new and strange consciousness.

As Cameron gazed out over the blood-red, darkening desert suddenly the
strife in his soul ceased.  The moment was one of incalculable change,
in which his eyes seemed to pierce the vastness of cloud and range, and
mystery of gloom and shadow--to see with strong vision the illimitable
space before him.  He felt the grandeur of the desert, its simplicity,
its truth.  He had learned at last the lesson it taught.  No longer
strange was his meeting and wandering with Warren. Each had marched in
the steps of destiny; and as the lines of their fates had been
inextricably tangled in the years that were gone, so now their steps
had crossed and turned them toward one common goal.  For years they had
been two men marching alone, answering to an inward driving search, and
the desert had brought them together. For years they had wandered alone
in silence and solitude, where the sun burned white all day and the
stars burned white all night, blindly following the whisper of a
spirit.  But now Cameron knew that he was no longer blind, and in this
flash of revelation he felt that it had been given him to help Warren
with his burden.

He returned to camp trying to evolve a plan.  As always at that long
hour when the afterglow of sunset lingered in the west, Warren plodded
to and fro in the gloom.  All night Cameron lay awake thinking.

In the morning, when Warren brought the burros to camp and began
preparations for the usual packing, Cameron broke silence.

"Pardner, your story last night made me think.  I want to tell you
something about myself.  It's hard enough to be driven by sorrow for
one you've loved, as you've been driven; but to suffer sleepless and
eternal remorse for the ruin of one you've loved as I have
suffered--that is hell....  Listen.  In my younger days--it seems long
now, yet it's not so many years--I was wild.  I wronged the sweetest
and loveliest girl I ever knew.  I went away not dreaming that any
disgrace might come to her.  Along about that time I fell into terrible
moods--I changed--I learned I really loved her.  Then came a letter I
should have gotten months before.  It told of her trouble--importuned
me to hurry to save her.  Half frantic with shame and fear, I got a
marriage certificate and rushed back to her town. She was gone--had
been gone for weeks, and her disgrace was known. Friends warned me to
keep out of reach of her father.  I trailed her--found her.  I married
her.  But too late!... She would not live with me. She left me--I
followed her west, but never found her."

Warren leaned forward a little and looked into Cameron's eyes, as if
searching there for the repentance that might make him less deserving
of a man's scorn.

Cameron met the gaze unflinchingly, and again began to speak:

"You know, of course, how men out here somehow lose old names, old
identities.  It won't surprise you much to learn my name really isn't
Cameron, as I once told you."

Warren stiffened upright.  It seemed that there might have been a
blank, a suspension, between his grave interest and some strange mood
to come.

Cameron felt his heart bulge and contract in his breast; all his body
grew cold; and it took tremendous effort for him to make his lips form
words.

"Warren, I'm the man you're hunting.  I'm Burton.  I was Nell's lover!"

The old man rose and towered over Cameron, and then plunged down upon
him, and clutched at his throat with terrible stifling hands. The harsh
contact, the pain awakened Cameron to his peril before it was too late.
Desperate fighting saved him from being hurled to the ground and
stamped and crushed.  Warren seemed a maddened giant.  There was a
reeling, swaying, wrestling struggle before the elder man began to
weaken.  The Cameron, buffeted, bloody, half-stunned, panted for speech.

"Warren--hold on!  Give me--a minute.  I married Nell.  Didn't you know
that?... I saved the child!"

Cameron felt the shock that vibrated through Warren.  He repeated the
words again and again.  As if compelled by some resistless power,
Warren released Cameron, and, staggering back, stood with uplifted,
shaking hands.  In his face was a horrible darkness.

"Warren!  Wait--listen!" panted Cameron.  "I've got that marriage
certificate--I've had it by me all these years.  I kept it--to prove to
myself I did right."

The old man uttered a broken cry.

Cameron stole off among the rocks.  How long he absented himself or
what he did he had no idea.  When he returned Warren was sitting before
the campfire, and once more he appeared composed.  He spoke, and his
voice had a deeper note; but otherwise he seemed as usual.

They packed the burros and faced the north together.

Cameron experienced a singular exaltation.  He had lightened his
comrade's burden.  Wonderfully it came to him that he had also
lightened his own.  From that hour it was not torment to think of Nell.
Walking with his comrade through the silent places, lying beside him
under the serene luminous light of the stars, Cameron began to feel the
haunting presence of invisible things that were real to him--phantoms
whispering peace.  In the moan of the cool wind, in the silken seep of
sifting sand, in the distant rumble of a slipping ledge, in the faint
rush of a shooting star he heard these phantoms of peace coming with
whispers of the long pain of men at the last made endurable.  Even in
the white noonday, under the burning sun, these phantoms came to be
real to him. In the dead silence of the midnight hours he heard them
breathing nearer on the desert wind--nature's voices of motherhood,
whispers of God, peace in the solitude.



IV

There came a morning when the sun shone angry and red through a dull,
smoky haze.

"We're in for sandstorms," said Cameron.

They had scarcely covered a mile when a desert-wide, moaning, yellow
wall of flying sand swooped down upon them.  Seeking shelter in the lee
of a rock, they waited, hoping the storm was only a squall, such as
frequently whipped across the open places.  The moan increased to a
roar, and the dull red slowly dimmed, to disappear in the yellow pall,
and the air grew thick and dark.  Warren slipped the packs from the
burros.  Cameron feared the sandstorms had arrived some weeks ahead of
their usual season.

The men covered their heads and patiently waited.  The long hours
dragged, and the storm increased in fury.  Cameron and Warren wet
scarfs with water from their canteens, and bound them round their
faces, and then covered their heads.  The steady, hollow bellow of
flying sand went on.  It flew so thickly that enough sifted down under
the shelving rock to weight the blankets and almost bury the men.  They
were frequently compelled to shake off the sand to keep from being
borne to the ground.  And it was necessary to keep digging out the
packs.  The floor of their shelter gradually rose higher and higher.
They tried to eat, and seemed to be grinding only sand between their
teeth.  They lost the count of time. They dared not sleep, for that
would have meant being buried alive. The could only crouch close to the
leaning rock, shake off the sand, blindly dig out their packs, and
every moment gasp and cough and choke to fight suffocation.

The storm finally blew itself out.  It left the prospectors heavy and
stupid for want of sleep.  Their burros had wandered away, or had been
buried in the sand.  Far as eye could reach the desert had marvelously
changed; it was now a rippling sea of sand dunes. Away to the north
rose the peak that was their only guiding mark. They headed toward it,
carrying a shovel and part of their packs.

At noon the peak vanished in the shimmering glare of the desert. The
prospectors pushed on, guided by the sun.  In every wash they tried for
water.  With the forked peach branch in his hands Warren always
succeeded in locating water.  They dug, but it lay too deep.  At
length, spent and sore, they fell and slept through that night and part
of the next day.  Then they succeeded in getting water, and quenched
their thirst, and filled the canteens, and cooked a meal.

The burning day found them in an interminably wide plain, where there
was no shelter from the fierce sun. The men were exceedingly careful
with their water, though there was absolute necessity of drinking a
little every hour.  Late in the afternoon they came to a canyon that
they believed was the lower end of the one in which they had last found
water.  For hours they traveled toward its head, and, long after night
had set, found what they sought. Yielding to exhaustion, they slept,
and next day were loath to leave the waterhole.  Cool night spurred
them on with canteens full and renewed strength.

Morning told Cameron that they had turned back miles into the desert,
and it was desert new to him.  The red sun, the increasing heat, and
especially the variety and large size of the cactus plants warned
Cameron that he had descended to a lower level.  Mountain peaks loomed
on all sides, some near, others distant; and one, a blue spur,
splitting the glaring sky far to the north, Cameron thought he
recognized as a landmark.  The ascent toward it was heartbreaking, not
in steepness, but in its league-and-league-long monotonous rise.
Cameron knew there was only one hope--to make the water hold out and
never stop to rest.  Warren began to weaken. Often he had to halt.  The
burning white day passed, and likewise the night, with its white stars
shining so pitilessly cold and bright.

Cameron measured the water in his canteen by its weight.  Evaporation
by heat consumed as much as he drank.  During one of the rests, when he
had wetted his parched mouth and throat, he found opportunity to pour a
little water from his canteen into Warren's.

At first Cameron had curbed his restless activity to accommodate the
pace of his elder comrade.  But now he felt that he was losing
something of his instinctive and passionate zeal to get out of the
desert.  The thought of water came to occupy his mind.  He began to
imagine that his last little store of water did not appreciably
diminish.  He knew he was not quite right in his mind regarding water;
nevertheless, he felt this to be more of fact than fancy, and he began
to ponder.

When next they rested he pretended to be in a kind of stupor; but he
covertly watched Warren.  The man appeared far gone, yet he had
cunning.  He cautiously took up Cameron's canteen and poured water into
it from his own.

This troubled Cameron.  The old irritation at not being able to thwart
Warren returned to him.  Cameron reflected, and concluded that he had
been unwise not to expect this very thing.  Then, as his comrade
dropped into weary rest, he lifted both canteens.  If there were any
water in Warren's, it was only very little.  Both men had been enduring
the terrible desert thirst, concealing it, each giving his water to the
other, and the sacrifice had been useless.

Instead of ministering to the parched throats of one or both, the water
had evaporated.  When Cameron made sure of this, he took one more
drink, the last, and poured the little water left into Warren's
canteen.  He threw his own away.

Soon afterward Warren discovered the loss.

"Where's your canteen?" he asked.

"The heat was getting my water, so I drank what was left."

"My son!" said Warren.

The day opened for them in a red and green hell of rock and cactus.
Like a flame the sun scorched and peeled their faces.  Warren went
blind from the glare, and Cameron had to lead him.  At last Warren
plunged down, exhausted, in the shade of a ledge.

Cameron rested and waited, hopeless, with hot, weary eyes gazing down
from the height where he sat.  The ledge was the top step of a ragged
gigantic stairway.  Below stretched a sad, austere, and lonely valley.
A dim, wide streak, lighter than the bordering gray, wound down the
valley floor.  Once a river had flowed there, leaving only a forlorn
trace down the winding floor of this forlorn valley.

Movement on the part of Warren attracted Cameron's attention. Evidently
the old prospector had recovered his sight and some of his strength,
for he had arisen, and now began to walk along the arroyo bed with his
forked peach branch held before him.  He had clung to the precious bit
of wood.  Cameron considered the prospect for water hopeless, because
he saw that the arroyo had once been a canyon, and had been filled with
sands by desert winds.  Warren, however, stopped in a deep pit, and,
cutting his canteen in half, began to use one side of it as a scoop.
He scooped out a wide hollow, so wide that Cameron was certain he had
gone crazy.  Cameron gently urged him to stop, and then forcibly tried
to make him. But these efforts were futile.  Warren worked with slow,
ceaseless, methodical movement.  He toiled for what seemed hours.
Cameron, seeing the darkening, dampening sand, realized a wonderful
possibility of water, and he plunged into the pit with the other half
of the canteen.  Then both men toiled, round and round the wide hole,
down deeper and deeper.  The sand grew moist, then wet.  At the bottom
of the deep pit the sand coarsened, gave place to gravel. Finally water
welled in, a stronger volume than Cameron ever remembered finding on
the desert.  It would soon fill the hole and run over.  He marveled at
the circumstance.  The time was near the end of the dry season.
Perhaps an underground stream flowed from the range behind down to the
valley floor, and at this point came near to the surface.  Cameron had
heard of such desert miracles.

The finding of water revived Cameron's flagging hopes.  But they were
short-lived.  Warren had spend himself utterly.

"I'm done.  Don't linger," he whispered.  "My son, go--go!"

Then he fell.  Cameron dragged him out of the sand pit to a sheltered
place under the ledge.  While sitting beside the failing man Cameron
discovered painted images on the wall.  Often in the desert he had
found these evidences of a prehistoric people.  Then, from long habit,
he picked up a piece of rock and examined it. Its weight made him
closely scrutinize it.  The color was a peculiar black.  He scraped
through the black rust to find a piece of gold.  Around him lay
scattered heaps of black pebbles and bits of black, weathered rock and
pieces of broken ledge, and they showed gold.

"Warren!  Look!  See it!  Feel it!  Gold!"

But Warren had never cared, and now he was too blind to see.

"Go--go!" he whispered.

Cameron gazed down the gray reaches of the forlorn valley, and
something within him that was neither intelligence nor
emotion--something inscrutably strange--impelled him to promise.

Then Cameron built up stone monuments to mark his gold strike.  That
done, he tarried beside the unconscious Warren.  Moments passed--grew
into hours.  Cameron still had strength left to make an effort to get
out of the desert.  But that same inscrutable something which had
ordered his strange involuntary promise to Warren held him beside his
fallen comrade.  He watched the white sun turn to gold, and then to red
and sink behind mountains in the west.  Twilight stole into the arroyo.
It lingered, slowly turning to gloom. The vault of blue black lightened
to the blinking of stars. Then fell the serene, silent, luminous desert
night.

Cameron kept his vigil.  As the long hours wore on he felt creep over
him the comforting sense that he need not forever fight sleep. A wan
glow flared behind the dark, uneven horizon, and a melancholy misshapen
moon rose to make the white night one of shadows.  Absolute silence
claimed the desert.  It was mute.  Then that inscrutable something
breathed to him, telling him when he was alone.  He need not have
looked at the dark, still face beside him.

Another face haunted Cameron's--a woman's face.  It was there in the
white moonlit shadows; it drifted in the darkness beyond; it softened,
changed to that of a young girl, sweet, with the same dark, haunting
eyes of her mother.  Cameron prayed to that nameless thing within him,
the spirit of something deep and mystical as life.  He prayed to that
nameless thing outside, of which the rocks and the sand, the spiked
cactus and the ragged lava, the endless waste, with its vast star-fired
mantle, were but atoms.  He prayed for mercy to a woman--for happiness
to her child.  Both mother and daughter were close to him then.  Time
and distance were annihilated. He had faith--he saw into the future.
The fateful threads of the past, so inextricably woven with his error,
wound out their tragic length here in this forlorn desert.

Cameron then took a little tin box from his pocket, and, opening it,
removed a folded certificate.  He had kept a pen, and now he wrote
something upon the paper, and in lieu of ink he wrote with blood.  The
moon afforded him enough light to see; and, having replaced the paper,
he laid the little box upon a shelf of rock. It would remain there
unaffected by dust, moisture, heat, time. How long had those painted
images been there clear and sharp on the dry stone walls?  There were
no trails in that desert, and always there were incalculable changes.
Cameron saw this mutable mood of nature--the sands would fly and seep
and carve and bury; the floods would dig and cut; the ledges would
weather in the heat and rain; the avalanches would slide; the cactus
seeds would roll in the wind to catch in a niche and split the soil
with thirsty roots.  Years would pass.  Cameron seemed to see them,
too; and likewise destiny leading a child down into this forlorn waste,
where she would find love and fortune, and the grave of her father.

Cameron covered the dark, still face of his comrade from the light of
the waning moon.

That action was the severing of his hold on realities.  They fell away
from him in final separation.  Vaguely, dreamily he seemed to behold
his soul.  Night merged into gray day; and night came again, weird and
dark.  Then up out of the vast void of the desert, from the silence and
illimitableness, trooped his phantoms of peace. Majestically they
formed around him, marshalling and mustering in ceremonious state, and
moved to lay upon him their passionless serenity.



I

OLD FRIENDS

RICHARD GALE reflected that his sojourn in the West had been what his
disgusted father had predicted--idling here and there, with no
objective point or purpose.

It was reflection such as this, only more serious and perhaps somewhat
desperate, that had brought Gale down to the border. For some time the
newspapers had been printing news of Mexican revolution, guerrilla
warfare, United States cavalry patrolling the international line,
American cowboys fighting with the rebels, and wild stories of bold
raiders and bandits.  But as opportunity, and adventure, too, had
apparently given him a wide berth in Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, he had
struck southwest for the Arizona border, where he hoped to see some
stirring life.  He did not care very much what happened.  Months of
futile wandering in the hope of finding a place where he fitted had
inclined Richard to his father's opinion.

It was after dark one evening in early October when Richard arrived in
Casita.  He was surprised to find that it was evidently a town of
importance.  There was a jostling, jabbering, sombreroed crowd of
Mexicans around the railroad station.  He felt as if he were in a
foreign country.  After a while he saw several men of his nationality,
one of whom he engaged to carry his luggage to a hotel.  They walked up
a wide, well-lighted street lined with buildings in which were bright
windows.  Of the many people encountered by Gale most were Mexicans.
His guide explained that the smaller half of Casita lay in Arizona, the
other half in Mexico, and of several thousand inhabitants the majority
belonged on the southern side of the street, which was the boundary
line.  He also said that rebels had entered the town that day, causing
a good deal of excitement.

Gale was almost at the end of his financial resources, which fact
occasioned him to turn away from a pretentious hotel and to ask his
guide for a cheaper lodging-house.  When this was found, a sight of the
loungers in the office, and also a desire for comfort, persuaded Gale
to change his traveling-clothes for rough outing garb and boots.

"Well, I'm almost broke," he soliloquized, thoughtfully.  "The governor
said I wouldn't make any money.  He's right--so far. And he said I'd be
coming home beaten.  There he's wrong.  I've got a hunch that something
'll happen to me in this Greaser town."

He went out into a wide, whitewashed, high-ceiled corridor, and from
that into an immense room which, but for pool tables, bar, benches,
would have been like a courtyard.  The floor was cobblestoned, the
walls were of adobe, and the large windows opened like doors.  A blue
cloud of smoke filled the place.  Gale heard the click of pool balls
and the clink of glasses along the crowded bar.  Bare-legged,
sandal-footed Mexicans in white rubbed shoulders with Mexicans mantled
in black and red.  There were others in tight-fitting blue uniforms
with gold fringe or tassels at the shoulders.  These men wore belts
with heavy, bone-handled guns, and evidently were the rurales, or
native policemen.  There were black-bearded, coarse-visaged Americans,
some gambling round the little tables, others drinking.  The pool
tables were the center of a noisy crowd of younger men, several of whom
were unsteady on their feet.  There were khaki-clad cavalrymen
strutting in and out.

At one end of the room, somewhat apart from the general meelee, was a
group of six men round a little table, four of whom were seated, the
other two standing.  These last two drew a second glance from Gale.
The sharp-featured, bronzed faces and piercing eyes, the tall, slender,
loosely jointed bodies, the quiet, easy, reckless air that seemed to be
a part of the men--these things would plainly have stamped them as
cowboys without the buckled sombreros, the colored scarfs, the
high-topped, high-heeled boots with great silver-roweled spurs.  Gale
did not fail to note, also, that these cowboys wore guns, and this fact
was rather a shock to his idea of the modern West.  It caused him to
give some credence to the rumors of fighting along the border, and he
felt a thrill.

He satisfied his hunger in a restaurant adjoining, and as he stepped
back into the saloon a man wearing a military cape jostled him.
Apologies from both were instant.  Gale was moving on when the other
stopped short as if startled, and, leaning forward, exclaimed:

"Dick Gale?"

"You've got me," replied Gale, in surprise.  "But I don't know you."

He could not see the stranger's face, because it was wholly shaded by a
wide-brimmed hat pulled well down.

"By Jove!  It's Dick!  If this isn't great!  Don't you know me?"

"I've heard your voice somewhere," replied Gale.  "Maybe I'll recognize
you if you come out from under that bonnet."

For answer the man, suddenly manifesting thought of himself, hurriedly
drew Gale into the restaurant, where he thrust back his hat to disclose
a handsome, sunburned face.

"George Thorne!  So help me--"

"'S-s-ssh.  You needn't yell," interrupted the other, as he met Gale's
outstretched hand.  There was a close, hard, straining grip. "I must
not be recognized here.  There are reasons.  I'll explain in a minute.
Say, but it's fine to see you!  Five years, Dick, five years since I
saw you run down University Field and spread-eagle the whole Wisconsin
football team."

"Don't recollect that," replied Dick, laughing.  "George, I'll bet you
I'm gladder to see you than you are to see me.  It seems so long.  You
went into the army, didn't you?"

"I did.  I'm here now with the Ninth Cavalry.  But--never mind me.
What're you doing way down here?  Say, I just noticed your togs. Dick,
you can't be going in for mining or ranching, not in this God-forsaken
desert?"

"On the square, George, I don't know any more why I'm here than--than
you know."

"Well, that beats me!" ejaculated Thorne, sitting back in his chair,
amaze and concern in his expression.  "What the devil's wrong? Your old
man's got too much money for you ever to be up against it. Dick, you
couldn't have gone to the bad?"

A tide of emotion surged over Gale.  How good it was to meet a
friend--some one to whom to talk!  He had never appreciated his
loneliness until that moment.

"George, how I ever drifted down here I don't know.  I didn't exactly
quarrel with the governor.  But--damn it, Dad hurt me--shamed me, and I
dug out for the West.  It was this way. After leaving college I tried
to please him by tackling one thing after another that he set me to do.
On the square, I had no head for business.  I made a mess of
everything.  The governor got sore. He kept ramming the harpoon into me
till I just couldn't stand it. What little ability I possessed deserted
me when I got my back up, and there you are.  Dad and I had a rather
uncomfortable half hour. When I quit--when I told him straight out that
I was going West to fare for myself, why, it wouldn't have been so
tough if he hadn't laughed at me.  He called me a rich man's son--an
idle, easy-going spineless swell.  He said I didn't even have character
enough to be out and out bad.  He said I didn't have sense enough to
marry one of the nice girls in my sister's crowd.  He said I couldn't
get back home unless I sent to him for money.  He said he didn't
believe I could fight--could really make a fight for anything under the
sun.  Oh--he--he shot it into me, all right."

Dick dropped his head upon his hands, somewhat ashamed of the smarting
dimness in his eyes.  He had not meant to say so much. Yet what a
relief to let out that long-congested burden!

"Fight!" cried Thorne, hotly.  "What's ailing him?  Didn't they call
you Biff Gale in college?  Dick, you were one of the best men Stagg
ever developed.  I heard him say so--that you were the fastest,
one-hundred-and-seventy-five-pound man he'd ever trained, the hardest
to stop."

"The governor didn't count football," said Dick.  "He didn't mean that
kind of fight.  When I left home I don't think I had an idea what was
wrong with me.  But, George, I think I know now.  I was a rich man's
son--spoiled, dependent, absolutely ignorant of the value of money.  I
haven't yet discovered any earning capacity in me.  I seem to be unable
to do anything with my hands.  That's the trouble.  But I'm at the end
of my tether now.  And I'm going to punch cattle or be a miner, or do
some real stunt--like joining the rebels."

"Aha!  I thought you'd spring that last one on me," declared Thorne,
wagging his head.  "Well, you just forget it.  Say, old boy, there's
something doing in Mexico.  The United States in general doesn't
realize it.  But across that line there are crazy revolutionists,
ill-paid soldiers, guerrilla leaders, raiders, robbers, outlaws,
bandits galore, starving peons by the thousand, girls and women in
terror.  Mexico is like some of her volcanoes--ready to erupt fire and
hell!  Don't make the awful mistake of joining rebel forces.  Americans
are hated by Mexicans of the lower class--the fighting class, both
rebel and federal.  Half the time these crazy Greasers are on one side,
then on the other. If you didn't starve or get shot in ambush, or die
of thirst, some Greaser would knife you in the back for you belt buckle
or boots.  There are a good many Americans with the rebels eastward
toward Agua, Prieta and Juarez.  Orozco is operating in Chihuahua, and
I guess he has some idea of warfare.  But this is Sonora, a mountainous
desert, the home of the slave and the Yaqui.  There's unorganized
revolt everywhere.  The American miners and ranchers, those who could
get away, have fled across into the States, leaving property.  Those
who couldn't or wouldn't come must fight for their lives, are fighting
now."

"That's bad," said Gale.  "It's news to me.  Why doesn't the government
take action, do something?"

"Afraid of international complications.  Don't want to offend the
Maderists, or be criticized by jealous foreign nations.  It's a
delicate situation, Dick.  The Washington officials know the gravity of
it, you can bet.  But the United States in general is in the dark, and
the army--well, you ought to hear the inside talk back at San Antonio.
We're patrolling the boundary line.  We're making a grand bluff.  I
could tell you of a dozen instances where cavalry should have pursued
raiders on the other side of the line.  But we won't do it.  The
officers are a grouchy lot these days.  You see, of course, what
significance would attach to United States cavalry going into Mexican
territory.  There would simply be hell.  My own colonel is the sorest
man on the job.  We're all sore.  It's like sitting on a powder
magazine.  We can't keep the rebels and raiders from crossing the line.
Yet we don't fight.  My commission expires soon.  I'll be discharged in
three months.  You can bet I'm glad for more reasons than I've
mentioned."

Thorne was evidently laboring under strong, suppressed excitement. His
face showed pale under the tan, and his eyes gleamed with a dark fire.
Occasionally his delight at meeting, talking with Gale, dominated the
other emotions, but not for long.  He had seated himself at a table
near one of the doorlike windows leading into the street, and every
little while he would glance sharply out.  Also he kept consulting his
watch.

These details gradually grew upon Gale as Thorne talked.

"George, it strikes me that you're upset," said Dick, presently.  "I
seem to remember you as a cool-headed fellow whom nothing could
disturb. Has the army changed you?"

Thorne laughed.  It was a laugh with a strange, high note.  It was
reckless--it hinted of exaltation.  He rose abruptly; he gave the
waiter money to go for drinks; he looked into the saloon, and then into
the street.  On this side of the house there was a porch opening on a
plaza with trees and shrubbery and branches.  Thorne peered out one
window, then another.  His actions were rapid.  Returning to the table,
he put his hands upon it and leaned over to look closely into Gale's
face.

"I'm away from camp without leave," he said.

"Isn't that a serious offense?" asked Dick.

"Serious?  For me, if I'm discovered, it means ruin.  There are rebels
in town.  Any moment we might have trouble.  I ought to be ready for
duty--within call.  If I'm discovered it means arrest. That means
delay--the failure of my plans--ruin."

Gale was silenced by his friend's intensity.  Thorne bent over closer
with his dark eyes searching bright.

"We were old pals--once?"

"Surely," replied Dick.

"What would you say, Dick Gale, if I told you that you're the one man
I'd rather have had come along than any other at this crisis of my
life?"

The earnest gaze, the passionate voice with its deep tremor drew Dick
upright, thrilling and eager, conscious of strange, unfamiliar
impetuosity.

"Thorne, I should say I was glad to be the fellow," replied Dick.

Their hands locked for a moment, and they sat down again with heads
close over the table.

"Listen," began Thorne, in low, swift whisper, "a few days, a week
ago--it seems like a year!--I was of some assistance to refugees
fleeing from Mexico into the States.  They were all women, and one of
them was dressed as a nun.  Quite by accident I saw her face. It was
that of a beautiful girl.  I observed she kept aloof from the others.
I suspected a disguise, and, when opportunity afforded, spoke to her,
offered my services.  She replied to my poor efforts at Spanish in
fluent English.  She had fled in terror from her home, some place down
in Sinaloa.  Rebels are active there.  Her father was captured and held
for ransom.  When the ransom was paid the rebels killed him. The leader
of these rebels was a bandit named Rojas.  Long before the revolution
began he had been feared by people of class--loved by the peons.
Bandits are worshiped by the peons. All of the famous bandits have
robbed the rich and given to the poor. Rojas saw the daughter, made off
with her.  But she contrived to bribe her guards, and escaped almost
immediately before any harm befell her.  She hid among friends.  Rojas
nearly tore down the town in his efforts to find her.  Then she
disguised herself, and traveled by horseback, stage, and train to
Casita.

"Her story fascinated me, and that one fleeting glimpse I had of her
face I couldn't forget.  She had no friends here, no money. She knew
Rojas was trailing her.  This talk I had with her was at the railroad
station, where all was bustle and confusion.  No one noticed us, so I
thought.  I advised her to remove the disguise of a nun before she left
the waiting-room.  And I got a boy to guide her.  But he fetched her to
his house.  I had promised to come in the evening to talk over the
situation with her.

"I found her, Dick, and when I saw her--I went stark, staring, raving
mad over her.  She is the most beautiful, wonderful girl I ever saw.
Her name is Mercedes Castaneda, and she belongs to one of the old
wealthy Spanish families.  She has lived abroad and in Havana.  She
speaks French as well as English.  She is--but I must be brief.

"Dick, think, think!  With Mercedes also it was love at first sight. My
plan is to marry her and get her farther to the interior, away from the
border.  It may not be easy.  She's watched.  So am I. It was
impossible to see her without the women of this house knowing. At
first, perhaps, they had only curiosity--an itch to gossip.  But the
last two days there has been a change.  Since last night there's some
powerful influence at work.  Oh, these Mexicans are subtle, mysterious!
After all, they are Spaniards.  They work in secret, in the dark.  They
are dominated first by religion, then by gold, then by passion for a
woman.  Rojas must have got word to his friends here; yesterday his
gang of cutthroat rebels arrived, and to-day he came.  When I learned
that, I took my chance and left camp.  I hunted up a priest.  He
promised to come here.  It's time he's due.  But I'm afraid he'll be
stopped."

"Thorne, why don't you take the girl and get married without waiting,
without running these risks?" said Dick.

"I fear it's too late now.  I should have done that last night. You
see, we're over the line--"

"Are we in Mexican territory now?" queried Gale, sharply.

"I guess yes, old boy.  That's what complicates it.  Rojas and his
rebels have Casita in their hands.  But Rojas without his rebels would
be able to stop me, get the girl, and make for his mountain haunts.  If
Mercedes is really watched--if her identity is known, which I am sure
is the case--we couldn't get far from this house before I'd be knifed
and she seized."

"Good Heavens!  Thorne, can that sort of thing happen less than a
stone's throw from the United States line?" asked Gale, incredulously.

"It can happen, and don't you forget it.  You don't seem to realize the
power these guerrilla leaders, these rebel captains, and particularly
these bandits, exercise over the mass of Mexicans. A bandit is a man of
honor in Mexico.  He is feared, envied, loved. In the hearts of the
people he stands next to the national idol--the bull-fighter, the
matador.  The race has a wild, barbarian, bloody strain.  Take
Quinteros, for instance.  He was a peon, a slave. He became a famous
bandit.  At the outbreak of the revolution he proclaimed himself a
leader, and with a band of followers he devastated whole counties.  The
opposition to federal forces was only a blind to rob and riot and carry
off women.  The motto of this man and his followers was:  'Let us enjoy
ourselves while we may!'

"There are other bandits besides Quinteros, not so famous or such great
leaders, but just as bloodthirsty.  I've seen Rojas.  He's a handsome,
bold sneering devil, vainer than any peacock.  He decks himself in gold
lace and sliver trappings, in all the finery he can steal.  He was one
of the rebels who helped sack Sinaloa and carry off half a million in
money and valuables.  Rojas spends gold like he spills blood.  But he
is chiefly famous for abducting women. The peon girls consider it an
honor to be ridden off with.  Rojas has shown a penchant for girls of
the better class."

Thorne wiped the perspiration from his pale face and bent a dark gaze
out of the window before he resumed his talk.

"Consider what the position of Mercedes really is.  I can't get any
help from our side of the line.  If so, I don't know where. The
population on that side is mostly Mexican, absolutely in sympathy with
whatever actuates those on this side.  The whole caboodle of Greasers
on both sides belong to the class in sympathy with the rebels, the
class that secretly respects men like Rojas, and hates an aristocrat
like Mercedes.  They would conspire to throw her into his power.  Rojas
can turn all the hidden underground influences to his ends.  Unless I
thwart him he'll get Mercedes as easily as he can light a cigarette.
But I'll kill him or some of his gang or her before I let him get
her.... This is the situation, old friend.  I've little time to spare.
I face arrest for desertion.  Rojas is in town. I think I was followed
to this hotel.  The priest has betrayed me or has been stopped.
Mercedes is here alone, waiting, absolutely dependent upon me to save
her from--from....  She's the sweetest, loveliest girl!... In a few
moments--sooner or later there'll be hell here!  Dick, are you with me?"

Dick Gale drew a long, deep breath.  A coldness, a lethargy, an
indifference that had weighed upon him for months had passed out of his
being.  On the instant he could not speak, but his hand closed
powerfully upon his friend's.  Thorne's face changed wonderfully, the
distress, the fear, the appeal all vanishing in a smile of passionate
gratefulness.

Then Dick's gaze, attracted by some slight sound, shot over his
friend's shoulder to see a face at the window--a handsome, bold,
sneering face, with glittering dark eyes that flashed in sinister
intentness.

Dick stiffened in his seat.  Thorne, with sudden clenching of hands,
wheeled toward the window.

"Rojas!" he whispered.



