CHAPTER IV.

NATURE OF BEAUTY.


In this chapter, my aim is to show that there is more than one kind of
beauty, and that much confusion has arisen among writers, from not clearly
distinguishing the characteristics of these kinds.

An essential condition, then, of all excitement and action in animal
bodies, is a greater or less degree of novelty in the objects impressing
them--even if this novelty should arise only from a previous cessation of
excitement.

Now, objects of greater or less novelty are the causes of excitement,
pleasurable or painful, by means of their various relations.

The lowest degree of bodily pleasure (though, owing to its constancy,
immense in its total amount) is that which arises, during health, from
those relations of bodies and that excitement which cause the mere local
exercise of the organs--a source of pleasure which is seldom the object of
our voluntary attention, but which seems to me to be the chief cause of
attachment to life amid its more definite and conspicuous evils.

All higher mental emotions consist of pleasure or pain superadded to more
or less definite ideas. Pleasurable emotions arise from the agreeable
relations of things; painful emotions, from the disagreeable ones.

The term by which we express the influence which objects, by means of
their relations, possess of exciting emotions of pleasure in the mind, is
BEAUTY.

Beauty, when founded on the relations of objects, or of the parts of
objects, to each other, forms a first class, and may be termed _intrinsic
beauty_.

When beauty is farther considered in relation to ourselves, it forms a
second class, and may be termed _extrinsic_ beauty.

We are next led (hitherto this has apparently been done without analyzing
or defining the operation) to a division of the latter into two genera;
namely, the _minor beauty_, of which prettiness, delicacy, &c., are
modifications, and that which is called _grandeur_ or _sublimity_.

The characters of the minor beauty or prettiness, with relation to
ourselves, are smallness, subordination, and subjection. Hence female
beauty, in relation to the male.

The characters of grandeur or sublimity, with relation to ourselves, are
greatness, superordination, and power. Hence male beauty, in relation to
the female.

By the preceding brief train of analysis and definition, is, I believe,
answered the question--"whether the emotion of grandeur make a branch of
the emotion of beauty, or be entirely distinct from it."

Having, by this concise statement of my own views on these subjects, made
the reader acquainted with some of the materials of future consideration
here employed, I may now examine the opinions of some philosophers, in
order to see how far they accord with these first principles, and what
answer can be given to them where they differ.

That _beauty_, _generally considered_, has nothing to do with particular
size, is very well shown by Payne Knight, who, though he argues
incorrectly about it in many other respects, here truly says: "All degrees
of magnitude contribute to beauty in proportion as they show objects to be
perfect in their kind. The dimensions of a beautiful horse are very
different from those of a beautiful lapdog; and those of a beautiful oak
from those of a beautiful myrtle; because, nature has formed these
different kinds of animals and vegetables upon different scales.

"The notion of objects being rendered beautiful by being gradually
diminished, or tapered, is equally unfounded; for the same object, which
is small by degrees, and beautifully less, when seen in one direction, is
large by degrees, and beautifully bigger, when seen in another. The stems
of trees are tapered upward; and the columns of Grecian architecture,
having been taken from them, and therefore retaining a degree of analogy
with them, were tapered upward too: but the legs of animals are tapered
downward, and the inverted obelisks, upon which busts were placed, having
a similar analogy to them, were tapered downward also; while pilasters,
which had no analogy with either, but were mere square posts terminating a
wall, never tapered at all."

Speaking of beauty generally, and without seeing the distinctions I have
made above, Burke, on the contrary, states the first quality of beauty to
be comparative smallness, and says: "In ordinary conversation, it is usual
to add the endearing name of little to everything we love;" and "in most
languages, the objects of love are spoken of under diminutive epithets."

This is evidently true only of the objects of _minor_ or _subordinate
beauty_, which Burke confusedly thought the only kind of it, though he
elsewhere grants, that beauty may be connected with sublimity! It shows,
however, that relative littleness is essential to that first kind of
beauty.

With greater knowledge of facts than Burke possessed, and with as feeble
reasoning powers, but with less taste, and with a perverse whimsicality
which was all his own, Payne Knight similarly, making no distinction in
beauty, considered smallness as an accidental association, failed to see
that it characterized a kind of beauty, and argued, that "if we join the
diminutive to a term which precludes all such affection, or does not even,
in some degree, express it, it immediately converts it into a term of
contempt and reproach: thus, a bantling, a fondling, a darling, &c., are
terms of endearment; but a witling, a changeling, a lordling, &c., are
invariably terms of scorn: so in French, '_mon petit enfant_,' is an
expression of endearment; but '_mon petit monsieur_,' is an expression of
the most pointed reproach and contempt."

Now, this chatter of grammatical termination and French phrase, though
meant to look vastly clever, is merely a blunder. There is no analogy in
the cases compared: a "darling" or little dear unites _dear_, an
expression of love, with _little_, implying that dependance which enhances
love; while "witling" or little wit unites _wit_, an expression of talent,
with _little_, meaning the small quantity or absence of the talent alluded
to; and it is because the latter term means, not physical littleness,
which well associates with love, but moral littleness and mental
degradation, that it becomes a term of contempt.

Even from the little already said, it seems evident that much of the
confusion on this subject has arisen from not distinguishing the two
genera of beauty, and not seeing that "the emotion of grandeur" is merely
"a branch of the emotion of beauty."

The other genus of beauty, _grand_ or _sublime beauty_, is well described
by the names given to it, grandeur or sublimity. Some have considered
sublimity as expressing grandeur in the highest degree: it would perhaps
be as well to express the cause of the emotion by grandeur, and the
emotion itself by sublimity.

Nothing is sublime that is not vast or powerful, or that does not make him
who feels it sensible of its physical or moral superiority.

The simplest cause of sublimity is presented by all objects of vast
magnitude or extent--a seemingly boundless plain, the sky, the ocean,
&c.; and the particular direction of the magnitude or extent always
correspondingly modifies the emotion--height giving more especially the
idea of power, breadth of resistance, depth of danger, &c. Of the objects
mentioned above, the ocean is the most sublime, because, to vastness in
length and breadth, it adds depth, and a force perpetually active.

Now, that these objects, though sublime, are beautiful, is very evident;
and it is therefore also evident how much Burke erred in asserting
comparative smallness to be the first character of beauty generally
considered. This and similar errors, as already said, have greatly
obscured this subject, and have led Burke and others so to modify and
qualify their doctrines, as to take from them all precision and certainty.

Hence, in one place, Burke says: "As, in the animal world, and in a good
measure in the vegetable world likewise, the qualities that constitute
_beauty_ may _possibly_ be united to things of _greater dimensions_ [that
is, littleness may be united with bigness!]; when they are so united they
constitute _a species something different both from the sublime and
beautiful_, which I have before called, Fine."

So also he says: "Ugliness I imagine likewise to be consistent enough with
an idea of the sublime. But I would by no means insinuate that ugliness of
itself is a sublime idea, unless united with such qualities as excite a
strong terror."

Here, he confounds sublimity with terror, as do Blair and other writers,
when they say that "exact proportion of parts, though it enters often
into the beautiful, is much disregarded in the sublime." It is a fact,
that exactly in proportion as ugliness is substituted for beauty in vast
objects, is sublimity taken away, until at last it is utterly lost in the
terrible.

Even Blair shows that sublimity may exist without terror or pain. "The
proper sensation of sublimity appears," he observes, "to be
distinguishable from the sensation of either of these, and, on several
occasions, to be entirely separated from them. In many grand objects,
there is no coincidence with terror at all; as in the magnificent prospect
of wide-extended plains, and of the starry firmament; or in the moral
dispositions and sentiments, which we view with high admiration; and in
many painful and terrible objects also, it is clear, there is no sort of
grandeur. The amputation of a limb, or the bite of a snake, is exceedingly
terrible, but is destitute of all claim whatever to sublimity."

Payne Knight shows that terror is even opposed to sublimity: "All the
great and terrible convulsions of nature; such as storms, tempests,
hurricanes, earthquakes, volcanoes, &c., excite sublime ideas, and impress
sublime sentiments by the prodigious exertions of energy and power which
they seem to display: for though these objects are, in their nature,
terrible, and generally known to be so, it is not this attribute of terror
that contributes, in the smallest degree to render them sublime.... Timid
women fly to a cellar, or a darkened room, to avoid the sublime effects of
a thunder-storm; because to them they are not sublime, but terrible. To
those only are they sublime, '_qui formidine nulla imbuti spectant_,' who
behold them without any fear at all; and to whom, therefore, they are in
no degree terrible."

This farther confirms the distinction which I made of beauty into minor or
subordinate, and grand or sublime beauty, although Knight adopted other
principles, if principles they may be called, and neglected such
distinction.

There is but one other error on this subject which I need to notice. Burke
says: "To make anything very terrible, obscurity seems in general to be
necessary. When we know the full extent of any danger, when we can
accustom our eyes to it, a great deal of the apprehension vanishes. Every
one will be sensible of this, who considers how greatly night adds to our
dread, in all cases of danger.... Those despotic governments which are
founded on the passions of men, and principally upon the passion of fear,
keep their chief as much as may be from the public eye. The policy has
been the same in many cases of religion. Almost all the heathen temples
were dark."

From what has already been said, it is evident that all this contributes
to terror, not to sublimity; and that the same error is made by Blair when
he says, "As obscurity, so disorder, too, is very compatible with
grandeur, nay, frequently heightens it."

To expose the weakness and to destroy the authority of some writers on
this subject, can only set the mind free for the investigation of truth.
I may, therefore, conclude this chapter by quoting the shrewd remarks of
Knight on some of the principles of Burke. I shall afterward be forced
critically to examine the notions of Knight in their turn.

Burke states that the highest degree of sublime sensation is astonishment;
and the subordinate degrees, awe, reverence, and respect; all which he
considers as modes of terror. And Knight observes that this graduated
scale of the sublime, from respect to astonishment, cannot, perhaps be
better illustrated than by applying it to his own character.

"He was certainly," says Knight, "a very respectable man, and reverenced
by all who knew him intimately. At one period of his life, too, when he
became the disinterested patron of remote and injured nations, who had
none to help them, his character was truly sublime; but, unless upon those
whom he so ably and eloquently arraigned, I do not believe that it
impressed any awe.... If, during this period, he had suddenly appeared
among the managers in Westminster Hall without his wig and coat, or had
walked up St. James's street without his breeches, it would have
occasioned great and universal astonishment; and if he had, at the same
time, carried a loaded blunderbuss in his hands, the astonishment would
have been mixed with no small portion of terror: but I do not believe that
the united effects of these two powerful passions would have produced any
sentiment or sensation approaching to sublime, even in the breasts of
those who had the strongest sense of self-preservation and the quickest
sensibility of danger."

Thus, I believe, it now appears that novelty[10] is the exciting cause of
pleasurable emotion, and of the consequent perception of beauty in the
relations of things, and that the two genera of beauty--the minor or
subordinate beauty, and grandeur or sublimity--have distinct
characteristics, the confounding of which by writers has led to the
obscurity of this part of the subject.




