CHAPTER XX.

DEFECTS OF BEAUTY.


_Defects of the Locomotive System._

1. If the whole figure be either too broad or too tall; because, the first
is inelegant, and the last unfeminine. Persons who are too tall are
generally ill at ease and destitute of grace, a greater misfortune to a
woman than to a man.--Too low a stature is a defect less disagreeable,
especially for women. If, however, on the one side, it gives prettiness,
on the other, it deprives of all imposing appearance.

2. If the bones, except those of the pelvis, be not proportionally small;
because, in woman, this portion of the locomotive system ought to be
completely subordinate to the vital.

3. If the ligaments, and the articulations they form, be not
proportionally small; because, in woman, this portion of the locomotive
system ought also to be completely subordinate to the vital.

Either of the last two defects will produce what is termed clumsiness.

4. If the muscles, generally more slender, feeble, soft and yielding than
in man, be not large around the pelvis, and delicate elsewhere; because,
this is necessary, for reasons which will be afterward assigned, as well
as to permit the ease and suppleness of the movements.

5. If, in a mature female, the length of the neck, compared with the
trunk, be not proportionally somewhat less than in the male; because, in
her, the subordination of the locomotive system, the predominance of the
vital, and the dependance of the mental, are naturally connected with the
shorter vertebrae and shorter course of the vessels of the neck.

       *       *       *       *       *

(The following defects, from 6 to 15 inclusive, have necessarily a
reference also to the vital system; because, the form and capacity of the
cavities here spoken of, as formed by the osseous frame of the locomotive
system, have an obvious relation to the vital organs, which these cavities
are destined to contain.)

6. If the upper part of the body (exclusive of the bosom) be
proportionally more, and the lower part of the body less prominent, than
in man, so that, when she stands perfectly upright or lies on the back,
the space between the breasts is more prominent than the mons veneris;
because, such conformation is injurious to impregnation, gestation, and
parturition.

7. If the shoulders seem wider than the haunches; because, this appearance
generally arises from the narrowness of the pelvis, and its consequent
unfitness for gestation and parturition.

8. If, on the contrary, the shoulders be much narrower than the pelvis;
because, this indicates extreme weakness of the locomotive system.

9. If the shoulders do not slope from the lower part of the neck; because,
this shows that the upper part of the chest is not sufficiently wide of
itself, but is rendered angular by the muscularity, &c., of the shoulders.

10. If the upper part of the chest be not relatively short and wide, and
if it owe not its width rather to itself than to the size of the
shoulders; because, this shows that the vital organs contained in the
chest are not sufficiently expanded.

11. If, in youth, the upper part of the trunk, including the muscles
moving the shoulders, do not form an inverted cone, whose apex is the
waist; because, in that case, the lightness and beauty of the locomotive
system are destroyed by the unrestrained expansion of the vital.

12. If the loins be not extended at the expense of the chest above and of
the limbs below; because, on this depends their capacity to receive organs
enlarged or displaced during gestation.

13. If the back be not hollow; because, this shows that the pelvis is not
sufficiently deep to project posteriorly, nor consequently of sufficient
capacity for gestation and parturition.

14. If the haunches be not widely expanded (as already implied in speaking
of the shoulders); because, the interior cavity of the pelvis is then
insufficient for gestation and parturition.

15. If, in consequence of the form of the pelvis, and the arch of the
pubis being larger, the mons veneris be not more prominent than the
chest; because, the pelvic cavity is then also insufficient for gestation
and parturition.

       *       *       *       *       *

16. If the thighs of woman be not wider than those of man; because, the
width of the female pelvis, and the purposes which it serves, require
this.

17. If the size of the thighs be not large, the haunches as it were
increasing till they reach their greatest extent at the upper part of the
thigh, which anteriorly rises as high as the mons veneris, and if the
knees do not approximate.

18. If the arms and the limbs be not relatively short, if they do not
taper greatly as they recede from the trunk, and if the hands and feet be
not small; because, it is the vital system and the trunk, which is by far
the most important part in the female.

19. If the larynx or flute part of the throat be not small; because their
magnitude indicates a masculine character.


_Defects of the Vital System._

(Defects of the contained vital parts, which have been already implied in
enumerating those of the containing locomotive parts, are not again
mentioned here, as the intelligent reader can easily supply these and
similar omissions.)

1. If, in consequence of marriage taking place before their full growth,
women remain always of diminished stature, weak, and pale.

2. If the digestive organs being large rather than active, is inconsistent
with the greater activity and less permanence of all the other functions,
secretion, gestation, &c., excepted.

3. If the absorbing vessels, being inactive, are insufficient for large
secretions.

4. If the circulating vessels, being inactive and imperfectly ramified,
leave the skin cold, opaque, and destitute of complexion.

5. If the secreting vessels, being inactive, furnish neither the plumpness
necessary to beauty, nor those ovarian, uterine, and mammary excretions on
which progeny is dependant.

6. If the neck form not an insensible transition between the body and
head, being sufficiently full to conceal the muscles of the neck and the
flute part of the throat.

7. If, in a young woman, the mammæ, without being too large, do not occupy
the bosom, and rise from it with nearly equal curves on every side, which
similarly terminate in their apices; or if, in the mature woman, they do
not, when supported, seem laterally to protrude somewhat on the space
occupied by the arms; because, these show that this important part of the
vital system is insufficiently developed.

8. If the waist, tapering little farther than the middle of the trunk, and
being sufficiently marked, especially in the back and loins, by the
approximation of the expanded pelvis, be not also slightly encroached on
by the plumpness of all the contiguous parts, without however destroying
its elegance, softness and flexibility; because, this similarly shows
feebleness in a portion of that system, which is by far the most important
to woman.

9. If the waist be broader than the upper part of the trunk, including the
muscles moving the shoulders; because, this indicates that expansion of
the stomach, liver, and other glands, which is generally the result of
their excessive use or excitement. It is attended with a common look and
an inelegant appearance.

10. If the abdomen be not moderately expanded, its upper portion beginning
to swell out, higher even than the umbilicus, and its greatest projection
being almost immediately under that point; because, this shows a weakness
of the vital system, and a disproportion to the parts immediately above.

11. If the abdomen, which should be highest immediately under the
umbilicus, slope not gently toward the mons veneris, and be more prominent
elsewhere; because this is the result of that excessive expansion which
takes place during parturition.

12. If the abdomen, which, as well as being elevated, should be narrow at
its upper part, become as broad there as below, and lose that gentle
lateral depression by which it is distinguished from the more muscular
parts on the sides of the pelvis; because, this indicates the operation of
the causes mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

13. If a remarkable fulness exist not behind the upper part of the
haunches, and on each side of the lower part of the spine, commencing as
high as the waist, and terminating in the still greater swell of the
distinctly separated hips; the flat expanse between these and immediately
over the fissure of the hips, being relieved by a considerable dimple on
each side, caused by the elevation of all the surrounding parts; because,
it indicates feebleness in that system which is most essential to woman.

14. If the cellular tissue and the plumpness which is connected with it,
do not predominate, so as to obliterate all distinct projection of the
muscles; because, this likewise shows that an important portion of the
vital system is feeble, and it deprives woman of the forms which are
necessary to love. Nothing can completely compensate, in woman, for the
absolute want of plumpness. The features of meager persons are hard; they
have a dry and arid physiognomy; the mouth is without charm; the color is
without freshness; their limbs seem ill united with their body; and all
their movements are abrupt and coarse.

15. If plumpness be too predominant; because, it then destroys the
distinctness of parts, and constitutes an excess productive of
inconvenience.

16. If that excessive plumpness be broken, as it were, into masses;
because, it constitutes coarseness of the vital system.

17. If former plumpness have left the previously-filled cellular tissue
and expanded integuments enfeebled; because, that constitutes flaccidity.

18. If the almost entire absorption of adipose substance have finally left
the bones angular, the muscles and other parts permanently rigid, and the
skin dry; because, that indicates decay of the vital system, and
characterizes age.

19. If the skin be not fine, soft, and white, delicate, thin, and
transparent, fresh and animated, if the complexion be not pure and vivid,
if the hair be not fine, soft, and luxuriant, and if the nails be not
smooth, transparent, and rose-colored; because, these likewise show the
feebleness of that system which is most important to woman.


_Defects of the Mental System._

1. If the head, compared with the trunk, be not less than that of the
male; because, the mental system, in the female, ought to be subordinate
to the vital, and the reverse is inconsistent with the healthful and happy
exercise of her faculties as woman.

2. If the organs of sense be not proportionally larger, when compared with
the brain, and more delicately outlined than in the male; because,
sensibility should exceed reasoning power, in the female.

3. If the brain (in other words) be not proportionally smaller, when
compared with the organs of sense, than in the male; because, reasoning
power should be subordinate to sensibility in the female.

4. If the cerebel be not proportionally smaller, when compared with the
organs of sense, than in the male; because, voluntary power should also be
subordinate to sensibility, in the female.

5. If the cerebel be not narrow and pointed posteriorly, that is, long
rather than broad (its general form in woman); because, the volitions of
woman should be intense, not permanent.

6. If the forehead be not large in proportion to the backhead, but on the
contrary low, or very narrow; because, the former being the seat of
observation, if the organ be small, the function must be correspondingly
so, and in that case passion will probably predominate.

7. If the delicacy of the skin permit not to the touch of woman
corresponding delicacy.

8. If the mouth be not small, or extend much beyond the nostrils, and if
the lips be not delicately outlined and of vermillion hue.

9. If the nose be not nearly in the same direction with the forehead, or
if more than a slight inflexion is to be seen.

10. If the eyes be not relatively large and perfectly clear in every part.

11. If the eyelids, instead of an oblong, form nearly a circular aperture,
resembling somewhat the eye of monkeys, cats, or birds; because, this
round eye, when large, and especially when dark, is always indicative of a
bold, and, when small, of a pert insensibility of character.

12. If the eyelashes be not long and silky, and if the eyebrows be not
furnished with fine hairs, and be not arched and distinctly separated.

13. If the ears be prominent, so as to alter the regularity of the oval of
the head, or surcharge its outline with prominences.




