Chapter VI.

The explanation of the nature of the picturesque, after the failure of
Knight and Price in this respect.--Sect. I., Appendix to preceding
chapters.

The vindication of the doctrine of Hobbes, as to the cause of laughter;
and exposition of the errors of Campbell and Beattie on this
subject.--Sect. II., Appendix.

The explanation of the cause of the pleasure received from representations
exciting pity; and of the errors of Burke, &c., on that subject.--Sect.
III., Appendix.

The arrangement of anatomy and physiology, and the application of the
principles of these sciences to the distinguishing and judging of
beauty.--Chapter VII.

The explanation of the difference in the beauty of the two sexes even in
the same country.--Chapter IX.

Various arguments establishing the standard of beauty in woman; and
exposure of the sophistry of Knight, on this subject.--Chapter X.

The showing, by the preceding arrangements, that the ancient temperaments
are partial or complex views of anthropological phenomena.--Chapter XI.,
et seq.

The description of the first species of beauty, or that of the locomotive
system, and of its varieties, as founded on examination of
structure.--Chapter XII.

The description of the second species of beauty, or that of the nutritive
system, and of its varieties, as founded on examination of
structure.--Chapter XIII.

The description of the third species of beauty, or that of the thinking
system, and of its varieties, as founded on examination of
structure.--Chapter XIV.

The explanation of the cause of the deformity produced by the obliquely
placed eyes of the Chinese, &c.--Chapter XV.

The explanation of the mode in which the action of the muscles of the face
becomes physiognomically expressive.--Ibid.

The explanation of the physiognomical character of the different kinds of
the hair.--Ibid.

The explanation of the cause of the different effects of the same face,
even in a state of repose.--Ibid.

The indication of the faulty feature, and its gradual increase, even in
beautiful faces.--Ibid.

The exposition of the different organization of Greek and Roman
heads.--Ibid.

The explanation of the combinations and transitions of beauty.--Chapter
XVI.

The explanation of the numerical, geometrical, and harmonic methods of
proportion, employed by the ancient Greeks.--Chapter XVII.

Some remarks on character, expression, and detail in art.--Ibid.

Some observations on the Greek forehead, actual as well as ideal.--Chapter
XVIII.

The explanation of the reason of the Greek ideal rule, as to the
proportion between the forehead and the other parts of the face.--Ibid.

The explanation of the reason of the Greek ideal rule, as to the profile
of the forehead and nose, or as to the direction of the mesial line which
they form, and the exposition of Winckelmann's blunder respecting
it.--Ibid.

The explanation of the reason why the Greeks suppressed all great degrees
of impassioned expression.--Ibid.

The mere indication of the Greek idealizations as applied to the nutritive
and locomotive systems, and the explanation of the latter in the
Apollo.--Ibid.

The replies to the objections of Burke and Alison, as to ideal
beauty.--Ibid.

The enunciation of the ideal in attitude.--Ibid.

Various views as to the Venus de Medici, the conformation of the nose, and
the connexion of odor with love, in animals and plants.--Chapter XIX.

Some remarks on the Venus de Medici.--Ibid.

The pointing out and explanation of various defects in beauty.--Chapter
XX.

The pointing out and explanation of various external indications of
figure, beauty, mind, habits, and age.--Chapter XXI.

The writer may possibly be mistaken as to the originality of one or two of
these points; but, leaving the critical reader to deduct as many of these
as it is in his power to do, enough of novelty would remain for the
writer's ambition, in this respect, if he had done no more than exposed
the errors of Burke, Knight, Alison, &c., and established the true
doctrine of beauty, in the first chapters--given an analysis and
classification of beauty in woman, in the chapters which follow--and
applied this to the fine arts, and solved the difficulty of Leonardo da
Vinci, &c., in the last chapters.




ANALYSIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF BEAUTY IN WOMAN.




