CHAPTER VI.

THE ELEMENTS OF BEAUTY.[11]


On the subject of the preceding chapter, even the reasonings of Hume
appear to me to be of too vague and indefinite a kind. It requires the
more minute scrutiny into which I shall now enter, in order to place it
upon a deeper and more scientific foundation. If I can here show that, in
the material qualities of the objects of nature and art, there exist
elements of beauty equally invariable in themselves and in the kind of
effect they produce upon the mind, it is evident there can be no farther
dispute about a standard of beauty.

Many attempts have been made to determine the material elements of beauty,
by Hogarth, Home, and others. All have more or less failed, from not
observing that these elements are modified, varied, and complicated, as we
advance from the most simple to the most complex class of natural beings,
or of the arts which relate to these respectively. Many partial views of
perfect truth and great interest have been taken, and by every one of
these it will be my duty here to profit: but, from the failure just
pointed out, no philosophical and systematic doctrine of beauty, ascending
from its origin in elements through its higher combinations, has ever been
attained by any of the numerous, deep, acute, and elegant thinkers who
have devoted their time to this subject, as the foundation of taste and of
the fine or intellectual arts.

Profiting, as I ought to do, by the partial views of these philosophers, I
pretend here only to take one larger view--to analyze, to generalize, to
systematize, the materials which they present to me.

In the hope of accomplishing this, I shall now endeavor successively to
trace the elements of beauty which belong respectively to inanimate,
living, and thinking beings, and to the useful, ornamental, and
intellectual arts which have a reference to these, the neglect of all
which I have described as the fundamental cause of previous failure.

Again, I repeat, it is to this analysis and generalization alone, and to
the systemization founded upon it, that I make any pretence. The materials
have long been presented by all the great writers on the subject: they
have only left them in confusion, and without conclusion. I shall now
proceed to employ them.


SECTION I.

ELEMENTS OF BEAUTY IN INANIMATE BEINGS.

Though Burke did not accurately trace the elements of beauty in any one
class of the objects of nature or art, he yet states a preliminary truth
on this subject so well, that I here quote it: "It would be absurd," he
observes, "to say that all things affect us by association only; since
some things must have been originally and naturally agreeable or
disagreeable, from which the others derive their associated powers; and it
would be, I fancy, to little purpose to look for the cause of our passions
in association, until we fail of it in the natural properties of things."

Home, advancing farther, says: "If a tree be beautiful by means of its
color, its figure, its size, its motion, it is in reality possessed of so
many different beauties, which ought to be examined separately, in order
to have a clear notion of the whole.

"When any body is viewed as a whole, the beauty of its figure arises from
regularity[12] and simplicity; and viewing the parts with relation to each
other, from uniformity[12], proportion, and order."

I will here only observe that these are the qualities, as will speedily
appear, which Burke should have set down as the fundamental and first
characteristics of beauty, instead of relative littleness, which belongs
not to beauty generally, but only to the minor or subordinate beauty.

Even Home, having arrived thus far, says: "To inquire why an object, by
means of the particulars mentioned, appears beautiful, would, I am afraid,
be a vain attempt."

But he truly adds: "One thing is clear, that regularity, uniformity,
order, and simplicity, contribute each of them to readiness of
apprehension, and enable us to form more distinct images of objects than
can be done, with the utmost attention, where these particulars are not
found." And he subjoins: "This final cause is, I acknowledge, too slight,
to account satisfactorily for a taste that makes a figure so illustrious
in the nature of man; and that this branch of our constitution has a
purpose still more important, we have great reason to believe."

Now had Home seen that the characteristics of general beauty always are,
with regard to the object, accordant and agreeable relations, the
importance of the qualities he has just enumerated would have been
evident; for, without them, these characteristics of the object could not
exist: simplicity, regularity, uniformity, order, &c., are the very
elements of accordant and agreeable relations. This is in reality the
still more important purpose in which Home believed, and to which the
readiness of apprehension he now alludes to eminently contributes.

As to simplicity, he observes, that "a multitude of objects crowding into
the mind at once, disturb the attention, and pass without making any
impression, or any lasting impression; and in a group, no single object
makes the figure it would do apart, when it occupies the whole attention.
For the same reason, even a single object, when it divides the attention
by the multiplicity of its parts, equals not, in strength of impression, a
more simple object comprehended in a single view: parts extremely complex
must be considered in portions successively; and a number of impressions
in succession, which cannot unite because not simultaneous, never touch
the mind like one entire impression made as it were at one stroke.

"A square is less beautiful than a circle, because it is less simple: a
circle has parts as well as a square; but its parts not being distinct
like those of a square, it makes one entire impression; whereas, the
attention is divided among the sides and angles of a square.... A square,
though not more regular than a hexagon or octagon, is more beautiful than
either, because a square is more simple, and the attention less divided.

"Simplicity thus contributes to beauty."

By regularity is meant that circumstance in a figure by which we perceive
it to be formed according to a certain rule. Thus, a circle, a square, a
parallelogram, or triangle, pleases by its regularity.

"A square," says Home--(who here furnishes the best materials to a more
general view, because he most frequently assigns physical causes, and
whom, with some abbreviation, I therefore continue to quote)--"a square is
more beautiful than a parallelogram, because the former exceeds the latter
in regularity and in uniformity of parts. This is true with respect to
intrinsic beauty only; for in many instances, utility comes in to cast the
balance on the side of the parallelogram: this figure for the doors and
windows of a dwelling-house, is preferred because of utility; and here we
find the beauty of utility prevailing over that of regularity and
uniformity."

Thus regularity and uniformity contribute to intrinsic beauty.

"A parallelogram, again, depends for its beauty on the proportion [or
relation of quantity] of its sides. Its beauty is lost by a great
inequality of these sides: it is also lost by their approximating toward
equality; for proportion there degenerates into imperfect uniformity, and
the figure appears an unsuccessful attempt toward a square."

Thus proportion contributes to beauty.

"An equilateral triangle yields not to a square in regularity nor in
uniformity of parts, and it is more simple. Its inferiority in beauty is
at least partly owing to inferiority of order in the position of its
parts: the sides of an equilateral triangle incline to each other in the
same angle, which is the most perfect order they are susceptible of; but
this order is obscure, and far from being so perfect as the parallelism of
the sides of a square."

Thus order contributes to the beauty of visible objects.

"A mountain, it may be objected, is an agreeable object, without so much
as the appearance of regularity; and a chain of mountains is still more
agreeable, without being arranged in any order. But though regularity,
uniformity, and order, are causes of beauty, there are also other causes
of it, as color; and when we pass from small to great objects, and
consider grandeur instead of beauty, very little regularity is required."

It follows, from all that has been here said, and this has been shown by
Burke, that any rugged, any sudden projection, any sharp angle, is in the
highest degree contrary to the idea of beauty. Such projections and angles
are destitute of all the qualities which have just been
enumerated--simplicity, regularity, uniformity, proportion, order; and
conformably to the principles I have laid down in a previous chapter, they
can present only relations which are naturally disagreeable. This view is
corroborated by the fact, that all very sharp, broken, or angular objects,
were disagreeable to the boy couched by Cheselden, as they are to all eyes
of very nice sensibility.

Now, as angular forms give, to the sense of touch, sharpness, roughness,
or harshness, so do opposite forms give smoothness or fineness. Hence,
Burke makes smoothness his second characteristic of beauty, and that far
more truly than he makes littleness its first, for, as he observes,
"smoothness is a quality so essential to beauty, that I do not now
recollect anything beautiful that is not smooth."

Such being really the case, I am bound to expose Knight's sophistry on
this point. "This elegant author," says he, "has expatiated upon the
gratifications of feeling smooth and undulating surfaces in general: but,
I believe, these gratifications have been confined to himself; and
probably to his own imagination acting through the medium of his favorite
system: for, except in the communication of the sexes, which affords no
general illustration, and ought therefore to be kept entirely out of the
question, I have never heard of any person being addicted to such
luxuries; though a feeling-board would certainly afford as cheap and
innocent a gratification, as either a smelling-bottle, a picture, or a
flute, provided it were capable of affording any gratification at all."

This is a good specimen of the kind of perverted reasoning, which
peculiarly distinguishes Knight.

A man affecting the character of philosopher, ought calmly to have
observed that, by young people before puberty, and, consequently, when
there is not the slightest sexual bias, smooth objects are generally found
to be agreeable, and rough or harsh ones to be the reverse. This would at
once have set him right upon this point.

If, to such a man, it should for a moment have appeared worth while to ask
why we do not make use of feeling-boards, as well as of smelling-bottles,
he ought to have sought the solution of his difficulty in the nature of
the senses; and then, with a trifle more of ability than Payne Knight
hereby shows himself to have possessed, he would have seen that smoothness
affords us as much pleasure as any smell, but that, as it would have been
always troublesome, and often impossible, to apply our fingers to smooth
surfaces, we generally receive the varied and incessant pleasure it
affords, by means of sight; that it is borne by light to the eye, as smell
is by the air; and that this is the reason why, except when contact is
indispensable, we have no need of anything in the way of a feeling-board.

But Knight says: "Smoothness being properly a quality, perceivable only by
the touch, and applied metaphorically to the objects of the other senses,
we often apply it, very improperly, to those of vision; assigning
smoothness as a cause of visible beauty, to things which, though smooth to
the touch, cast the most sharp, harsh, and angular reflections of light
upon the eyes; and these reflections are all that the eye feels, or
naturally perceives.... Such are all objects of cut-glass or polished
metal; as may be seen by the manner in which painters imitate them: for,
as the imitations of painting extend only to the visible qualities of
bodies, they show those visible qualities fairly and impartially.... Yet
the imitative representation of such objects in painting is far less harsh
and dazzling than the effects of them in reality: for there are no
materials that a painter can employ, capable of expressing the sharpness
and brilliancy of those angular reflections of the collected and
condensed rays, which are emitted from the surfaces of polished metals."

It seems, to me, scarcely possible to find sophistry more worthless than
this, or rather a more contemptible quibble; for that which, availing
himself of our technicalities about light, he calls angularity, sharpness,
&c., has no analogy with disagreeable angularity of form. To produce the
brilliance and splendor which he calls angular, and describes as so
_offensive_, we polish crystalline and metallic bodies in the highest
degree!--we value precisely those which thus admit of greatest
splendor!--and, on that very account, the diamond (rightly or wrongly, is
not the question) is deemed the most valuable object on earth!

So much for those elements of beauty, in inanimate things, which fall
under the cognizance of our fundamental sense, or that of touch.

As to sight and its objects, it is true that, as this organ varies in
different persons, their taste is modified, with regard to colors. But the
preference of light and delicate colors to dark and glaring ones, is
almost universal among persons of sensibility.

Alison, indeed, ascribes the effects of all colors to association.
"White," he says, "as it is the color of day, is expressive to us of the
cheerfulness or gayety which the return of day brings: black, as the color
of darkness [night], is expressive of gloom and melancholy." And he adds:
"Whether some colors may not of themselves produce agreeable sensations,
and others disagreeable sensations, I am not anxious to dispute." But
this is the very point into which Alison ought to have inquired. Nature
does nothing without foundation in the simplest principles; and this
foundation is not only anterior to, but is the cause of all association.

That, independent of any association, blackness is naturally disagreeable,
if not painful, is happily determined by the case of the boy restored to
sight by Cheselden, who tells us that the first time the boy saw a black
object, it gave him great uneasiness; and that, some time after, upon
accidentally seeing a negro-woman, he was struck with great horror at the
sight. This appears to be perfectly conclusive.

Knight indeed says: "As to the uneasiness which the boy, couched by
Cheselden, felt at the first sight of a black object, it arose either from
the harshness of its outline, or from its appearing to act as a partial
extinguisher applied to his eyes, which, as every object that he saw,
seemed to touch them, would, of course, be its effect." It is highly
probable that black operates in both these ways; and it has therefore
natural effects, independent of all association.

As to sounds, Alison observes, that the cries of some animals are sublime,
as the roar of the lion, the scream of the eagle, &c.; and he thinks they
become so, because we associate them with the strength and ferocity of the
animals which utter them. By opposite associations, he accounts for the
beauty of the notes of birds. And he says, that there is a similar
sublimity or beauty, in the tones of the human voice, and that "such
sounds are associated, in our imaginations, with the qualities of mind of
which they are in general expressive, and naturally produce in us the
conception of these qualities."

This writer endeavors to establish his views on this subject, by
observing, that "grandeur or sublimity of sound, can no otherwise arise
from its loudness, than as that loudness excites an idea of power in the
sonorous object, or in some other associated with it in the mind: for a
child's drum, close to the ear, fills it with more real noise, than the
discharge of a cannon a mile off; and the rattling of a carriage in the
street, when faintly and indistinctly heard, has often been mistaken for
thunder at a distance. Yet no one ever imagined the beating of a child's
drum, or the rattling of a carriage over the stones, to be grand or
sublime; which, nevertheless, they must be, if grandeur or sublimity
belong at all to the sensation of loudness. But artillery and lightning
are powerful engines of destruction; and with their power we sympathize,
whenever the sound of them excites any sentiments of sublimity."

Now, all this is directly opposed to the doctrine it is meant to support.
It distinctly implies that loudness is so natural and so frequent a result
of the violent contact of bodies, that we sometimes mistakenly ascribe
power to objects, of which we have not correctly distinguished the sounds,
owing to imitation, distance, &c. The occasional mistake implies the
general truth.

Alison, himself, notwithstanding his doctrine of association, is
accordingly led to observe, that "there are some philosophers who consider
these as the natural signs of passion or affection, and who believe that
it is not from experience, but by means of an original faculty, that we
interpret them: and this opinion is supported by great authorities."

He adds the following observations, which, notwithstanding the error they
involve, are too much to the purpose to be omitted here, and which in
reality illustrate a natural and true theory, better than they do his
own:--

"It is natural, however, to suppose, that in this, as in every case, our
experience should gradually lead to the formation of some general rules,
with regard to this expression.

"The great divisions of sound are into loud and low, grave and acute, long
and short, increasing and diminishing. The two first divisions are
expressive in themselves: the two last, only in conjunction with others.

"Loud sound is connected with ideas of power and danger. Many objects in
nature which have such qualities, are distinguished by such sounds; and
this association is farther confirmed from the human voice, in which all
violent and impetuous passions are expressed in loud tones.

"Low sound has a contrary expression, and is connected with ideas of
weakness, gentleness, and delicacy. This association takes its rise, not
only from the observation of inanimate nature, or of animals, where, in a
great number of cases, such sounds distinguish objects with such
qualities, but particularly from the human voice, where all gentle, or
delicate, or sorrowful affections are expressed by such tones.

"Grave sound is connected with ideas of moderation, dignity, solemnity,
&c., principally, I believe, from all moderate, or restrained, or
chastened affections being distinguished by such tones in the human voice.

"Acute sound is expressive of pain, or fear, or surprise, &c., and
generally operates by producing some degree of astonishment. This
association, also, seems principally to arise from our experience of such
connexions in the human voice.

"Long or lengthened sound seems to me to have no expression in itself, but
only to signify the continuance of that quality which is signified by
other qualities of sound. A loud or a low, a grave or an acute sound
prolonged expresses to us no more than the continuance of the quality
which is generally signified by such sounds.

"Short or abrupt sound has a contrary expression, and signifies the sudden
cessation of the quality thus expressed.

"Increasing sound signifies, in the same manner, the increase of the
quality expressed.

"Decreasing sound signifies the gradual diminution of such qualities.

"Motion furnishes another sort of beauty.

"Figure, color, and motion, readily blend in one object, and one general
perception of beauty. In many beautiful objects they all unite, and
render the beauty greater."

These characteristics are too universal not to support the doctrine of
natural appropriation and power, of which association is merely a
consequence.

It may be said, that all this chiefly regards mere geometrical forms, not
objects in nature. But, on referring to inanimate objects, it will be
found that they everywhere present these forms.

The round, the simplest form appears to characterize all elementary bodies
and all that are free from compression, to be in fact the most elementary
and the most readily assumed in nature. This form, accordingly, is
presented by the drops of water and of every liquid, by every atom
probably of oxygen, hydrogen, and azote, by the smallest as well as the
largest bodies, even the innumerable celestial orbs.

All the other, the angular forms are presented by inanimate bodies under
compression, or by mineral crystals.

Thus, then, do these simple geometrical forms characterize the simplest
bodies in nature; and it appears that this first kind of beauty is
peculiarly their own. It will, in the sequel, be as clearly seen, that
each of the other classes of natural beings presents beauty of a different
kind, which similarly characterizes it. Hence, no rational theory of
beauty could be formed by writers, who indiscriminatingly jumbled together
the characteristics of all the kinds of beauty, and expected to find them
everywhere.

As, then, from all that has been said, it appears that all the elements of
beauty which have thus been noticed, belong to inanimate beings, and as
this is shown by the passages I have quoted from the best writers, it
seems surprising, not merely that they should not have seen this to be the
case, but, that it should not have led them to observe, that there exists
also a second beauty, of living beings, and third, of thinking beings, as
well as others of the useful, the ornamental, and the intellectual arts
respectively, in each of which some new element was only added to the
characters of the preceding species.

It seems still more surprising that Alison, who deviates so widely from
all fundamental principles, should have actually stumbled upon an
observation of a few of the characteristics of inanimate beings, and
traced them as they pass upward through some living and thinking
beings--whose new characteristics, however, he did not discriminate. He
observes, that "the greater part of those bodies in nature, which possess
hardness, strength, or durability, are distinguished by angular forms. The
greater part of those bodies, on the contrary, which possess weakness,
fragility, or delicacy, are distinguished by winding or curvilinear forms.
In the mineral kingdom, all rocks, stones, and metals, the hardest and
most durable bodies we know, assume universally angular forms. In the
vegetable kingdom, all strong and durable plants are in general
distinguished by similar forms. The feebler and more delicate race of
vegetables, on the contrary, are mostly distinguished by winding forms. In
the animal kingdom, in the same manner, strong and powerful animals are
generally characterized by angular forms; feeble and delicate animals, by
forms of the contrary kind."[13]


SECTION II.

ELEMENTS OF BEAUTY IN LIVING BEINGS.

I have now to show that, in living beings, while the characters of the
first and fundamental beauty, that of inanimate beings, are still
partially continued, new characteristics are added to them.

Plants accordingly possess both rigid parts, like some of those described
in the preceding section, and delicate parts, which, in ascending through
the classes of natural beings from the simplest to the most complex, are
the very first to present to us new and additional characters totally
distinct from those of the preceding class.

I. To begin as nature does, then, we find the trunks and stems of plants,
which are near the ground, resembling most in character the inanimate
bodies from among which they spring. They assume the simplest and most
universal form in nature, the round one; but as growth is their great
function, they extend in height and become cylindrical.

Even the branches, the twigs, and the tendrils, continue this elementary
character; but it is in them, or in the stem when, like them, it is
tender, that such elementary characters give way to the purposes of life,
namely, growth and reproduction, and that we discover the new and
additional characters of beauty which this class presents to us.

II. To render this matter plain, I must observe that the formation of
rings, which unite in tubes, appears to be almost universally the material
condition of growth and reproduction. Every new portion of these tubes,
moreover, and every superadded ring, is less than that which preceded it.

It is from this that results the first characteristic of this second kind
of beauty, namely, fineness or delicacy. Hence, Burke made the possession
of a delicate frame, without any remarkable appearance of strength, his
fifth condition in beauty; and he here erred only from that want of
discrimination which led him to confound together all the conditions of
beauty, and prevented his seeing that they belonged to different genera.

Now, as fine and delicate bodies, which are growing, will shoot in that
direction where space, air, and light, can best be had, and as this, amid
other twigs and tendrils, will greatly vary, so will their productions
rarely continue long in the same straight line, but will, on the contrary,
bend. Hence, the curved or bending form is the second characteristic of
this kind of beauty.

It is worthy of remark, that, as the trunks, stems, twigs, and tendrils,
of plants assume the simplest and most universal form in nature, the round
one, so their more delicate parts have again the tendency to bend into a
similar form.

In the young and feeble branches of plants, it is observed by Alison, that
the bending form is "beautiful, when we perceive that it is the
consequence of the delicacy of their texture, and of their being
overpowered by the weight of the flower.... In the smaller and feebler
tribe of flowers, as in the violet, the daisy, or the lily of the valley,
the bending of the stem constitutes a very beautiful form, because we
immediately perceive that it is the consequence of the weakness and
delicacy of the flower."

From the circumstances now described, it results that all the parts of
plants present the most surprising variety. They vary their direction
every moment, as Burke observes, and they change under the eye by a
deviation continually carrying on, but for whose beginning or end you will
find it difficult to ascertain a point.

Variety is therefore the third characteristic of this second kind of
beauty; and in the indiscriminating views of Burke, he made two similar
conditions, viz: "Thirdly, to have a variety in the direction of the
parts; but, fourthly, to have those parts not angular, but melted as it
were into each other;" thus applying these to beauty generally, to which
they are not applicable, but in a confused and imperfect way.

It is scarcely necessary to observe that variety, as a character of
beauty, owes its effect to the need of changing impressions, in order to
enliven our sensibility, which does not fail to become inactive under the
long-continued impression of the same stimulant.

It is connected with this variety that unequal numbers are preferred, as
we see in the number of flowers and of their petals, in that of leaves
grouped together, and in the indentations of these leaves.

From all this springs the fourth and last characteristic of this second
species of beauty, namely, contrast. This strikes us when we at once look
at the rigid stem and bending boughs, and all the variety which the latter
display.

It will be observed, that, of all the characteristics of beauty, none tend
to render our perceptions so vivid as variety and contrast.

I conclude this section with a few remarks on the errors which Alison has
committed on this subject.

"In the rose," says that writer, "and the white lily, and in the tribe of
flowering shrubs, the same bending form assumed by the stem is felt as a
defect; and instead of impressing us with the idea of delicacy, leads us
to believe the operation of some force to twist it into this
direction."--This, however, is no defect arising from the bending form not
being abstractly more beautiful, but from its being contrary to the nature
of the stem of flowering shrubs to bend, from its being, as he himself
observes, the result of some force to twist it.

He asserts, however, that in plants, angular forms are beautiful, when
they are expressive of fineness, of tenderness, of delicacy, or such
affecting qualities; and he thinks that this may perhaps appear from the
consideration of the following instances:--

"The myrtle, for instance, is generally reckoned a beautiful form, yet the
growth of its stem is perpendicular, the junction of its branches form
regular and similar angles, and their direction is in straight or angular
lines. The known delicacy, however, and tenderness of the vegetable, at
least in this climate, prevail over the general expression of the form,
and give it the same beauty which we generally find in forms of a contrary
kind."--The mistake here committed is in supposing the beauty of the
myrtle to depend on its angularity, instead of its being evergreen,
fragrant, and suggesting pleasures of association.

"How much more beautiful," he says, "is the rose-tree when its buds begin
to blow, than afterward, when its flowers are full and in their greatest
perfection! yet, in this first situation, its form has much less winding
surface, and is much more composed of straight lines and of angles, than
afterward when the weight of the flower weighs down the feeble branches,
and describes the easiest and most varied curves."--But he answers himself
by adding: "The circumstance of its youth, a circumstance in all cases so
affecting, the delicacy of its blossom, so well expressed by the care
which Nature has taken in surrounding the opening bud with leaves, prevail
so much upon our imagination, that we behold the form itself with more
delight in this situation than afterward, when it assumes the more general
form of delicacy."

"There are few things in the vegetable world," he says, "more beautiful
than the knotted and angular stem of the balsam, merely from its singular
transparency, which it is impossible to look at without a strong
impression of the fineness and delicacy of the vegetable."--But it is its
transparency, not its angularity, that is beautiful.

The beauty of color is not less conspicuous than that of form in this
class of beings.


SECTION III.

ELEMENTS OF BEAUTY IN THINKING BEINGS.

I have next to show that, in thinking beings, while the characters of
inanimate, and those of living beauty, are still more or less continued,
new characteristics are also added to them.

I. In animals, accordingly, the bones bear a close analogy to the wood of
plants. They generally assume the same rounded form; but, as thinking
beings are necessarily moving ones, their bones are hollow to combine
lightness with strength, and they are separated by joints to permit
flexion and extension.

II. As animals, like plants, grow and reproduce, a portion of their
general organization, their vascular system, which serves the purpose of
growth and reproduction, consists, like plants, of trunks, branches, &c.;
and the surface of their bodies, the skin, is formed by a tissue of these
vessels. Accordingly, both the vessels themselves, and the tissue which
they form, present the delicacy, the bending, the variety, and the
contrast, which are the characters of the preceding species of beauty.

The undulating and serpentine lines which art seeks always to design in
its most beautiful productions, exist in greater number at the surface of
the human body than at that of any other animal. Wherever, as Hogarth
observes, "for the sake of the necessary motion of the parts, with proper
strength and agility, the insertions of the muscles are too hard and
sudden, their swellings too bold, or the hollows between them too deep,
for their outlines to be beautiful; nature softens these hardnesses, and
plumps up these vacancies with a proper supply of fat, and covers the
whole with the soft, smooth, springy, and, in delicate life, almost
transparent skin, which, conforming itself to the external shape of all
the parts beneath, expresses to the eye the idea of its contents with the
utmost delicacy of beauty and grace."

It is principally in the features of the face, as has often been observed,
and on the surface of the torso and of the members of a beautiful woman,
that these delicate, bending, varied, and contrasted lines are multiplied:
by their union, they mark the outlines of different parts, as in the
region of the neck, of the bosom, at the shoulders, on the surface of the
abdomen, on the sides, and principally in the gradual transitions from the
head to the neck, and from the loins to the inferior extremities.

These lines vary under different circumstances; much enbonpoint producing
round lines, and leanness or old age producing straight ones.

Woman and man stand pre-eminent among animals as to this kind of beauty;
and to them succeed the swifter animals, as the horse, the stag, &c.

The animals, on the contrary, of which the surface presents right lines
and square forms, are correspondingly deprived of beauty; as the toad, the
hog, and all the animals which seem to us ugly.

In all animals, also, the beauty of color, even when slightly varied,
becomes extremely interesting.--In human beauty, considerable variety is
produced by the different shades of the skin.

Such, indeed, is the variety resulting from all this, that some degree
even of intricacy is produced. The undulating lines which cross in every
direction, and the tortuous paths of the eye, are the means of an
agreeable complication.

Hence Burke, following Hogarth, says: "Observe that part of a beautiful
woman where she is perhaps the most beautiful, about the neck and breasts:
the smoothness, the softness, the easy and insensible swell, the variety
of the surface, which is never for the smallest space the same, the
deceitful maze, through which the unsteady eye slides giddily, without
knowing where to fix, or whither it is carried. Is not this a
demonstration of that change of surface, continual, and yet hardly
perceptible at any point, which forms one of the great constituents of
beauty?

The hair affords an excellent instance of this agreeable complication.
Soft curls agitated by the wind have been the theme of every poet. And
yet, says Hogarth, "to show how excess ought to be avoided in intricacy,
as well as in every other principle, the very same head of hair, wisped
and matted together, would make the most disagreeable figure; because the
eye would be perplexed, and at a fault, and unable to trace such a
confused number of uncomposed and entangled lines."

III. But animals have a higher system of organs and functions which
peculiarly distinguishes them, and which presents new and peculiar
characteristics of beauty. This consists of the organs by which they
receive impressions from, and react upon the objects around them--the
first organs which Nature presents having altogether external relations,
and the first, consequently, in which we look for fitness for any purpose.

The importance of fitness to the beauty of such objects is learned
imperceptibly. Lines and forms, though the most elegant, fail to please
us, if ill distributed in this respect: and objects, to a great extent
destitute of the other characters of natural beauty, become beautiful when
regarded in relation to fitness. Thus would this sense appear to be so
powerful, as in some measure to regulate our other perceptions of beauty.

It is fitness which leads us to admire in one animal, what would displease
us if found in another. "The variety," says Barry, "and union of parts,
which we call beautiful in a greyhound, are pleasing in consequence of the
idea of agility which they convey. In other animals, less agility is
united with more strength; and, indeed, all the different arrangements
please because they indicate either different qualities, different degrees
of qualities, or the different combinations of them."

In relation to the various fitness of the human body, the same writer
says: "We should not increase the beauty of the female bosom, by the
addition of another protuberance; and the exquisite undulating transitions
from the convex to the concave tendencies, could not be multiplied with
any success. In fine, our rule for judging of the mode and degree of this
combination of variety and unity, seems to be no other than that of its
fitness and conformity to the designation of each species."

But it is less necessary for me to adduce authorities in support of this
truth, than to answer the objections that have been made to it by some of
the ablest writers on the subject--objections which have generally their
origin in the narrow views which these men have taken, and in those
partial hypotheses which, even when true, led them to reject all other
truth.

"It is said," observes Burke, "that the idea of a part's being well
adapted to answer its end, is one cause of beauty, or indeed beauty
itself.... In framing this theory, I am apprehensive that experience was
not sufficiently consulted. For, on that principle, the wedgelike snout of
a swine with its tough cartilage at the end, the little sunk eyes, and
the whole make of the head, so well adapted to its offices of digging and
rooting, would be extremely beautiful."--And so they are, when the beauty
of fitness for their purpose is considered; but that purpose being the
mere growth and fattening of an animal of sensual and dirty habits, it is
a fallacy to represent this, without explanation, as a fair proof of the
absence of connexion between fitness and beauty.

"If beauty in our species," says the same writer, "was annexed to use, men
would be much more lovely than women; and strength and agility would be
considered as the only beauties."--Burke was a stringer of fine words, not
for woman, but for queens, when that served a selfish and venal purpose.
The sentence just quoted shows that his gallantry was as ignorant as it
was mean. He here asserts by implication that women are less useful than
men, although it is to women that the care of the whole human race, during
its most helpless years, is committed, and although they take upon
themselves all that half of the duties of life which men are as little
capable of performing, as women are of performing the portion suited to
men.

"And," says he, "I appeal to the first and most natural feelings of
mankind, whether, on beholding a beautiful eye, or a well-fashioned mouth,
or a well-turned leg, any ideas of their being well fitted for seeing,
eating, or running, ever present themselves."--Is running, then, the
proper use of the leg in woman! Rousseau more truly thought its use was
to _fail_ in running, or _not_ to run! Is eating the only use of her
mouth! This, too from the man who deplored that "the age of chivalry was
gone!"--Nevertheless, I will venture to assert that such things never were
and never will be seen, without suggesting ideas of fitness of some kind
or other.

"There is," he proceeds, "another notion current, pretty closely allied to
the former; that perfection is the constituent cause of beauty. This
opinion has been made to extend much farther than to sensible objects. But
in these, so far is perfection, considered as such, from being the cause
of beauty, that this quality, where it is highest in the female sex,
almost always carries with it an idea of weakness and imperfection."--For
this plain reason, that female perfection is utterly incompatible with
great muscular perfection or strength, which would indeed be injurious to
the performance of every feminine function.

We may now advance another step in the subject under discussion. What,
then, are the peculiar physical characters of beings thus possessing sense
and motion, and thus characterized by fitness?

"It must be remembered," says Knight, "that irregularity is the general
characteristic of trees, and regularity that of animals."--It would have
been more correct to say that symmetry is this peculiar characteristic.
There is little resemblance between the parts of one side; and it is
symmetry which results from the uniform disposition of double parts, and
from the regular division of single ones.

Hence an agreeable impression is produced by the corresponding disposition
and the exact resemblance of the eyes, of the eyebrows, of the ears, of
the hemispheres of the bosom, and of the different parts of which the
limbs are composed; and the forehead, the nose, the mouth, the abdomen,
the back, are agreeably distinguished by means of the median line which
divides them.

It appears that the eye is pleased by the exactness of corresponding
parts; and that symmetry is the first character of beauty in thinking
beings.

Occasional irregularity makes us better appreciate the importance of
symmetry. The oblique direction of the eyes, squinting, twisting of the
nose or lips, unequal magnitude of the hemispheres of the bosom, or
unequal length of the limbs, disfigure the most beautiful person.

But how does symmetry contribute to fitness, or why is it necessary?

"All our limbs and organs," says Payne Knight, "serve us in pairs, and by
mutual co-operation with each other: whence the habitual association of
ideas has taught us to consider this uniformity as indispensable to the
beauty and perfection of the animal form. There is no reason to be deduced
from any abstract consideration of the nature of things, why an animal
should be more ugly and disgusting for having only one eye, or one ear,
than for having only one nose or one mouth; yet if we were to meet with a
beast with one eye, or two noses, or two mouths, in any part of the world,
we should, without inquiry, decide it to be a monster, and turn from it
with abhorrence: neither is there any reason, in the nature of things, why
a strict parity, or relative equality, in the correspondent limbs and
features of a man or a horse, should be absolutely essential to beauty,
and absolutely destructive of it in the roots and branches of a tree. But,
nevertheless, the Creator having formed the one regular, and the other
irregular, we habitually associate ideas of regularity to the perfection
of one, and ideas of irregularity to the perfection of the other; and this
habit has been so unvaried, as to have become natural."

This is the common cant of every weak man at loss for a reason. Now, it is
not by any "habitual association" with "our limbs and organs serving us in
pairs," that we are "taught to consider this uniformity indispensable to
beauty," but because, independent of all association, we could not
conveniently walk upon one leg, or, indeed, on any unequal number of legs:
and there being two sides in the moving organs, there are necessarily two
in the sensitive organs, which are mere portions of the same general
system. Thus it is locomotion to be performed that renders "a strict
parity, or relative equality, in the correspondent limbs and features of a
man or a horse" absolutely essential to beauty; and it is the absence of
locomotion which renders it utterly worthless, and therefore very rare, in
"the roots and branches of a tree."

In animals, proportion is not less essential than symmetry. It is indeed
the second character of this kind of beauty. As this part of the subject
has been perfectly well treated by Mr. Alison, I need only quote what he
has said:--

"It is this expression of fitness which is, I apprehend, the source of the
beauty of what is strictly and properly called proportion in the parts of
the human form.

"We expect a different form, and a different conformation of limbs, in a
running footman and a waterman, in a wrestler and a racing groom, in a
shepherd and a sailor, &c.

"They who are conversant in the productions of the fine arts, must have
equally observed, that the forms and proportions of features, which the
sculptor and the painter have given to their works, are very different,
according to the nature of the character they represent, and the emotion
they wish to excite. The form or proportions of the features of Jove are
different from those of Hercules; those of Apollo, from those of Ganymede;
those of the Fawn, from those of the Gladiator. In female beauty, the form
and proportions in the features of Juno are very different from those of
Venus; those of Minerva, from those of Diana; those of Niobe, from those
of the Graces. All, however, are beautiful; because all are adapted with
exquisite taste to the characters they wish the countenance to express."

In "the Hercules and the Antinous, the Jupiter and the Apollo, we find
that not only the proportions of the form, but those of every limb, are
different; and that the pleasure we feel in these proportions arises from
their exquisite fitness for the physical ends which the artists were
consulting.

"The illustration, however, may be made still more precise; for, even in
the same countenance, and in the same hour, the same form of feature may
be beautiful or otherwise."


SECTION IV.

ELEMENTS OF BEAUTY AS EMPLOYED IN OBJECTS OF ART.

I divide the arts into the useful, the ornamental, and the intellectual,
commonly called the fine arts; and I shall endeavor to show, that the
objects of each of these are characterized by a peculiar kind of beauty,
corresponding to one of those already described.

I shall endeavor to show that the objects of the useful arts are
characterized by the simple geometrical forms which belong to inanimate
beings; that those of the ornamental arts are characterized by the
delicate, bending, varied, and contrasted forms of living beings; and that
those of the intellectual arts are, in their highest efforts,
characterized chiefly by thinking forms, as in gesture, sculpture,
painting, or by functions of mind actually exercised, in oratory, poetry,
music.

In all these arts, purpose is implied--not purpose in the hypothetical
sense, as applied to the existence, conditions, and objects, of natural
beings--but in the common intelligible sense of the word, as expressing
the intention of men in the pursuit of these arts.


_Beauty of Useful Objects._

Here the purpose being utility, this kind of beauty arises from the
perception of means as adapted to an end, which of course implies, the
parts of anything being fitted to answer the purpose of the whole.

This implies an act of understanding and judgment; for of no product of
useful art can we perceive the extrinsic beauty, until we know its
destination, and the relations which that involves.

When these are known, so powerful is the sense of utility, that, though
deviation from the elementary beauty never ceases to be felt, yet that
sense sanctions it to a great extent. Hence it is that an irregular
dwelling-house may become beautiful, when its convenience is striking.
Hence it is that, in the forms of furniture, machines, and instruments,
their beauty arises chiefly from this consideration; and that every form
becomes beautiful by association, where it is perfectly adapted to its
end.

The greater, however, the elementary beauty, that can be introduced in
useful objects, the more obvious will their utility be, and the more
beautiful will they universally appear. This will be granted the moment I
mention simplicity.

Of all the elements of beauty already spoken of--of all the means of
producing accordant and agreeable relations--simplicity appears to be the
most efficient; and in all the useful arts, no elementary consideration
recommends their objects so much.

This implies all the rest, regularity, uniformity, proportion, order, &c.,
as far as is compatible with purpose.

Thus, in regard to uniformity, says some one, a number of things destined
for the same purpose, as chairs, spoons, &c., cannot be too uniform,
because they are adapted to uniform purposes; but it would be absurd to
give to objects destined for one purpose the form suited to those destined
for another.

So also the objects of useful art will resemble in form precisely as they
resemble in purpose; and where the purpose is similar, and the deviation
which is admissible is slight, this becomes a subject of great nicety,
and, if ornament be at the same time admissible, a subject of exquisite
taste.

It was by the transcendent exercise of these qualities, that the Greeks
succeeded in fixing the orders of architecture. The most beautiful columns
would have shocked the sight, if their mass had not corresponded to that
of the edifice which they sustained; and the difference which existed in
this respect, required a difference of ornament.

Home indeed observes, that "writers on architecture insist much upon the
proportions of a column, and assign different proportions to the Doric,
Ionic, and Corinthian; but no architect will maintain, that the most
accurate proportions contribute more to use, than several that are less
accurate and less agreeable."

That such a man should have committed such an error is surprising. It
seems evident that the different proportion in the columns of these orders
is admirably suited to the different quantity of matter in their
entablatures. A greater superincumbent mass, required shorter and thicker
columns; a less superincumbent mass, longer and slender ones. Many
experiments, much observation, were requisite to determine this; but the
Greeks had the means of making them, and solved every problem on the
subject; and the result of the perfection they attained is, that all err
who depart from the truth they have determined.

It was, again, the differing quantities of matter in the entablatures, and
the accurately-corresponding dimensions of the columns that determined, of
course amid infinite experiment and observation, the nature of their
ornaments. Hence, the Doric is distinguished by simplicity; the Ionic by
elegance; and the Corinthian by lightness, in ornament as well as in
proportion.

Even, therefore, if we were to destroy all the associations of elegance,
of magnificence, of costliness, and, still more than all, of antiquity,
which are so strongly connected with such forms, the pleasure which their
proportions would afford, would remain, as in all cases where means are
best adapted to their end.

In his objections to proportion as an element of beauty, Burke only
confounds this kind of beauty with that which I have next to describe.

"The effects of proportion and fitness," he says, "at least so far as they
proceed from a mere consideration of the work itself, produce approbation,
the acquiescence of the understanding, but not love, nor any passion of
that species. When we examine the structure of a watch, when we come to
know thoroughly the use of every part of it, satisfied as we are with the
fitness of the whole, we are far enough from perceiving anything like
beauty in the watchwork itself; but let us look on the case, the labor of
some curious artist in engraving, with little or no idea of use, we shall
have a much livelier idea of beauty than we ever could have had from the
watch itself, though the masterpiece of Graham."

It is an emotion of pleasure which is the inevitable result of the
perception of beauty, not love, nor any passion of the kind. These will or
will not follow, according to the nature of the object, and of the mind of
the observer. A hill, a valley, or a rivulet, may be beautiful, and it
will excite an emotion of pleasure when its beauty is discerned; but it
may produce no desire or passion of love. There may exist, then, the
beauty of utility, as to the structure of the watch, and that of ornament
as to its case; and some minds will more readily perceive the one; others,
the other.

When Burke adds, "In beauty, the effect is previous to any knowledge of
the use; but to judge of proportion, we must know the end for which any
work is designed;" he forgets, that, in the instance of the barber's
block, &c., he showed that the perception of beauty, as well as
proportion, required observation, experience, and reflection.


_Beauty of Ornamental Objects._

There are three great arts which, under circumstances of high
civilization, become ornamental, namely, landscape-gardening,
architecture, and dress--the particular arts by which our persons are more
or less closely invested;[14] and all of them, then, require beauty of the
second kind, that which belongs particularly to vegetable beings, and is
characterized by delicate, bending varied, and contrasted forms.

All these, regarded as ornamental arts, have chiefly bodily and sensual
pleasures for their purpose; and this I consider as distinguishing them
from the intellectual arts, which have a higher purpose.

Of landscape-gardening, the materials are plants, and therefore its beauty
is evidently dependant on, or rather composed of, theirs.

The same kind of beauty will be found in every ornamental art. Hence,
Alison says: "The greater part of beautiful forms in nature, are to be
found in the vegetable kingdom, in the forms of flowers, of foliage, of
shrubs, and in those assumed by the young shoots of trees. It is from
them, accordingly, that almost all those forms have been imitated, which
have been employed by artists for the purposes of ornament and elegance."

On this kind of beauty, mistaking it for the only one, Hogarth founded his
peculiar doctrine. "He adopts two lines, on which, according to him, the
beauty of figure principally depends. One is the waving line, or a curve
bending gently in opposite directions. This he calls the line of beauty;
and he shows how often it is found in flowers, shells, and various works
of nature; while it is common also in the figures designed by painters and
sculptors, for the purpose of decoration. The other line, which he calls
the line of grace, is the former waving line, twisted round some solid
body. Twisted pillars and twisted horns exhibit it. In all the instances
which he mentions, variety plainly appears to be so important an element
of this kind of beauty, that he states a portion of the truth, when he
defines the art of drawing pleasing forms to be the art of varying well;
for the curve line, so much the favorite of painters, derives much of its
beauty from its perpetual bending and variation from the stiff regularity
of the straight line." It is evident, however, that in this, he mistakes
one kind of beauty for all.

Of architecture, considered as a fine art, much of the beauty depends on
the imitation of vegetable forms. Employing materials which require the
best characteristics of the first kind of beauty, it, in its choicest and
ornamented parts, imitates both the rigid trunks, and the delicate and
bending forms of plants. Its columns, tapering upward, are copied from the
trunks of trees; and their decorations are suited with consummate art to
their dimensions, and the weight they support. The simple Doric has little
ornament; the elegant Ionic has more; the light Corinthian has most.

On the subject of these finely-calculated ornaments, some observations
have struck me, which I have not seen mentioned elsewhere. The Doric
presents only columns, without any other ornament than that of which their
mere form admits. The Ionic expresses increased lightness, by the
interposition of its volute, as if the superincumbent weight had but
gently pressed a soft solid into a scroll. The Corinthian expresses the
utmost lightness, by forming its capitals of foliage, as if the weight
above them could not crush even a leaf. The Composite expresses gayety, by
adding flowers to the foliage. It is from imperfect views of this, that
the meaning and effect of caryatides have been mistaken: instead of being
oppressed by weight, they seem, when well employed, to have no weight to
support.

In nearly all internal architectural decorations, it is the delicate,
bending, varied, and contrasted vegetable forms which are imitated.

"There is scarce a room, in any house whatever," says Hogarth, "where one
does not see the waving line employed in some way or other. How inelegant
would the shapes of all our moveables be without it? how very plain and
unornamental the mouldings of cornices and chimney-pieces, without the
variety introduced by the ogee member, which is entirely composed of
waving lines."

The distinctions I have here made, are farther illustrated by the remarks
of Alison, who says: "These ornaments being executed in a very hard and
durable substance, are in fact only beautiful when they appear but as
minute parts of the whole. The great constituent parts of every building
require direct and angular lines, because in such parts we require the
expression of stability and strength. It is only in the minute and
delicate parts of the work, that any kind of ornament is attempted with
propriety; and whenever ornaments exceed in size, in their quantity of
matter, or in the prominence of their relief, that proportion which, in
point of lightness or delicacy, we expect them to hold with respect to the
whole of the building, the imitation of the most beautiful vegetable forms
does not preserve them from the censure of clumsiness and deformity."

In dress, considered as an ornamental art, and, as practised by the sex
which chiefly studies it, the chief beauty depends on the adoption of
winding forms in drapery, and of wreaths of flowers for the head, &c.
These are essential to the variety and contrast, as well as to the gayety
which that sex desires.

"Uniformity," says Hogarth, "is chiefly complied with in dress, on account
of fitness, and seems to be extended not much farther than dressing both
arms alike, and having the shoes of the same color. For when any part of
dress has not the excuse of fitness or propriety for its uniformity of
parts, the ladies always call it formal."

These irregular, varying, and somewhat complicated draperies excite that
active curiosity, and those movements of imagination, to which skilful
women never neglect to address themselves in modern costume.

It is with the same feeling and intention, whether these be defined or
not, that, in the head-dress, they seek for bending lines and
circumvolutions, and that they combine variously the waves and the tresses
of the hair.

For the same reason, a feather or a flower is never placed precisely over
the middle of the forehead; and if two are employed, great care is taken
that their positions are dissimilar.

It has sometimes struck me as remarkable, that precious stones are almost
always arranged differently from flowers. While the latter are placed
irregularly, and in waving lines, not only on the head, but the bosom, and
the skirt of the dress, the former are in general regularly placed, either
on the median line of the person, as the middle of the forehead and, in
Eastern countries, of the nose, or symmetrically in similar pendants from
each ear, and bracelets on the arms and wrists.

The instinctive feeling which gives origin to this is, that flowers adorn
the system of life and reproduction, and by their color and smell,
associate with its emotions, which they also express and communicate to
others--they, therefore, assume the varied forms of that system; whereas,
diamonds, attached generally to mental organs, or organs of sense, are
significant of mental feelings, love of splendor, distinction, pride,
&c.--they, therefore, assume the symmetrical form of these organs. Hence,
too, flowers are recommended to the young; diamonds are permitted only to
the old.


_Beauty of Intellectual Objects._

I have already said, that the intellectual arts are, in their highest
efforts, characterized chiefly by animal forms, as in gesture, sculpture,
and painting, or by animal functions actually exercised, in oratory,
poetry, and music.

In the useful arts, the purpose is utility; in the ornamental arts, it is
bodily or sensual pleasure; and in the intellectual arts, it is the
pleasure of imagination.

The first elements of beauty, however, are not forgotten in these arts. As
simplicity is conspicuous in the works of nature, so is it a condition of
beauty in all the operations of mind. In philosophy, general theorems
become beautiful from this simplicity; and polished manners receive from
it dignity and grace. The intellectual arts are especially dependant upon
it: it has been a striking character of their most illustrious
cultivators, and of their very highest efforts.

How much the characters and accidents of elementary beauty influence
intellectual art, has been well shown by Mr. Knight.

"In the higher class of landscapes," he says, "whether in nature or in
art, the mere sensual gratification of the eye is comparatively so small,
as scarcely to be attended to: but yet, if there occur a single spot,
either in the scene or the picture, offensively harsh and glaring--if the
landscape-gardener, in the one, or the picture-cleaner, in the other, have
exerted their unhappy talents of polishing, all the magic instantly
vanishes, and the imagination avenges the injury offered to the sense. The
glaring and unharmonious spot, being the most prominent and obtrusive,
irresistibly attracts the attention, so as to interrupt the repose of the
whole, and leaves the mind no place to rest upon."

"It is, in some respects," he observes, "the same with the sense of
hearing. The mere sensual gratification, arising from the melody of an
actor's voice, is a very small part, indeed, of the pleasure which we
receive from the representation of a fine drama: but, nevertheless, if a
single note of the voice be absolutely cracked and out of tune, so as to
offend and disgust the ear, it will completely destroy the effect of the
most skilful acting, and render all the sublimity and pathos of the finest
tragedy ludicrous."

This, I may observe, is a concession of much that he elsewhere
inconsistently contends for; for sensual beauty could never act thus
powerfully, if it possessed not fundamental importance as an element even
in the most complex beauty.

That the second kind of beauty also enters into the acts or products of
intellectual beauty, is sufficiently illustrated by the observation of
Hogarth, who on this subject observes, that all the common and necessary
motions for the business of life are performed by men in straight or plain
lines, while all the graceful and ornamental movements are made in waving
lines.

As Alison has given the best view of the history and character of beauty
in the intellectual arts, as that indeed constitutes the most valuable
portion of his work, I shall conclude this section by a greatly abridged
view of these as nearly as possible in his own words.

There is no production of taste, which has not many qualities of a very
indifferent kind; and our sense of the beauty or sublimity of every object
accordingly depends upon the quality or qualities of it which we consider.

This, Mr. Alison might have observed, is in great measure dependant upon
our will. We can generally, when we please, confine our consideration of
it to the qualities that least excite pleasurable or painful emotion, and
that can least interest the imagination.

It is in consequence of this, that the exercise of criticism always
destroys, for the time, our sensibility to the beauty of every
composition, and that habits of this kind generally destroy the
sensibility of taste.

When, on the other hand, the emotions of sublimity or beauty are produced,
it will be found that some affection is uniformly first excited by the
presence of the object; and whether the general impression we receive is
that of gayety, or tenderness, or melancholy, or solemnity, or terror,
&c., we have never any difficulty of determining.

But whatever may be the nature of that simple emotion which any object is
fitted to excite, if it produce not a train of kindred thought in our
minds, we are conscious only of that simple emotion.

In many cases, on the contrary, we are conscious of a train of thought
being immediately awakened in the imagination, analogous to the character
of expression of the original object.

"Thus, when we feel either the beauty or sublimity of natural scenery--the
gay lustre of a morning in spring, or the mild radiance of a
summer-evening--the savage majesty of a wintry storm, or the wild
magnificence of the tempestuous ocean--we are conscious of a variety of
images in our minds, very different from those which the objects
themselves present to the eye. Trains of pleasing or of solemn thought
arise spontaneously within our minds; our hearts swell with emotions, of
which the objects before us seem to afford no adequate cause; and we are
never so much satiated with delight, as when, in recalling our attention,
we are unable (little able, perhaps, and less disposed) to trace either
the progress or the connexion of those thoughts, which have passed with so
much rapidity through our imagination.

"The effect of the different arts of taste is similar. The landscapes of
Claude Lorraine, the poetry of Milton, the music of the greatest masters,
excite feeble emotions in our minds when our attention is confined to the
qualities they present to our senses, or when it is to such qualities of
their composition that we turn our regard. It is then only we feel the
sublimity or beauty of their productions, when our imaginations are
kindled by their power, when we lose ourselves amid the number of images
that pass before our minds, and when we waken at last from this play of
fancy, as from the charm of a romantic dream.

"The degree in which the emotions of sublimity or beauty are felt, is in
general proportioned to the prevalence of those relations of thought in
the mind, upon which this exercise of imagination depends. The principal
relation which seems to take place in those trains of thought that are
produced by objects of taste, is that of resemblance; the relation, of all
others the most loose and general, and which affords the greatest range of
thought for our imagination to pursue. Wherever, accordingly, these
emotions are felt, it will be found, not only that this is the relation
which principally prevails among our ideas, but that the emotion itself is
proportioned to the degree in which it prevails.

"What, for instance, is the impression we feel from the scenery of spring?
The soft and gentle green with which the earth is spread, the feeble
texture of the plants and flowers, the young of animals just entering into
life, and the remains of winter yet lingering among the woods and
hills--all conspire to infuse into our minds somewhat of that fearful
tenderness with which infancy is usually beheld. With such a sentiment,
how innumerable are the ideas which present themselves to our
imagination! ideas, it is apparent, by no means confined to the scene
before our eyes, or to the possible desolation which may yet await its
infant beauty, but which almost involuntarily extend themselves to
analogies with the life of man, and bring before us all those images of
hope or fear, which, according to our peculiar situations, have the
dominion of our heart!--The beauty of autumn is accompanied with a similar
exercise of thought.

"Whatever increases this exercise or employment of imagination, increases
also the emotion of beauty or sublimity.

"This is very obviously the effect of all associations. There is no man
who has not some interesting associations with particular scenes, or airs,
or books, and who does not feel their beauty or sublimity enhanced to him
by such connexions. The view of the house where one was born, of the
school where one was educated, and where the gay years of infancy were
passed, is indifferent to no man.

"In the case of those trains of thought, which are suggested by objects
either of sublimity or beauty, it will be found, that they are in all
cases composed of ideas capable of exciting some affection or emotion; and
that not only the whole succession is accompanied with that peculiar
emotion which we call the emotion of beauty or sublimity, but that every
individual idea of such a succession is in itself productive of some
simple emotion or other.

"Thus the ideas suggested by the scenery of spring, are ideas productive
of emotions of cheer fulness, of gladness, and of tenderness. The images
suggested by the prospect of ruins, are images belonging to pity, to
melancholy, and to admiration. The ideas, in the same manner, awakened by
the view of the ocean in a storm, are ideas of power, of majesty, and of
terror."

To prevent circumlocution, such ideas may be termed ideas of emotion; and
the effect which is produced upon the mind, by objects of taste, may be
considered as consisting in the production of a regular or consistent
train of ideas of emotion.

"In those trains which are suggested by objects of sublimity or beauty,
however slight the connexion between individual thoughts may be, it will
be found, that there is always some general principle of connexion which
pervades the whole, and gives them some certain definite character. They
are either gay, or pathetic, or melancholy, or solemn, or awful, or
elevating, &c., according to the nature of the emotion which is first
excited. Thus the prospect of a serene evening in summer, produces first
an emotion of peacefulness and tranquillity, and then suggests a variety
of images corresponding to this primary impression. The sight of a
torrent, or of a storm, in the same manner, impresses us first with
sentiments of awe or solemnity, or terror, and then awakens in our minds a
series of conceptions allied to this peculiar emotion."

The intellectual, or fine arts are those whose objects are thus addressed
to the imagination; and the pleasures they afford are described, by way of
distinction, as the pleasures of the imagination.


SUMMARY OF THIS CHAPTER.

Thus, by analysis, generalization, and systematization, of the materials
which the best writers present, I have, in this chapter, endeavored to
take new and larger views; and, by an examination of the elements of
beauty, I have endeavored to fix its doctrines upon an immoveable basis.

I have shown that there exist elements of beauty equally invariable in
themselves, and in the kind of effect they produce upon the mind; that
these elements are modified, varied, and complicated, as we advance from
the most simple to the most complex class of natural beings, or of the
arts which relate to these respectively; that the elements of beauty in
inanimate beings, consist in the simplicity, regularity, uniformity,
proportion, order, &c., of those geometrical forms which are so intimately
connected with mere existence; that the elements of beauty in living
beings, consist in adding to the preceding the delicacy, bending, variety,
contrast, &c., which are connected with growth, and reproduction; that the
elements of beauty in thinking beings, consist in adding to the preceding
the symmetry, proportion,[15] &c., which are connected with fitness for
sense, thought, and motion; that the elements of beauty in the objects of
useful art, consist in the same simplicity, regularity, uniformity,
proportion, order, of geometrical forms which belong to inanimate beings;
that the elements of beauty in the objects of ornamental art consist in
the same delicacy, bending, variety, contrast, which belong to living
beings; and that the elements of beauty in the objects of intellectual art
consist in thinking forms, in gesture, sculpture, and painting, or in
functions of mind actually exercised, in oratory, poetry, and music.

The elements of beauty have hitherto been confounded by many writers, as
more or less applicable to objects of all kinds; and as this general and
confused application was easily disproved as to many objects, uncertainty
and doubt have been thrown over the whole. The remaining writers have
consequently been led to adopt, as characters of beauty, only one or two
of these elements, which were consequently capable of application only to
one or two classes of its objects. Hence, no subject of human inquiry has
hitherto been left in a more disgraceful condition than this, the very
foundation of taste.

I do not hesitate to state that, owing to the near approximations to
truth, and the insensible transitions into error, which I have found in
every writer, and the immense mass of confused materials which they
present, this subject has cost me more trouble than any one I have ever
investigated, except that of my work on the mind;[16] nor without some
physiological knowledge, do I think tasks of this kind at all practicable.
Generally speaking, each branch of knowledge is most surely advanced by
acquaintance with its related branches; and philosophers cannot too much
bear in mind the words of Cicero: "Etenim omnes artes quæ ad humanitatem
pertinent, habent quoddam commune vinculum, et quasi cognatione quadam
inter se continentur."




APPENDIX TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS.


SECTION I.

NATURE OF THE PICTURESQUE.[17]

In landscape, the nature of the beautiful and the sublime seems to be
better understood than that of the picturesque. There are few disputes as
to the former; many as to the latter. These disputes, moreover, are not as
to _what is picturesque_, but as to _what picturesque is_.

Payne Knight asserts, that the picturesque has no distinctive character,
and merely designates what a painter would imitate. Price, on the
contrary, has given so many admirable illustrations of it, that its
characteristics are before every reader. Strange to tell, its nature or
essence has not been penetrated, because these characteristics have not
been rigidly analyzed.

Price has, indeed, generalized considerably on this subject, by showing
that irregularity, roughness, &c., enter into all scenes of a picturesque
description; and the examination of any one of them will certainly verify
the truth of his observation.

Thus, on a remote country-road, we often observe the deep ruts on its
surface which in winter would render it impassable--the huge and loose
moss-grown stone, ready to encumber it by falling from the bank--the
stunted pollard by its side, whose roots are exposed by the earth falling
away from it, and which must itself be swept away by the first wind that
may blow against it in an unfavorable direction--the almost ruined
cottage, above and beyond these, whose gable is propped up by an old and
broken wheel, and whose thatched roof, stained with every hue of moss or
lichen, has, at one part, long fallen in--the shaggy and ragged horse that
browses among the rank weeds around it--and the old man, bent with age,
who leans over the broken gate in front of it.

Here, in every circumstance, is verified the irregularity and roughness
which Price ascribes to the picturesque. But he has failed to observe,
that _the irregularity and roughness are but the signs of that which
interests the mind far more deeply_, namely, the universal DECAY which
causes them. This is the essence of the picturesque--the charm in it which
begets our sympathy.

Confining his remark merely to ruins, the author of "Observations on
Gardening," says: "At the sight of a ruin, reflections on the change, the
decay, and the desolation, before us naturally occur; and they introduce a
long succession of others, all tinctured with that melancholy which these
have inspired; or if the monument revive the memory of former times, we do
not stop at the simple fact which it records, but recollect many more
coeval circumstances which we see, nor perhaps as they were, but as they
are come down to us, venerable with age, and magnified by fame."--What is
here said of ruins, and is indeed as to them sufficiently striking, is
true of the picturesque universally, and it is only surprising that, amid
such disputes, this simple and obvious truth should not have been
observed.

In landscape, therefore, the picturesque stands in the same relation to
the beautiful and sublime, that the pathetic does to them in poetry.
Hence, speaking also of ruins only, Alison says: "The images suggested by
the prospect of ruins, are images belonging to pity, to melancholy, and to
admiration."

A thousand illustrations might be given in support of this truth and the
principle which it affords; but I think it better to leave these to the
suggestion or the choice of every reader.


SECTION II.

CAUSE OF LAUGHTER.

This has been partly explained by Beattie, partly by Hobbes; and it is
chiefly to vindicate the latter, who knew much more of the human mind than
the people who have attacked him, that I write the pages immediately
following.

Speaking of the quality in things, which makes them provoke the pleasing
emotion or sentiment of which laughter is the external sign, Beattie says:
"It is an uncommon mixture of relation and contrariety, exhibited, or
supposed to be united, in the same assemblage." And elsewhere he says:
"Laughter arises from the view of two or more inconsistent, unsuitable, or
incongruous parts or circumstances, considered as united in one complex
object or assemblage, or as acquiring a sort of mutual relation from the
peculiar manner in which the mind takes notice of them."

"The latter may arise from contiguity, from the relation of cause and
effect, from unexpected likeness, from dignity and meanness, from
absurdity, &c.

"Thus, at first view, the dawn of the morning and a boiled lobster seem
utterly incongruous, but when a change of color from black to red is
suggested, we recognise a likeness, and consequently a relation, or ground
of comparison.

"And here let it be observed, that the greater the number of incongruities
that are blended in the same assemblage, the more ludicrous it will
probably be. If, as in the last example, there be an opposition of dignity
and meanness, as well as of likeness and dissimilitude, the effect of the
contrast will be more powerful, than if only one of these oppositions had
appeared in the ludicrous idea."

The first part of the subject seems, indeed, so clear as to admit of no
objection.

Hobbes, viewing more particularly the act of the mind, defines laughter to
be a "sudden glory, arising from a sudden conception of some eminency in
ourselves, by comparison with the infirmity of others, or with our own
formerly." And elsewhere he says: "Men laugh at jests, the wit whereof
always consisteth in the elegant discovering and conveying to our minds,
some absurdity of another."[18]

Dr. Campbell objects that "contempt may be raised in a very high degree,
both suddenly and unexpectedly, without producing the least tendency to
laugh." But if there exist that incongruity in the same assemblage
described as the fundamental cause of this sudden conception of our own
superiority, laughter, as Beattie has shown, "will always, or for the most
part, excite the risible emotion, unless when the perception of it is
attended with some other emotion of greater authority," dependant on
custom, politeness, &c.

Dr. Campbell also observes, that "laughter may be, and is daily, produced
by the perception of incongruous associations, when there is no contempt.

"We often smile at a witty performance or passage, such as Butler's
allusion to a boiled lobster, in his picture of the morning, when we are
so far from conceiving any inferiority or turpitude in the author, that
we greatly admire his genius, and wish ourselves possessed of that very
turn of fancy which produced the drollery in question.

"Many have laughed at the queerness of the comparison in these lines,

  'For rhyme the rudder is of verses,
  With which like ships they steer their courses,'

who never dreamed that there was any person or party, practice or opinion,
derided in them.

"If any admirer of the Hobbesian philosophy should pretend to discover
some class of men whom the poet here meant to ridicule, he ought to
consider, that if any one hath been tickled with the passage to whom the
same thought never occurred, that single instance would be sufficient to
subvert the doctrine, as it would show that there may be laughter where
there is no triumph or glorying over anybody, and, consequently, no
conceit of one's own superiority.

Now, the class of men laughed at in both cases is the same, namely, poets,
whose lofty allusions are ridiculed by the former, and silly rhymes by the
latter; nor can any one duly appreciate or be pleased with either, to whom
this intention of the writer is not obvious. Who ever dreamed of
"turpitude in the author," as Dr. Campbell supposes!

"As to the wag," says Beattie, "who amuses himself on the first of April
with telling lies, he must be shallow, indeed, if he hope, by so doing, to
acquire any superiority over another man whom he knows to be wiser and
better than himself; for, on these occasions, the greatness of the joke,
and the loudness of the laugh, are, if I rightly remember, in exact
proportion to the sagacity of the person imposed on."--No doubt; but it is
because he is thrown into an apparent and whimsical, though momentary
inferiority; and the greater his sagacity, the more amusing does this
appear.

"Do we not," says he, "sometimes laugh at fortuitous combinations, in
which, as no mental energy is concerned in producing them, there cannot be
either fault or turpitude? Could not one imagine a set of people jumbled
together by accident, so as to present a laughable group to those who know
their characters?"--Undoubtedly; but then the slouch of one, and the
rigidity of the other, &c., make both contemptible, as to physical
characteristics at least, and there is no need of turpitude in either.

The strongest apparent objection, however, is that of Dr. Campbell, who
says: "Indeed, men's telling their own blunders, even blunders recently
committed, and laughing at them, a thing not uncommon in very risible
dispositions, is utterly inexplicable upon Hobbes's system. For, to
consider the thing only with regard to the laugher himself, there is to
him no subject of glorying, that is not counterbalanced by an equal
subject of humiliation (he being both the person laughing, and the person
laughed at), and these two subjects must destroy one another."

But he overlooks the precise terms employed by Hobbes, who says: "The
passion of laughter is nothing else but sudden glory, arising from a
sudden conception of some eminency in ourselves, by comparison with the
infirmity of others, or with _our own formerly_. For men laugh at _the
follies of themselves past_, when they come suddenly to remembrance,
_except they bring with them any present dishonor_."

It is not therefore true, as Dr. Campbell says, that "with regard to
others, he appears solely under the notion of inferiority, as the person
triumphed over." He, on the contrary, appears as achieving a very glorious
triumph, that, namely, over his own errors.

This shows also the error of Addison's remarks, that "according to this
account, when we hear a man laugh excessively, instead of saying that he
is very merry, we ought to tell him that he is very proud."--A man may
contemn the errors both of himself and others, without pride: and, indeed,
in contemning the former, he proves himself to be far above that
sentiment, and verifies Dr. Campbell's remark that no two characters more
rarely meet in the same person, than that of a very risible man, and a
very self-conceited supercilious man.

It is curious to see a great man, like Hobbes, thus attacked by less ones,
who do not even understand him.


SECTION III.

CAUSE OF THE PLEASURE RECEIVED FROM REPRESENTATIONS EXCITING PITY.

Many hypotheses have been proposed to explain this cause.

According to the Abbé Du Bos,[19] in order to get rid of listlessness, the
mind seeks for emotions; and the stronger these are the better. Hence, the
passions which in themselves are the most distressing, are, for this
purpose, preferable to the pleasant, because they most effectually relieve
the mind from the less endurable languor which preys upon it during
inaction.

The sophistry of this explanation is evident. Pleasant passions, as Dr.
Campbell has shown, ought in every respect to have the advantage, because,
while they preserve the mind from this state of inaction, they convey a
feeling which is agreeable. Nor is it true that the stronger the emotion
is, so much the fitter for this purpose; for if we exceed a certain
measure, instead of a sympathetic and delightful sorrow, we excite only
horror and aversion. The most, therefore, that can be concluded from the
Abbé's premises, is, that it is useful to excite passion of some kind or
other, but not that the distressing ones are the fittest.

According to Fontenelle,[20] theatrical representation has almost the
effect of reality: but yet not altogether. We have still a certain idea of
falsehood in the whole of what we see. We weep for the misfortunes of a
hero to whom we are attached. In the same instant, we comfort ourselves by
reflecting, that it is nothing but a fiction.

The short answer to this is, that we are conscious of no such alternation
as that here described.

According to David Hume, whose hypothesis is a kind of supplement to the
former two, that which "when the sorrow is not softened by fiction, raises
a pleasure from the bosom of uneasiness, a pleasure which still retains
all the features and outward symptoms of distress and sorrow, is that very
eloquence with which the melancholy scene is represented."

In reply, Dr. Campbell has shown that the aggravating of all the
circumstances of misery in the representation, cannot make it be
contemplated with pleasure, but must be the most effectual method for
making it give greater pain; that the detection of the speaker's talents
and address, which Hume's hypothesis implies, is in direct opposition to
the fundamental maxim, that "it is essential to the art to conceal the
art;" and that the supposition that there are two distinct effects
produced by the eloquence on the hearers, one the sentiment of beauty, or
of the harmony of oratorical numbers, the other the passion which the
speaker purposes to raise in their minds, and that when the first
predominates, the mixture of the two effects becomes exceedingly pleasant,
and the reverse when the second is superior, is altogether imaginary.

According to Hawkesworth,[21] the compassion in question may be "resolved
into that power of imagination, by which we apply the misfortunes of
others to ourselves;" and we are said "to pity no longer than we fancy
ourselves to suffer, and to be pleased only by reflecting that our
sufferings are not real; thus indulging a dream of distress, from which we
can awake whenever we please, to exult in our security, and enjoy the
comparison of the fiction with the truth."

This hypothesis is evidently too gross to need reply.

Dr. Campbell has answered the preceding hypotheses at great length, and
quite satisfactorily. I regret to say that his own is as worthless, as
well as remarkably confused and unintelligible.

To Burke, who wrote at a later period, it falls to my lot to reply at
greater length.

"To examine this point concerning the effect of tragedy in a proper
manner," says that writer, "we must previously consider how we are
affected by the feelings of our fellow-creatures in circumstances of real
distress. I am convinced we have a degree of delight, and that no small
one, in the real misfortunes and pains of others; for, let the affection
be what it will in appearance, if it does not make us shun such objects,
if on the contrary it induces us to approach them, if it makes us dwell
upon them, in this case I conceive we must have a delight or pleasure of
some species or other in contemplating objects of this kind.... Our
delight in cases of this kind is very greatly heightened, if the sufferer
be some excellent person who sinks under an unworthy fortune.... The
delight we have in such things hinders us from shunning scenes of misery;
and the pains we feel, prompt us to relieve ourselves, in relieving those
who suffer.... In imitated distress, the only difference is the pleasure
resulting from the effects of imitation."

A more monstrous doctrine than this was never perhaps enunciated. A very
little analysis will expose its fallacy.

In relation to events of this kind, there are three very distinct
cases--real occurrence, subsequent inspection or historical narration, and
dramatic representation; in each, the affection of the mind is very
different; and nearly all the errors on this subject seem to have occurred
from confounding them. Burke has done this in the greatest degree.

The real occurrence of unmerited suffering is beheld with no delight, but
with unmixed pain, by every well-constituted mind. Hume,[22] therefore,
justly observes, that "the same object of distress, which pleases in a
tragedy, were it really set before us, would give the most unfeigned
uneasiness." It is only by confounding this with the next case, of
subsequent inspection or historical narration, that Burke gets into error
here.

"We do not," says Burke, "sufficiently distinguish what we would by no
means choose to do [or _to see done_--he should have added] from what we
should be eager enough to see if it was once done. We delight in seeing
things [_after they are done_--he should have added], which, so far from
doing, our heartiest wishes would be to see redressed."

That the additions I have made, more truly state the case, seems as
evident, as it is, that they afford a very different conclusion from
Burke's, of our beholding unmerited suffering with delight. But he himself
proves this by the very instance which he gives in illustration of his
doctrine.

"This noble capital," he says, "the pride of England and of Europe, I
believe _no man is so strangely wicked as to desire to see destroyed_ by a
conflagration or an earthquake, though he should be removed himself to the
greatest distance from the danger. But _suppose such a fatal accident to
have happened_, what numbers from all parts would crowd to behold the
ruins, and among them many who would have been content never to have seen
London in its glory!"

Here the words which I have put in italics clearly show that I was right
in the additions I suggested in his previous statement, and that he there
confounded delight in seeing the infliction of unmerited suffering, with
delight in seeing it after infliction, or of seeing it historically
narrated; for, in this his illustration, it is the latter, and not the
former, that he supposes--nay he now says "no man is so strangely wicked
as to desire to see destroyed!" &c. Indeed, it is quite plain that,
supposing an attempt made to destroy London, so far would every one be
from being delighted to see it done, that he would eagerly prevent it.
There is here, therefore, on the part of this writer, only his common and
characteristic confusion of ideas.

"Choose a day," he says, "on which to represent the most sublime and
affecting tragedy we have; appoint the most favorite actors; spare no cost
upon the scenes and decorations; unite the greatest efforts of poetry,
painting, and music; and when you have collected your audience, just at
the moment when their minds are erect with expectation, let it be reported
that a state-criminal, of high rank, is on the point of being executed in
the adjoining square; in a moment the emptiness of the theatre would
demonstrate the comparative weakness of the imitative arts, and proclaim
the triumph of the real sympathy."

This presents only another instance of want of discrimination. If the
"state-criminal, of high rank," were not a real criminal--if he were an
unmerited sufferer, the place of execution, supposing his rescue
impossible, would assuredly be fled from by every person of feeling and
honor; as we read of in the public papers, lately, when a murder of that
kind was perpetrating by some one of the base little jailor-princes of
Germany. And we know that, in the case of legal perpetrations of that kind
in England, even upon real criminals, none but the most degraded wretches
go to witness such scenes.

In tragic representation, then, we know that the suffering is not real,
else should we fly. There have, indeed, in such cases, been instances of a
sort of momentary deception, but it is only children, and very simple
people, utter strangers to theatrical amusements, who are apt to be so
deceived; and as their case always excites the surprise and laughter of
every one, it clearly proves that others are under no sort of deception.

Even Burke, notwithstanding his want of discrimination, and his monstrous
hypothesis, says: "Imitated distress is never so perfect, but we can
perceive it is imitation, and on that principle are somewhat pleased with
it." And his case of desertion of the theatre, if it occur under any
circumstances, illustrates this.

Burke adds, indeed: "But then I imagine we shall be much _mistaken_ if we
attribute any considerable part of our satisfaction in tragedy to the
consideration that tragedy is _a deceit_, and its representations _no
realities_. [We seek no satisfaction of the kind: we know it to be a
deceit throughout!] The nearer it approaches the reality, and the farther
it removes us from all idea of fiction, the more perfect is its power."

The nearest possible _approach_ to reality, is only necessary to the
success of fiction, to the pleasure of imagination. He himself has said:
"Imitated distress is never so perfect, but we can perceive it is
imitation!" Again, therefore, here is only Burke's characteristic
confusion of ideas.

My own doctrine on this subject is already obvious from the remarks made
on others. _We never cease to know that tragic representation is a mere
deception; our reason is never imposed upon; our imagination is alone
engaged; we are perfectly conscious that it is so; and we have all the
sensibility, fine feeling, and generosity of pity, as well as the
satisfaction of being thereby raised wonderfully in our own esteem, at the
small cost of three shillings!_

It is not a little curious, that this should not have been evident to
those who have written so much about it. Dr. Campbell, alone, has
approached it. "So great," he says, "is the anomaly which sometimes
displays itself in human characters, that it is not impossible to find
persons who are quickly made to cry at seeing a tragedy, or reading a
romance, which they know to be fictions, and yet are both inattentive and
unfeeling in respect of the actual objects of compassion who live in their
neighborhood, and are daily under their eye.... Men may be of a selfish,
contracted, and even avaricious disposition, who are not what we should
denominate hard-hearted, or unsusceptible of sympathetic feeling. Such
will gladly enjoy the luxury of pity (as Hawkesworth terms it) when it
nowise interferes with their more powerful passions; that is, when it
comes unaccompanied with a demand upon their pockets."--This should have
led him to the simple truth, and should have prevented his framing the
most confused, unintelligible, and worthless hypothesis upon this
subject.




