CHAPTER III.

CAUTIONS AS TO YOUTH.


In relation to _early_ sexual association, it cannot be doubted, that,
when the instinct of reproduction begins to be developed, the reserve
which parents, relatives, and instructers, adopt on this subject, is often
the means of producing injurious effects; because, a system of concealment
on this subject, as observed in the preceding chapter, is quite
impracticable. Discoveries made by young persons in obscene books, the
unguarded language or shameless conduct of grown-up persons, even the wild
flights of an imagination which is then easily excited, will have the most
fatal consequences.

Parents or instructers ought, therefore, at that critical period, to give
rational explanations as to the nature and the object of the propensity,
the mechanism of reproduction in various vegetable and animal beings, and
the fatal consequences to which this propensity may lead. Such procedure,
if well conducted, cannot but have the most beneficial results; because,
in order that a sane person should avoid any danger, it is only necessary
that he should see it distinctly.

The advantage, it has been observed, which the parent, relative, or
instructer, derives, from himself in forming the adolescent in the new
faculty which is developed in him, is to prevent his choosing, among
corrupt servants or ignorant youths of his own age, the confidants of his
passion. The parent or instructer, moreover, is then justly entitled to,
and has gratefully given to him, the entire confidence of the adolescent;
and he is thereby enabled exactly to appreciate the degree of power of the
propensity which he desires to divert or to guide.

Such being the case, it is the business of the parent to present a true
picture of the effects of too early association of this kind, on the
stature, the various development of the figure, the muscular power, the
quality of the voice, the health, the moral sense, and especially on the
acuteness, the power, the dignity, and the courage, of the mind.

In doing this, it would be as stupid as injurious to employ the slightest
degree of false representation, of unjust reprimand, or too much of what
is called moralizing, which is often only the contemptible cant of a being
who cannot reason, especially when it takes the place of a simple and
powerful statement of facts. All of these would only render the young man
a dissembler, and would compel him to choose another confidant.

Among other considerations, varying according to the circumstances of the
case, those stated below may with advantage be presented.

At a certain period in the life both of plants and animals, varying
according to their kind and the climate they live in, they are fit for
and disposed to the reproduction of their species. The sexes in both are
then attracted to each other. In plants, the powder termed pollen, in
animals a peculiar liquid which, deriving its name by analogy from the
seeds of plants, is termed seminal, is secreted by the male plant or
animal, and, by organs differently formed in each kind, is cast upon ova
or eggs either contained within, or deposited by, the female. The details
of this process are among the most beautiful and interesting of the living
economy. In mankind, the attainment of this period is termed puberty.

It is with this critical period, and his conduct during it, that all that
the youth deems most valuable, all that can decide his fortunes and his
happiness in the world, his stature, figure, strength, voice, health, and
mental powers, are most intimately connected.

In regard to stature, the body appears to complete its increase in height
chiefly at the age of puberty, and during the first years which succeed
that age. To be assured of the powerful influence of his own conduct, at
this period, upon his stature, the youth has only to compare the tall men
and women of the country as in Yorkshire, Lancashire, Westmoreland,
Cumberland, and the Scottish borders, where they have not been overworked,
with the stunted and dwarfed creatures of the metropolis, where a
stranger, when he first enters it, is apt to think he sees so many ugly
boys and girls, whereas, they are full-grown London men and women. Half
the population of the metropolis is affected in this way; and it is the
obvious consequence of the acceleration of puberty by confinement,
stimulating food, indecent plays, and sexual association.

In regard to the perfect development and beauty of the figure, the youth
is probably aware that the most beautiful races of horses and dogs rapidly
deteriorate, if men do not carefully maintain them by continence as well
as by crossing. The too early employment, the depraved abuses, the injury,
or the removal, of the sexual organs, are all of them causes still more
certain of deformity. The latter of these causes acts, of course, most
obviously; and it is evidenced in the almost universal malformation of
eunuchs, geldings, &c.

That, in regard to bodily strength, sexual continence adds energy to the
muscular fibre, is clearly seen by observing the most ardent quadrupeds
previous to the time of the union of their sexes. But, this being past,
precisely in the same proportion does the act of reproduction debilitate
and break down the strongest animal. Many male animals even fall almost
exhausted by a single act of union with the opposite sex.

Every classical student has read the beautiful allegory of Hercules, who,
having spun at the knees of Omphale ([Greek: omphalos] the navel, here put
for the most essential part of the female generative organ), thereby lost
his strength: this beautifully expresses the abasement of power amid the
indulgences of love. Euripides also depicts the terrible Achilles as timid
before women, and respectful with Clytemnestra and Iphigenia. Hence, when
a foolish lord reproached the poet Dryden with having given too much
timidity toward women to a personage in one of his tragedies, and added
that he knew better how to employ his time with the ladies, the poet
answered: "You now acknowledge that you are no hero, which I intended that
personage to be."

As to voice, which depends on the muscles of respiration, and more
immediately on those of the mouth and throat, as general strength does on
the muscles of the whole body, both merely affording expressions of the
mind, the influence of the sexual union upon it is prodigious. How
entirely it is altered by the removal of the testes in eunuchs is known to
every one: in corresponding proportion, is it altered by every act of the
generative organs, but especially by sexual indulgence during puberty. The
horrible voice of early libertines and prostitutes presents an alarming
example of this. To those who value voice in conversation, in the
delightful and humanizing exercise of music, or in the grander efforts of
public speaking, nothing more need be said.

As to health, the less we are prodigal of life, the longer we preserve it.
Every one capable of observing may see that the stag loses his horns and
his hair after procreation; that birds fall into moulting and sadness; and
that male insects even perish after this effort, as if they yielded their
individual life to their progeny. Indeed, everything perishes so much the
more readily, as it has thus transmitted life to its descendants, or has
cast it away in vain pleasures.

In mankind, as in other animals, to procreate is in effect to die to one's
self, and to leave one's life to posterity; especially, if this takes
place in early life. It is then that man becomes bald and bent; and that
the charms of woman fade. Even in advanced age, epicures are so well aware
of this, that they are known to abstain from amorous excess, as the
acknowledged cause of premature death.

In relation to mind--as the generative power is the source of several
characteristics of genius, the exhaustion of that power at an early age
must take away these characteristics. Genius as surely languishes and is
extinguished amid early sexual indulgence, as do the faculties of voice
and locomotion, which are merely its signs and expressions.

It is thus with all our faculties, locomotive, vital, mental, at an early
age. They are strengthened by all that they do not dissipate; and that
which their organs too abundantly dispense is not only taken immediately
from their own power, and mediately from that of the other organs, but it
ensures the permanent debility of the whole.

It is true that the strong passions which are modified or characterized by
the sexual impulse, excite the imagination and impel the mind to sublime
exertions; but the sole means of either obtaining or preserving such
impulsion is, to shun the indulgence of pleasure in early life, and its
waste at later periods.

It has accordingly been observed, that the passion of love appears to be
most excessive in animals which least excel in mental faculties. Thus the
beasts which are the most lascivious, the ass, the boar, &c., are also the
most stupid; and idiots and cretins display a sensuality which brutifies
them still more. Hence, the Homeric fable that Circe transformed men into
beasts.

It would also appear that the most stupid animals, swine, rabbits, &c., in
general produce the greatest number of young; while men of genius have
engendered the fewest. It is remarked that none of the greatest men of
antiquity were much given to sexual pleasure.

It is, then, of the greatest importance to young men who are ambitious of
excellence, to mark well this truth, that the most powerful and
distinguished in mental faculties, other things being equal, will be he
who wastes them least in early life by sexual indulgence--who most
economizes the vital stimulant, in order to excite the mental powers on
great occasions. By such means may a man surely surpass others, if he have
received from his parents proportional mental energy.

Beside the means already indicated, there is one proposed by an able
writer, as serving to divert the instinct of propagation when too early
and excessive, and consequently dangerous: that is, the sentiment of love.
To employ this means, he observes, "it is necessary to search early, after
knowing the character of the adolescent whom it is wished to direct, for a
young woman whose beauty and good qualities may inspire him with
attachment. This means will serve, more than can easily be imagined, to
preserve the adolescent both from the grosser attractions of libertinism
and the disease it entails, and from _the more dangerous snares of
coquetry_. It is," he adds, "a virtuous young woman and a solid
attachment that are here spoken of."--At some future period I shall
probably show how wise this recommendation is, as well as the necessity
and the advantages of early marriages, under favorable circumstances.

Having now shown the evils of early sexual association, I may briefly
notice those of later libertinism.

If, even in more advanced life, and when the constitution is stronger, the
instinct of propagation be not restrained within just limits, it
degenerates into inordinate lewdness or real mania: "Repperit obscænas
veneres vitiosa libido." By such depravation, nobleness of character is
utterly destroyed.

This scarcely evitable consequence of great fortune and of the facility of
indulgence, it has been justly observed, will ever be the ruin of the
rich, and a mode of enervating the most vigorous branches of the most
powerful house.

The libertine, then, owing to exhaustion, by sexual indulgence, is
characterized by physical and moral impotence, or has a brain as incapable
of thinking, as his muscles are of acting.

As libertines are enfeebled by indulgence, it follows that they are
proportionally distinguished by fear and cowardice. Nothing, indeed,
destroys courage more than sexual abuses.

But, from cowardice, spring cunning, duplicity, lying, and perfidy. These
common results of cowardice are uniformly found in eunuchs, slaves,
courtiers, and sycophants; while boldness, frankness, and generosity,
belong to virtuous, free, and magnanimous men.

Again, cowardice, artifice, falsehood, and perfidy, are the usual elements
of cruelty. Men feel more wounded in self-love, as they are conscious of
being more contemptible; and they avenge themselves with more malignity
upon their enemy, as they find themselves more weak and worthless, and as
they consequently dread him more.

These are the causes of that malignant revenge which princes have often
shown, as, in ancient times, Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Domitian,
Heliogabalus, &c. In later times, Catharine de Medici solicited the
massacre of the Protestants; Paul, Constantine, and Nicholas, of Russia,
were happy only when they wallowed in blood; Charles X., equally
effeminate and bigoted, perpetrated the massacre of the Parisians; Don
Miguel covered Portugal with his assassinations; and nearly all the
sovereigns and sycophants in Europe upheld or palliated his atrocities.[7]

The strong and brave man, on the contrary, scarcely feels hurt, and scorns
revenge.

It is not cruelty only with which we may reproach these effeminate
individuals: it is every vice which springs from baseness of character.

Libertinism, moreover, is not hurtful only to the health and welfare of
these individuals: it is so also to those of their posterity.

Finally, the results of libertinism have constantly marked, not merely the
ruin of families, but the degeneration of races, and the decay of empires.
The delights of Capua caused the ruin of Hannibal; and the Roman, once so
proud before kings, finally transformed himself into the wretched slave of
monsters degraded far below the rank of humanity.

So little, however, do men look to remote consequences that perhaps the
most frightful punishments of libertinism are the diseases which it
inflicts. Man may, then, be said to meet only death on the path of life.

The dangers of promiscuous love are, indeed, far beyond what young men
will easily believe. I do not exaggerate when I state, that, out of every
three women, and those the least common of the promiscuous, two at least
are certainly in a state of disease capable of the most destructive
infection. A surgeon in the habit of receiving foul patients at a public
hospital tells me, I might safely say that nine out of every ten are in
this state.[8]

While writing this, Sir Anthony Carlisle observes to me, that, "the
special disease which appears to be a punishment for sexual profligacy, is
not only malignant, painful, and hideous, in every stage of it, but the
only remedy known for its cure, mercury, is a poison which generally
leaves its own evils for the venom which it destroys. This frightful
disease has no natural termination but in a disgusting disgraceful death,
after disfiguring the countenance, by causing blindness, loss of the nose,
the palate and teeth, and by the spoliation of the sinning organs. The
miserables, who thus perish in public hospitals, are so offensive to the
more respectable patients, that they are confined to appointed rooms,
termed foul wards, where they linger and die in the bloom of life, either
of the penalty inflicted by their profligacy, of the poison administered
to them, or of incurable consequent diseases, such as consumption, palsy,
or madness."

Hence, it has been observed, that, if we have to deal with a young man
incapable of guidance by the nobler motives, of feeling contempt for vice,
and horror for debauchery, there yet remain means to be employed. Let him
be conducted to the hospital, where he will find collected the poor
victims of debauchery--the unhappy women whom, even the day before, he may
have seen in the streets, with faces dressed in smiles, amid the torments,
the corrosion, and the contagion of disease. This may leave an impression
sufficiently deep. But let him also know that these unhappy creatures are
a thousand times more pitiable than the libertine who destroys them, and
who forfeits the only good we cannot refuse to other wretches, compassion
for the misery he endures.[9]




