CHAPTER V.

STANDARD OF TASTE IN BEAUTY.


The expression, "standard of taste," is used to signify the basis or
foundation of our judgments respecting beauty and deformity, and their
consequent certainty.

Setting aside such objection as might be raised to a standard of taste on
the doctrine of Berkeley (which I refuted in 1809, and which I need not
enter into here), this matter was long ago settled by David Hume; and I
have nothing new to say upon the subject (there is probably enough of
novelty in other chapters, whatever its worth may be), except that Burke
appears to have borrowed all he knew about it from that incomparably more
profound philosopher.

As I ought not, however, to omit here a view of the subject, I cannot do
better than transcribe the words of Hume and Burke respectively. While
this will put the reader in possession of all that I think necessary upon
this subject, it will farther tend to show in what Burke's ability as a
philosopher consisted.

I must first, however, observe that the word "taste," as expressing our
judgment of beauty, is a metaphor whimsically borrowed from the lowest of
our senses, and is applied to our exercise of that faculty, as regards
both natural objects, and the fine arts which imitate these.

It is not wonderful that the variety and inconstancy of tastes respecting
the attributes and the characters of beauty, should have led many
philosophers to deny that there exist any certain combinations of forms
and of effects to which the term beauty ought to be invariably attached.

In his "Philosophical Dictionary," Voltaire, after quoting some nonsense
from the crazy dreamer who did so much injury to Greek philosophy, says:
"I am willing to believe that nothing can be more beautiful than this
discourse of Plato; but it does not give us very clear ideas of the nature
of the beautiful. Ask of a toad what is beauty, pure beauty, the [Greek:
to kalon]; he will answer you that it is his female, with two large round
eyes projecting from her little head, a large and flat throat, a yellow
belly, and a brown back. Ask the devil, and he will tell you that the
beautiful is a pair of horns, four claws, and a tail. Consult, lastly, the
philosophers, and they will answer you by rigmarole: they want something
conformable to the archetype of the beautiful in essence, to the [Greek:
to kalon]." This is wit, not reason: let us look for that to a deeper
thinker--as proposed above.

David Hume says: "It appears that, amid all the variety and caprice of
taste, there are certain general principles of approbation or blame, whose
influence a careful eye may trace in all operations of the mind. Some
particular forms or qualities from the original structure of the internal
fabric, are calculated to please, and others to displease.... If they fail
of their effect in any particular instance, it is from some apparent
_defect_ or imperfection in the organ.

"In each creature there is a sound and a defective state; and the former
alone can be supposed to afford us a true standard of taste and sentiment.
If, in the sound state of the organ, there be an entire or a considerable
uniformity of sentiment among men, we may thence derive an idea of the
perfect beauty; in like manner as the appearance of objects in daylight,
to the eye of a man in health, is denominated their true and real color."

To the same purpose writes Burke, after some preliminary observations:--

"All the natural powers in man, which I know, that are conversant about
external objects, are the senses, the imagination, and the judgment.

"First, with regard to the senses. We do and we must suppose, that, as the
conformations of their organs are nearly or altogether the same in all
men, so the manner of perceiving external objects is in all men the same,
or with little difference.

"As there will be little doubt that bodies present similar images to the
whole species, it must necessarily be allowed, that the pleasures and the
pains which every object excites in one man, it must raise in all mankind,
while it operates naturally, simply, and by its proper powers only.

"Custom, and some other causes, have made many deviations from the natural
pleasures or pains which belong to these several tastes; but then the
power of distinguishing between the natural and the acquired relish
remains to the very last.

"There is in all men a sufficient remembrance of the original natural
causes of pleasure, to enable them to bring all things offered to their
senses to that standard, and to regulate their feelings and opinions by
it.

"Suppose one who had so vitiated his palate as to take more pleasure in
the taste of opium than in that of butter or honey, to be presented with a
bolus of squills; there is hardly any doubt but that he would prefer the
butter or honey to this nauseous morsel, or to any other bitter drug to
which he had not been accustomed; which proves that his palate was
naturally like that of other men in all things, that it is still like the
palate of other men in many things, and only vitiated in some particular
points."

In the same manner, Payne Knight observes that "things, naturally the most
nauseous, become most grateful; and things, naturally most grateful, most
insipid.

"This extreme effect, however, only takes place where the palate has
become morbid and vitiated by continued, and even forced gratification;
and even when the metaphors taken from this sense, and employed to express
intellectual qualities, show that it is always felt and considered as a
corruption, even by those who are most corrupted: for though there are
many who prefer port wine to malmsey, and tobacco to sugar, yet no one
ever spoke of a sour or bitter temper as pleasant, or of a sweet one as
unpleasant." By this concession, Knight answers several of his own
objections.

"When it is said," farther observes Burke, very properly, "taste cannot be
disputed, it can only mean, that no one can strictly answer what pleasure
or pain some particular man may find from the taste of some particular
thing. This indeed cannot be disputed; but we may dispute, and with
sufficient clearness too, concerning the things which are naturally
pleasing or disagreeable to the sense. But when we talk of any peculiar or
acquired relish, then we must know the habits, the prejudices, or the
distempers of this particular man, and we must draw our conclusions from
those."

Hume proceeds to a second point, by observing that "one obvious cause, why
many feel not the proper sentiment of beauty, is the want of that
_delicacy_ of imagination which is requisite to convey a sensibility of
those finer emotions.

"Where the organs are so fine, as to allow nothing to escape them, and at
the same time so exact, as to perceive every ingredient in the
composition; this we call delicacy of taste, whether we employ these terms
in the literal or metaphorical sense."

Burke enlarges on this, after preliminary observing that "the power of the
imagination is incapable of producing anything absolutely new; it can only
vary the disposition of those ideas which it has received from the
senses. Now, the imagination is the most extensive province of pleasure
and pain, as it is the region of our fears and our hopes, and of all our
passions that are connected with them.

"Since the imagination is only the representation of the senses, it can
only be pleased or displeased with the images, from the same principle on
which the sense is pleased or displeased with the realities; and
consequently there must be just as close an agreement in the imaginations
as in the senses of men.

"There are some men formed with feelings so blunt, with tempers so cold
and phlegmatic, that they can hardly be said to be awake during the whole
course of their lives. Upon such persons, the most striking objects make
but a faint and obscure impression. There are others so continually in the
agitation of gross and merely sensual pleasures, or so occupied in the low
drudgery of avarice, or so heated in the chase of honors and distinction,
that their minds, which had been used continually to the storms of these
violent and tempestuous passions, can hardly be put in motion by the
delicate and refined play of the imagination. These men, though from a
different cause, become as stupid and insensible as the former; but
whenever either of these happen to be struck with any natural elegance or
greatness, or with these qualities in any work of art, they are moved upon
the same principle."

On a third point, Hume says: "But though there be naturally a wide
difference in point of delicacy between one person and another, nothing
tends farther to increase and improve this talent, than _practice_ in a
particular art, and the frequent survey or contemplation of a particular
species of beauty.

"So advantageous is practice to the discernment of beauty, that, before we
can give judgment on any work of importance, it will even be requisite
that that very individual performance be more than once perused by us, and
be surveyed in different lights with attention and deliberation."

This is well illustrated by Burke, who observes: "It is known that the
taste (whatever it is) is improved exactly as we improve our knowledge, by
a steady attention to our object, and by frequent exercise.

"To illustrate this--(that there is a difference, not in the causes, nor
in the manner of men's being affected, but in the degree, owing to natural
sensibility, or greater attention to the object)--to illustrate this by
the procedure of the senses in which the same difference is found, let us
suppose a very smooth marble-table to be set before two men; they both
perceive it to be smooth, and they are both pleased with it because of
this quality. So far they agree.

"But suppose another, and after that another table, the latter still
smoother than the former, to be set before them. It is now very probable
that these men, who are so agreed upon what is smooth, and in the pleasure
thence, will disagree when they come to settle which table has the
advantage in point of polish.... Nor is it easy, when such a difference
arises, to settle the point, if the excess or diminution be not glaring.

"In these nice cases, supposing the acuteness of the sense equal, the
greater attention and habit in such things will have the advantage. In the
question about the tables, the marble-polisher will unquestionably
determine the most accurately.

"In the imagination, beside the pain or pleasure arising from the
properties of the natural object, a pleasure is perceived from the
resemblance which the imitation has to the original.

"All men are nearly equal in this point, as far as their knowledge of the
things represented or compared extends.

"The principle of this knowledge is very much accidental, as it depends
upon experience and observation, and not on the strength or weakness of
any natural faculty; and it is from this difference in knowledge that what
we commonly, though with no great exactness, call a difference in taste,
proceeds.

"A man to whom sculpture is new sees a barber's block, or some ordinary
piece of statuary; he is immediately struck and pleased, because he sees
something like a human figure; and entirely taken up with this likeness,
he does not at all attend to its defects. No person, I believe, at the
first time of seeing a piece of imitation, ever did. Some time after, we
suppose that this novice lights upon a more artificial work of the same
nature; he begins to look with contempt on what he admired at first; not
that he admired it even then for its unlikeness to a man, but for that
general though inaccurate resemblance which it bore to the human figure.
What he admired at different times in these so different figures, is
strictly the same; and though his knowledge is improved, his taste is not
altered. Hitherto his mistake was from a want of knowledge in art, and
this arose from his inexperience; but he may be still deficient, from a
want of knowledge in nature. For it is possible that the man in question
may stop here, and that the masterpiece of a great hand may please him no
more than the middling performance of a vulgar artist; and this not for
want of better or higher relish, but because all men do not observe with
sufficient accuracy on the human figure, to enable them to judge properly
of an imitation of it."

On other points, Hume makes the following observations:--

"Without being frequently obliged to form _comparisons_ between the
several species and degrees of excellence, and estimating their proportion
to each other ... a man is indeed totally unqualified to pronounce an
opinion with regard to any object presented to him. By comparison alone,
we fix the epithets of praise or blame, and learn how to assign the due
degree of each.

"But to enable a critic more fully to execute this undertaking, he must
preserve his mind free from all _prejudice_ and allow nothing to enter
into his consideration, but the very object which is submitted to his
examination.

"It is well known, that, in all questions submitted to the understanding,
prejudice is destructive of sound judgment, and perverts all operations of
the intellectual faculties: it is no less contrary to good taste; nor has
it less influence to corrupt our sentiments of beauty. It belongs to _good
sense_ to check its influence in both cases; and in this respect, as well
as in many others, reason, if not an essential part of taste, is at least
requisite to the operations of this latter faculty. In all the nobler
productions of genius, there is a mutual relation and correspondence of
parts; nor can either the beauties or blemishes be perceived by him whose
thought is not capacious enough to comprehend all those parts, and compare
them with each other, in order to perceive the consistence and uniformity
of the whole. Every work of art has also a certain end or purpose for
which it is calculated; and is to be deemed more or less perfect, as it is
more or less fitted to attain this end."

To a repetition of this, Burke adds some useful remarks:--

"As many of the works of imagination are not confined to representation of
sensible objects, nor to efforts upon the passions, but extend themselves
to the manners, the characters, the actions, and designs of men, their
relations, their virtues and vices, they come within the province of the
judgment, which is improved by attention and by the habit of reasoning.

"The cause of a wrong taste is a defect of judgment. And this may arise
from a natural weakness of understanding (in whatever the strength of
that faculty may consist), or which is much more commonly the case, it
may arise from a want of proper and well-directed exercise, which alone
can make it strong and ready. Beside that ignorance, inattention,
prejudice, rashness, levity, obstinacy, in short, all those passions, and
all those vices which pervert the judgment in other matters, prejudice it
no less in this its more refined and elegant province. These causes
produce different opinions upon everything which is an object of the
understanding, without inducing us to suppose, that there are no settled
principles of reason.

"A rectitude of judgment in the arts, which may be called a good taste,
does in a great measure depend upon sensibility; because, if the mind has
no bent to the pleasures of the imagination, it will never apply itself
sufficiently to works of that species to acquire a competent knowledge in
them. But though a degree of sensibility is requisite to form a good
judgment, yet a good judgment does not necessarily arise from a quick
sensibility of pleasure; it frequently happens that a very poor judge,
merely by force of a greater complexional sensibility, is more affected by
a poor piece, than the best judge by the most perfect; for as everything
new, extraordinary, grand, or passionate, is well calculated to affect
such a person, and that the faults do not affect him, his pleasure is more
pure and unmixed.

"In the morning of our days, when the senses are unworn and tender, when
the whole man is awake in every part, and the gloss of novelty fresh upon
all the objects that surround us, how lively at that time are our
sensations, but how false and inaccurate the judgments we form of things!

"Every trivial cause of pleasure is apt to affect the man of too sanguine
a complexion: his appetite is to keen to suffer his taste to be
delicate.... One of this character can never be a refined judge; never
what the comic poet calls '_elegans formarum spectator_.'

"The rude hearer is affected by the principles which operate in these arts
even in their rudest condition; and he is not skilful enough to perceive
the defects. But as arts advance toward their perfection, the science of
criticism advances with equal pace, and the pleasure of judges is
frequently interrupted by the faults which are discovered in the most
finished compositions."

The chief idea above expressed, is again repeated by Sir J. Reynolds, who
says: "The principles of these (the imagination and the passions) are as
invariable as the former (the senses), and are to be known and reasoned
upon in the same manner, by an appeal to _common sense_ deciding upon the
common feelings of mankind."

These views are thus summed by Hume: "The organs of internal sensation are
seldom so perfect as to allow the general principles their full play, and
produce a feeling correspondent to those principles. They either labor
under some defect, or are vitiated by some disorder; and by that means,
excite a sentiment, which may be pronounced erroneous. When the critic has
no delicacy, he judges without any distinction, and is only affected by
the grosser and more palpable qualities of the object: the finer touches
pass unnoticed and disregarded. Where he is not aided by practice, his
verdict is attended with confusion and hesitation. Where no comparison has
been employed, the most frivolous beauties, such as rather merit the name
of defects, are the object of his admiration. Where he lies under the
influence of prejudice, all his natural sentiments are perverted. Where
good sense is wanting, he is not qualified to discern the beauties of
design and reasoning, which are the highest and most excellent. Under some
or other of these imperfections, the generality of men labor; and hence, a
true judge in the finer arts is observed, even during the most polished
ages, to be so rare a character: strong sense, united to delicate
sentiment, improved by practice, perfected by comparison, and cleared of
all prejudice, can alone entitle critics to this valuable character; and
the joint verdict of such, wherever they are to be found, is the true
standard of taste and beauty."

Taking the principal ideas above, Burke also concludes: "On the whole it
appears to me, that what is called taste, in its most general acceptation,
is not a simple idea, but is partly made up of a perception of the primary
pleasures of sense, of the secondary pleasures of the imagination, and of
the conclusions of the reasoning faculty, concerning the various relations
of these, and concerning the human passions, manners, and actions."

"It is sufficient for our present purpose," Hume farther observes, "if we
have proved that the taste of all individuals is not upon an equal
footing, and that some men in general, however difficult to be
particularly pitched upon, will be acknowledged by universal sentiment to
have a preference above others.

"Though men of delicate taste be rare, they are easily to be distinguished
in society by the soundness of their understanding, and the superiority of
their faculties above the rest of mankind. The ascendant which they
acquire, gives a prevalence to that lively approbation, with which they
receive any productions of genius, and renders it generally predominant.
Many men, when left to themselves, have but a faint and dubious perception
of beauty, who yet are capable of relishing any fine stroke which is
pointed out to them. Every convert to the admiration of the real poet or
orator, is the cause of some new conversion. And though prejudices may
prevail for a time, they never unite in celebrating any rival to the true
genius, but yield at last to the force of nature and just sentiment."

Hume finally obviates some apparent difficulties:--

"But notwithstanding all our endeavors to fix a standard of taste, and
reconcile the discordant apprehensions of men, there still remain two
sources of variation, which are not sufficient indeed to confound all the
boundaries of beauty and deformity, but will often serve to produce a
difference in the degrees of our approbation or blame. The one is the
different humors of particular men; the other, the particular manner and
opinions of our age and country.

"A young man, whose passions are warm, will be more sensibly touched with
amorous and tender images, than a man more advanced in years, who takes
pleasure in wise, philosophical reflections concerning the conduct of life
and moderation of the passions. At twenty, Ovid may be the favorite
author; Horace at forty; and perhaps Tacitus at fifty. Vainly would we, in
such cases, endeavor to enter into the sentiments of others, and divest
ourselves of those propensities which are natural to us. We choose our
favorite author as we do our friend, from a conformity of humor and
disposition.

"Such preferences are innocent and unavoidable, and can never reasonably
be the object of dispute, because there is no standard by which they can
be decided.

"For a like reason, we are more pleased, in the course of our reading,
with pictures and characters that resemble objects which are found in our
own age or country, than with those which describe a different set of
customs.

"A man of learning and reflection can make allowance for these
peculiarities of manners; but a common audience can never divest
themselves so far of their usual ideas and sentiments, as to relish
pictures which nowise resemble them."

Thus I believe the reader has before him a view, sufficiently clear, of
that popular topic, the standard of taste, as well as of the agreement
which subsists among the best writers on the subject. In the next chapter,
we proceed to a more fundamental and difficult inquiry.




