XI

THE CURE BY FAITH


    The healing of his seamless dress
    Is by our beds of pain--
    We touch Him in life's throng and press,
    And we are whole again.
                WHITTIER.

I cannot finish my little book of ideals without writing some things
that are in my mind about cure by faith or by prayer. It is a subject
that I approach with hesitation because of the danger of
misunderstanding. No subject is more difficult and none is more
important for the invalid to understand. We hear a great deal about the
wonderful cures of Christian Science or of similar agencies, and we all
know of people who have been restored to usefulness by such means. Has
the healing of Christ again become possible on earth? No one would be
more eager to accept it and acknowledge it than the physician if it
were really so. But careful investigation always reveals the fact that
the wonderful cures are not of the body but of the mind. It is easy
enough to say that a cancer or tuberculosis has been cured by faith, and
apparently easy for many people to believe it, but alas, the proof is
wanting. The Christian Scientist, honest and sincere as he may be, is
not qualified to say what is true disease and what is not. What looks
like diseased tissue recovers, but medical men know that it could not
have been diseased in the most serious sense, and that the prayer for
recovery could have had nothing to do with the cure, save in a very
indirect way.

The man who discards medicine for philosophy or religion is courting
unnecessary suffering and even death. The worst part of it is that he
may induce some one else to make the same mistake with similar results.
In writing this opinion I am in no way denying the great significance
and value of faith nor of the prayerful and trustful mind. If it cannot
cure actual physical disease, faith can accomplish veritable miracles of
healing in the mind of the patient. No thoughtful or honest medical man
will deny it. Nor will most medical men deny that the course of almost
any physical illness may be modified by faith and prayer. I am almost
saying that there is no known medicine of such potency. Every bodily
function is the better for the conquering spirit that transcends the
earth and finds its necessary expression in prayer.

There really need be no issue or disagreement between medicine and faith
cure. At its best, one is not more wonderful than the other, and both
aim to accomplish the same end--the relief of human suffering. When the
two are merged, as some day they will be, we shall be surprised to
discover how alike they are. Christian Science is rightly scorned by
medical men because it is unscientific, because it makes absurd and
untenable claims outside its own field, and because it has not as yet
investigated that field in the scientific spirit. When proper study and
investigation have been made it will be found that faith cure, not in
its present state, but in some future development, will have an immense
field of usefulness. It will be worthy of as much respect in that field
as medicine proper in its own sphere. As a matter of fact both medicine
and faith cure are miraculous in a very real sense, as both depend for
efficiency now and always upon the same great laws which may be fairly
called divine. What is the discovery that the serum of a horse will
under certain circumstances cure diphtheria? Does it not mean that man
is tapping sources of power far beyond his understanding? Is man
responsible save as the agent? Did he produce the complex animal
chemistry that makes this cure possible? Did man make the horse, or the
laws that control the physiology and pathology of that animal? Here,
then, is faith cure in its largest and best sense. The biologist may not
be willing to admit it, but his faith in these great laws of God have
made possible the cure of a dread disease. Here, as in all matters of
pure religion, it is what men say and write, not the fact itself, that
makes all the misunderstanding; we make our judgments and conceive our
prejudices from mere surface considerations. Call life what you
will,--leave out the symbolic word "God" altogether,--the facts remain.
The true scientific spirit must reverence and adore the power that lies
behind creation. It is as inconsistent for the bacteriologist to be an
unbeliever as it is for the Christian Scientist to deny the value of
bacteriology. Medicine is infinitely farther advanced than Christian
Science, and yet Christian Science has grasped some truth that the
natural scientist has stupidly missed. When an obsession is thrown off
and courage substituted for fear, we witness as important a "cure" as
can be shown to the credit of surgery. If the Christian Scientists and
the other faith-curers were only less superficial and less narrow in
their explanation of the facts, if they would condescend to study the
diseases they treat, they would be entitled to, and would receive, more
respect and consideration.

The cure and prevention of disease through the agency of man are
evidently part of the divine plan. Our eagerness to advance along the
lines of investigation and practice is but that divine plan in action.
The truly scientific spirit will neglect no possible curative agent.
When scientific men ridicule prayer, they are thinking not of the real
thing which is above all possible criticism, but of the feeble and often
pathetic groping for the real thing. We ask in our prayers for
impossible blessings that would invert the laws of God and change the
face of nature--very well, we must be prepared for disappointment. The
attitude of prayer may, indeed, transform our own lives and make
possible for us experiences that would otherwise have been impossible.
But our pathetic demands--we shall never know how forlorn and weak they
are. Prayer is the opening of the heart to the being we call God--it is
most natural and reasonable. If we pray in our weakness and blindness
for what we may not have, there is, nevertheless, a wonderful
re-creative effect within us. The comfort and peace of such communion is
beyond all else healing and restoring in its influence upon the troubled
and anxious mind of man. The poet or the scientist who bows in adoration
before the glory of God revealed in nature, prays in effect to that God
and his soul is refreshed and renewed. The poor wretch who stands
blindfolded before the firing squad, waiting the word that ends the life
of a military spy, is near enough to God--and the whispered prayer upon
his lips is cure for the wounds that take his life.

The best kind of prayer seeks not and asks not for physical relief or
benefit, but opens the heart to its maker, and so receives the cure of
peace that is a greater miracle than any yet wrought by man. Under the
influence of that cure the sick are well and the dead are alive again.
With the courage and spirit of such a cure in our lives, we shall
inevitably do our utmost to relieve, by any good means, the physical
suffering of the world. We shall follow the laws of nature. We shall
study them with the utmost care. We shall take nothing for granted,
since by less careful steps we shall miss the divine law and so go
astray. The science of healing will become no chance and irrational
thing. We shall use all the natural means to relieve and prevent
suffering--there will be no scoring of one set of doctors by another
because all will have one purpose. But more to the point than that, men
will discover that health in its largest sense consists in living devout
and prayerful lives whereunto shall be revealed in good time all that
our finite minds can know and use. There will be no suffering of the
body in the old and pitiful sense, for we shall be so much alive that
disease and death can no longer claim us.


THE END







