CHAPTER IX [p152]

THE INSIGHT OF HUMANISM


1. _The Two Approaches to Life_

The land of heart’s desire is a place in which no man desires what he
cannot have and each man can have what he desires. There have been
great differences of opinion among men as to how they could best enter
this happy land.

If they thought their natural impulses were by way of being lecherous,
greedy, and cruel, they have accepted some form of the classical and
Christian doctrine that man must subdue his naive impulses, and by
reason, grace, or renunciation, transform his will. If they thought
that man was naturally innocent and good, they have accepted some one
of the many variants of liberalism, and concerned themselves not with
the reform of desire but with the provision of opportunities for its
fulfilment.

There are differences of emphasis among liberals, but they all accept
the same premise, which is that if only external circumstances are
favorable the internal life of man will adjust itself successfully.
So completely does this theory of human nature dominate the field of
contemporary thought that modern men are rarely reminded, and then only
by those whom it is the fashion to ignore, that they are challenging
the testimony not merely of their maiden aunts, but of all the greatest
teachers of wisdom. [p153] Yet if the modern man is an optimist on
the subject of his impulses, the reason is to be found less in his own
self-confidence than in his distrust of men and in his intoxication
over things.

Owing to the dissolution of the ancestral order he has learned to
distrust those who exercise authority. Owing to the progress of science
he has acquired an unbounded confidence in his capacity to create
desirable objects. He is so rebellious and so constructive that he has
still to ask himself whether the free and naive pursuit of desirable
objects can really produce a desirable world. Yet in all the books of
wisdom that is the question which confronts him. There it is written in
many languages and in the idiom of many different cultures that if man
is to find happiness, he must reconstruct not merely his world, but,
first of all, himself.

Is this wisdom dead and done with, or has it a bearing upon the deep
uneasiness of the modern man? The answer depends upon what we must
conceive to be the nature of man.


2. _Freedom and Restraint_

It is significant that fashions in human nature are continually
changing. There are, as it were, two extremes: at the one is the belief
that our naive passions are evil, at the other that they are good,
and between these two poles, the prevailing opinion oscillates. One
might suppose that somewhere, perhaps near the center, there would be
a point which was the truth, and that on that point men would reach
an agreement. But experience shows that there is no agreement, and
that there is no known point [p154] where the two views are perfectly
balanced. The fact is that the prevailing view is invariably a rebound
from the excesses of the other, and one can understand it only by
knowing what it is a reaction from.

It is impossible, for example, to do justice to Rousseau and
the romantics without understanding the dead classicism, the
conventionalities, and the tyrannies of the Eighteenth Century. It is
equally impossible to do justice to the Eighteenth Century without
understanding the licentiousness of the High Renaissance and the
political disorders resulting from the Reformation. These in their turn
become intelligible only when we have understood the later consequences
of the mediæval view of life. No particular view endures. When human
nature is wholly distrusted and severely repressed, sooner or later it
asserts itself and bursts its bonds; and when it is naively trusted, it
produces so much disorder and corruption that men once again idealize
order and restraint.

We happen to be living in an age when there is a severe reaction
against the distrust and repression practiced by those whom it is
customary to describe as Puritans. It is, in fact, a reaction against a
degenerate form of Puritanism which manifested itself as a disposition
to be prim, prudish, and pedantic. For latter-day Puritanism had become
a rather second-rate notion that less obvious things are more noble
than grosser ones and that spirituality is the pursuit of rarefied
sensations. It had embraced the idea that a man had advanced in the
realm of the spirit in proportion to his concern with abstractions, and
cults of grimly spiritual persons devoted themselves to the worship of
sonorous generalities. All this associated itself [p155] with a rather
preposterous idealism which insisted that maidens should be wan and
easily frightened, that draperies and decorations should conceal the
essential forms of objects, and that the good life had something to do
with expurgated speech, with pale colors, and shadows and silhouettes,
with the thin music of harps and soprano voices, with fig leaves and
a general conspiracy to tell lies to children, with philosophies that
denied the reality of evil, and with all manner of affectation and
self-deception.

Yet in these many attempts to grow wings and take off from the things
that are of the earth earthy, it is impossible not to recognize a
resemblance, somewhat in the nature of a caricature, to the teaching of
the sages. There is no doubt that in one form or another, Socrates and
Buddha, Jesus and St. Paul, Plotinus and Spinoza, taught that the good
life is impossible without asceticism, that without renunciation of
many of the ordinary appetites, no man can really live well. Prejudice
against the human body and a tendency to be disgusted with its habits,
a contempt for the ordinary concerns of daily experience is to be
found in all of them, and it is not surprising that men, living in an
age of moral confusion like that associated with the name of the good
Queen Victoria, should have come to believe that if only they covered
up their passions they had conquered them. It was a rather ludicrous
mistake as the satirists of the anti-Victorian era have so copiously
pointed out. But at least there was a dim recognition in this cult of
the genteel that the good life does involve some kind of conquest of
the carnal passions.

That conception of the good life has become so repulsive [p156] to the
present generation that it is almost incapable of understanding and
appreciating the original insight of which the works of Dr. Bowdler and
Mrs. Grundy are a caricature. Yet it is a fact, and a most arresting
one, that in all the great religions, and in all the great moral
philosophies from Aristotle to Bernard Shaw, it is taught that one of
the conditions of happiness is to renounce some of the satisfactions
which men normally crave. This tradition as to what constitutes the
wisdom of life is supported by testimony from so many independent
sources that it cannot be dismissed lightly. With minor variations it
is a common theme in the teaching of an Athenian aristocrat like Plato,
an Indian nobleman like Buddha, and a humble Jew like Spinoza; in
fact, wherever men have thought at all carefully about the problem of
evil and of what constitutes a good life, they have concluded that an
essential element in any human philosophy is renunciation. They cannot
all have been so foolish as Anthony Comstock. They must have had some
insight into experience which led them to that conclusion.

If asceticism in all its forms were as stupid and cruel as it is now
the fashion to think it is, then the traditions of saintliness and
of heroism are monstrously misleading. For in the legends of heroes,
of sages, of explorers, inventors and discoverers, of pioneers and
patriots, there is almost invariably this same underlying theme of
sacrifice and unworldliness. They are poor. They live dangerously. By
ordinary standards they are extremely uncomfortable. They give up ease,
property, pleasure, pride, place, and power to attain things which are
transcendent and rare. They live for ends which seem to yield them
[p157] no profit, and they are ready to die, if need be, for that
which the dead can no longer enjoy. And yet, though there is nothing
in our current morality to justify their unworldliness, we continue to
admire them greatly.

In saying all this I am not trying to clinch an argument by appealing
to great names. There is much in the teaching of all the spiritual
leaders of the past which is wholly obsolete to-day, and there is no
compulsive authority in any part of their teaching. They may have been
as mistaken in their insight into the human soul as they usually were
in their notions of physics and history. To say, then, that there is
an ascetic element in all the great philosophies of the past is not
proof that there must be one in modern philosophy. But it creates a
presumption, I think, which cannot be ignored, for we must remember
that the least perishable part of the literature and thought of the
past is that which deals with human nature. Scientific method and
historical scholarship have enormously increased our competence in
the whole field of physics and history. But for an understanding of
human nature we are still very largely dependent, as they were, upon
introspection, general observation, and intuition. There has been no
revolutionary advance here since the hellenic philosophers. That is why
Aristotle’s ethics is still as fresh for anyone who accustoms himself
to the idiom as Nietzsche, or Freud, or Bertrand Russell, whereas
Aristotle’s physics, his biology, or his zoology is of interest only to
antiquarians.

It is, then, as an insight into human nature, and not as a rule
authoritatively imposed or highly sanctioned by the prestige of great
men, that I propose now to inquire what meaning there is for us in the
fact that men in the [p158] past have so persistently associated the
good life with some form of ascetic discipline and renunciation. The
modern world, as it has emancipated itself from its ancestral regime,
has assumed almost as a matter of course that the human passions, if
thoroughly liberated from all tyrannies and distortions, would by their
fulfilment achieve happiness. All those who teach asceticism, deny
this major premise of modernity, and the result is that the prevailing
philosophy is at odds on the most fundamental of all issues with the
wisdom of the past.


3. _The Ascetic Principle_

The average man to-day, when he hears the word asceticism, is likely
to think of St. Simeon Stylites who sat on top of a pillar, of hermits
living in caves, of hair-shirts, of long fasts, chastity, strange
vigils, and even of tattooing, self-mutilation, and flagellation. Or
if he does not think of such examples, which the modern man regards as
pathological and for the psychiatrist to explain, the word asceticism
may connote some such attitude of mind as Herbert Asbury has recorded
in the biography of his kinsman, Bishop Asbury, the founder of American
Methodism, of whom a friend, who knew him well, wrote: “I never saw
him indulge in even innocent pleasantry. His was the solemnity of an
apostle; it was so interwoven with his conduct that he could not put
off the gravity of the bishop either in the parlour or the dining-room.
He was a rigid enemy to ease; hence the pleasures of study and the
charms of recreation he alike sacrificed to the more sublime work
of saving souls.... He knew nothing about pleasing the flesh at the
expense of duty; flesh [p159] and blood were enemies with whom he
never took counsel.”

If asceticism meant only this sort of thing, it might be interesting
only as a curiosity. But apart from the asceticism of primitive peoples
and of the pathological, there is a sane and civilized asceticism which
presents a quite different face. There is, for example, the argument of
Socrates in the _Phædo_ that the body is a nuisance to a philosopher in
search of truth. It is, he says, “a source of endless trouble to us by
reason of the mere requirement of food; and is liable also to diseases
which overtake and impede us in the search after true being: it fills
us full of loves, and lusts, and fears, and fancies of all kinds, and
endless foolery, and in fact, as men say, takes away from us the power
of thinking at all. Whence come wars, and fightings, and factions?
Whence but from the body and the lusts of the body? Wars are occasioned
by the love of money, and money has to be acquired for the sake and in
the service of the body; and by reason of all these impediments we have
no time to give to philosophy; and, last and worst of all, even if we
are at leisure and betake ourselves to some speculation, the body is
always breaking in upon us, causing us turmoil and confusion in our
inquiries, and so amazing us that we are prevented from seeing the
truth.”

Plato, in pursuing the argument in this particular dialogue, concludes
that because the body is such a nuisance the only pure philosopher is
a dead one. It is, perhaps, a logical conclusion. But in other places,
particularly in the _Republic_, Plato described a system of education
which he thought would produce philosophers: the neophytes [p160]
were put through a stern discipline of hard living and gymnastics and
learning, were compelled to live in tents, to own nothing which they
could call their own, and to cut themselves off from all family ties.

When the description of this regime provokes Adeimantus to remark
that “you are not making the men of this class particularly happy,”
Socrates is made to reply that while it is not his object to make any
class particularly happy, yet it would not surprise him if in the given
circumstances even this class were very happy. When we look further
for his meaning, we find it to be that the guardians are trained by
their ascetic discipline to abandon all private aims and to find their
happiness in an appreciation of a perfectly ordered commonwealth. If
we understand this we shall, I believe, understand what civilized
asceticism means. We shall have come back to the original meaning of
the word itself, which is derived from the Greek ἀσκέω, “I practice,”
and “embodies a metaphor taken from the ancient wrestling place or
palæstra, where victory rewarded those who had best trained their
bodies.” An ascetic in the original meaning of the term is an athlete;
and it was in this spirit that the early Christians trained themselves
deliberately as “athletes of Christ” to bear without flinching the
tortures of their martyrdom.

When asceticism is irrational, it is a form of totemism or fetich
worship and derives from a belief that certain things are tabu or
that evil spirits can be placated by human suffering. Or without any
coherent belief whatsoever asceticism may be merely a perversion
arising out of that ambivalence of the human passions which often makes
pain, inflicted on others or self-inflicted, an exquisite [p161]
pleasure. But when asceticism is rational, it is a discipline of the
mind and body to fit men for the service of an ideal. Its purpose
is to harden and to purify, to suppress contrary passions, and thus
to intensify the passion for the ideal. “I chastise my body,” said
St. Paul, “and bring it into subjection.” The Church, especially in
the earlier centuries, was compelled to fight continually against
irrational asceticism, and as late as the Middle Ages, the Inquisition
pursued sects which regarded marriage as the “greater adultery” and
practiced self-emasculation. The rational view was the view of St.
Jerome: “Be on your guard when you begin to mortify your body by
abstinence and fasting, lest you imagine yourself to be perfect and a
saint; for perfection does not consist in this virtue. It is only a
help; a disposition; a means, though a fitting one, for the attainment
of true perfection.”

Now when St. Paul said that he had to bring his body into subjection,
when Aristotle defined the barbarians’ ideal as “the living as one
likes,” when Plato made Socrates say that the soul is infected by
the body, when Buddha preached the extinction of all craving, when
Spinoza wrote that because we rejoice in virtue we are able to
control our lusts, they accepted a view of human nature which is
quite diametrically opposed to one which has had wide currency in our
civilization since the Renaissance.

This contrary view was undoubtedly provoked by the evils which came
from the attempt to put the ascetic principle extensively into
practice. Rabelais is by all odds the most convincing of the moderns
who revolted, for [p162] Rabelais not only talked about the natural
man but actually knew him and delighted in him. Thus when Villers
writes to Madame de Staël that in her work “primitive, incorruptible,
naive, passionate nature” is “in conflict with the barriers and
shackles of conventional life,” we feel, I think, that neither Villers
nor the lady would really have cared very much for primitive nature in
all its naivete. The natural man that they were talking about lived
in Arcady and his passions were as violent as those of a lapdog;
throughout the romantic movement, with rare exceptions, the talk about
passion and impulse and instinct has this air of unreality and of
neurotic confusion. There is not in it, as there is in Rabelais, for
example, an honest gusto for the passions that are to be liberated
from the restraints imposed by that “rabble of squint-minded fellows,
dissembling and counterfeit saints, demure lookers, hypocrites,
pretended zealots, tough friars, buskin-monks, and other such sects of
men, who disguise themselves like masquers to deceive the world.”

Rabelais advised his readers that if they desired to become good
Pantagruelists, “that is to say, to live in peace, joy, health, making
yourself always merry—never trust those men that always peep out
through a little hole.” And in establishing the Abbey of Theleme,
Gargantua furnished it magnificently and barred the gates against
bigots, hypocrites, dissemblers, attorneys, barristers, usurers,
drunkards, and cannibals; he invited in all noble blades and brisk
and handsome people, faithful expounders of the Scripture, and lovely
ladies, proper, fair, and mirthful. “Their life,” he says, “was spent
not in laws, statutes, or rules, but at their own free will and
pleasure. [p163] They rose from bed when they thought good, drank,
ate, worked, slept, when the desire came to them. None did awaken them,
none constrained them either to drink or eat, nor to do any other
thing: for so had Gargantua established it. The Rule of their order had
but one clause: _Do What Thou Wilt._”

But there was a catch in this rule. Not only had drunkards and
cannibals been excluded in the first place, but Rabelais assures us
that those who were admitted, because they were “free, well born, well
educated, and accustomed to good company, have by nature an instinct
and spur which prompts them to virtuous acts and withdraws them from
vice. This they call honor.” And in another passage Rabelais limits the
propensities of the natural man even more radically when he speaks of
“a certain gaiety of spirit _cured_ in contempt of chance and fortune.”

There is always a catch in any doctrine of the natural goodness of man.
For mere passive obedience to impulse as it comes and goes, without
effort to check it or direct it, ends in something like Alfred de
Musset’s Rolla, of whom it was said:

  It was not Rolla who ruled his life,
  It was his passions; he let them go
  As a drowsy shepherd watches the water flow.

So even Dora Russell at the crisis of her assault upon the Christian
tradition advises us to “live by instinct _and_ intelligence,” which
must mean, if it means anything, that intelligence is to be in some
respects the master as well as the servant of instinct. That this is
what Mrs. Russell means is abundantly plain by her fury at capitalists,
imperialists, [p164] conservatives, and churchmen, whose instincts
lead them to do things of which she does not approve. For like her
distinguished husband she trusts those impulses which are creative and
beneficent, and distrusts those which are possessive and destructive.
That is to say, like every other moralist, she trusts those parts of
human nature which she trusts.


4. _Oscillation between Two Principles_

These cycles of action and reaction are disastrous to the establishment
of a stable humanism. A theocratic culture depends upon an assured
view of the way in which God governs the universe, and as long as
that view suits the typical needs of a society made stable by custom,
the theocratic culture is stable. But humanism arises in complex
and changing societies, and if it is to have any power to make life
coherent and orderly, it must hold an assured view of how man can
govern himself. If he oscillates aimlessly between the belief that he
must distrust his impulses and the belief that he may naively obey
them, it is impossible for him to fix any point of reference for
the development of his moral code, his educational plans, his human
relationships, his politics, and his personal ideals.

It is not hard to see, I think, why he oscillates in this fashion
between trust and distrust. He cannot obey every impulse, for he has
conflicting impulses within himself. There are also his neighbors with
their impulses. They cannot all be satisfied, for the very simple
reason that the sum of their demands far outruns the available supply
of satisfactions. There is not room enough, there are not objects
[p165] enough in the world to fulfill all human desires. Desires are,
for all practical purposes, unlimited and insatiable, and therefore any
ethics which does not recognize the necessity of putting restraint upon
naive desire is inherently absurd. On the other hand, it is impossible
to distrust every impulse, for the only conclusion then is to commit
suicide. Buddha did, to be sure, teach that craving was the source
of all misery, and that it must be wholly extinguished. But it is
evident from an examination of what he actually advised his disciples
to renounce, that while they were to be poor, chaste, unworldly, and
incurious about the nature of things, they were to be rewarded with
the highest of all satisfactions, and were to be “like the broad
earth, unvexed; like the pillar of the city gate, unmoved; like a
pellucid lake, unruffled.” For Nirvana meant, as Rhys Davids says, the
extinction of a sinful, grasping condition of mind.

Confronted by two opposed views of human nature, neither of which can
be taken unreservedly, moralists have had to pick and choose, deciding
how much or how little they would trust the different impulses. But
there is no measure by which they could decide how much of an impulse
is virtuous, how much more is intemperate, and how much more than
that is utterly sinful. The attempts to regulate the sexual impulse
illustrate the difficulty. Shall the moralist call the complete
absence of all conscious sexual desire virtue? Then he disobeys the
commandment to be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth. Shall
he then limit virtuous desire to that which is felt for a lawful
mate? That implies that man and woman must mate with the first person
for whom they feel any sexual desire. [p166] But this cannot always
be arranged. The first person may be otherwise engaged. It becomes
necessary then to permit a certain amount of promiscuous, though
unfulfilled, sexual desire in the process of sexual selection. And
then having somehow gotten past that difficulty, and with two persons
safely mated, a whole new series of problems arise out of the question
of how far sexual satisfaction depends for its virtue upon its being
the successful means to, or more subtly still, the intended means
to, procreation. I shall not pursue the matter further. The attempt
to measure the degree in which impulse is to be permitted to express
itself is obviously full of difficulties.

The moral problem remains utterly insoluble as long as men regard it as
an attempt to separate their good impulses from their bad ones, and to
decide how much their good impulses are to be encouraged. Morality, if
it is not fixed by custom and authority, becomes a mere matter of taste
determined by the idiosyncrasies of the moralist.


5. _The Golden Mean and Its Difficulties_

Aristotle faced this fundamental difficulty of humanism in the
_Ethics_. He had expounded the theory that happiness is due to virtue,
and that virtue is a mean between two extremes. There must, he said, be
neither defect nor excess of any quality. We must, in brief, go so far
but no further in obedience to our impulses. Thus between rashness and
cowardice the mean is courage; between prodigality and niggardliness
it is liberality; between incontinence and total abstinence it is
temperateness; between ostentation and meanness it is magnificence;
between empty boasting and little-mindedness it is magnanimity; between
[p167] flattery and moroseness it is friendliness; between bashfulness
and impudence it is modesty; between arrogance and false modesty, it is
truthfulness.

So runs the Aristotelian catalogue, and probably no code ever described
so well the ideal of a gentleman. But having laid down his general
precepts, Aristotle, unlike most moralists, faced the difficulty of
applying them. He recognized that it is one thing to accept the theory
of a golden mean, and quite another to know where that mean lies. “For
in each case it is difficult to find the mean ... thus it is easy, and
in every man’s power to be angry, and to give and spend money; but to
determine the person to whom, and the quantity, and the time, and the
motive, and the manner, is no longer in every man’s power, nor is it
easy; therefore excellence is rare, and praiseworthy and honorable.”
For while the mean between excess and defect is excellent, “it is easy
to miss a mark, but difficult to hit it.”

If we look at the matter more closely in order to find out why moral
codes are, as Aristotle says, so hit and miss, we must, I think, come
to the conclusion that there is an undetected fallacy in most moral
thinking which renders moral insight abortive. It is that fallacy which
I now propose to examine.

A moral code like Aristotle’s, which we may fairly regard as the
rational prototype of all humanistic codes, consists of an inventory
of good and bad appetites and of good and bad satisfactions. All
conventional moralizing, which does not rest on the sheer fiat of
public opinion, custom, or God, assumes the existence of some such
inventory of permissible desires and permissible fulfilments. But what
[p168] does the making of such inventories mean? It means that good
and evil are believed to be objective qualities of the natural world
like weight, dimension, and motion, that certain desires are inherently
good, certain others are inherently bad, and that the same is true
of the different objects of desire. But this is nothing but what is
known as the pathetic fallacy. For surely each desire and each object
as such, taken separately without relation to anything else, is as
innocent and as neutral as the forces that move the planets.

The categories of good and evil would not apply if there were no
sentient being to experience good and evil. In such a world no object
would be any better or any worse than any other object; nobody talks
about good and bad electrons. All electrons are morally alike because
no sentient being can tell them apart. Nor would the categories of
good and evil apply to a world in which each impulse was in a vacuum
of its own. In such a world all our impulses would be like our
digestive tracts on a day when we do not know we have a stomach. If
our impulses did not impinge upon each other and upon objects there
would be no problem of good and evil. Therefore the quality of good
and evil lies not in impulses as such, nor in objects as such, but in
the relationship between impulses and objects. Therefore the making of
inventories is fundamentally misleading.

There is another fallacy which is closely associated with this one.
We make lists of our impulses. A standard list which is much used
comprises the following: flight, repulsion, curiosity, pugnacity,
self-abasement, self-assertion, parental, reproductive, gregarious,
acquisitive, constructive. [p169] Whether this is a good list or not
is neither here nor there. Through the ages men have been making such
lists in the fond belief that they were analyzing the human character.
No doubt these terms describe something; we all recognize that these
words are the names of impulses that move us. But if we consider them
further, we must also recognize that these impulses do not move all
persons the same way, nor any one person the same way at all times in
his life and under all circumstances.

It is hardly necessary, I am sure, to labor the point very much. There
is the instinct to be curious: it disposes one man to measure the
diameter of Betelgeuse when he is forty years old; when he was a child
it disposed him to find out whether he could hang up a cat by its
tail; that curious child’s companion in the experiment on the cat was
disposed, when he grew up, to take much trouble in finding out how much
income tax his neighbor paid and whether his employer was faithful to
his wife. The parental instinct of one man is to launch his child on
the world as an independent human being; in another man the instinct
manifests itself as a determination to have children who will depend
upon him and cater to him all his days long. So when we make lists of
our impulses we really do not know enough about them to pass judgment.
For desires are complex, and their greatest complexity lies in the fact
that they change.

The objects of desire are no less complex. Take, for example, a jade
goddess. To a Chinese coolie it is an object with mysterious powers, a
part of the mechanism which governs the universe. But the jade goddess
is now in a Fifth Avenue shop window, and a policeman on his beat
[p170] sees it. It is a green stone figure to him. The dealer inside
knows that it is rare and is worth a thousand dollars. The collector
could enjoy it immensely if he possessed it. The connoisseur finds
intricate pleasure in it as a work of art and an elaborate interest in
it as a memento of a whole culture. The objects of desire, then, are
not simple things. We help to create them. We say that this man desires
that woman. But what, in fact, does he desire? A few moments of ecstasy
from her body, something which a thousand women could give him equally
well, or an intimate union with so much of her whole being that for
that very reason she is unique to him? The quality of his passion and
the character of his mistress will depend in a very large degree on how
much of her being he takes into account. It depends also, I hasten to
add, on how much there is to take into account.

At any moment in our lives we desire only those objects which we are
then capable of desiring and in the way we are then capable of desiring
them. But our desires do not remain fixed from the cradle to the grave.
They change. And as they change the desirability of objects about us
changes too. It is impossible, then, to make lists of good and evil
desires and of good and evil objects. For good and evil are qualities
in the relationship between variable desires and variable objects of
desire.

The attempt to construct moral codes on the basis of an inventory
is an attempt to understand something which is always in process of
change by treating it as a still life and taking snapshots of it. That
is what moralists have almost always attempted to do. They have tried
to capture the essence of a changing thing in a collection [p171] of
fixed concepts. It cannot be done. The reality of human nature is bound
to elude us if we look only at a momentary cross-section of it. To
understand it, therefore, for the purposes of moralizing, we have to
revise our intellectual apparatus, and learn to look upon each moment
of behavior not as the manifestation of certain fixed elements in human
nature, but as a stage in the evolution of human nature. We grow up,
mature, and decline; being endowed with memory and the capacity to form
habits, our conduct is cumulative. We drag our past along with us and
it pushes us on. We do not make a new approach to each new experience.
We approach new experiences with the expectations and habits developed
by previous experience, and under the impact of novelty these
expectations and habits become modified.


6. _The Matrix of Humanism_

The conception of human nature as developing behavior is, of course,
accepted by all modern psychologists. If they study the child they are
bound to consider him as potentially an adult. If they study the adult
they are bound to regard him as originally a child. Abnormal psychology
makes sense only insofar as it can be understood as an abnormal
development of the personality, regardless of whether that abnormality
is traceable to pre-natal variations, to organic disease, or to
functional disturbance. Folk psychology, whether or not one accepts the
interesting but speculative hypothesis that there is a parallel between
the development of the individual and the development of the race, is
another mode of investigating the evolution of behavior. The concept
of development [p172] is thoroughly established in psychology as the
major clue to the understanding of human nature.

The moralist, since he is concerned with human nature, is compelled
to employ this concept. But he employs it somewhat differently than
the scientist. Being a moralist, he is interested in understanding the
principles of behavior in order that he may understand the principles
of right behavior. The psychologist, as such, is interested in the
development of behavior, regardless of whether that development leads
to misery or to happiness. He studies the various processes no matter
where they lead. For in science the concept of development implies
no judgment as to whether there is a good or a bad development. The
development of an idiot and of a genius are on the same footing, and
are theoretically of equal interest. But to the moralist the study of
development is focussed on the effort to discover those processes of
development which can be made to produce right relationships between
the individual and his environment, and by a right relationship he is
bound to mean one in which there is an harmonious adjustment between
desires and the objects of desire. How often, and how nearly, it
is possible for human beings to approximate such perfection is an
unanswerable question. The proof of that pudding lies in the eating
of it, and it is not the function of the moralist under humanism to
guarantee the outcome. His function is to point out as clearly as it is
possible to do so the path which presumably leads toward the good life.

In describing that path he is bound to depend upon the best available
insight into the processes by which good and bad adjustments are made.
In the present state of [p173] our knowledge this means that he must
rely to a very large degree upon his own intuitions, commonsense, and
sense of life. Great progress has been made in scientific psychology
within the last generation, enough progress, I think, to supplement
in important ways our own unanalyzed and intuitive wisdom about life.
But it would be idle to suppose that the science of psychology is
in a stage where it can be used as a substitute for experienced and
penetrating imaginative insight. We can be confident that on the whole
a good meteorologist can tell us more about the weather than even the
most weather-wise old sea captain. But we cannot have that kind of
confidence in even the best of psychologists. Indeed, an acquaintance
with psychologists will, I think, compel anyone to admit that, if they
are good psychologists, they are almost certain to possess a gift
of insight which is unaccounted for by their technical apparatus.
Doubtless it is true that in all the sciences the difference between
a good scientist and a poor one comes down at last, after all the
technical and theoretical procedure has been learned, to some sort of
residual flair for the realities of that subject. But in the study
of human nature that residual flair, which seems to be composed of
intuition, commonsense, and unconsciously deposited experience, plays a
much greater role than it does in the more advanced sciences.

The uses of psychology to the moralist are, therefore, in confirming
and correcting, in broadening and organizing, his insight into human
nature. He is confronted, of course, with a great deal of confusion.
There is, to begin with, no agreed terminology, and therefore it is
often almost impossible to know whether two psychologists [p174]
using the same word mean the same thing. Anyone who has stumbled about
amidst words like instinct, impulse, consciousness, the unconscious,
will know how confusing it all is. Psychologists are still using a
literary language in which the connotations of words tend to overwhelm
their precise signification. To make the confusion greater there is
the elaborate system-making, the headstrong generalizing, and the
fierce dogmatism which have produced the psychological sects. But all
of this is characteristic of a young science, and if that is borne in
mind, there is nothing disconcerting about it. The Eighteenth Century
in dealing with the Newtonian physics, and the Nineteenth in dealing
with the Darwinian biology, went through a hullabaloo similar to
that which we are now going through in connection with behaviorism,
psychoanalysis, and the so-called _gestalt-theorie_. Our only concern
here is to ask whether underneath all the controversy there is not some
trustworthy common ground on which the moralist can stand.

I have already said that there was common ground in the concept of
development. We can go further than that, however, and say, I think,
that with the help of psychology we are in position now to construct
reliable and useful pictures, which confirm and correct our own
intuitive understanding, of the infantile and of the mature approach
to experience. We can, as it were, fix these two poles and regard the
history of each soul as the history of its progress from infantilism
to maturity. We are by no means able as yet to describe all the phases
of development between these two poles; we know that progress is
often temporarily interrupted, often completely [p175] arrested, and
sometimes turned into a rout. But insofar as we are able to realize
clearly what a fully matured character is like, the word progress has
a meaning because we know what we mean by the goal of moral effort.
That goal is maturity. If we knew all the stages in the development to
maturity, and how to control them, we should have an adequate science
of education, we could deal successfully with functional disorders, we
should have a very great mastery of the art of life. For the problems
of education are at bottom problems in how to lead the child from one
stage of development to another until at last he becomes an harmonious
and autonomous personality; the functional disorders of the character
are problems in the fixations and repressions on the path to maturity;
the art of living is to pass gracefully from youth to old age, and, at
last, as Montaigne said, to learn to die.

It is this progress which we have to understand and imaginatively to
conceive. For in conceiving it we conceive the matrix of humanism. In
this conception is to be found, I believe, the substitute for that
conception of divine government which gives shape and form to the
theocratic culture. To replace the conception of man as the subject of
a heavenly king, which dominates the whole ancestral order of life,
humanism takes as its dominant pattern the progress of the individual
from helpless infancy to self-governing maturity.


7. _The Career of the Soul_

If our scientific knowledge of human nature were adequate, we could
achieve in the humanistic culture that which all theologies have tried
to achieve: we could found [p176] our morality on tested truths.
They would be truths about the development of human nature, and not,
as in the popular religions, truth of physics and of history. But
our knowledge of human nature is inadequate, and therefore, like the
teachers of popular religion, we have in place of exact knowledge
to invent imaginative fictions in the hope that the progress of
science will confirm and correct, but will not utterly contradict,
our hypotheses. We can claim no more than this: for our understanding
of human nature we are compelled to use our insight and the best
available psychological science of our age, exactly as Dante, for his
understanding of the divine constitution of the universe, had to use
the accepted astronomy of his day. If our psychology turns out to be
wrong, the only difference will be that we shall have to discard an
hypothesis whereas our forefathers had to discard a revealed dogma.

The sketch which I am about to make of the progress from infancy to
maturity is to be taken, then, not as tested scientific truth, but as
an imaginative construction. It will be, if you like, a modern fable
which symbolizes rather than describes, as the primitive legends of the
sun god symbolized, rather than described, the observed facts. Because
it is an imaginative construction, the same meaning might be expressed
in other ways and with many variations of detail. But though the
fiction itself is of no consequence, the meaning it conveys is of the
highest consequence, and it is confirmed, as I shall attempt to show,
not only by ordinary insight but by the deepest wisdom of the greatest
teachers.

Freud, in a famous paper, has described the passage [p177] from
infancy to maturity as a transition from the dominion of momentary
pleasure and pain to the dominion of reality. This theory is not
peculiar to psychoanalysis in any of its several schools, and it does
not depend upon the controverted points of doctrine. It is, in fact,
more or less of a commonplace in psychological thought. I am employing
it here because a distinguished colleague of Freud’s, Dr. S. Ferenczi
of Budapest, has made an attempt to indicate the chief stages in the
development between these two poles of experience. It is a most useful
bit of speculation, and while I believe it could be duplicated in terms
either of behaviorism or of the _gestalt-theorie_, I do not happen to
have come across any portrait of the idea which is as vivid as Dr.
Ferenczi’s.

The first stage of human development, says Ferenczi, takes place in
the womb where the embryo lives as a parasite of the mother’s body.
An outer world exists for it only in a very restricted degree; all it
needs for protection, warmth, and nourishment is assured by the mother.
Because everything is there which is necessary for the satisfaction
of the instincts, Ferenczi calls this the Period of Unconditional
Omnipotence.

It is, therefore, rather disagreeable and perhaps terrifying to be
born, for with the detachment from the mother and the “rude disturbance
of the wish-less tranquillity he had enjoyed in the womb,” the trouble
of living begins, and evokes feelings which might perhaps be described
as a longing to recover the perfect pre-natal adjustment. Nurses
instinctively recognize this longing, says Ferenczi, and as soon as
the infant expresses his discomfort by struggling and crying, they
deliberately create a situation [p178] which resembles as closely
as possible the one he has just left. They lay him down by the warm
body of the mother, or wrap him up in soft, warm coverings, shield his
eyes from the light and his ears from noise. The illusion is more or
less complete, for, of course, the infant is unaware of the activities
of the nurse. For all he knows “his wishes are realized simply by
imagining the satisfaction of them.” Ferenczi calls this the Period of
Magical-Hallucinatory Omnipotence.

But this period does not last very long, since the nurse is unable
to anticipate every desire that the growing infant feels. “The
hallucinatory representation of the wish-fulfilment soon proves
inadequate to bring about any longer a real wish-fulfilment.” So the
infant has to give signals, and the more complicated his wishes become
the more signals he has to give. He begins to use a gesture-language,
and if there is a willing nurse always at hand without too many
new-fangled notions, the child gets what he wants for the mere trouble
of expressing his wants. Ferenczi calls this the Period of Omnipotence
by the Help of Magic Gestures.

But as time goes on and as the number of his wants increase these
gestures lose some of their magic. The number of the conditions
increase to which he has to submit. “The outstretched hand must often
be drawn back empty.... Indeed, an invincible hostile power may
forcibly oppose itself to this gesture and compel the hand to resume
its former position.” At this point his sense of reality begins; the
sense, that is to say, of something outside himself which does not
submit to his wishes. “Till now the ‘all-powerful’ being has been
able [p179] to feel himself one with the world that obliged him
and followed his every nod, but gradually there appears a painful
discordance in his experiences.” Because all experiences are no longer
incorporated in the ego, Ferenczi calls this the Projection Phase.

But though the child has now begun to discern the existence of reality,
his sense of that reality is still quite imperfect. At first, perhaps,
he regards this outer world, though it opposes his wishes, as having
qualities like his own. Ferenczi calls this the Animistic Period.
The child then begins to talk and to substitute for gestures actual
statements of what he desires. Provided he lives in a household bent on
fulfilling his wants as soon as possible, he retains to a very great
degree the illusion that his wishes are sovereign. Ferenczi calls this
the Period of Magic Thoughts and Magic Words.

Finally, if he matures successfully, he passes into the last period
where he is no longer under the domination of the pleasure-principle:
the feeling of omnipotence gives way to the full appreciation of the
force of circumstances. Now unfortunately neither Freud nor Ferenczi,
nor, so far as I know, any other psychoanalyst, devotes much attention
to this last phase of maturity in which the sense of reality has become
perfected. They are preoccupied with pathology; that is to say, with
the problems which arise out of a failure to attain this last stage in
which the adult makes a complete adjustment with his world because his
wishes are matured to accept the conditions which reality imposes.

Yet it is this last stage which plainly constitutes the goal of moral
effect, for here alone the adult once again [p180] recovers that
harmony between himself and his environment which he lost in that
period of infancy when he first discovered that his wishes were no
longer sovereign. It is the memory of that earliest harmony which he
carries with him all his days. This is his memory of a golden age,
his intimation, as Wordsworth says, of immortality. But insofar as he
expects by an infantile philosophy to recover that heaven which lay
about him in his infancy, he is doomed to disappointment. In the womb,
and for a few years of his childhood, happiness was the gratification
of his naive desires. His family arranged the world to suit his wishes.
But as he grows up, and begins to be an independent personality, this
providence ministering to his wishes disappears. He can then no longer
hope that the world will be adjusted to his wishes, and he is compelled
by a long and difficult process of learning and training to adjust his
wishes to the world. If he succeeds he is mature. If he is mature, he
is once again harmonious with the nature of things. He has virtue. And
he is happy.

The process of maturing consists then of a revision of his desires
in the light of an understanding of reality. When he is completely
infantile there is nothing in the world but his wishes. Therefore, he
does not need and does not have an understanding of the outer world.
It exists for him merely as gratification or denial. But as he begins
to learn that the universe is not composed of his wishes, he begins to
see his wishes in a context and in perspective. He begins to acquire
a sense of space and to learn how much there is beyond his reach,
until at last he realizes how small a figure he is on this earth, and
how small a part of the universe is the solar system of which [p181]
ours is one of the smaller planets. He has learned a lot from the
days when he put out his hand and reached for the moon. He begins,
also, to acquire a sense of time and to realize that the moment in
which he feels the intense desire to seize something is an instant
in a lifetime, an infinitesimal point in the history of the race. He
acquires a sense of birth and decay and death, a knowledge that that
which he craves, his craving itself, and he himself who feels that
craving, did not have this craving yesterday and will no longer have
it to-morrow. He acquires a sense of cause and effect, a knowledge,
that is to say, that the sequences of events are not to be interrupted
by his preferences. He begins to discern the existence of other beings
beside himself, and to understand that they too have their preferences
and their wishes, that these wishes are often contrary to his own,
and that there is not room enough in the world, nor are there things
enough, to gratify all the wishes of everybody.

Thus to learn the lessons of experience is to undergo a transvaluation
of the values we bring with us from the womb and to transmute our
naive impulses. The breakdown of the infantile adjustment in which
providential powers ministered to every wish compels us either to flee
from reality or to understand it. And by understanding it we create new
objects of desire. For when we know a good deal about a thing, know how
it originated, how it is likely to behave, what it is made of, and what
is its place amidst other things, we are dealing with something quite
different from the simple object naively apprehended.

The understanding creates a new environment. The more subtle and
discriminating, the more informed and [p182] sympathetic the
understanding is, the more complex and yet ordered do the things
about us become. To most of us, as Mr. Santayana once said, music is
a pleasant noise which produces a drowsy revery relieved by nervous
thrills. But the trained musician hears what we do not hear at all; he
hears the form, the structure, the pattern, and the significance of an
ideal world. A naturalist out of doors perceives a whole universe of
related life which the rest of us do not even see. A world which is
ordinarily unseen has become visible through the understanding. When
the mind has fetched it out of the flux of dumb sensations, defined
it and fixed it, this unseen world becomes more real than the dumb
sensations it supplants. When the understanding is at work, it is as if
circumstance had ceased to mutter strange sounds and had begun to speak
our language. When experience is understood, it is no longer what it is
wholly to the infant, very largely to youth, and in great measure to
most men, a succession of desirable objects at which they instinctively
grasp, interspersed with undesirable ones from which they instinctively
shrink. If objects are seen in their context, in the light of their
origin and destiny, with sympathy for their own logic and their own
purposes, they become interesting in themselves, and are no longer
blind stimuli to pleasant and unpleasant sensations.

For when our desires come into contact with the world created by
the understanding, their character is altered. They are confronted
by a much more complex stimulus which evokes a much more complex
response. Instead of the naive and imperious lust of our infantile
natures which is to seize, to have and to hold, our lusts are offset
[p183] by other lusts and a balance between them is set up. That is
to say, they are made rational by the ordered variety with which the
understanding confronts them. We learn that there are more things in
heaven and earth than we dreamed of in our immature philosophy, that
there are many choices and that none is absolute, that beyond the
mountains, as the Chinese say, there are people also. The obviously
pleasant or unpleasant thus becomes less obviously what we felt it
was before our knowledge of it became complicated by anticipation and
memory. The immediately desirable seems not quite so desirable and the
undesirable less intolerable. Delight is perhaps not so intense nor
pain so poignant as youth and the romantics would have them. They are
absorbed into a larger experience in which the rewards are a sustained
and more even enjoyment, and serenity in the presence of inescapable
evil. In place of a world, where like children we are ministered to
by a solicitous mother, the understanding introduces us into a world
where delight is reserved for those who can appreciate the meaning and
purpose of things outside ourselves, and can make these meanings and
purposes their own.


8. _The Passage into Maturity_

The critical phase of human experience, then, is the passage from
childhood to maturity; the critical question is whether childish
habits and expectations are to persist or to be transformed. We grow
older. But it is by no means certain that we shall grow up. The human
character is a complicated thing, and its elements do not necessarily
march in step. It is possible to be a sage in some [p184] things and
a child in others, to be at once precocious and retarded, to be shrewd
and foolish, serene and irritable. For some parts of our personalities
may well be more mature than others; not infrequently we participate in
the enterprises of an adult with the mood and manners of a child.

The successful passage into maturity depends, therefore, on a breaking
up and reconstruction of those habits which were appropriate only to
our earliest experience.

In a certain larger sense this is the essence of education. For unless
a man has acquired the character of an adult, he is a lost soul no
matter how good his technical equipment. The world unhappily contains
many such lost souls. They are often in high places, men trained
to manipulate the machinery of civilization, but utterly incapable
of handling their own purposes in any civilized fashion. For their
purposes are merely the relics of an infancy when their wishes were
law, and they knew neither necessity nor change.

When a childish disposition is carried over into an adult environment
the result is a radically false valuation of that environment. The
symptoms are fairly evident. They may appear as a disposition to feel
that everything which happens to a man has an intentional relation to
himself; life becomes a kind of conspiracy to make him happy or to make
him miserable. In either case it is thought to be deeply concerned with
his destiny. The childish pattern appears also as a deep sense that
life owes him something, that somehow it is the duty of the universe to
look after him, and to listen sharply when he speaks to it. The notion
that the universe is full of [p185] purposes utterly unknown to him,
utterly indifferent to him, is as outrageous to one who is imperfectly
matured as would be the conduct of a mother who forgot to give a hungry
child its lunch. The childish pattern appears also as a disposition to
believe that he may reach out for anything in sight and take it, and
that having gotten it nobody must ever under any circumstances take
it away. Death and decay are, therefore, almost an insult, a kind of
mischief in the nature of things, which ought not to be there, and
would not be there, if everything only behaved as good little boys
believe it should. There is indeed authority for the belief that we
are all being punished for the naughtiness of our first grandmother;
that work and trouble and death would not really be there to plague us
but for her unhappy transgression; that by rights we ought to live in
paradise and have everything we want for ever and ever.

Here, too, is the source of that common complaint of the world-weary
that they are tired of their pleasures. They have what they yearned
for; yet having it they are depressed at finding that they do not care.
Their inability to enjoy what they can have is the obverse of the
desire to possess the unattainable: both are due to carrying over the
expectations of youth into adult life. They find themselves in a world
unlike the world of their youth; they themselves are no longer youths.
But they retain the criteria of youth, and with them measure the world
and their own deserts.

Here, too, is the origin of the apparent paradox that as men grow older
they grow wiser but sadder. It is not a paradox at all if we remember
that this wisdom which [p186] makes them sadder is, after all, an
incompleted wisdom. They have grown wiser as to the character of the
world, wiser too about their own powers, but they remain naive as to
what they may expect of the world and themselves. The expectations
which they formed in their youth persist as deeply ingrained habits
to worry them in their maturity. They are only partially matured;
they have become only partially wise. They have acquired skill and
information, but the parts of them which are adult are embedded in
other parts of their natures which are childish. For men do not
necessarily mature altogether and in unison; they learn to do this
and that more easily than they learn what to like and what to reject.
Intelligence is often more completely educated than desire; our outward
behavior has an appearance of being grown up which our inner vanities
and hopes, our dim but powerful cravings, often belie. In a word, we
learn the arts and the sciences long before we learn philosophy.

If we ask ourselves what is this wisdom which experience forces upon
us, the answer must be that we discover the world is differently
constituted than we had supposed it to be. It is not that we learn more
about its physical elements, or its geography, or the variety of its
inhabitants, or the ways in which human society is governed. Knowledge
of this sort can be taught to a child without in any fundamental way
disturbing his childishness. In fact, all of us are aware that we once
knew a great many things which we have since forgotten. The essential
discovery of maturity has little if anything to do with information
about the names, the locations, and the sequences of facts; it is the
acquiring of a different sense [p187] of life, a different kind of
intuition about the nature of things.

A boy can take you into the open at night and show you the stars;
he might tell you no end of things about them, conceivably all that
an astronomer could teach. But until and unless he feels the vast
indifference of the universe to his own fate, and has placed himself
in the perspective of cold and illimitable space, he has not looked
maturely at the heavens. Until he has felt this, and unless he can
endure this, he remains a child, and in his childishness he will
resent the heavens when they are not accommodating. He will demand
sunshine when he wishes to play, and rain when the ground is dry, and
he will look upon storms as anger directed at him, and the thunder as a
personal threat.

The discovery that our wishes have little or no authority in the world
brings with it experience of the necessity that is in the nature of
things. The lesson of this experience is one from which we shrink and
to which few ever wholly accommodate themselves. The world of the child
is a kind of enchanted island. The labor that went into procuring his
food, his clothes, his toys, is wholly invisible at first. His earliest
expectations are, therefore, that somehow the Lord will provide. Only
gradually does the truth come home to him how much effort it costs to
satisfy his wants. It takes even longer for him to understand that not
only does he not get what he wants by asking for it but he cannot be
sure to get what he wants by working for it. It is not easy to accept
the knowledge that desire, that prayer, that effort can be and often
are frustrated, that in the nature of things [p188] there is much
fumbling, trial and error, deadlock and defeat.

The sense of evil is acquired late; by many persons it is never
acquired at all. Children suffer, and childhood is by no means so
unreservedly happy as some make it out to be. But childish suffering
is not inherently tragic. It is not stamped with the irrevocability
which the adult feels to be part of the essence of evil. Evil for the
child is something which can be explained away, made up for, done away
with. Pretentious philosophies have been built on this fancy purporting
somehow to absorb the evil of the world in an all-embracing goodness,
as a child’s tears are dried by its mother’s kisses. The discovery that
there is evil which is as genuine as goodness, that there is ugliness
and violence which are no less real than joy and love, is one of those
discoveries that the adult is forced somehow to accept in his valuation
of experience.

And then there is the knowledge, which only experience can give, that
everything changes and that everything comes to an end. It is possible
to tell a child about mortality, but to realize it he must live long
enough to experience it. This knowledge does not come from words; it
comes in feeling, in the feeling that he himself is older, in the
death of kin and friends, in seeing well-known objects wear out, in
discarding old things, in awakening to the sense that there is a whole
new generation in the world which looks upon him as old. There is an
intimation of immortality in our youth because we have not yet had
experience of mortality. The persons and the things which surround us
seem eternal because [p189] we have known them too briefly to realize
that they change. We have seen neither their beginning nor their end.

In the last analysis we have no right to say that the world of youth is
an illusion. For the child it is a true picture of the world in that
it corresponds to, and is justified in, his experience. If he did not
have to grow older, it would be quite sufficient because nothing in his
experience would contradict it. Our sense of life as we mature is quite
different, but there is no reason to think that it has any absolute
finality. Perhaps if we lived several hundred years we should acquire
a wholly different sense of life, compared with which all our adult
philosophy would seem quite callow.

The child’s sense of life can be called an illusion only if it is
carried over into manhood, for then it ceases to fit his experience and
to be justified by events. The habits formed in a childish environment
become progressively unworkable and contradictory as the youth is
thrust out from the protection of his family into an adult environment.
Then the infantile conviction that his wants will somehow be met
collides with the fact that he must provide for himself. The world
begins to seem out of joint. The child’s notion that things are to be
had for the asking becomes a vast confusion in which words are treated
as laws, and rhetoric as action. The childish belief that each of us is
the center of an adoring and solicitous universe becomes the source of
endless disappointments because we cannot reconcile what we feel is due
us with what we must resign ourselves to. The sense of the unreality of
evil, which our earliest experience seemed to justify, [p190] becomes
a deep preference for not knowing the truth, an habitual desire to
think of the world as we should prefer it to be; out of this rebellion
against truth, out of this determination that the facts shall conform
to our wishes, are born all manner of bigotry and uncharitableness.
The child’s sense that things do not end, that they are there forever,
becomes, once it is carried over into maturity, a vain and anxious
effort to possess things forever. The incapacity to realize that
the objects of desire will last only a little while makes us put an
extravagant value upon them, and to care for them, not as they are and
for what they can actually give us, but for what we foolishly insist
they ought to be and ought always to give us.

The child’s philosophy rests upon the assumption that the world outside
is in gear with his own appetites. For this reason an adult with a
childish character will ascribe an authority to his appetites which may
easily land him in fanaticism or frustration, in a crazy indulgence
or a miserable starvation. And to the environment he will ascribe a
willingness to conform to him, a capacity to be owned by him, which
land him in all sorts of delusions of grandeur. Only the extreme
cases are in the asylums. The world is full of semi-adult persons who
secretly nurse the notion that they are, or that by rights they ought
to be, Don Juan, Crœsus, Napoleon, or the Messiah.

They have brought with them the notion that they are still as
intimately attached to nature and to society as the child is to its
household. The adult has to break this attachment to persons and
things. His world does not permit him to remain fused with it, but
compels him to stand away from things. For things no longer obey
[p191] his wishes. And therefore he cannot let his wishes become
too deeply involved in things. He can no longer count on possessing
whatever he may happen to want. And therefore he must learn to want
what he can possess. He can no longer hold forever the things at which
he grasps; for they change, and slip away. And therefore he must
learn to hold on to things which do not slip away and change, to hold
on to things not by grasping them, but by understanding them and by
remembering them. Then he is wholly an adult. Then he has conquered
mortality in the only way mortal men can conquer it. For he has ceased
to expect anything of the world which it cannot give, and he has
learned to love it under the only aspect in which it is eternal.


9. _The Function of High Religion_

In the light of this conception of maturity as the ultimate phase
in the development of the human personality, we are, I think, in
a position to understand the riddle which we set ourselves at the
beginning of this chapter. I asked what significance there was for us
in the fact that men have so persistently associated the good life
with some form of ascetic discipline and renunciation. The answer is
that asceticism is an effort to overcome immaturity. When men do not
outgrow their childish desires, they seek to repress them. The ascetic
discipline, if it is successful, is a form of education; if it is
unsuccessful, it is an agonized conflict due to an imperfect education
or an incapacity to grow up. By the same token, moral regulations
imposed on others, insofar as they are at all rational, and not methods
of exploitation or expressions of jealousy, are attempts to curb the
social disorders [p192] which result from the activities of grown-up
children.

It follows that asceticisms and moralities are at best means to an
end; they are more or less inadequate substitutes for the educational
process and the natural growth of wisdom. They are often confused
with virtue, but they are not virtue. For virtue is the quality of
mature desire, and when desire is mature the tortures of renunciations
and of prohibitions have ceased to be necessary. “Blessedness,” says
Spinoza, “is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself; nor should
we rejoice in it for that we restrain our lusts, but, on the contrary,
because we rejoice therein we can restrain our lusts.” The mature
character may be attained by growth and experience and insight, or by
ascetic discipline, or by that process of being reborn which is called
conversion; when it is attained, the moral problem of whether to yield
to impulse or to check it, and how much to check it and how much to
yield, has disappeared. A mature desire is innocent. This, I think, is
the final teaching of the great sages. “To him who has finished the
Path, and passed beyond sorrow, who has freed himself on all sides,
and thrown away every fetter, there is no more fever of grief,” says a
Buddhist writer.

  The Master said,

  “At fifteen I had my mind bent on learning.

  “At thirty, I stood firm.

  “At forty, I had no doubts.

  “At fifty, I knew the decrees of Heaven.

  “At sixty, my ear was an obedient organ for the reception of truth.

  “At seventy, I could follow what my heart desired, without
  transgressing what was right.”

[p193] To be able, as Confucius indicates, to follow what the heart
desires without coming into collision with the stubborn facts of life
is the privilege of the utterly innocent and of the utterly wise. It is
the privilege of the infant and of the sage who stand at the two poles
of experience; of the infant because the world ministers to his heart’s
desire and of the sage because he has learned what to desire. Perhaps
this is what Jesus meant when he told his followers that they must
become like little children.

If this is what he meant, and if this is what Buddha, Confucius, and
Spinoza meant, then we have here the clue to the function of high
religion in human affairs. I venture, at least, to suggest that the
function of high religion is to reveal to men the quality of mature
experience, that high religion is a prophecy and an anticipation of
what life is like when desire is in perfect harmony with reality. It
announces the discovery that men can enter into the realm of the spirit
when they have outgrown all childishness.




