CHAPTER III [p037]

THE LOSS OF CERTAINTY


1. _Ways of Reading the Bible_

It is important to an understanding of this matter that we should not
confuse the modern practice of redefining God with the ancient use of
allegory.

From the earliest days the words of the Bible have been embroidered
with luxuriant and often fantastic meanings. In Leviticus it says,
for example, that the meal offering may be baked in an oven, fried in
a pan, or toasted on a plate. This passage, says Origen, proves that
Scripture must have three meanings. It came to have any number of
meanings. Thus St. Augustine explained that Eden meant the life of the
blessed, and its four rivers the four virtues; farther on in the same
chapter he declares that Eden is the Church, and that its four rivers
are the four Gospels.

In the same manner Wyclif in a later age preached a sermon explaining
the parable of the Good Samaritan. The man who went down from Jerusalem
to Jericho represents Adam and Eve; the robbers are the fiends of hell;
the priest and Levite who went by on the other side are the patriarchs,
saints, and prophets who failed to bring salvation; the Good Samaritan
is Jesus; the wine which he pours into his wounds is sharp words to
prick men from sin, and the oil is hope.... Savonarola, we are [p038]
told, preached during the whole of Lent, 1492, taking as his text
Noah’s Ark and “giving each day a different interpretation of the ten
planks of which the Ark was composed.”

By this method of interpretation the devout adapted the Bible to
their own uses, smoothing away its contradictions and explaining
away passages, like the command in Genesis to kill uncircumcised
children, which, read literally, would have seemed to them barbarous
and immoral. We must be careful, however, not to misunderstand this
method of thought. When they said that the beautiful woman in the Song
of Solomon was the Church, they were not conscious, as we are, that
this is a figure of speech. There had not entered into their habits of
thought the kind of analytical precision in which one thing can mean
only one thing. It is no contradiction to say that the allegory was
taken literally; certainly there was no sense of unreality about it,
as there is for us. “These and similar allegorical interpretations may
be suitably put ...” says St. Augustine, speaking here to the educated
minority, “without giving offense to anyone, while yet we believe the
strict truth of the history confirmed by its circumstantial narrative
of facts.”

But at last men became too analytical and too self-conscious to accept
the naive use of allegory. They realized that allegory was a loose
method of interpretation which lent itself easily to the citing of
scripture in order to justify heresy. If the ten planks in Noah’s Ark
could mean a different set of truths on each day in Lent, there was
no telling what they might come to mean in the end. It was clear,
therefore, that allegory was dangerous [p039] and might, as Luther
said, “degenerate into a mere monkey game”; it was wanton, like “a sort
of beautiful harlot who proves herself spiritually seductive to idle
men.”

This danger was a result of the general loosening of organic
faith which was already evident in Luther’s day. To men who had
the unconscious certainties about God and his universe, allegory
was a perfectly safe method of interpreting the Bible because all
the interpretations, however fantastic, were inspired by the same
pre-judgments and tended therefore to confirm the same convictions. The
allegories of simple men are like many-colored flowers in one garden,
growing from the same soil, watered by the same rains, turning their
faces toward the same sun. But as men became emancipated from their
ancestral way of life, their convictions about God and destiny and
human morality changed. Then the method of allegory ceased to be the
merely exuberant expression of the same ancient truths, and became a
confusing method of rationalizing all kinds of new experiments. It
promoted heresy because men had become heretical, where once, while men
were devout, it had only embroidered their devotions.

“To allegorize is to juggle with Scripture,” said Luther. The
Protestant Reformers could not tolerate that. For they lived in an
age when faith was already disintegrating, and they had themselves
destroyed the authority of an infallible source of religion. “We must,”
wrote Calvin, “entirely reject the allegories of Origen, and of others
like him, which Satan, with the deepest subtlety, has endeavored to
introduce into the Church, for the [p040] purpose of rendering the
doctrine of Scripture ambiguous and destitute of all certainty and
firmness.”

The insistence of the Reformers on a literal interpretation of the
Bible had, as Dr. Fosdick points out, two unforeseen results. It led
to the so-called Higher Criticism which in substance is nothing but a
scientific attempt to find out what the Bible did mean literally to
those who wrote it. And this in turn made it practically impossible for
modern men to believe all that the Bible literally says. When they read
the Bible as allegory they found in it unending confirmation of what
they already believed. But when they read it literally, as history, as
astronomy, and biology, and as a code of laws, it contradicted at many
crucial points the practical working convictions of their daily lives.
“The consequence is,” says Dr. Fosdick, “that we face the Biblical
world made historically vivid over against the modern world presently
experienced, and we cannot use the old method (_i.e._ allegory) of
accommodating one to the other.”


2. _Modernism: Immortality as an Example_

This predicament forced modern churchmen to seek what Dr. Fosdick calls
“a new solution.” They could not believe that the Bible was taken down,
as John Donne put it, by “the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost.” Yet they
believed, as every sane man does, that the Bible contains wisdom which
bears deeply upon the conduct of human life. Their problem was to find
a way of picking and choosing passages in the Scriptures, and then of
interpreting those which were chosen in such a way as to make them
credible to modern men. They had to find some [p041] way of setting
aside the story that God made Eve out of Adam’s rib, that God commanded
the massacre of whole populations, and that he enjoyed the slaughter of
animals at the sacrifice; but they had at the same time to find a way
of preserving for the use of modern men the lessons of the ministry of
Jesus and the promise of life everlasting.

The method they employ is based on a theory. It is a theory that the
Bible contains “abiding messages” placed in a “transient setting.” The
Bible, for example, is full of stories about devils and angels. Now,
modern men do not believe in devils and angels. These are “categories”
which they have outgrown. But what the devils and angels stood for
are evils and blessings which modern men still encounter. We have,
therefore, only to “decode” the Bible, and where it speaks of devils
to see temptations, sin, disease, pain, and suffering, which have a
psychic origin; where it speaks of angels to remember that sense of
unseen friendliness which may help us at a crisis in our lives. The old
wine is still good, but it needs to be put in new bottles. “The modern
preacher’s responsibility is thus to decode the abiding meanings of
Scripture from outgrown phraseology.”

This is not so difficult a thing to do for the devils and the angels.
But a little reflection will show, I think, that in dealing with
the major themes of religion, the solution is not so easy. The real
difficulty appears when Dr. Fosdick attempts to decode the biblical
promise of immortal life.

He begins by rejecting completely the resurrection of the flesh and
any kind of immortality which is imagined as the survival of the
physical person. Yet he believes [p042] in “the persistence of
personality through death.” For he maintains that without this belief
the final victory of death would signify “the triumphant irrationality
of existence”; not to believe in immortality is to submit to “mental
confusion.” Speaking quite frankly, however, he cannot easily imagine
“a completely disembodied existence.” Yet it is obviously not easy to
imagine the persistence of personality through death once you have made
up your mind not to imagine a concrete heaven inhabited by well-defined
persons.

Modern churchmen, like Dean Inge for example, who have faced the
difficulty more boldly than Dr. Fosdick does, arrive at an intelligible
explanation of what they mean by immortality. But they mean something
which is not only very difficult to understand, but extremely difficult
for most men to enjoy when they have understood it. They inject
intelligible meaning into the word “eternal” by employing it in a sense
which is wholly different from that which the common man employs.
By immortality he means life that goes on age after age without
stopping. But the modern churchmen who have really clarified their
minds are platonists. They apply the word “eternal” to that which is
independent of time and existence. Between the two conceptions there
is the profoundest difference, for in the commonsense of the worldling
existence is so precious that he wishes it to continue for ever and
ever. But to the platonist existence, or embodiment, is transient,
accidental, irrational; only that is permanent which is timeless.
Commonsense demands that if we are immortal we should meet our friend
again later and continue our friendship; the platonist [p043] loves
the memory of his friend after death as he loved an ideal image of him
during his life. In communing with his memories and his ideals he knows
himself to be in touch with eternal things. For not even the gods, says
Homer, can undo the past; no accident of mortality can destroy anything
which can be represented in the mind. Heroes die, but that such heroic
deeds were done is a chapter forever, as Mr. Santayana says, in any
complete history of the universe. The thinker dies, but his thoughts
are beyond the reach of destruction. Men are mortal; but ideas are
immortal.

I do not know whether I have known how to state clearly what is meant
by this platonic view to which, in varying degrees of clarity, all
emancipated minds turn when they talk of immortality. But, at least, it
is clear that it is a conception which calls for a radically different
adjustment to life than that to which the worldling is accustomed. He
desires objects to love, goods and successes that are perishable, and
he wishes them not to perish. Before he can enter the platonic world,
before he can even attain to a hint of its meaning, he must abandon the
very desires of which his hope of immortality is the expression. He
must detach himself from his wish to acquire and possess objects that
die; he must learn what it means to possess things not by holding them,
but by understanding them, and to enjoy them as objects of reflection.
He must not only cease to desire immortality as he conceives it, but
the material embodiment of things as well. Then only, when he has
renounced his love of existence, can he begin to love the forms of
existence, and to live among imperishable ideas. [p044] Then, and in
this sense only, does he enter into eternal life.

The ordinary man, when he hears this doctrine expounded, is almost
certain to say with the Indian sage: “the worship of the Impersonal
laid no hold upon my heart.” His heart is set on the enjoyment of
worldly goods, and the doctrine, for all but a few exceptional spirits,
requires a radical change of heart. It is forbidding except to the few
in whom “the intellect (is) passionate and the passions cold.” For it
demands a conversion of their natural desire to possess tangible things
into a passion to understand intangible and abstract things. This
philosophy is ascetic, unworldly, and profoundly disinterested.

Now it can be argued that this is precisely what the Gospels teach as
to the meaning of salvation. Excellent authority can be cited from the
Gospel of John and the Epistles of St. Paul to justify this form of
the Christian tradition: “Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom
of God” ... “the things that are seen are temporal, but the things
that are not seen are eternal” ... “I see another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind.” It can hardly be denied, as Dean
Inge says, that “we are able to carry back to the fountain-head that
Christian tradition” which may quite accurately be described as the
religion of the spirit. But mixed with it in the Scripture, there is
the other tradition, the popular tradition which may be called the
religion of commonsense. Out of this latter have grown the institutions
of the church and the faith of the mass of men. The religion of the
spirit has been reserved for a few, “a succession [p045] of lives
which have been sheltered rather than inspired by the machinery and
statecraft of a mighty institution,” and while the few who lived the
life of the spirit have undoubtedly done much to inspire the popular
religion with new insight, they have been, on the whole, a group apart.

Yet those who belonged to these two distinct traditions did use the
same churches and the same symbolism. There was an even deeper bond of
unity between them. Both believed that renunciation and self-discipline
are the way of salvation—in the religion of the spirit as the way to
enter now into love of eternal things; in the religion of commonsense
as a rather heavy price paid to God in return for everlasting happiness
after death. It may be argued, therefore, by churchmen like Dr.
Fosdick, that the “abiding message” of the Bible about immortality is
that men must renounce the world in order to win eternity. That some
men mean by eternity a kind of perpetual motion and others a kind of
abstraction is merely a difference in their habits of thought, and does
not impair the validity or the importance of the central experience. If
they will renounce their worldly passions, they will find what the idea
of eternity has to give, no matter what they imagine it to mean.

But although Dr. Fosdick implies that this solves the difficulty, it
can be shown, I believe, that it does not. What he has succeeded in
doing is to disentangle from the Bible a meaning for immortality which
has a noble tradition behind it and is at the same time intellectually
possible for a modern man. But the history of religion ought to put
us on guard against assuming too easily [p046] that a statement of
the purest truth is in itself capable of affecting the lives of any
considerable number of people. Dean Inge, who is a very much more
clear-headed churchman, says quite frankly that “a religion succeeds,
not because it is true, but because it suits the worshippers.” Merely
to tell men, however fervently, that they may conquer mortality by
renouncing the flesh, will not go far toward persuading many of them
to renounce the flesh. There must be, as there has been in all the
historic religions, something more than a statement of the moral law.
There must be a psychological machinery for enforcing the moral law.

For those who are suited to the religion of the spirit no machinery is
needed. But for the mass of men who are not naturally suited to it,
a machinery which compels this conversion is indispensable. Jesus in
his time, and Gautama Buddha before him, taught a moral law which was
addressed to those who could receive it. They were not many. Buddhism
and Christianity became world religions centuries after the death of
their founders, and only when there had been added to the central
message a great organized method of teaching it.

The essence of such an organization is the title to say with apostolic
certainty that the message is true. Churchmen, like Dr. Fosdick, can
make no such claim about their message. They reject revelation. They
reject the authority of any church to speak directly for God. They
reject the literal inspiration of the Bible. They reject altogether
many parts of the Bible as not only uninspired, but false and
misleading. They do not believe in God as a lawgiver, judge, father,
and spectator of human life. [p047] When they say that this or that
message in the Bible is “permanently valid,” they mean only that in
their judgment, according to their reading of human experience, it is
a well-tested truth. To say this is not merely to deny that the Bible
is authoritative in astronomy and biology; it is to deny equally that
it is authoritative as to what is good and bad for men. The Bible thus
becomes no more than a revered collection of hypotheses which each man
may reject or accept in the light of his own knowledge.

The lessons may still be true. But they are robbed of their certainty.
Each man is thrown back upon his own resources; he is denied the
support which all popular religion offers him, the conviction that
outside himself there is a power on which he can and must lean for
guidance. In the ancient faith a man said: “I believe this on the
authority of an all-wise God.” In the new faith he is in effect
compelled to say: “I have examined the alleged pronouncements of an
all-knowing God; some of them are obviously untrue, some are rather
repulsive, others, however, if they are properly restated, I find to be
exceedingly good.”

Something quite fundamental is left out of the modernist creeds. At
least something which has hitherto been quite fundamental is left
out. That something is the most abiding of all the experiences of
religion, namely, the conviction that the religion comes from God.
Suppose it were true, which it plainly is not, that Dr. Fosdick by his
process of selection and decoding has retained “precisely the thing
at which the Bible was driving.” Still he would be without the thing
on which popular religion [p048] has been founded. For the Bible to
our ancestors was not simply, as he implies, a book of wisdom. It was
a book of wisdom backed by the power of God himself. That is not an
inconsiderable difference. It is all the difference there is between a
pious resolution and a moral law.

The Bible, as men formerly accepted it, contained wisdom _certified_
by the powers that govern the universe. It did not merely contain many
well-tested truths, similar in kind to those which are to be found in
Plato, Aristotle, Montaigne, and Bernard Shaw. It contained truths
which could not be doubted because they had been spoken by God through
his prophets and his Son. They could not be wrong. But once it is
allowed that each man may select from the Bible as he sees fit, judging
each passage by his own notions of what is “abiding,” you have stripped
the Scriptures of their authority to command men’s confidence and to
compel their obedience. The Scriptures may still inspire respect. But
they are disarmed.


3. _What Modernism Leaves Out_

Many reasons have been adduced to explain why people do not go to
church as much as they once did. Surely the most important reason is
that they are not so certain that they are going to meet God when they
go to church. If they had that certainty they would go. If they really
believed that they were being watched by a Supreme Being who is more
powerful than all the kings of earth put together, if they really
believed that not only their actions but their secret thoughts were
known and would be remembered by the creator and ultimate judge of the
[p049] universe, there would be no complaint whatever about church
attendance. The most worldly would be in the front pews, and preachers
would not have to resort so often to their rather desperate expedients
to attract an audience. If the conviction were there that the creed
professed was invincibly true, the modern congregation would not come
to church, as they usually do to-day, to hear the preacher and to
listen to the music. They would come to worship God.

Religious professions will not work when they rest merely on a kind of
passive assent; or on intricate reasoning, or on fierce exhortation, or
on a good-natured conspiracy to be vague and highflown. A man cannot
cheat about faith. Either he has it in the marrow of his bones, or in
a crisis, when he is distracted and in sorrow, there is no conviction
there to support him. Without complete certainty religion does not
offer genuine consolation. It is without the strength to compensate
our weakness. Nor can it sanction the rules of morality. Ethical codes
cannot lay claim to unhesitating obedience when they are based upon the
opinions of a majority, or on the notions of wise men, or on estimates
of what is socially useful, or on an appeal to patriotism. For they
depend then on the force which happens to range itself behind them at a
particular time; or on their convenience for a moment. They are felt to
be the outcome of human, and therefore quite fallible, decisions. They
are no necessary part of the government of the universe. They were not
given by God to Moses on Sinai. They are not the commandments of God
speaking through his Infallible Church.

A human morality has no such sanction as a divine. [p050] The
sanction of a divine morality is the certainty of the believer that it
originated with God. But if he has once come to think that the rule of
conduct has a purely human, local, and temporal origin, its sanction is
gone. His obedience is transformed, as ours has been by knowledge of
that sort, from conviction to conformity or calculated expediency.

Without certainty there can be no profound sense that a man’s own
purpose has become part of the purpose of the whole creation. It
is necessary to believe in a God who is active in the world before
a man can feel himself to be, as St. Paul said, “a fellow laborer”
with God. Yet this sense of partnership with a Person who transcends
the individual’s own life, his own ego, and his own capacities, is
fundamental in all popular religion. It underlies all the other
elements of religion. For in the certainty that he is enlisted with
God, man finds not only comfort in defeat, not only an ideal of
holiness which persuades him to renounce his immediate desires, but an
ecstatic mobilizing of all his scattered energies in one triumphant
sense of his own infinite importance.




