CHAPTER XIII [p260]

GOVERNMENT IN THE GREAT SOCIETY


1. _Loyalty_

The difficulty of discovering an industrial philosophy which fits
machine industry on a large scale has proved less trying than the
discovery of a political philosophy which fits the modern state. I do
not know why this should be so unless it be that, as compared with
politicians, business men have had a closer opportunity to observe
and more pressing reasons for trying to understand the transformation
wrought by machinery and scientific invention. Certainly even the best
political thinking is notably inferior in realism and in pertinence
to the economic thinking which now plays so important a part in the
direction of industry. To a very considerable degree the writer on
politics to-day is about where the economist was when all economic
theory began and for all practical purposes seemed to end with Robinson
Crusoe and his man Friday. Nobody takes political science very
seriously, for nobody is convinced that it is a science or that it has
any important bearing on politics.

In very considerable measure political theory in the modern world
is sterilized by its own ideas. There have been passed down from
generation to generation a collection of concepts which are so hallowed
and so dense that their only use is to excite emotions and to obscure
insight. [p261] How many of us really know what we are talking
about when we use words like the state, sovereignty, independence,
democracy, representative government, national honor, liberty, and
loyalty? Very few of us, I think, could define any of these terms
under cross-examination, though we are prepared to shed blood, or at
least ink, in their behalf. These terms have ceased to be intellectual
instruments for apprehending the facts we have to deal with and have
become push buttons which touch off emotional reflexes.

As good a way as any to raise the temperature of political debate is to
talk about loyalty. Everybody regards himself as loyal and resents any
imputation upon his loyalty, yet even a cursory inspection of this term
will show, I think, that it may mean any number of different things.
It is clearest when used in a military sense. A loyal soldier is one
who obeys his superior officer. A loyal officer is one who obeys his
commander-in-chief. But just exactly what is a loyal commander-in-chief
cannot be told so easily. He is loyal to the nation. He is loyal to the
best interests of the nation. But what those best interests may be,
whether they mean making peace or carrying the war into the enemy’s
country, is an exceedingly debatable question. When the citizen’s
loyalty is in question the whole matter becomes immensely subtle. Must
he be loyal to every law and every command issued by the established
authorities, kings, legislators, and aldermen? There are many who would
say that this is the definition of civic loyalty, to obey the law
without qualifications while it is a law. But such definition puts the
taint of disloyalty on almost all citizens [p262] of the modern state.
For the fact is that all the laws on the books are not even known, and
that a considerable portion are entirely disregarded, and many it is
impossible to obey. The definition, moreover, places outside the pale
many who rank as great patriots, men who defied the law out of loyalty
to some principle which the lawmakers have rejected. But what makes
matters even more complicated is the fact that in modern communities
the principle is accepted that the commands of the established
authorities not only may be criticized but that they ought to be.

At this stage of political development the military element in
loyalty has virtually disappeared. The idea of toleration, of freedom
of speech, and above all the idea of organized opposition, alters
radically the attributes of the sovereign. For a sovereign who has to
be obeyed but not believed in, whose decisions are legitimate matters
of dispute, who may be displaced by his bitterest opponents, has lost
all semblance of omnipotence and omniscience. “He has sovereignty,”
wrote Jean Bodin, “who, after God, acknowledges no one greater than
himself.” Our governors command only for the time being—and within
strict limits. Their authority is only such as they can win and hold.
Political loyalty under these conditions, whatever else it may be,
is certainly not unqualified allegiance to those who hold office, to
the policies they pursue, or even to the laws they enact. Neither the
government as it exists, nor its conduct, nor even the constitution by
which it operates, exercises any ultimate claim upon the loyalty of the
citizen. The most one can say, I think, is that the loyal citizen is
one who loves his country and regards the status quo as an arrangement
which he [p263] is at liberty to modify only by argument, according to
well-understood rules, without violence, and with due regard for the
interests and opinions of his fellow men. If he is loyal to this ideal
of political conduct he is as loyal as the modern state can force him
to be, or as it is desirable that he should be.


2. _The Evolution of Loyalty_

Broadly speaking, the evolution of political loyalty passes through
three phases. In the earliest, the most primitive, and for almost all
men the most natural, loyalty is allegiance to a chieftain; in the
middle phase it tends to become allegiance to an institution—that is
to say, to a corporate, rather than to a human, personality; and in the
last phase it becomes allegiance to a pattern of conduct. The kind of
government which any community is capable of operating is very largely
determined by the kind of loyalty of which its members are capable.

It is plain, for example, that among a people who are capable only of
loyalty to another human being the political system is bound to take
the shape of a hierarchy, in which each man is loyal to his superior,
and the man at the top is loyal to God alone. Such a society will be
feudal, military, theocratic. If it is successfully organized it will
be an ordered despotism, culminating, as the feudal system did, in
God’s Vice-gerent on earth. If it is unsuccessfully organized, as for
example, in the more backward countries of Central America to-day,
the system of personal allegiances will produce little factions each
with its chief, all of them contending for, without quite achieving,
absolute power. This type of organization is so fundamentally [p264]
human that it prevails even in communities which think they have
outgrown it. Thus it appears in what Americans call a political
machine, which is nothing but a hierarchy of professional politicians
held together by profitable personal loyalties. The political boss
is a demilitarized chieftain in the direct line of descent from his
prototypes.

The modern world has come to regard organization on the basis of human
allegiances as alien and dangerous. Yet the political machine exists
even in the most advanced communities. The reason for that is obvious.
With the enfranchisement of virtually the whole adult population,
political power has passed into the hands of a great mass of people
most of whom are altogether incapable of loyalty to institutions,
much less to ideas. They do not understand them. For these voters
the only kind of political behavior is through allegiance to a human
superior, and modern democracies are considered fortunate if the
political leaders and bosses on whom these human allegiances converge
are relatively loyal to the institutions of the country. This, for
example, is the meaning of the dramatic speech in which President
Calles on September 1, 1928, voluntarily renounced the continuation of
his own dictatorship. “For the first time in Mexican history,” he said,
“the Republic faces a situation (owing to the assassination of General
Obregon) whose dominant note is the lack of a military leader, which
is going to make it finally possible for us to direct the policy of
the country into truly institutional channels, striving to pass once
for all from our historical condition of one-man rule to the higher,
more dignified, more useful, and more civilized condition of a nation
of laws and institutions.” It is [p265] hardly to be supposed that
President Calles thought that the Mexican people as a whole could pass
once for all from their historical condition of one-man rule. What he
meant was that the political chieftains to whom the people were loyal
ought thereafter to arrange the succession and to exercise power not
as seemed desirable to them, or as they might imagine that God had
privately commanded them, but in accordance with objective rules of
political conduct.

The conceptions of sovereignty which we inherit are derived from the
primitive system of personal allegiances. That is why the conception
of sovereignty has become increasingly confused as modern civilization
has become more complex. In the Middle Ages the theory reached its
symmetrical perfection. Mankind was conceived as a great organism in
which the spiritual and temporal hierarchies were united as the soul
is united with the body in “an inseverable connection and an unbroken
interaction which must display itself in every part and also throughout
the whole.” But of course even in the Middle Ages the symmetry of this
conception was marred by the fierce disputes between the Emperors and
the Popes. After the Sixteenth Century the whole conception began to
disintegrate. There appeared a congeries of monarchs each claiming to
rule in his territory by divine right. But obviously when there are
many agents of the Lord ruling men, and when they do not agree, the
theory of sovereignty in its moral aspects is in grave difficulties.

As time went on, limitations of all kinds began to be imposed upon
sovereigns. The existence at the same time of many sovereigns produced
the need of international law, for obviously there could have been no
international [p266] law in a world where all of mankind, barring
infidels who did not have to be considered, were under one sovereign
power. The limitations imposed by international law from without were
accompanied by limitations imposed from within.

These limitations from within were based on quite practical
considerations. There grew up slowly in the Middle Ages the idea
that the State originated “in a contract of Subjection made between
People and Ruler.” The first modern writer to argue effectively that
government was based not on a warrant from the Lord, but on a “social
compact” is said to have been Richard Hooker, a clergyman of the
Established Church, who held, in 1594, that the royal authority was
derived from a contract between the king and the people. This idea
soon became popular, for it suited the needs of all those who did not
participate in the privileges of the absolute monarchy. It suited not
only the Church of England, when as in Hooker’s time it was assailed,
but also the dissenting churches, and then the rising middle class
whose ambitions were frustrated by the landed nobles with the king at
their head. The doctrine of the social compact was expounded in many
different forms in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries by men like
Milton, Spinoza, Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau.

As an historical theory to explain the origin of human society it
is of course demonstrably false, but as a weapon for breaking up
the concentration of sovereign power and distributing it, the idea
has played a mighty role in history. It is almost certain to appear
wherever there is an absolutism which men feel the need of checking.
But the [p267] theory of the social compact disappears when power
has become so widely diffused that no one can any longer locate
the sovereign. That is what is happening in the advanced modern
communities. The sovereign, whom it was once desirable to put under
contract, has become so anonymous and diffuse that his very existence
to-day is a legal fiction rather than a political fact. And loyalty
by the same token is no longer provided with a personal superior of
indubitable prestige to which it can be attached.


3. _Pluralism_

The relationship between lord and vassals in which each man attaches
himself for better or worse to some superior person tends gradually to
disappear in the modern world. Its passing was somewhat prematurely
announced by the Declaration of the Rights of Man; it did not wholly
disappear by the dissolution of the bonds which bound one man to
another, for the psychological bonds are stronger than the legal.
Nevertheless the effect of modern civilization is to dissolve these
psychological bonds, to break up clannishness and personal dependence.
Men and women alike tend to become more or less independent persons
rather than to remain members of a social organism.

The reason for this lies in the diversification of their interests.
Life in the ancestral order was not only simpler and contained within
narrower limits than it is to-day, but there was a far greater unity
in the activity of each individual. Working the land, fighting,
raising a family, worshipping, were so closely related that they could
be governed by a very simple allegiance to the chief of the tribe
[p268] or the lord of the manor. In the modern world this synthesis
has disintegrated and the activities of a man cannot be directed by a
simple allegiance. Each man finds himself the center of a complex of
loyalties. He is loyal to his government, he is loyal to his state, he
is loyal to his village, he is loyal to his neighborhood. He has his
own family. He has his wife’s family. His wife has her family. He has
his church. His wife may have a different church. He may be an employer
of thousands of men. He may be an employee. He must be loyal to his
corporation, to his trade union, or his professional society. He is
a buyer in many different markets. He is a seller in many different
markets. He is a creditor and a debtor. He owns shares in several
industries. He belongs to a political party, to clubs, to a social set.
The multiplicity of his interests makes it impossible for him to give
his whole allegiance to any person or to any institution.

It may be, in fact for most men it must be, that in each of these
associations he follows a leader. In any considerable number of people
it is certain that they will group themselves in hierarchical form.
In every club, in every social circle, in every trade union, in every
stockholders’ meeting there are leaders and their lieutenants and the
led. But these allegiances are partial. Because a man has so many
loyalties each loyalty commands only a segment of himself. They are
not, therefore, whole-hearted loyalties like that of a good soldier
to his captain. They are qualified, calculated, debatable, and they
are sanctioned not by inherent authority but by expediency or inertia.
[p269]

The outward manifestation of these complex loyalties of the modern man
is the multitude of institutions through which the affairs of mankind
are directed. Now since each of these corporate entities represents
only a part of any man’s interest, except perhaps in the case of the
paid executive secretary, none of these institutions can count to the
bitter end upon the undivided loyalty of all its members. The conflicts
between institutions are in considerable measure conflicts of interest
within the same individuals. There is a point where the activity of a
man’s trade union may so seriously affect the value of the securities
he owns that he does not know which way his interest lies. The
criss-crossing of loyalties is so great in an advanced community that
no grouping is self-contained. No grouping, therefore, can maintain a
military discipline or a military character. For when men strive too
fiercely as members of any one group they soon find that they are at
war with themselves as members of another group.

The statement that modern society is pluralistic cannot, then, be
dismissed as a newfangled notion invented by theorists. It is a sober
description of the actual facts. Each man has countless interests
through which he is attached to a very complex social situation.
The complexity of his allegiance cannot fail to be reflected in his
political conduct.


4. _Live and Let Live_

One of the inevitable effects of being attached to many different,
somewhat conflicting, interdependent groupings is to blunt the edges
of partisanship. It is possible to [p270] be fiercely partisan only
as against those who are wholly alien. It is a fair generalization to
say that the fiercest Democrats are to be found where there are the
fewest Republicans, the most bloodthirsty patriots in the safest swivel
chairs. Where men are personally entangled with the groups that are
in potential conflict, where Democrats and Republicans belong to the
same country club and where Protestants and Catholics marry each other,
it is psychologically impossible to be sharply intolerant. That is
why astute directors of corporations adopt the policy of distributing
their securities as widely as they can; they know quite well that
even the most modest shareholder is in some measure insulated against
anti-corporate agitation. It is inherent in the complex pluralism of
the modern world that men should behave moderately, and experience
amply confirms this conclusion.

There is little doubt that in the great metropolitan centers there
exists a disposition to live and let live, to give and take, to agree
and to agree to differ, which is not to be found in simple homogeneous
communities. In complex communities life quickly becomes intolerable if
men are intolerant. For they are in daily contact with almost everybody
and everything they could conceivably wish to persecute. Their victims
would be their customers, their employees, their landlords, their
tenants and perhaps their wives’ relations. But in a simple community
a kind of pastoral intolerance for everything alien adds a quaint
flavor to living. For the most part it vents itself in the open air.
The terrible indictments drawn up in a Mississippi village against the
Pope in Rome, the Russian nation, the vices of Paris, and the [p271]
enormities of New York are in the main quite lyrical. The Pope may
never even know what the Mississippi preacher thinks of him and New
York continues to go to, but never apparently to reach, hell.

When an agitator wishes to start a crusade, a religious revival, an
inquisition, or some sort of jingo excitement, the further he goes from
the centers of modern civilization the more following he can attract.
It is in the backwoods and in the hill country, in kitchens and in
old men’s clubs, that fanaticism can be kindled. The urban crowd, if
it has been urban for any length of time and has become used to its
environment, may be fickle, faddish, nervous, unstable, but it lacks
the concentration of energy to become fiercely excited for any length
of time about anything. At its worst it is a raging mob, but it is
not persistently fanatical. There are too many things to attract its
attention for it to remain preoccupied for long with any one thing.

To responsible men of affairs the complexity of modern civilization is
a daily lesson in the necessity of not pressing any claim too far, of
understanding opposing points of view, of seeking to reconcile them, of
conducting matters so that there is some kind of harmony in a plural
society. This accounts, I think, for the increasing use of political
devices which are wholly unknown in simpler societies. There is, for
example, the ideal of a civil service. It is wholly modern and it is
quite revolutionary. For it assumes that a great deal of the business
of the state can and must be carried on by a class of men who have no
personal and no party allegiance, who are in fact neutral in politics
and concerned only with the execution [p272] of a task. I know how
imperfectly the civil service works, but that it should exist at all,
and that the ideal it embodies should be generally acknowledged,
is profound testimony as to how inherent in the modern situation
is the concept of disinterestedness. The theory of an independent
judiciary arises out of the same need for disinterested judgment.
Even more significant, perhaps, is the use in all political debates
of the evidence of technicians, experts, and neutral investigators.
The statesman who imagined he had thought up a solution for a social
problem while he was in his bath would be a good deal of a joke; even
if he had stumbled on a good idea, he would not dare to commit himself
to it without elaborate preliminary surveys, investigations, hearings,
conferences, and the like.

Men occupying responsible posts in the Great Society have become aware,
in short, that their guesses and their prejudices are untrustworthy,
and that successful decisions can be made only in a neutral spirit by
comparing their hypotheses with their understanding of reality.


5. _Government in the People_

It has been the cause of considerable wonder to many persons that the
most complex modern communities, where the old loyalties are most
completely dissolved, where authority has so little prestige, where
moral codes are held in such small esteem, should nevertheless have
proved to be far more impervious to the strain of war and revolution
than the older and simpler types of civilization. It has been Russia,
China, Poland, Italy, Spain, rather than England, Germany, Belgium,
and the United States which have been most disorderly in the post-war
[p273] period. The contrary might have been expected. It might well
have been anticipated that the highly organized, delicately poised
social mechanisms would disintegrate the most easily.

Yet it is now evident why modern civilization is so durable. Its
strength lies in its sensitiveness. The effect of bad decisions is
so quickly felt, the consequences are so inescapably serious, that
corrective action is almost immediately set in motion. A simple society
like Russia can let its railroads go gradually to wrack and ruin, but
a complex society like London or New York is instantly disorganized
if the railroads do not run on schedule. So many persons are at once
affected in so many vitally important ways that remedies have to be
found immediately. This does not mean that modern states are governed
as wisely as they should be, or that they do not neglect much that they
cannot really afford to neglect. They blunder along badly enough in all
conscience. There is nevertheless a minimum of order and of necessary
services which they have to provide for themselves. They have to keep
going. They cannot afford the luxury of prolonged disorder or of a
general paralysis. Their own necessities are dependent on such fragile
structures, and everyone is so much affected, that when a modern state
is in trouble it can draw upon incomparable reserves of public spirit.

“I made ninety-one local committees in ninety-one local communities to
look after the Mississippi flood,” Mr. Hoover once explained, “that’s
what I principally did.... You say: ‘a couple of thousand refugees are
coming. They’ve got to have accommodations. Huts. [p274] Water-mains.
Sewers. Streets. Dining-halls. Meals. Doctors. Everything.’... So
you go away and they go ahead and just simply do it. Of all those
ninety-one committees there was just one that fell down.” Mr. Hard,
who reports these remarks, goes on to make Mr. Hoover say that: “No
other Main Street in the world could have done what the American
Main Street did in the Mississippi flood; and Europe may jeer as it
pleases at our mass production and our mass organization and our mass
education. The safety of the United States is its multitudinous mass
leadership.” Allowing for the fact that these remarks appeared in a
campaign biography at a time when Mr. Hoover’s friends were rather
concerned about demonstrating the intensity of his patriotism, there
is nevertheless substantial truth in them. I am inclined to believe
that “multitudinous mass leadership” will be found wherever industrial
society is firmly established, that is to say, wherever a people has
lived with the machine process long enough to acquire the aptitudes
that it calls for. This capacity to organize, to administer affairs,
to deal realistically with necessity, can hardly be due to some
congenital superiority in the American people. They are, after all
only transplanted Europeans. That their aptitudes may be somewhat more
highly developed is not, however, inconceivable: the new civilization
may have developed more freely in a land where it did not have to
contend with the institutions of a military, feudal, and clerical
society.

The essential point is that as the machine technology makes social
relations complex, it dissolves the habits of obedience and dependence;
it disintegrates the centralization [p275] of power and of leadership;
it diffuses the experience of responsible decision throughout the
population, compelling each man to acquire the habit of making
judgments instead of looking for orders, of adjusting his will to the
wills of others instead of trusting to custom and organic loyalties.
The real law under which modern society is administered is neither the
accumulated precedents of tradition nor a set of commands originating
on high which are imposed like orders in an army upon the rank and file
below. The real law in the modern state is the multitude of little
decisions made daily by millions of men.

Because this is so, the character of government is changing radically.
This change is obscured for us in our theorizing by the fact that our
political ideas derive from a different kind of social experience.
We think of governing as the act of a person; for the actual king we
have tried to substitute a corporate king, which we call the nation,
the people, the majority, public opinion, or the general will. But
none of these entities has the attributes of a king, and the failure
of political thinking to lay the ghosts of monarchy leads to endless
misunderstanding. The crucial difference between modern politics and
that to which mankind has been accustomed is that the power to act and
to compel obedience is almost never sufficiently centralized nowadays
to be exercised by one will. The power is distributed and qualified so
that power is exerted not by command but by interaction.

The prime business of government, therefore, is not to direct the
affairs of the community, but to harmonize the direction which the
community gives to its affairs. [p276] The Congress of the United
States, for example, does not consult the conscience and its God and
then decree a tariff law. It enacts the kind of tariff which at the
moment represents the most stable compromise among the interests which
have made themselves heard. The law may be outrageously unfair. But if
it is, that is because those whose interests are neglected did not at
that time have the power to make themselves felt. If the law favors
manufacturers rather than farmers, it is because the manufacturers
at that time have greater weight in the social equilibrium than the
farmers. That may sound hard. But it is doubtful whether a modern
legislature can make laws effective if those laws are not the formal
expression of what the persons actually affected can and wish to do.

The amount of law is relatively small which a modern legislature can
successfully impose. The reason for this is that unless the enforcement
of the law is taken in hand by the citizenry, the officials as such
are quite helpless. It is possible to enforce the law of contracts,
because the injured party will sue; it is possible to enforce the law
against burglary, because almost everybody will report a burglary to
the police. But it is not possible to enforce the old-fashioned speed
laws on the highways because the police are too few and far between,
the pedestrians are uninterested, and motorists like to speed. There is
here a very fundamental principle of modern lawmaking: insofar as a law
depends upon the initiative of officials in detecting violations and in
prosecuting, that law will almost certainly be difficult to enforce. If
a considerable part of the population is hostile to the law, and if the
[p277] majority has only a platonic belief in it, the law will surely
break down. For what gives law reality is not that it is commanded by
the sovereign but that it brings the organized force of the state to
the aid of those citizens who believe in the law.

What the government really does is not to rule men, but to add
overwhelming force to men when they rule their affairs. The passage
of a law is in effect a promise that the police, the courts, and the
officials will defend and enforce certain rights when citizens choose
to exercise them. For all practical purposes this is just as true when
what was once a private wrong to be redressed by private action in law
courts on proof of specific injury has been made by statute a public
wrong which is preventable and punishable by administrative action.
When the citizens are no longer interested in preventing or punishing
specific instances of what the statute declares is a public wrong, the
statute becomes a dead letter. The principle is most obviously true in
the case of a sumptuary law like prohibition. The reason prohibition
is unenforceable in the great cities is that the citizens will not
report the names and addresses of their bootleggers to the prohibition
officials. But the principle is no less true in less obvious cases,
as, for example, in tariffs or laws to regulate railroads. Thus it is
difficult to enforce the tariff law on jewels, for they are easily
smuggled. Insofar as the law is enforced it is because jewelers find
it profitable to maintain an organization which detects smuggling.
Because they know the ins and outs of the trade, and have men in all
the jewelry markets of the world who have an interest in catching
smugglers, it is possible for the United [p278] States Government to
make a fair showing in administering the law. The government cannot
from hour to hour inspect all the transactions of its people, and
any law which rests on the premise that government can do this is
a foolish law. The railroad laws are enforced because shippers are
vigilant. The criminal laws depend upon how earnestly citizens object
to certain kinds of crime. In fact it may be said that laws which make
certain kinds of conduct illicit are effective insofar as the breach
of these laws arouses the citizenry to call in the police and to take
the trouble to help the police. It is not enough that the mass of the
population should be law-abiding. A minority can stultify the law if
the population as a whole is not also law-enforcing.

This is the real sense in which it can be said that power in the modern
state resides not in the government but in the people. As that phrase
is usually employed it alleges that ‘the people,’ as articulated by
elected officials, can govern by command as the monarch or tribal
chieftain once governed. In this sense government by the people is a
delusion. What we have among advanced communities is something that
might perhaps be described as government in the people. The naively
democratic theory was that out of the mass of the voters there arose a
cloud of wills which ascended to heaven, condensed into a thunderbolt,
and then smote the people. It was supposed that the opinion of masses
of persons somehow became the opinion of a corporate person called The
People, and that this corporate person then directed human affairs like
a monarch. But that is not what happens. Government is in the people
and stays there. Government is [p279] their multitudinous decisions in
concrete situations, and what officials do is to assist and facilitate
this process of governing. Effective laws may be said to register an
understanding among those concerned by which the law-abiding know
what to expect and what is expected of them; they are insured with
all the force that the state commands against the disruption of this
understanding by the recalcitrant minority. In the modern state a law
which does not register the inward assent of most of those who are
affected will have very little force as against the breakers of that
law. For it is only by that inward assent that power becomes mobilized
to enforce the law. The government in the person of its officials, its
paltry inspectors and policemen, has relatively little power of its
own. It derives its power from the people in amounts which vary with
the circumstances of each law. That is why the same government may act
with invincible majesty in one place and with ludicrous futility in
another.


6. _Politicians and Statesmen_

The role of the leader would be easier to define if it were agreed
to give separate meanings to two very common words. I mean the words
“politician” and “statesman.” In popular usage a vague distinction
is recognized: to call a man a statesman is eulogy, to call him a
politician is to be, however faintly, disparaging. The dictionary, in
fact, defines a politician as one who seeks to subserve the interests
of a political party _merely_; as an afterthought it defines him as
one skilled in political science: a statesman. And in defining a
statesman the [p280] dictionary says that he is a political leader of
distinguished ability.

These definitions can, I think, be improved upon by clarifying the
meanings which are vaguely intended in popular usage. When we think
offhand of a politician we think of a man who works for a partial
interest. At the worst it is his own pocket. At the best it may be
his party, his class, or an institution with which he is identified.
We never feel that he can or will take into account all the interests
concerned, and because bias and partisanship are the qualities of
his conduct, we feel, unless we are naively afflicted with the same
bias, that he is not to be trusted too far. Now the word ‘statesman,’
when it is not mere pomposity, connotes a man whose mind is elevated
sufficiently above the conflict of contending parties to enable him to
adopt a course of action which takes into account a greater number of
interests in the perspective of a longer period of time. It is some
such conception as this that Edmund Burke had in mind when he wrote
that the state “ought not to be considered as nothing better than a
partnership in a trade of pepper and coffee, calico or tobacco, or
some other such low concern, to be taken up for a little temporary
interest and to be dissolved by the fancy of the parties.... It is a
partnership in a higher and more permanent sense—a partnership in all
science; a partnership in all art; a partnership in every virtue and in
all perfection. As the ends of such a partnership cannot be obtained
in many generations it becomes a partnership not only between those
who are living, but between those who are dead and those who are to be
born.” [p281]

The politician, then, is a man who seeks to attain the special objects
of particular interests. If he is the leader of a political party he
will try either to purchase the support of particular interests by
specific pledges, or if that is impracticable, he will employ some
form of deception. I include under the term ‘deception’ the whole art
of propaganda, whether it consists of half-truths, lies, ambiguities,
evasions, calculated silence, red herrings, unresponsiveness, slogans,
catchwords, showmanship, bathos, hokum, and buncombe. They are, one and
all, methods of preventing a disinterested inquiry into the situation.
I do not say that any one can be elected to office without employing
deception, though I am inclined to think that there is a new school of
political reporters in the land who with a kind of beautiful cruelty
are making it rather embarrassing for politicians to employ their old
tricks. A man may have to be a politician to be elected when there is
adult suffrage, and it may be that statesmanship, in the sense in which
I am using the term, cannot occupy the whole attention of any public
man. It is true at least that it never does.

The reason for this is that in order to hold office a man must array in
his support a varied assortment of persons with all sorts of confused
and conflicting purposes. When then, it may be asked, does he begin to
be a statesman? He begins whenever he stops trying merely to satisfy or
to obfuscate the momentary wishes of his constituents, and sets out to
make them realize and assent to those hidden interests of theirs which
are permanent because they fit the facts and can be harmonized with the
interests of their neighbors. The politician says: “I [p282] will give
you what you want.” The statesman says: “What you think you want is
this. What it is possible for you to get is that. What you really want,
therefore, is the following.” The politician stirs up a following; the
statesman leads it. The politician, in brief, accepts unregenerate
desire at its face value and either fulfills it or perpetrates a fraud;
the statesman re-educates desire by confronting it with the reality,
and so makes possible an enduring adjustment of interests within the
community.

The chief element in the art of statesmanship under modern conditions
is the ability to elucidate the confused and clamorous interests which
converge upon the seat of government. It is an ability to penetrate
from the naive self-interest of each group to its permanent and real
interest. It is a difficult art which requires great courage, deep
sympathy, and a vast amount of information. That is why it is so rare.
But when a statesman is successful in converting his constituents from
a childlike pursuit of what seems interesting to a realistic view of
their interests, he receives a kind of support which the ordinary glib
politician can never hope for. Candor is a bitter pill when first it is
tasted but it is full of health, and once a man becomes established in
the public mind as a person who deals habitually and successfully with
real things, he acquires an eminence of a wholly different quality from
that of even the most celebrated caterer to the popular favor. His hold
on the people is enduring because he promises nothing which he cannot
achieve; he proposes nothing which turns out to be a fake. Sooner or
later the politician, because he deals in unrealities, is found out.
Then he either goes to jail, or he is tolerated [p283] cynically as a
picturesque and amiable scoundrel; or he retires and ceases to meddle
with the destinies of men. The words of a statesman prove to have value
because they express not the desires of the moment but the conditions
under which desires can actually be adjusted to reality. His projects
are policies which lay down an ordered plan of action in which all the
elements affected will, after they have had some experience of it,
find it profitable to co-operate. His laws register what the people
really desire when they have clarified their wants. His laws have force
because they mobilize the energies which alone can make laws effective.

It is not necessary, nor is it probable, that a statesmanlike policy
will win such assent when it is first proposed. Nor is it necessary
for the statesman to wait until he has won complete assent. There are
many things which people cannot understand until they have lived with
them for a while. Often, therefore, the great statesman is bound to
act boldly in advance of his constituents. When he does this he stakes
his judgment as to what the people will in the end find to be good
against what the people happen ardently to desire. This capacity to
act upon the hidden realities of a situation in spite of appearances
is the essence of statesmanship. It consists in giving the people
not what they want but what they will learn to want. It requires the
courage which is possible only in a mind that is detached from the
agitations of the moment. It requires the insight which comes only from
an objective and discerning knowledge of the facts, and a high and
imperturbable disinterestedness.




