CHAPTER VIII [p145]

GOLDEN MEMORIES


It will be granted, I suppose, that there would be no need for
certainty about the plan and government of the universe if, as a
matter of course, all our desires were regularly fulfilled. In a world
where no man desired what he could not have, there would be no need to
regulate human conduct and therefore no need for morality. In a world
where each man could have what he desired, there would be no need for
consolation and for reassuring guarantees that justice, mercy, and love
will ultimately prevail. In a world where there was perfect adjustment
between human desires and their environment, there would be no problem
of evil: we should not know the meaning of sin, sorrow, crime, fear,
frustration, pain, and emptiness. We do not live in such a well-ordered
world. But we can imagine it by making either of two assumptions:
that we have ceased to desire anything which causes evil, or that
omnipotence fulfills all our desires. The first of these assumptions
leads to the Nirvana of the Buddhists, where all craving has ceased and
there is perfect peace. The second leads to the heaven of all popular
religions, to some paradise like that of Mohammed perhaps where, as Mr.
Santayana says, men may “sit in well-watered gardens, clad in green
silks, drinking delicious sherbets, and transfixed by the gazelle-like
glance of some young girl, all innocence and fire.” [p146]

Among educated men it has always been difficult to imagine a heaven
of fulfilled desires. For since no two persons have exactly the
same desires, one man’s imagination of heaven may not suit another
man’s. In general, the attempts which have been made to picture the
Christian heaven reflect the temperaments of highly contemplative
spirits, and it is customary nowadays to say that this heaven would
be a most uninteresting place. No doubt it would be to those who are
not contemplative. But the objectors have missed the main point, which
is that no one is supposed to pass through the pearly gates who is
not suited to dwell in Paradise. That is what St. Peter is there for,
to see that the unfit do not enter; the other places, Purgatory and
the Inferno, are available to those spirits who could not be happy in
Heaven. There are, by definition, no uncongenial spirits in Heaven.
There were once, but Satan and his followers were thrown out headlong,
and they now live in places which are suited to their temperaments. A
devout man may quite properly, therefore, advise those who do not think
they would enjoy Heaven to go to Hell.

The attempt to imagine a heaven is an attempt to conceive a world in
which the disorders of human desire no longer exist. Now it is in their
prayers that men have sought to come to terms with their disorders, and
their prayers reveal most concretely how much the hunger for certainty
and for help is a hunger for the fulfillment of desire. For prayer,
says Father Wynne, is “the expression of our desires to God whether
for ourselves or for others.” In the higher reaches of religion “the
expression is not intended to instruct or direct God what to do, but to
[p147] appeal to His goodness for the things we need; and the appeal
is necessary, not because He is ignorant of our needs or sentiments,
but to give definite form to our desires, to concentrate our whole
attention on what we have to recommend to Him, to help us appreciate
our close personal relation with Him.” But in order to know what to
pray for, we need grace, that is to say, God Himself must teach us what
to ask Him for. We can be sure that we should pray for salvation, but
in particular we need guidance from God “to know the special means that
will most help us in any particular need.” But besides the spiritual
objects of prayer “we are to ask also for temporal things, our daily
bread and all that it implies, health, strength, and other worldly or
temporal goods ...”; we are to pray also for escape from evils, “the
penalty of our sins, the dangers of temptation, and every manner of
physical or spiritual affliction.”

There has, however, always been a logical difficulty about offering
petitions to an all-wise and all-powerful Providence. Thus in the
_Dialogue of Dives and Pauper_, which was published in 1493, the
question is put: “Why pray we to God with oure mouth sithe he knowyth
alle oure thoughte, all our desire, al our wyl and what us nedeth?”
To this question the only answer which was not evasive came from the
mystics who led a life of contemplation. Prayer, they said, is not mere
petition; it is communion with God. It is not because prayer gives a
man what he wants, but because it “ones the soul to God,” that it is
rational and necessary. This, too, is the conception of prayer held by
a liberal pastor like Dr. Fosdick who looks with scorn upon “clamorous
petition to an [p148] anthropomorphic God” and says that “true prayer
... is to assimilate ... (the) spirit which is God (that) ... surrounds
our lives.” The same idea, stated in somewhat more precise language,
is set down by Mr. Santayana when he says that “in rational prayer the
soul may be said to accomplish three things important to its welfare:
it withdraws within itself and defines its good, it accommodates itself
to destiny, and it grows like the ideal which it conceives.”

But, of course, this is not the way the common man through the ages
has conceived prayer. In fact he must have prayed before he had any
clear conception of what a prayer is or of whom it is addressed to.
Thus we are told that in Arcadia the girls invoked Hera by the title of
“Hera the Girl,” the married women prayed to “Hera the Married One,”
and the widows prayed to “Hera the Widow.” Sometimes the prayer is a
spontaneous expression of sorrow or of delight, a lyrical cry which
has no ulterior purpose and is addressed to no one. Sometimes prayer
is a magical formula which compels the deity to listen and to obey.
The subject is both complicated and obscure. But this much at least is
clear: along with elements which can be described only as spontaneous
and lyrical, with traces of magic, and at times with a purely
disinterested desire to commune with God, simple people have looked
upon prayer as “an instrument for applying God’s illimitable power to
daily life.”

Popular discussion of prayer has often been extremely practical: “How
can prayer be made most efficient? Is it by ordinary Masses or by other
offices? Is it by the elaboration or the multiplication of services?”
Lady Alice [p149] West who died in 1395 ordered 4400 Masses “in the
most haste that it may be do, withynne xiiii nyght next after my
deces.” Thomas Walwayn who died in 1415 left orders for 10,000 Masses
“with oute pompe whyche may not profyt myn soule.” John Plot, however,
wished his Masses said “with solempne seruise that ys for to sayn
wyth Belle Ryngyng.” There was debate as to whether prayers were most
effective if said in Rome or in the Holy Land ... by certain priests
rather than by others ... by the friars rather than by the priests ...
whether there were more potent prayers than the _Pater_ ... whether
prayers should be addressed to the Father, the Son, or to St. Mary
... whether St. Mary could be approached best through her mother, St.
Anne....

It is not necessary to dogmatize by saying that prayer is magic, or
soliloquy, or communion, or petition for this and that, in order to
see that it is the expression of a human need. The quality of the need
varies. It may be anything from a desire for rain to a desire for
friendship with unseen spirits, but always it illustrates the saying
that “all men stand in need of God.”

If we ask ourselves what we mean by ‘need,’ we must answer, I suppose,
that the resources of our own natures and the power we are able to
exercise over events are insufficient to satisfy the cravings of our
natures. We must eat, but we cannot be sure that drought will not
destroy the crops. We are beset by enemies, and we are not sure we
can conquer them. We are threatened by earthquake, storm, and disease
against which we cannot wholly protect ourselves. We become deeply
attached to other persons. But they must die and we must die, and we
cannot stay [p150] the doom. In brief, we find ourselves in a world in
which our hopes are defeated.

Somehow we are so constituted that we demand the impossible. There is
in us somewhere an intimation that we ought not to be defeated. But
where did this intimation come from? How is it that we are not born
satisfied with our mortality, content with our fate? Why is it that the
normal fate of man seems to us abnormal? What is there in the back of
our heads which keeps telling us that life as we find it is not what it
ought to be?

The biologist might answer, I suppose, that this craving for a
different kind of world is simply our own consciousness of that blind
push of natural forces which create the variations on which natural
selection works to produce the survival of the fittest. Nature, he
might say, is wholly indifferent to the outcries of the individual;
this vast process of which each of us is so insignificant a part,
keeps going because there is in all the parts a superabundant urging
to go on. There is no human economy in it and no human order. Man, for
example, has far more sexual desire than is needed for the rational
propagation of the species. But there is no rational plan in nature. It
works here, and everywhere, on the principle that by having too much
there will surely be enough; the seeds which do not germinate, the
seedlings which perish, the desires which are left over, are no concern
of nature’s. For nature has no concern. There is no concern except that
which we ourselves feel, and that is a mere flicker on the stream of
time, and will soon go out.

While there is no way of gainsaying that this explanation is true,
it is true only if we look at life from the particular point of view
which the biologist adopts. If, however, [p151] we look inwardly
upon ourselves, instead of surveying our species from the outside, we
find, I think, that this sense that the world ought not to be what it
is seems to originate in a kind of dim memory that it once was what
we feel it ought to be. Indeed, so vivid is this memory that for ages
men took it to be an account of historical events; in absolute good
faith they constituted for themselves the picture of a Golden Age which
existed before evil came into the world. Hope was, therefore, a kind
of memory; the ideal was to achieve something which had been lost. The
memory of an age of innocence has haunted the whole of mankind. It has
been a light behind their present experience which cast shadows upon
it, and made it seem insubstantial and not inevitable. Before this
life, there had been another which was happier. And so they reasoned
that what once was possible must somehow be possible again. Having once
known the good, it was unbelievable that evil should be final.

Even after criticism has dissolved the beautiful legends in which it
was embodied, this memory of a Golden Age persists. It persists as an
intimation of our own inward experience, and like an uneasy spirit it
intrudes itself upon our most realistic efforts to accept the world
as we find it. For it takes many shapes, which sometimes deceive us,
appearing then not as the memory of a happiness we have lost, but as
the anticipation of utopia to come.

It is an intimation that man is entitled to live in the land of heart’s
desire. It is a deep conviction that happiness is possible, and all
inquiry into the foundations of morals turns ultimately upon whether
man can achieve this happiness by pursuing his desires, or whether he
must first learn to desire the kind of happiness which is possible.




