CHAPTER VII [p112]

THE DRAMA OF DESTINY


1. _The Soul in the Modern World_

The effect of modernity, then, is to specialize and thus to intensify
our separated activities. Once all things were phases of a single
destiny: the church, the state, the family, the school were means to
the same end; the rights and duties of the individual in society, the
rules of morality, the themes of art, and the teachings of science
were all of them ways of revealing, of celebrating, of applying the
laws laid down in the divine constitution of the universe. In the
modern world institutions are more or less independent, each serving
its own proximate purpose, and our culture is really a collection of
separate interests each sovereign within its own realm. We do not put
shrines in our workshops, and we think it unseemly to talk business
in the vestibule of a church. We dislike politics in the pulpit and
preaching from politicians. We do not look upon our scholars as priests
or upon our priests as learned men. We do not expect science to sustain
theology, nor religion to dominate art. On the contrary we insist with
much fervor on the separation of church and state, of religion and
science, of politics and historical research, of morality and art, of
business and love. This separation of activities has its counterpart
in a separation of selves; the life of a modern man is not so much
the [p113] history of a single soul; it is rather a play of many
characters within a single body.

That may be why the modern autobiographical novel usually runs to two
volumes; the author requires more space to explain how his various
personalities came to be what they were at each little crisis of
adolescence and of middle age than St. Augustine, St. Thomas à Kempis,
and St. Francis put together needed in order to describe their whole
destiny in this world and the next. No doubt we are rather long-winded
and tiresome about the complexities of our souls. But from the
knowledge that we are complex there is no escape.

The modern man is unable any longer to think of himself as a single
personality approaching an everlasting judgment. He is one man to-day
and another to-morrow, one person here and another there. He does not
feel he knows himself. He is sure that no one else knows him at all.
His motives are intricate, and not wholly what they seem. He is moved
by impulses which he feels but cannot describe. There are dark depths
in his nature which no one has ever explored. There are splendors which
are unreleased. He has become greatly interested in his moods. The
precise nuances of his likes and dislikes have become very important.
There is no telling just what he is or what he may become, but there
is a certain breathless interest in having one of his selves watch and
comment upon the mischief and the frustrations of his other selves.
The problems of his character have become dissociated from any feeling
that they involve his immortal destiny. They have become dissociated
from the feeling that they deeply matter. From the feeling that [p114]
they are deeply his own. From the feeling that there is any personality
to own them. There they are: his inferiority complex and mine, your
sadistic impulse and Tom Jones’s, Anna’s father fixation, and little
Willie’s pyromania.

The thoroughly modern man has really ceased to believe that there is
an immortal essence presiding like a king over his appetites. The
word ‘soul’ has become a figure of speech, which he uses loosely,
sometimes to mean his tenderer aspirations, sometimes to mean the
whole collection of his impulses, sometimes, when he is in a hurry,
to mean nothing at all. It is certainly not the fashion any longer to
think of the soul as a little lord ruling the turbulent rabble of his
carnal passions; the constitutional form in popular psychology to-day
is republican. Each impulse may invoke the Bill of Rights, and have
its way if the others will let it. As Bertrand Russell has put it: “A
single desire is no better and no worse, considered in isolation, than
any other; but a group of desires is better than another group if all
of the first group can be satisfied, while in the second group some are
inconsistent with others,” but since, unhappily as is usually the case,
desires are extremely inconsistent, the uttermost that the modern man
can say is that the victory must go to the strongest desires. Morality
thus becomes a traffic code designed to keep as many desires as
possible moving together without too many violent collisions. When men
insist that morality is more than that, they are quickly denounced, in
general correctly, as Meddlesome Matties, as enemies of human liberty,
or as schemers trying to get the better of their fellow men. Morality,
conceived as a discipline [p115] to fit men for heaven, is resented;
morality, conceived as a discipline for happiness, is understood by
very few. The objective moral certitudes have dissolved, and in the
liberal philosophy there is nothing to take their place.


2. _The Great Scenario_

The modern world is like a stage on which a stupendous play has just
been presented. Many who were in the audience are still spellbound,
and as they pass out into the street, the scenario of the drama still
seems to them the very clue and plan of life. In the prologue the earth
was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep.
Then at the command of God the sun, the moon, the stars, the earth, its
plants and its animals, then man, and after him woman, were created.
And in the epilogue the blessed were living in the New Jerusalem, a
city of pure gold like clear glass, with walls laid on foundations of
precious stones. Between the darkness that preceded creation and the
glory of this heavenly city which had no need of the sun, a plot was
unfolded which constitutes the history of mankind. In the beginning man
was perfect. But the devil tempted him to eat the forbidden fruit, and
as a punishment God banished him from paradise, and laid upon him and
his descendants the curse of labor and of death.

But in meting out this punishment, God in his mercy promised ultimately
to redeem the children of Adam. From among them he chose one tribe who
were to be the custodians of this promise. And then in due time he
sent his Son, born of a Virgin, to teach the gospel of salvation, and
to expiate the sin of Adam upon a cross. [p116] Those who believed
in this gospel and followed its commandments, would at the final day
of reckoning enter into the heavenly Jerusalem; the rest would be
consigned to the devil and his everlasting torments.

Into this marvelous story the whole of human history and of human
knowledge could be fitted, and only in accordance with it could they
be understood. This was the key to existence, the answer to doubt,
the solace for pain, and the guarantee of happiness. But to many who
were in the audience it is now evident that they have seen a play, a
magnificent play, one of the most sublime ever created by the human
imagination, but nevertheless a play, and not a literal account of
human destiny. They know it was a play. They have lingered long enough
to see the scene shifters at work. The painted drop is half rolled
up; some of the turrets of the celestial city can still be seen, and
part of the choir of angels. But behind them, plainly visible, are the
struts and gears which held in place what under a gentler light looked
like the boundaries of the universe. They are only human fears and
human hopes, and bits of antique science and half-forgotten history,
and symbols here and there of experiences through which some in each
generation pass.

Conceivably men might once again imagine another drama which was as
great as the epic of the Christian Bible. But like _Paradise Lost_
or _Faust_, it would remain a work of the imagination. While the
intellectual climate in which we live is what it is, while we continue
to be as conscious as we are of how our own minds work, we could not
again accept naively such a gorgeous fable of our destiny. Yet only
five hundred years ago the whole [p117] of Christendom believed that
this story was literally and objectively true. God was not another
name for the evolutionary process, or for the sum total of the laws of
nature, or for a compendium of all noble things, as he is in modernist
accounts of him; he was the ruler of the universe, an omnipotent,
magical King, who felt, who thought, who remembered and issued his
commands. And because there was such a God, whose plan was clearly
revealed in all its essentials, human life had a definite meaning,
morality had a certain foundation, men felt themselves to be living
within the framework of a universe which they called divine because it
corresponded with their deepest desires.

If we ask ourselves why it is impossible for us to sum up the meaning
of existence in a great personal drama, we have to begin by remembering
that every great story of this kind must assume that the universe
is governed by forces which are essentially of the same order as
the promptings of the human heart. Otherwise it would not greatly
interest us. A story, however plausible, about beings who had no human
qualities, a plot which unfolded itself as utterly indifferent to our
own personal fate, would not serve as a substitute for the Christian
epic. This is the trouble with the so-called religion of creative
evolution: even if it is true, which is far from certain, it is so
profoundly indifferent to our individual fate, that it leaves most men
cold. For there are very few who are so mystical as to be able to sink
themselves wholly in the hidden purposes of an unconscious natural
force. This, too, as the Catholic Church has always insisted, is the
trouble with pantheistic religion, for if everything is [p118] divine,
then nothing is peculiarly divine, and all the distinctions of good and
evil are meaningless.

The story must not only assume that human ideals inspire the whole
creation, but it must contain guarantees that this is so. There must
be no doubt about it. Science must confirm the moral assumptions; the
highest and most certain available knowledge must clinch the conviction
that the story unfolded is the secret of life.


3. _Earmarks of Truth_

Religious teachers who were close to the people have always understood
that they must perform wonders if they were to make their God
convincing and their own title to speak for him valid. The writer of
Exodus, for example, was quite clear in his mind about this:

  And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me,
  nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The Lord hath not
  appeared unto thee.

  And the Lord said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he
  said, A rod.

  And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground,
  and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.

  And the Lord said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by
  the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
  rod in his hand:

  That they may believe that the Lord God of their fathers, the God
  of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared
  unto thee.

Even in the wildest flights of his fancy the common man is almost
always primarily interested in the prosaic consequences. If he believes
in fairies he is not likely [p119] to imagine them as spirits
inhabiting a world apart, but as little people who do things which
affect his own affairs. The common man is an unconscious pragmatist:
he believes because he is satisfied that his beliefs change the course
of events. He would not be inspired to worship a god who merely
contemplates the universe, or a god who created it once, and then
rested, while its destiny unfolds itself inexorably. To the plain
people religion is not disinterested speculation but a very practical
matter. It is concerned with their well-being in this world and in an
equally concrete world hereafter. They have wanted to know the will of
God because they had to know it if they were to put themselves right
with the king of creation.

Those who professed to know God’s will had to demonstrate that they
knew it. This was the function of miracles. They were tangible evidence
that the religious teacher had a true commission. “Then those men, when
they had seen the miracle (of the loaves and the fishes) that Jesus
did, said, This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the
world.” When Jesus raised the dead man at the gate of the city of Nain,
“there came a fear on all: and they glorified God, saying, That a great
prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited his people.”
The most authoritative Catholic theologians teach that miracles “are
not wrought to show the internal truth of the doctrines, but only to
give _manifest_ reasons why we should accept the doctrines.” They are
“essentially an appeal to knowledge,” demonstrations, one might almost
say divine experiments, by which men are enabled to know the glory and
the providence of God. [p120]

The Catholic apologists maintain that God can be known by the exercise
of reason, but the miracle helps, as it were, to clinch the conviction.
The persistent attachment of the Catholic Church to miracles is
significant. It has a longer unbroken experience with human nature than
any other institution in the western world. It has adapted itself to
many circumstances, and under the profession of an unalterable creed it
has abandoned and then added much. But it has never ceased to insist
upon the need of a physical manifestation of the divine power. For with
an unerring instinct for realities, Catholic churchmen have understood
that there is a residuum of prosaic, matter-of-factness, of a need to
touch and to see, which verbal proofs can never quite satisfy. They
have resolutely responded to that need. They have not preached God
merely by praising him; they have brought God near to men by revealing
him to the senses, as one who is great enough and good enough and
sufficiently interested in them to heal the sick and to make the floods
recede.

But to-day scientists are ever so much superior to churchmen at this
kind of demonstration. The miracles which are recounted from the pulpit
were, after all, few and far between. There are even theologians who
teach that miracles ceased with the death of the Apostles. But the
miracles of science seem to be inexhaustible. It is not surprising,
then, that men of science should have acquired much of the intellectual
authority which churchmen once exercised. Scientists do not, of course,
speak of their discoveries as miracles. But to the common man they have
much the same character as miracles. They are [p121] wonderful, they
are inexplicable, they are manifestations of a great power over the
forces of nature.

It cannot be said, I think, that the people at large, even the
moderately educated minority, understand the difference between
scientific method and revelation, or that they have decided upon
reflection to trust science. There is at least as much mystery in
science for the common man as there ever was in religion; in a sense
there is more mystery, for the logic of science is still altogether
beyond his understanding, whereas the logic of revelation is the logic
of his own feelings. But if men at large do not understand the method
of science, they can appreciate some of its more tangible results.
And these results are so impressive that scientific men are often
embarrassed by the unbounded popular expectations which they have so
unintentionally aroused.

Their authority in the realm of knowledge has become virtually
irresistible. And so when scientists teach one theory and the Bible
another, the scientists invariably carry the greater conviction.


4. _On Reconciling Religion and Science_

The conflicts between scientists and churchmen are sometimes ascribed
to a misunderstanding on both sides. But when we examine the proposals
for peace, it is plain, I think, that they are in effect proposals
for a truce. There is, for example, the suggestion first put out, I
believe, in the Seventeenth Century that God made the universe like
a clock, and that having started it running he will let it alone
till it runs down. By this ingenious metaphor, which can neither be
proved nor disproved, [p122] it was possible to reconcile for a time
the scientific notion of natural law with the older notion of God as
creator and as judge. The religious conception was held to be true for
the beginning of the world and for the end, the scientific conception
was true in between. Later, when the theatre of the difficulty was
transferred from physics and astronomy to biology and history, a
variation was propounded. God, it was said, created the world and
governs it; the way he creates and governs is the way described by
scientists as ‘evolution.’

Attempts at reconciliations like these are based on a theory that it
is feasible somewhere in the field of knowledge to draw a line and
say that on one side the methods of science shall prevail, on the
other the methods of traditional religion. It is acknowledged that
where experiment and observation are possible, the field belongs to
the scientists; but it is argued that there is a vast field of great
interest to mankind which is beyond the reach of practical scientific
inquiry, and that here, touching questions like the ultimate destiny
of man, the purpose of life, and immortality, the older method of
revelation, inspired and verified by intuition, is still reliable.

In any truce of this sort there is bound to be aggression from both
sides. For it is a working policy rather than an inwardly accepted
conviction. Scientists cannot really believe that there are fields of
possible knowledge which they can never enter. They are bound to enter
all fields and to explore everything. And even if they fail, they
cannot believe that other scientists must always fail. Their essays,
moreover, create disturbance and doubt which orthodox churchmen are
forced to resent. For in [p123] any division of authority, there must
be some ultimate authority to settle questions of jurisdiction. Shall
scientists determine what belongs to science, or shall churchmen? The
question is insoluble as long as both claim that they have the right to
expound the nature of existence.

And so while the policy of toleration may be temporarily workable, it
is inherently unstable. Therefore, among men who are at once devoted
to the method of science and sensitive to the human need of religion,
the hope has arisen that something better can be worked out than a
purely diplomatic division of the mind into spheres of influence. Mr.
Whitehead, for example, in his book called _Science and the Modern
World_, argues “there are wider truths and finer perspectives within
which a reconciliation of a deeper religion and a more subtle science
will be found.” He illustrates what he means in this fashion. Galileo
said the earth moves and the sun is fixed; the Inquisition said the
earth is fixed and the sun moves; the Newtonian astronomers said that
both the sun and the earth move. “But now we say that any one of these
three statements is equally true, provided you have fixed your sense of
‘rest’ and ‘motion’ in the way required by the statement adopted. At
the date of Galileo’s controversy with the Inquisition, Galileo’s way
of stating the facts was beyond question the fruitful procedure for the
sake of scientific research. But at that time the concepts of relative
motion were in nobody’s mind; so that the statements were made in
ignorance of the qualifications required for the more perfect truth....
All sides had got hold of important truths.... [p124] But with the
knowledge of those times, the truths appeared to be inconsistent.”

This is reconciliation through a higher synthesis. But I cannot help
feeling that the scientist has here produced the synthesis, and that
the churchmen have merely provided one of the ideas which are to be
synthesized. Mr. Whitehead argues in effect that a subtler science
would confirm many ideas that were once taken on faith. But he holds
unswervingly to the belief of the scientist that his method contains
the criterion of truth. In his illustration the reconciliation between
Galileo, the Inquisition, and the Newtonian physicists is reached if
all three parties accept “the modern concept of relative motion.”
But the modern concept of relative motion was reached by scientific
thought, and not by apostolic revelation. To Mr. Whitehead, therefore,
the ultimate arbiter is science, and what he means by reconciliation is
a scientific view of the universe sufficiently wide and sufficiently
subtle to justify many of the important, but hitherto unverified,
claims of traditional religion. Mr. Whitehead, it happens, is an
Englishman as well as a great logician, and it is difficult to resist
the suspicion that he conceives the church of the future as enjoying
the dignities of an Indian Maharajah, with a resident scientist behind
the altar.

A reconciliation of this kind may soften the conflict for a while.
But it cannot for long disguise the fact that it is based on a denial
of the premises of faith. If the method of science has the last word,
then revelation is reduced from a means of arriving at absolute
certainty to a flash of insight which can be trusted if and when it
is verified by science. Under such terms of peace, the religious
[p125] experiences of mankind become merely one of the instruments of
knowledge, like the microscope and the binomial theorem, usable now
and then, but subject to correction, and provisional. They no longer
yield complete, ultimate, invincible truths. They yield an hypothesis.
But the religious life of most men has not, until this day at least,
been founded upon hypotheses which, when accurately stated, included a
coefficient of probable error.


5. _Gospels of Science_

Because its prestige is so great, science has been acclaimed as a new
revelation. Cults have attached themselves to scientific hypotheses
as fortune-tellers to a circus. A whole series of pseudo-religions
have been hastily constructed upon such dogmas as the laws of
nature, mechanism, Darwinian evolution, Lamarckian evolution, and
psychoanalysis. Each of these cults has had its own Decalogue of
Science founded at last, it was said, upon certain knowledge.

These cults are an attempt to fit the working theories of science to
the ordinary man’s desire for personal salvation. They do violence
to the integrity of scientific thought and they cannot satisfy the
layman’s need to believe. For the essence of the scientific method is
a determination to investigate phenomena without conceding anything to
naive human prejudices. Therefore, genuine men of science shrink from
the attempts of poets, prophets, and popular lecturers to translate
the current scientific theory into the broad and passionate dogmas
of popular faith. As a matter of common honesty they know that no
theory has the kind of absolute verity which [p126] popular faith
would attribute to it. As a matter of prudence they fear these popular
cults, knowing quite well that freedom of inquiry is endangered when
men become passionately loyal to an idea, and stake their personal
pride and hope of happiness upon its vindication. In the light of human
experience, men of science have learned what happens when investigators
are not free to discard any theory without breaking some dear old
lady’s heart. Their theories are not the kind of revelation which the
old lady is seeking, and their beliefs are relative and provisional to
a degree which must seem utterly alien and bewildering to her.

Here, for example, is the conclusion of some lectures by one of the
greatest living astronomers. I have italicized the words which the dear
old lady would not be likely to hear in a sermon:

  I have dealt mainly with two salient points—the problem of the
  source of a star’s energy, and the change of mass which must
  occur if there is any evolution of faint stars from bright stars.
  I have shown how these _appear_ to meet in the _hypothesis_ of
  the annihilation of matter. I _do not hold this as a secure
  conclusion_. I _hesitate even to advocate it as probable_, because
  there are many details which seem to me to throw _considerable
  doubt_ on it, and I have formed a strong impression that there
  must be _some essential point which has not yet been grasped_.
  I _simply_ tell it you as the _clue_ which at the moment we are
  _trying_ to follow up—_not knowing whether it is false scent or
  true_. I should have liked to have closed these lectures by leading
  up to some great climax. But perhaps it is more in accordance with
  the true conditions of scientific progress that they should _fizzle
  out_ with a glimpse of the _obscurity_ which marks the frontiers of
  present knowledge. I do not apologize for the [p127] _lameness_ of
  the conclusion, _for it is not a conclusion_. I _wish I could feel
  confident that it is even a beginning_.

This great climax, to which Dr. Eddington was unable to lead up, is
what the layman is looking for. We know quite well what the nature
of that great climax would be: it would be a statement of fact which
related the destiny of each individual to the destiny of the universe.
That is the kind of truth which is found in revelation. It is the kind
of truth which men would like to find in science. But it is the kind of
truth which science does not afford. The difficulty is deeper than the
provisional character of scientific hypothesis; it is not due merely to
the inability of the scientist to say that his conclusion is absolutely
secure. The layman in search of a dogma upon which to organize his
destiny might be willing to grant that the conclusions of science
to-day are as yet provisional. What he tends to misunderstand is that
even if the conclusions were guaranteed by all investigators now and
for all time to come, those conclusions would still fail to provide him
with a conception of the world of which the great climax was a prophecy
of the fate of creation in terms of his hopes and fears.

The radical novelty of modern science lies precisely in the rejection
of the belief, which is at the heart of all popular religion, that
the forces which move the stars and atoms are contingent upon the
preferences of the human heart. The science of Aristotle and of the
Schoolmen, on the other hand, was a truly popular science. It was in
its inspiration the instinctive science of the unscientific man. “They
read into the cause and goal of the universe,” as Dr. Randall has said,
“that which alone [p128] justifies it for man, its service of the
good.” They provided a conception of the universe which was available
for the religious needs of ordinary men, and in the _Divine Comedy_ we
can see the supreme example of what science must be like if it is to
satisfy the human need to believe. The purpose of the whole poem, said
Dante himself, “is to remove those who are living in this life from the
state of wretchedness, and to lead them to the state of blessedness.”
Mediæval science, which follows the logic of human desire, was such
that Dante could without violence either to its substance or its spirit
say at the summit of Paradise:

  To the high fantasy here power failed; but already my desire and
  will were rolled—even as a wheel that moveth equally—by the Love
  that moves the sun and the other stars.

This is the great climax which men instinctively expect: the ability
to say with perfect assurance that when the truth is fully evident it
will be seen that their desire and will are rolled by the love that
moves the sun and the other stars. They hope not only to find the will
of God in the universe but to know that his will is fundamentally like
their own. Only if they could believe that on the basis of scientific
investigation would they really feel that science had ‘explained’ the
world.

Explanation, in this sense, cannot come from modern science because
it is not in this sense that modern science attempts to explain the
universe. It is wholly misleading to say, for example, that the
scientific picture of the world is mechanical. All that can properly
be said is that many scientists have found it satisfying to think
about the universe as if it were built on a mechanical model. “If
I [p129] can make a mechanical model,” said Lord Kelvin, “I can
understand it. As long as I cannot make a mechanical model all the way
through, I cannot understand it.” But what does the scientist mean by
“understanding it”? He means, says Professor Bridgman, that he has
“reduced a situation to elements with which we are so familiar that we
accept them as a matter of course, so that our curiosity rests.” Modern
men are familiar with machines. They can take them apart and put them
together, so that even though we should all be a little flustered if
we had to tell just what we mean by a machine, our curiosity tends to
be satisfied if we hear that the phenomenon, say, of electricity or of
human behavior, is like a machine.

The place at which curiosity rests is not a fixed point called ‘the
truth.’ The unscientific man, like the Schoolmen of the Middle Ages,
really means by the truth an explanation of the universe in terms of
human desire. What modern science means by the truth has been stated
most clearly perhaps by the late Charles S. Peirce when he said
that “the opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all
those who investigate, is what we mean by the truth, and the object
represented in this opinion is the real.” When we say that something
has been ‘explained’ by science, we really mean only that our own
curiosity is satisfied. Another man, whose mind was more critical,
who commanded a greater field of experience, might not be satisfied
at all. Thus “the savage is satisfied by explaining the thunderstorm
as the capricious act of an angry God.... (But) even if the physicist
believed in the existence of the angry god, he would not be satisfied
with this explanation of the thunderstorm [p130] because he is not so
well acquainted with angry gods as to be able to predict when anger
is followed by a storm. He would have to know why the god had become
angry, and why making a thunderstorm eased his ire.” But even carrying
the explanation to this point would not be carrying it to its limit.
For there is no formal limit. The next scientist might wish to know
what a god was and what anger is. And when he had been told what their
elements are, the next man might be dissatisfied until he had found the
elements of these elements.

The man who says that the world is a machine has really advanced no
further than to say that he is so well satisfied with this analogy that
he is through with searching any further. That is his business, as long
as he does not insist that he has reached a clear and ultimate picture
of the universe. For obviously he has not. A machine is something in
which the parts push and pull each other. But why are they pushing and
pulling, and how do _they_ work? Do they push and pull because of the
action of the electrons in their orbits within the atoms? If that is
true, then how does an electron work? Is it, too, a machine? Or is it
something quite different from a machine? Shall we attempt to explain
machines electrically, or shall we attempt to explain electricity
mechanically?

It becomes plain, therefore, that scientific explanation is altogether
unlike the explanations to which the common man is accustomed. It does
not yield a certain picture of anything which can be taken naively as
a representation of reality. And therefore the philosophies which have
grown up about science, like mechanism or [p131] creative evolution,
are in no way guaranteed by science as the account of creation in
Genesis is guaranteed by the authority of Scripture. They are nothing
but provisional dramatizations which are soon dissolved by the progress
of science itself.

That is why nothing is so dead as the scientific religion of yesterday.
It is far more completely dead than any revealed religion, because the
revealed religion, whatever may be the defects of its cosmology or its
history, has some human experience at its core which we can recognize
and to which we may respond. But a religion like scientific materialism
has nothing in it, except the pretension that it is a true account of
the world. Once that pretension is exploded, it is wholly valueless as
a religion. It has become a collection of discarded concepts.


6. _The Deeper Conflict_

It follows from the very nature of scientific explanation, then, that
it cannot give men such a clue to a plan of existence as they find
in popular religion. For that plan must suppose that existence is
explained in terms of human destiny. Now conceivably existence might
again be explained, as it was in the Middle Ages, as the drama of human
destiny. It does not seem probable to us; yet we cannot say that it
is impossible. But even if science worked out such an explanation, it
would still be radically different from the explanations which popular
religion employs.

For if it were honestly stated, it would be necessary to say first,
that it is tentative, and subject to disproof by further experiment;
second, that it is relative, in that [p132] the same facts seen from
some other point and with some other purpose in mind could be explained
quite differently; third, that it is not a picture of the world, as
God would see it, and as all men must see it, but that it is simply
one among many possible creations of the mind into which most of the
data of experience can be fitted. When the scientist had finished
setting down his qualifications, the essence of the matter as a simple,
devout man sees it, would have evaporated. Certainty, as the devout
desire it, would be gone; verity, as they understand it, would be gone;
objectivity, as they imagine it, would be gone. What would remain
would be a highly abstracted, logical fiction, suited to disinterested
inquiry, but utterly unsuited to be the vehicle of his salvation.

The difficulty of reconciling popular religion with science is far
deeper than that of reconciling Genesis with Darwin, or any statement
of fact in the Bible with any discovery by scientists. It is the
difficulty of reconciling the human desire for a certain kind of
universe with a method of explaining the world which is absolutely
neutral in its intention. One can by twisting language sufficiently
“reconcile” Genesis with “evolution.” But what no one can do is to
guarantee that science will not destroy the doctrine of evolution the
day after it has been triumphantly proved that Genesis is compatible
with the theory of evolution. As a matter of fact, just that has
happened. The Darwinian theory, which theologians are busily accepting,
is so greatly modified already by science that some of it is almost as
obsolete as the Babylonian myth in Genesis. The reconciliation which
theologians are attempting is an impossible one, because one of the
[p133] factors which has to be reconciled—namely, the scientific
theory, changes so rapidly that the layman is never sure at any one
moment what the theory is which he has to reconcile with religious
dogma.

Yet the purpose of these attempts at reconciliation is evident enough.
It is to find a solid foundation for human ideals in the facts of
existence. Authority based on revelation once provided that foundation.
It gave an account of how the world began, of how it is governed, and
of how it will end, which made pain and joy, hope and fear, desire and
the denial of desire the central motives in the cosmic drama. This
account no longer satisfies our curiosity as to the nature of things;
the authority which certifies it no longer commands our complete
allegiance. The prestige, which once adhered to those who spoke by
revelation, has passed to scientists. But science, though it is the
most reliable method of knowledge we now possess, does not provide
an account of the world in which human destiny is the central theme.
Therefore, science, though it has displaced revelation, is not a
substitute for it. It yields a radically different kind of knowledge.
It explains the facts. But it does not pretend to justify the ways of
God to man. It enables us to realize some of our hopes. But it offers
no guarantees that they can be fulfilled.


7. _Theocracy and Humanism_

There is a revolution here in the realm of the spirit. We may describe
it briefly by saying that whereas men once felt they were living under
the eye of an all-powerful spectator, to-day they are watched only by
their neighbors [p134] and their own consciences. A few, perhaps, act
as if posterity were aware of them; the great number feel themselves
accountable only to their own consciences or to the opinion of the
society in which they live. Once men believed that they would be judged
at the throne of God. They believed that he saw not only their deeds
but their motives; there was no hole deep enough into which a man could
crawl to hide himself from the sight of God; there was no mood, however
fleeting, which escaped his notice.

The moral problem for each man, therefore, was to make his will conform
to the will of God. There were differences of opinion as to how this
could be done. There were differing conceptions of the nature of God,
and of what he most desired. But there was no difference of opinion on
the main point that it was imperative to obey him. Whether they thought
they could serve God best by burnt offerings or a contrite heart, by
slaying the infidel or by loving their neighbors, by vows of poverty or
by the magnificence of their altars, they never doubted that the chief
duty of man, and his ultimate chance of happiness, was to discover and
then to cultivate a right relationship to a supreme being.

This was the major premise upon which all human choices hinged. There
followed from it certain necessary conclusions. In determining what was
a right relationship to God, the test of rightness lay in a revelation
of the putative experience of God and not in the actual experience of
His creatures. It was God alone, therefore, who really understood the
reasons for righteousness and its nature. “The procedure of Divine
Justice,” said [p135] Calvin, “is too high to be scanned by human
measure or comprehended by the feebleness of human intellect.” That was
good which man understood was good in the eyes of God, regardless of
how it seemed to men.

Thus the distinction between good and evil, including not only all
rules of personal conduct but the whole arrangement of rights and
duties in society, were laws established not by the consent of the
governed, but by a king in heaven. They were his commandments. By
obedience men could obtain happiness. But they obtained it not because
virtue is the cause of happiness but because God rewarded with
happiness those who obeyed his commandments. Men did not really know
why God preferred certain kinds of conduct; they merely professed to
know what kind of conduct he preferred. They could not really ask
themselves what the difference was between good and evil. That was a
secret locked in the nature of a being whose choices were ultimately
inscrutable. The only question was what he willed. Even Job had to be
content without fathoming his reasons.

The moral commandments based upon divine authority were, in the nature
of things, rather broad generalizations. Obviously there could not be
special revelation as to the unique aspects of each human difficulty.
The divine law, like our ordinary human law, was addressed to typical
rather than to individual cases. Nevertheless, for much the greater
part of recorded history men have accepted such law without questioning
its validity. They could not have done so if the rules of morality had
not, at least in some rough way, worked. It is not difficult to see
why they worked. They were broad rules of conduct imposed [p136] upon
people living close to the soil, upon people, therefore, whose ways of
living changed little in the course of generations. The same situations
were so nearly and so often repeated that a typical solution would on
the whole be satisfactory.

These typical solutions, such as we find in the Mosaic law or the
code of Hammurabi, were no doubt the deposits of custom. They had,
therefore, become perfected in practice, and were solidly based upon
human experience. In the society in which they originated, there was
nothing arbitrary or alien about them. When, therefore, the lawgiver
carried these immemorial usages up with him on to Sinai, and brought
them down again graven on tablets of stone, the rationality of the
revelation was self-evident. It appeared to be arbitrary only when a
radical change in the way of life dissolved the premises and the usages
upon which the authoritative code was established.

That dissolution has proceeded to great lengths within the centuries
which we call modern. The crisis was reached, it seems, during the
Eighteenth Century, and in the teaching of Immanuel Kant it was made
manifest to the educated classes of the western world. Kant argued
in the _Critique of Pure Reason_ that the existence of God cannot be
demonstrated. He then insisted that without belief in God, freedom, and
immortality, there was no valid and true morality. So he insisted that
God must exist to justify morality. This highly sophisticated doctrine
marks the end of simple theism in modern thought. For Kant’s proof of
the existence of God was nothing but a plea that God ought to exist,
and the whole temper [p137] of the modern intellect is to deny that
what ought to be true necessarily is true.

Insofar as men have now lost their belief in a heavenly king, they have
to find some other ground for their moral choices than the revelation
of his will. It follows necessarily that they must find the tests of
righteousness wholly within human experience. The difference between
good and evil must be a difference which men themselves recognize and
understand. Happiness cannot be the reward of virtue; it must be the
intelligible consequence of it. It follows, too, that virtue cannot be
commanded; it must be willed out of personal conviction and desire.
Such a morality may properly be called humanism, for it is centered not
in superhuman but in human nature. When men can no longer be theists,
they must, if they are civilized, become humanists. They must live
by the premise that whatever is righteous is inherently desirable
because experience will demonstrate its desirability. They must live,
therefore, in the belief that the duty of man is not to make his
will conform to the will of God but to the surest knowledge of the
conditions of human happiness.

It is evident that a morality of humanism presents far greater
difficulties than a morality premised on theism. For one thing, it
is put immediately to a much severer test. When Kant, for example,
argued that theism was necessary to morality, his chief reason was that
since the good man is often defeated on earth, he must be permitted to
believe in a superhuman power which is “able to connect happiness and
morality in exact harmony with each other.” Humanism is not provided
with such [p138] reserves of moral credit; it cannot claim all
eternity in which its promises may be fulfilled. Unless its wisdom in
any sphere of life is demonstrated within a reasonable time in actual
experience, there is nothing to commend it.

A morality of humanism labors under even greater difficulties.
It appears in a complex and changing society; it is an attitude
toward life to which rational men necessarily turn whenever their
circumstances have rendered a theistic view incredible. It is just
because the simpler rules no longer work that the subtler choices
of humanism present themselves. These choices have to be made under
conditions, like those which prevail in modern urban societies, where
the extreme complexity of rapidly changing human relations makes it
very difficult to foresee all the consequences of any moral decision.
The men who must make their decisions are skeptical by habit and
unsettled amidst the novelties of their surroundings.

The teachers of a theistic morality, when the audience is devout, have
only to fortify the impression that the rules of conduct are certified
by God the invisible King. The ethical problem for the common man is
to recognize the well-known credentials of his teachers. In practice
he has merely to decide whether the priest, the prince, and the
elders, are what they claim to be. When he has done that, there are no
radical questions to be asked. But the teachers of humanism have no
credentials. Their teaching is not certified. They have to prove their
case by the test of mundane experience. They speak with no authority,
which can be scrutinized once and for all, and then forever accepted.
They can proclaim no rule of conduct with certainty, for they have no
inherent personal [p139] authority and they cannot be altogether sure
they are right. They cannot command. They cannot truly exhort. They
can only inquire, infer, and persuade. They have only human insight
to guide them and those to whom they speak must in the end themselves
accept the full responsibility for the consequences of any advice they
choose to accept.

Yet with all its difficulties, it is to a morality of humanism that men
must turn when the ancient order of things dissolves. When they find
that they no longer believe seriously and deeply that they are governed
from heaven, there is anarchy in their souls until by conscious effort
they find ways of governing themselves.




                             PART II [p141]

                      THE FOUNDATIONS OF HUMANISM

             _The stone which the builders rejected,
              The same is become the head of the corner?_
                                                 Luke XX, 17.




INTRODUCTION [p143]


The upshot of the discussion to this point is that modernity destroys
the disposition to believe that behind the visible world of physical
objects and human institutions there is a supernatural kingdom from
which ultimately all laws, all judgments, all rewards, all punishments,
and all compensations are derived. To those who believe that this
kingdom exists the modern spirit is nothing less than treason to God.

The popular religion rests on the belief that the kingdom is an
objective fact, as certain, as definite, and as real, in spite of
its invisibility, as the British Empire; it holds that this faith
is justified by overwhelming evidence supplied by revelation,
unimpeachable testimony, and incontrovertible signs. To the modern
spirit, on the other hand, the belief in this kingdom must necessarily
seem a grandiose fiction projected by human needs and desires. The
humanistic view is that the popular faith does not prove the existence
of its objects, but only the presence of a desire that such objects
should exist. The popular religion, in short, rests on a theory which,
if true, is an extension of physics and of history; the humanistic view
rests on human psychology and an interpretation of human experience.

It follows, then, that in exploring the modern problem it is necessary
consciously and clearly to make a choice between these diametrically
opposite points of view. The [p144] choice is fundamental and
exclusive, and it determines all the conclusions which follow. For
obviously to one who believes that the world is a theocracy, the
problem is how to bring the strayed and rebellious masses of mankind
back to their obedience, how to restore the lost provinces of God the
invisible King. But to one who takes the humanistic view the problem is
how mankind, deprived of the great fictions, is to come to terms with
the needs which created those fictions.

In this book I take the humanistic view because, in the kind of world I
happen to live in, I can do no other.




