CHAPTER X [p194]

HIGH RELIGION AND THE MODERN WORLD


1. _Popular Religion and the Great Teachers_

In popular thought it is taken for granted that to be religious is to
accept in some form or other the theocratic view that God governs the
universe. If that assumption is correct then the orthodox who inveigh
against the godlessness of contemporary thought and the militant
atheists who rejoice in this godlessness are both right when they
insist that religion is disappearing. Insofar as religion is identical
with a belief in theocracy, it has indeed lost much of its reality for
modern men.

There is little doubt, I think, that popular religion has been
always and everywhere theocratic in principle. If, then, we are to
define as religion that which the overwhelming majority of mankind
have cherished, it would be necessary to concede at once that the
dissolution of the belief in a supernatural government of human affairs
is a dissolution of religion itself. But if that is conceded, then it
is necessary to concede also that many whom the world recognizes as
its greatest religious teachers were not themselves religious men. For
it could be demonstrated, I think, that in the central intuition of
Aristotle, of the author of the Fourth Gospel, of Buddha, of Spinoza,
to name only originating minds, the theocratic principle is irrelevant.
No one of these teachers held the belief, [p195] which is at the
heart of theocratic religion, that the relationship between God and
man is somehow analogous with that of a king to his subjects, that
the relationship is in any sense a transaction between personalities
involving, however subtly, a quid pro quo, that God’s will and the
human will are interacting forces.

In place of the popular conception of religion as a matter of
commandments and obedience, reward and punishment, in a word, as a
form of government, these great teachers placed their emphasis upon
the conversion, the education, and the discipline of the human will.
Such beliefs as they had about God were not in the nature of oaths of
allegiance to a superior; their concern was not to placate the will of
God but to alter the will of man. This alteration of the human will
they conceived as good not because God commands it, but because it
is intrinsically good for man, because by the test of experience it
yields happiness, serenity, whole-heartedness. Belief is not, as it is
in popular religion, an act which by creating a claim upon divinity
insures man’s salvation; the force of belief, as Mr. Whitehead has put
it, is in “cleansing the inward parts.” Thus religion becomes “the art
and the theory of the internal life of man, so far as it depends on the
man himself and on what is permanent in the nature of things.”

The difference between religion conceived as the art and theory of
the internal life of man and religion conceived as cosmic government
is the great difference between the religion of these great sages and
the religion of the multitude. Though in matters of this kind the
distinction is not always absolutely clear in every case, [p196] on
the whole it cannot be disputed, I believe, that the difference is real
and of fundamental importance. If we observe popular religions as they
are administered by ecclesiastical establishments, it is overwhelmingly
plain that their main appeal rests upon the belief that through their
offices the devout are able to obtain eternal salvation, and even
earthly favors, from an invisible king. But if we observe truly, I
think, we shall see also that side by side with the popular religion,
sometimes in open conflict with it, sometimes in outward conformity
with it, there is generally to be found in cultivated communities a
minority to whom religion is primarily a reconditioning of their own
souls. They may be mystics like Eckhart, they may be platonists like
Origen or Dean Inge, they may be protestants like St. Augustine and
Luther in certain phases of their thought, they may be humanists like
Erasmus and Montaigne; as of Confucius, it may be said of them that
“the subjects on which the Master did not talk were: extraordinary
things, feats of strength, disorder, and spiritual beings.” They may
be inside the churches or outside them, but in intention, in the inner
meaning of their religion, they are wholly at variance with the popular
creeds. For in one form or another they reject the idea of attaining
salvation by placating God; in one form or another they regard
salvation as a condition of the soul which is reached only by some kind
of self-discipline.

It must be obvious that religion, conceived in this way, “as the art
and theory of the internal life of man,” is not dissolved by what I
have been calling the acids of modernity. It is the popular religion
which is dissolved. [p197] But just because this vast dissolution is
destroying the disposition to believe in a theocratic government of
the universe, just because men no longer find it wholly credible that
their affairs are subject to the ordinances of a heavenly king, just
because they no longer vividly believe in an invisible power which
regulates their lives, judges them, and sustains them, their only hope
of salvation lies in a religion which provides an internal discipline.

The real effect of modernity upon religion, therefore, is to make the
religion which was once the possession of an aristocracy of the spirit
the only possible kind of religion for all modern men.


2. _The Aristocratic Principle_

To those who want salvation cheap, and most men do, there is very
little comfort to be had out of the great teachers. Spinoza might have
been speaking for all of them when he said:

  If the way which I have pointed out ... seems exceedingly hard, it
  may nevertheless be discovered. Needs must it be hard, since it is
  so seldom found. How would it be possible, if salvation were ready
  to our hand, and could without great labor be found, that it should
  be by almost all men neglected? But all things excellent are as
  difficult as they are rare.

But why, we may ask, is salvation by almost all men neglected? The
answer is that they do not desire that which they have never learned to
desire. “One cannot,” as Voltaire said, “desire that which one does not
know.” Can a man love good wine when he has drunk nothing but ginger
beer? Did we have naturally and instinctively [p198] a taste for
that which constitutes the happiness of the saved, we should already
be saved, and their happiness would be ours. We lack the taste, which
is, I suppose, another way of saying what the theologians meant when
they spoke of original sin. To be saved, in the sense which the sages
had in mind, is by conversion, education, and self-discipline to have
achieved a certain quality and harmony of the passions. Then the good
life is possible. But although men have often heard this said, and have
read about it, unless in some measure they already desire it, the whole
teaching remains mere words and abstractions which are high, cold,
and remote. As long as they feel that the way to happiness is through
a will other than their own, and that somehow events can in this
fashion be made to yield to their unregenerate wishes, in this world or
another, the wisdom of the sages will not touch their hearts, and the
way which is pointed out will be neglected.

Wisdom will seem inhuman. In a sense it is inhuman, for it is so
uncommon. Those who have it speak a strange language, of which the
words perhaps have a familiar sound, but the meaning is too high and
abstract; their delights are strange delights, and unfathomable, like
a passion which we have never known. And if we encounter them in their
lives or in their writings, they seem to us a mixture of grandeur
and queerness. For they are at once more deeply at home in the world
than the transients who make up most of mankind; yet, because of the
quality of their passions, they are not wholly of the world as the
worldling understands it. But unless the worldling is entirely without
the capacity to transcend himself, he is [p199] bound in such an
encounter to catch a glimpse now and then of an experience where there
is a serenity he himself has never known, a peace that passes his
understanding, an ecstasy exquisite and without regret, and happiness
so clarified that it seems like brilliant and kindly light.

Yet no teacher has ever appeared in the world who was wise enough
to know how to teach his wisdom to all mankind. In fact, the great
teachers have attempted nothing so utopian. They were quite well aware
how difficult for most men is wisdom, and they have confessed frankly
that the perfect life was for a select few. It is arguable, in fact,
that the very idea of teaching the highest wisdom to all men is the
recent notion of a humanitarian and romantically democratic age, and
that it is quite foreign to the thought of the greatest teachers.
Gautama Buddha, for example, abolished caste within the religious
order which he founded, and declared that the path to Nirvana was open
to the lowest outcast as well as to the proudest Brahman. But it was
necessary to enter the order and submit to its stringent discipline.
It is obvious that Buddha never believed that very many could or would
do that. Jesus, whom we are accustomed to think of as wholly catholic
in his sympathies, spoke the bitter words: “Give not what is holy to
the dogs and cast not your pearls before swine.” In Mohammedanism that
which is mystical is esoteric: “all those emotions are meant only for
a small number of chosen ones ... even some of the noblest minds in
Islam restrict true religious life to an aristocracy, and accept the
ignorance of the multitude as an irremediable evil.”

There is an aristocratic principle in all the religions [p200] which
have attained wide acceptance. It is significant that Jesus was content
to leave the governance of the mass of men to Caesar, and that he
created no organization during his lifetime beyond the appointment
of the Apostles. It is significant, because it shows how much more
he was concerned with the few who could be saved than with arranging
the affairs of the mass of mankind. Plato, who was a more systematic
teacher than either Jesus or Buddha, did work out an elaborate social
order which took account not only of the philosophers, but of all the
citizens of the state. But in that very attempt he rested upon the
premise that most men will not attain the good life, and that for
them it is necessary to institute the laws. “The worthy disciples of
philosophy will be but a small remnant,” he said, “... the guardian ...
must be required to take the longer circuit, and toil at learning as
well as at gymnastics, or he will never reach the highest knowledge of
all which is his proper calling.”

Perhaps because they looked upon the attempts as hopeless, perhaps
because they did not know how to go about it, perhaps because they
were so wise, the greatest teachers have never offered their full
wisdom to the multitude. Like Mr. Valiant-for-truth in _The Pilgrim’s
Progress_ they said: “My sword I give to him that shall succeed me in
my pilgrimage, and my courage and skill to him that can get it.”


3. _The Peculiarity of the Modern Situation_

But because the teaching of the sages was incomprehensible, the
multitude, impressed but also bewildered, ignored them as teachers and
worshipped them as gods. [p201] In their wisdom the people were not
interested, but in the legends of their power, which rumor created,
there was something understandable. And thus, the religions which have
been organized around the names of great spiritual teachers have been
popular in proportion, one might almost say, to the degree in which the
original insight into the necessity for conversion and self-discipline
has been reduced to a system of commands and promises which the common
man can understand.

For popular religion is suited to the capacities of the unconverted.
The adherents of a popular religion necessarily include an enormous
number of people who are too young, or too feeble, too dull or too
violent, too unstable or too incurious, to have any comprehension
whatsoever of anything but the simplest scheme of rewards and
punishments. An organized religion cannot neglect them if it has any
pretensions to being universal. The great ecclesiastical establishments
have often sheltered spiritual lives, and drawn new vitality from
them. But fundamentally the great churches are secular institutions;
they are governments preoccupied inevitably with the regulation of
the unregenerate appetites of mankind. In their scriptures there is
to be found the teaching that true salvation depends upon internal
reform of desire. But since this reform is so very difficult, in
practice the churches have devoted themselves not so much to making
real conversions, as to governing the dispositions of the unconverted
multitude.

They are immensely engaged by the task of administering their moral
codes, persuading their congregations with promises, and threatening
them with punishments [p202] if they do not keep their childish
lusts within bounds. The fact that they use rewards and punishments,
and appeal even to Caesar, is evidence enough that they are dealing
with the unconverted. The fact that they invoke authority is in
itself evidence that they are speaking to the naive. The fact that
they pretend to have certain knowledge about the constitution of the
universe is evidence that they are interested in those who are not wise
enough to understand the limitations of knowledge. For to the few who
are converted, goodness is pleasant, and needs no sanctions. It needs
no authority, for it has been verified by experience. But when men have
to be coerced into goodness, it is plain that they do not care for it.

Now although the great teachers saw clearly enough the difference
between the popular religion and their own insight, they were under
no great compulsion to try and overcome it. They accepted the fact
that the true religion was esoteric and for the few. They saw that it
demanded the re-education of desire, but they had no systematic and
tested knowledge of how new habits can be formed. Invincible as was
their insight into the principle of happiness, they were compelled
to depend upon introspection, and to generalize from a limited
observation. They understood that the good life was in some degree an
acquired disposition; they were aware that it is not easily or naively
acquired.

For those who somehow had the disposition, the teachers instituted
stern disciplines which were really primitive experiments in the
re-education of desire. But there was no very urgent practical need
which impelled them to search for ways of making disciplines more
[p203] widely available. Those who submitted to them were in general
individuals who were already out of the ordinary. The mass of mankind
lived solidly within the framework of custom and the psychological
compulsions of theocracy. There was no pressing reason, as there is
to-day, now that this ancestral order is dissolved, why anyone should
seek to formulate a mode of life by which ordinary men, thrown upon
their own resources, can find their way without supernatural rules,
commands, punishments, and compensations. In the past there were a
few men here and there who had somehow, for reasons which we do not
understand, outgrown the ancestral society in which they lived. But the
society itself remained. It sheltered them. And it ruled the many.

The peculiarity of our modern situation is that multitudes, instead of
a few, are compelled to make radical and original adjustments. These
multitudes, though they have lost the ancient certainties, have not
outgrown the needs to which they ministered. They need to believe,
but they cannot. They need to be commanded, but they cannot find a
commander. They need support, and there is none. Their situation is
adult, but their dispositions are not. The religion of the spirit would
suit their needs, but it would seem to be beyond their powers.


4. _The Stone Which the Builders Rejected_

The way of life which I have called high religion has in all ages
seemed so unapproachably high that it has been reserved for a voluntary
aristocracy of the spirit. It has, in fact, been looked upon not only
as a kind of splendid idiosyncrasy of a few men here and there, but
[p204] as incompatible, in essence, with the practical conditions
under which life is lived. It is for these reasons, no doubt, that
the practice of high religion has almost invariably been associated
either with a solitary asceticism or with a specially organized life in
monastic establishments. High religion has been regarded as something
separate from the main concerns of mankind.

It is not difficult to see why this was so if we realize that the
insight into the value of disinterestedness, which is the core of high
religion, was not a sudden discovery nor a complete one, anywhere or
any time. Like all other things associated with evolutionary man, this
insight must have had very crude beginnings; it would be possible
to show, I think, that there have been many tentative and partial
perceptions of it which, under the clarifying power of men of genius,
have at times become coherent. When we remember that we are dealing
with an insight into the qualities of a matured personality, there is
no reason to suppose that the full significance of this insight has
ever been completely exhausted. It seems far more likely that the sages
demonstrated the existence of the realm of the spirit, but that it
still remains to be thoroughly explored.

If that is true then the attempt to live by these partial insights
must necessarily have presented inordinate practical difficulties.
Pythagoras, for example, seems to have grasped the idea that the
disinterested study of mathematics and music was cleansing to the
passions and also that in order to be disinterested it was necessary
to have purity of mind. So when he established his society in Southern
Italy he evidently attempted to combine the [p205] serious pursuit
of science with an ascetic discipline. But the pursuit of science was
too much for the mass of the faithful who assumed that “to follow
Pythagoras meant to go barefoot and to abstain from animal flesh and
beans.” And this in turn was too much for the dignity of the learned
who proceeded to dissociate themselves from the disciplinary aspect of
the Pythagorean teaching. It is a fair conclusion, I think, that the
breakdown of this early experiment must have been due fundamentally to
the fact that Pythagoras could not have known any tested method either
of equipping his followers to appreciate science or anything beside a
crude asceticism as a means of moral discipline. If this is true, then
the reason for the failure lay in the fact that though the original
insight was marvelously good, it was not implemented with the necessary
technical knowledge for applying it. Only a few, we may suppose, who
were already by the accidents of nature and nurture suited to the
Pythagorean ideal, can ever have successfully applied it.

In the Christian pursuit of the higher religious life the practical
difficulties presented themselves in a different way. In its beginning
Christianity was a sect of obscure men and women who were out of
touch with the intellectual interests of the Roman world. They were
persecuted aliens both in Palestine and elsewhere, and they came to
the conclusion that the Roman Empire and all its concerns was the
Kingdom of Satan. This, together with the widespread belief in the
Second Coming of Christ, dissociated the Christian life at the outset
from the life of the world. Later on, when Christianity became the
official religion of the Empire, and the Church a great [p206] secular
institution which concerned itself with government and property and
diplomacy and war, those who wished to live as nearly as possible
according to the original meaning of the Gospels were quite evidently
compelled to withdraw and live a separated life. “If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the
world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world
passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God
abideth forever.”

Although for some centuries the monasteries were the centers of what
learning there was, the impressions left by monasticism on mankind
seems to have been that the highest type of religious life is not
disinterested in human affairs, but uninterested; that it requires not
merely the renunciation of worldly desires, but of the world itself.
The insight was imperfect, and therefore as an example to mankind the
practice was abortive and confusing. Yet only an uncomprehending person
can fail to see that the vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience
proceeded from a profound, if partial, understanding of human nature
and its most perfect harmony. Plainly all manner of disorder both in
society and in the individual result from greed, uncontrollable sexual
desire, arrogance, and imperiousness. That was so plain to the early
Christians, and on the other hand it was so little plain how those
powerful passions could be civilized, that the monastics in effect gave
up and attempted to excise them entirely from their natures. In this
they did not succeed.

Had they known any way of curing the fever of human [p207] passion
except by attempting to excise it, the insight of high religion would
have had some practicable meaning for those who did not withdraw from
the world. But no way was known, and therefore the practice of high
religion had to mean separation from human society and violence to
human nature. But why was there no other way known of overcoming the
chaos of the passions? Was it because there is no other way? If that
were so then the world is as hopeless as the early Christians thought
it was; indeed it is more hopeless because it does not show any signs,
as they believed, of coming to an end. Was it because the early
Christian Fathers were not wise enough to discover a way? It is always
a good rule, I think, to discard any idea based on the premise that the
best minds of another age were congenitally inferior to our own. My
conviction is that necessity is the mother of discovery and invention,
and that the reason why the insight of high religion and the methods
of practicing it were so imperfectly developed, is that there was no
practical necessity for developing them.

The mass of men lived in an ancestral order which was regulated by
custom and authority, and made endurable by usage and compensatory
consolations. The organic quality of that society into which they
fitted took care of their passions; those who had outgrown such a
society, or were so constituted that they did not fit it, were the
exceptions. From them came the insight of high religion; for them a
separated life was a possible solution of their personal problems.
There was nothing in the nature of things to compel men to work out a
way of life, I won’t say for all men, but at least for many men, by
which [p208] they could govern their own natures. Behind any such
effort there would almost certainly have to be an urgent need. For the
inertia of the human race is immense.

It is my thesis that because the acids of modernity have dissolved
the adjustments of the ancestral order, there exists to-day on a
scale never before experienced by mankind and of an urgency without a
parallel, the need for that philosophy of life of which the insight
of high religion is a prophecy. For it is immature and unregenerate
desire which creates the disorders and the frustrations that confound
us. The preoccupation of the popular religion has been to find a way of
governing these disorders and of compensating for their frustrations.
The preoccupation of high religion is with the regeneration of the
passions that create the disorders and the frustrations. Insofar as
modernity has dissolved the power of the popular religion to govern
and to compensate, the need for a high religion which regenerates
becomes imperative, and what was once a kind of spiritual luxury of the
few has, under modern conditions, become an urgent necessity of the
many. The insight of high religion which has hitherto indicated a kind
of bypath into rare experiences is now a trail which the leaders of
mankind are compelled to take.

There is implied in this a radical displacement in the field of morals.
The main interest of the practical moralist in the past has been to
interpret, administer, and enforce a moral code. He knew what was
right. The populace acknowledged that he knew what was right. His
task was to persuade and compel them to do what was right. There was
a tacit assumption, which was [p209] quite correct, that very often
the populace and even the moralist himself would much rather have done
what was wrong. Very often they did it. Then they were punished in
this world or in the next. But to-day the moralist finds himself in
a different position. He is no longer absolutely sure that he knows
what is right. The populace, even if it respects him, is disinclined
to believe that a thing is right simply because he says it is. The
populace continues very frequently to prefer what was once regarded
as wrong. It no longer knows whether it is right or wrong, and of
course it gives itself the benefit of the doubt. The result is that
there no longer exists a moral code which the moralist can interpret,
administer, and enforce. The effect of that is moral anarchy within
and without. Since there is no principle under modern conditions which
authorizes the re-establishment of a moral code, the moralist, unless
he revises his premises, becomes entirely ineffectual. To revise his
premises can, under the circumstances, mean only one thing: that he
occupies himself with the problem of how to encourage that growth
into maturity, that outgrowing of naive desire, that cultivation of
disinterestedness, which render passion innocent and an authoritative
morality unnecessary.

The novelty of all this lies in the fact that the guardians of morality
among the people are compelled at last to take seriously what the
teachers of wisdom have taught. The insight of high religion may
be said, then, to be a discovery in the field of human experience
comparable with those prophetic conceptions in the natural sciences
which, after being looked upon for long periods as a [p210] curiosity,
are at last, because circumstances are ripe, seen to be the clue
to otherwise insoluble perplexities. The concept of evolution was
discovered by sheer insight innumerable times before the time of
Darwin. Not much came of it until the rapid evolution of human affairs
after the industrial revolution had somehow brought this neglected
insight into focus with men’s interests. There are many conceptions in
the science of the Greeks which are true intimations of what modern
physicists have found. But an insight of this sort comes into its own
only when circumstances conspire to make it inevitably appropriate.
It is my contention that in the field of morals circumstances are
producing a somewhat analogous condition: that the insight of the sages
into the value of disinterestedness has become the clue to otherwise
insoluble perplexities.




                            PART III [p211]

                        THE GENIUS OF MODERNITY

                _Where is the way where light dwelleth?_
                                                 Job 38:19.




