CHAPTER XI [p213]

THE CURE OF SOULS


1. _The Problem of Evil_

The greatest of all perplexities in theology has been to reconcile the
infinite goodness of God with his omnipotence. Nothing puts a greater
strain upon the faith of the common man than the existence of utterly
irrational suffering in the universe, and the problem which tormented
Job still troubles every devout and thoughtful man who beholds the
monstrous injustices of nature. If there were no pain in the world
except that which was felt by responsible beings who had knowingly
transgressed some law of conduct, there would, of course, be no problem
of evil. Pain would be nothing but a rational punishment. But the pain
which is suffered by those who according to all human standards are
innocent, by children and by animals, for example, cannot be fitted
into any rational theory of reward and punishment. It never has been.
The classic attempts to solve the problem of evil invariably falsify
the premises. This falsification may for a time satisfy the inquirer,
but it does not settle the problem. That is why the problem is forever
presenting itself again.

The solutions which have been proposed neglect one or the other of the
attributes of God: tacitly or otherwise either his infinite power or
his infinite love is denied. [p214] In the Old Testament, at least
in the older parts of it, the power of God is exalted at the expense
of his goodness. For it is simply impossible by any human standard
and within any intelligible meaning of the words to regard Yahveh as
wholly good. His cruelty is notorious and his capriciousness is that
of an Oriental despot. It is admitted, I believe, by all but the most
literally-minded of the fundamentalists that there are innumerable
incidents in the Old Testament which have to be expurgated if the Bible
is to be used as a source book of conduct for impressionable children.
Now for the ancient Hebrews who conceived God in their fashion, the
problem of evil did not exist because it had not occurred to them that
a ruler should be just and good as well as great and powerful.

As men came to believe that God must be just, beneficent, and loving,
the problem soon presented itself. And in the Book of Job, which is
supposed to date from the Fifth or Fourth Century B.C., we have a
poignant effort to solve it. Job’s conclusion is that the goodness of
Jehovah is among the “things too wonderful for me.” He accepts the
judgments of God, and acknowledges their goodness by attributing to God
a kind of goodness which is unlike the human conception of goodness.
He holds fast to the premise that God is omnipotent—“I know that thou
canst do all things”—and the other premise that God is beneficent
he redefines. Job’s mind was satisfied, and it is reported that he
prospered greatly thereafter. What had really happened was that Job
gave up the attempt to prove that God was like Job, that the world was
as Job wished it to be, and so piously and with his mind at [p215]
rest he made the best of things, and went about his affairs.

In Job the solution is reached by claiming that what seems evil to
us would really be recognized as goodness if our minds were not so
limited. To the naive this is no solution at all, for it depends
upon using the word ‘good’ in two senses; actually it was a perfect
solution, for Job had resigned himself to the fact that God and the
universe in which he was manifest are not controlled by human desires.
Those who refused to accept this solution involved themselves in
intricate theorizing. Some of them argued that evil is an illusion.
This theory has been widely held, though it is rather difficult to
see how, if evil is an illusion, good is not also an illusion. The
one seems as vividly real as the other. It has also been argued by
some that evil is not important. This, of course, does not solve the
theoretical problem. In fact it ignores the problem and is really
a piece of advice as to how men ought to conduct themselves in the
presence of God. Many have argued, also, that evil exists in the world
to test human character, that by bearing it and conquering it men prove
their worth. There is a core of truth in this observation as there is
in the theory that many things are not so bad as they seem. But it does
not explain why a good and all powerful Deity chose to make men go
through a school of suffering to achieve goodness, when he might have
created them good in the first place.

These theoretical difficulties have furnished the material for endless
debate. I shall not pursue the matter in all its intricacies, but I
venture to point out that what is attempted in all these solutions is
ultimately to make plain [p216] why the ruler of the universe does
not order things as we should order them if we had his power. Once
we confess, as Job finally did, that the plan of the universe is not
what we naively wish it would be, there is no problem of evil. For the
whole difficulty arises because of our desire to impute to the universe
itself, or to the god who rules it, purposes like our own; failing to
find them, we are disappointed, and are plunged into elaborate and
interminable debate.

The final insight of Job, though it seems to be consistent with the
orthodox popular religion, is really wholly inconsistent with the
inwardness of popular religion. The God of the Book of Job does not
minister to human desires, and the story of Job is really the story
of a man’s renunciation of the belief in such a God. It is the story
of how a man learned to accept life maturely. The God whose ways Job
finally acknowledges is no longer a projection of Job’s desires. He is
like the God of Spinoza who cannot be cajoled into returning the love
of his worshipper. He is, in short, the God of an impersonal reality.

Whether God is conceived as a creator of that reality, who administers
it inexorably, or whether he is identified with reality and is
conceived as the sum total of its laws, or whether, as in the language
of modern science, the name of God is not employed at all, is a matter
of metaphysical taste. The great divide lies between those who think
their wishes are of more than human significance and those who do
not. For these latter the problem of evil does not arise out of the
difficulty of reconciling the existence of evil with their assumptions.
They do not assume that reality must conform to human desire. The
[p217] problem for them is wholly practical. It is the problem of how
to remove evil and of how to bear the evil which cannot be removed.

Thus from the attempt to explain the ways of God in the world as it now
is, nature and human nature being what they are, the center of interest
is shifted to an attempt to discover ways of equipping man to conquer
evil. This displacement has in fact taken place in the modern world.
In their actual practice men do not try to account for evil in order
that they may accept it; they do not deny evil in order that they may
not have to account for it; they explain it in order that they may deal
with it.


2. _Superstition and Self-Consciousness_

This change of attitude toward evil is not, as at first perhaps it
may seem, merely a new way of talking about the same thing. It alters
radically the nature of evil itself. For evil is not a quality of
things as such. It is a quality of our relation to them. A dissonance
in music is unpleasant only to a musical ear. Pain is an evil only if
someone suffers, and there are those to whom pain is pleasure and most
men’s evil their good. For things are neutral and evil is a certain way
of experiencing them.

To realize this is to destroy the awfulness of evil. I use the word
‘awful’ in its exact sense, and I mean that in abandoning the notion
that evil has to be reconciled with a theory of how the world is
governed, we rob it of universal significance. We deflate it. The
psychological consequences are enormous, for a very great part of all
human suffering lies not in the pain itself, but in the [p218] anxiety
contributed by the meaning which we attach to it. Lucretius understood
this quite well, and in his superb argument against the fear of death
he reasoned that death has no terror because nothing can be terrible to
those who no longer exist. Before we were born, he says, “we felt no
distress when the Poeni from all sides came together to do battle....
For he whom evil is to befall, must in his own person exist at the
very time it comes, if the misery and suffering are haply to have any
place at all.” St. Thomas defines superstition as the vice of excess
in religion, and in this sense of the word it may be said that the
effect of the modern approach is to take evils out of the context of
superstition.

They cease to be signs and portents symbolizing the whole of human
destiny and become specific and distinguishable situations which have
to be dealt with. The effect of this is not only to limit drastically
the meaning, and therefore the dreadfulness, of any evil, but to
substitute for a general sense of evil an analytical estimate of
particular evils. They are then seen to be of long duration and of
short, preventable, curable, or inevitable. As long as all evils are
believed somehow to fit into a divine, if mysterious, plan, the effort
to eradicate them must seem on the whole futile, and even impious.
The history of medical progress offers innumerable instances of how
men have resisted the introduction of sanitary measures because they
dreaded to interfere with the providence of God. It is still felt, I
believe, in many quarters, even in medical circles, that to mitigate
the labor pains in childbirth is to blaspheme against the commandment
that in pain children shall be brought forth. An aura of dread [p219]
surrounds evil as long as evil situations remain entangled with a
theory of divine government.

The realization that evil exists only because we feel it to be
painful helps us not only to dissociate it from this aura of dread
but to dissociate ourselves from our own feelings about it. This is a
momentous achievement in the inner life of man. To be able to observe
our own feelings as if they were objective facts, to detach ourselves
from our own fears, hates, and lusts, to examine them, name them,
identify them, understand their origin, and finally to judge them, is
somehow to rob them of their imperiousness. They are no longer the same
feelings. They no longer dominate the whole field of consciousness.
They seem no longer to command the whole energy of our being. By
becoming conscious of them we in some fashion or other destroy their
concentration and diffuse their energy into other channels. We cease to
be possessed by one passion; contrary passions retain their vitality,
and an equilibrium tends to establish itself.

Just what the psychological mechanism of all this is I do not pretend
to say. It is something to which psychologists are giving increasing
attention. But since Hellenic times the phenomenon which I have been
describing has been well known. It was undoubtedly what the Sophists
meant by the injunction: know thyself. It was in large measure to
achieve control through detachment that Socrates elaborated his
dialectic, for the Socratic dialectic is an instrument for making men
self-conscious, and therefore the masters of their motives. Spinoza
grasped this principle with great clarity. “An emotion,” he says,
“which is a passion ceases to be a passion as soon as we [p220] form a
clear and distinct idea of it.” He goes on to say that “insofar as the
mind understands all things as necessary, it has more power over the
emotions, or is less passive to them.”

The more recent discoveries in the field of psychoanalysis are an
elaboration of this principle. They are based on the discovery of
Freud and Breuer at the close of the last century that a catharsis of
emotion is often obtained if the patient can be made to recall, and
thus to relive by describing it, the emotional situation which troubles
him. The release of the psychic poison is known technically as an
abreaction. Where the new psychology supplements the insights of the
Sophists, of Socrates, and Spinoza, is in the demonstration that there
are powerful passions affecting our lives of which it is impossible by
ordinary effort of memory “to form a clear and distinct idea.” They are
said to be unconscious, or more accurately, I suppose, they are out
of the reach of the normal consciousness. Freud and his school have
invented an elaborate technic by which the analyst is able frequently
to help the patient thread his way back through a chain of associations
to the buried passion and fetch it into consciousness.

The special technic of psychoanalysis can be tested only by scientific
experience. The therapeutic claims made by psychoanalysts, and their
theories of the functional disorders, lie outside the realm of this
discussion. But the essential principle is not a technical matter.
Anyone can confirm it out of his own experience. It has been discovered
and rediscovered by shrewd observers of human nature for at least
two thousand years. To become detached from one’s passions and to
understand them consciously [p221] is to render them disinterested. A
disinterested mind is harmonious with itself and with reality.

This is the principle by which a humanistic culture becomes bearable.
If the principle of a theocratic culture is dependence, obedience,
conformity in the presence of a superhuman power which administers
reality, the principle of humanism is detachment, understanding, and
disinterestedness in the presence of reality itself.


3. _Virtue_

It can be shown, I think, that those qualities which civilized men,
regardless of their theologies and their allegiances, have agreed to
call virtues, have disinterestedness as their inner principle. I am not
talking now about the eccentric virtues which at some time or other
have been held in great esteem. I am not talking about the virtue of
not playing cards, or of not drinking wine, or of not eating beef, or
of not eating pork, or of not admitting that women have legs. These
little virtues are historical accidents which may or may not once
have had a rational origin. I am talking about the central virtues
which are esteemed by every civilized people. I am talking about such
virtues as courage, honor, faithfulness, veracity, justice, temperance,
magnanimity, and love.

They would not be called virtues and held in high esteem if there were
no difficulty about them. There are innumerable dispositions which are
essential to living that no one takes the trouble to praise. Thus it is
not accounted a virtue if a man eats when he is hungry or goes to bed
when he is ill. He can be depended upon to take care of his immediate
wants. It is only those actions which [p222] he cannot be depended
upon to do, and yet are highly desirable, that men call virtuous. They
recognize that a premium has to be put upon certain qualities if men
are to make the effort which is required to transcend their ordinary
impulses. The premium consists in describing these desirable and rarer
qualities as virtues. For virtue is that kind of conduct which is
esteemed by God, or public opinion, or that less immediate part of a
man’s personality which he calls his conscience.

To transcend the ordinary impulses is, therefore, the common element in
all virtue. Courage, for example, is the willingness to face situations
from which it would be more or less natural to run away. No one thinks
it is courageous to run risks unwittingly. The drunken driver of an
automobile, the boy playing with a stick of dynamite, the man drinking
water which he does not know is polluted, all take risks as great as
those of the most renowned heroes. But the fact that they do not know
the risks, and do not, therefore, have to conquer the fear they would
feel if they did know them, robs their conduct of all courage. The
test is not the uselessness or even the undesirability of their acts.
It is useless to go over Niagara Falls in a barrel. But it is brave,
assuming the performer to be in his right mind. It is a wicked thing
to assassinate a king. But if it is not done from ambush, it is brave,
however wicked and however useless.

Because courage consists in transcending normal fears, the highest kind
of courage is cold courage; that is to say, courage in which the danger
has been fully realized and there is no emotional excitement to conceal
the danger. The world instantly recognized this in Colonel Lindbergh’s
[p223] flight to Paris. He flew alone; he was not an impetuous fool,
but a man of the utmost sobriety of judgment. He had no companion to
keep his courage screwed up; he knew exactly what he was doing, yet
apparently he did not realize the rewards which were in store for him.
The world understood that here was somebody who was altogether braver
than the average sensual man. For Colonel Lindbergh did not merely
conquer the Atlantic Ocean; he conquered those things in himself which
the rest of us would have found unconquerable.

The cold courage of a man like Noguchi who, though in failing health,
went into one of the unhealthiest parts of Africa to study a deadly
disease, could come only from a nature which was overwhelmingly
interested in objects outside itself. Noguchi must have known exactly
how dangerous it was for him to go to Africa, and exactly how horrible
was the disease to which he exposed himself. To have gone anyway is
really to have cared for science in a way which very few care for
anything so remote and impersonal. But even courage like Lindbergh’s
and Noguchi’s is more comprehensible than the kind of courage which
anonymous men have displayed. I am thinking of the four soldiers at
the Walter Reed Hospital who let themselves be used for the study
of typhoid fever. They did not even have Lindbergh’s interest in
performing a great feat or Noguchi’s interest in science to buoy them
up and carry them past the point where they might have faltered. Their
courage was as near to absolute courage as it is possible to imagine,
and I who think this cannot even recall their names.

To understand the inwardness of courage would be, I [p224] think, to
have understood almost all the other important virtues. It is “not only
the chiefest virtue and most dignifies the haver,” but it embodies
the principle of all virtue, which is to transcend the immediacy of
desire and to live for ends which are transpersonal. Virtuous action
is conduct which responds to situations that are more extensive,
more complicated, and take longer to reach their fulfillment, than
the situations to which we instinctively respond. An infant knows
neither vice nor virtue because it can respond only to what touches it
immediately. A man has virtue insofar as he can respond to a larger
situation.

He has honor if he holds himself to an ideal of conduct though it is
inconvenient, unprofitable, or dangerous to do so. He has veracity
if he says and believes what he thinks is true though it would be
easier to deceive others or himself. He is just if he acknowledges the
interests of all concerned in a transaction and not merely his own
apparent interest. He is temperate if, in the presence of temptation,
he can still prefer Philip sober to Philip drunk. He is magnanimous if,
as Aristotle says, he cares “more for truth than for opinion,” speaks
and acts openly, will not live at the will of another, except it be a
friend, does not recollect injuries, does not care that he should be
praised or that others should be blamed, does not complain or ask for
help in unavoidable or trifling calamities. For such a man, as the word
‘magnanimous’ itself implies, is “conversant with great matters.”

A man who has these virtues has somehow overcome the inertia of his
impulses. Their disposition is to respond to the immediate situation,
and not merely to the situation [p225] at the moment, but to the most
obvious fragment of it, and not only to the most obvious fragment,
but to that aspect which promises instant pleasure or pain. To have
virtue is to respond to larger situations and to longer stretches of
time and without much interest in their immediate result in convenience
and pleasure. It is to overcome the impulses of immaturity, to
detach one’s self from the objects that preoccupy it and from one’s
own preoccupations. There are many virtues in the catalogues of
the moralists, and they have many different names. But they have a
common principle, which is detachment from that which is apparently
pleasant or unpleasant, and they have a common quality, which is
disinterestedness, and they spring from a common source, which is
maturity of character.

Few men, if any, possess virtue in all its varieties because few men
are wholly matured to the core of their being. We are for the most part
like fruit which is partly ripened: there is sourness and sweetness in
our natures. This may be due to the casualness of our upbringing; it
may be due to unknown congenital causes; it may be due to functional
and organic disease, to partial inferiorities of mind and body. But
it is due also to the fact that we can give our full attention only
to a few phases of our experience. With the equipment at our disposal
we are forced to specialize and to neglect very much. Hence the
mature scientist with petty ambitions and ignoble timidities. Hence
the realistic statesman who is a peevish husband. Hence the man who
manages his affairs in masterly fashion and bungles every personal
relationship when he is away from his office. Hence the loyal friend
who is a [p226] crooked politician, the kind father who is a merciless
employer, the champion of mankind who is an intolerable companion.
If any of these could carry over into all their relationships the
qualities which have made them distinguished in some, they would be
wholly adult and wholly good. It would not be necessary to imagine the
ideal character, for he would already exist.

It is out of these practical virtues that our conception of virtue has
been formed. We may be sure that no quality is likely to have become
esteemed as a virtue which did not somewhere and sometime produce
at least the appearance of happiness. The virtues are grounded in
experience; they are not idle suggestions inadvertently adopted because
somebody took it into his head one fine day to proclaim a new ideal.
There are, to be sure, certain residual and obsolete virtues which
no longer correspond to anything in our own experience and now seem
utterly arbitrary and capricious. But the cardinal virtues correspond
to an experience so long and so nearly universal among men of our
civilization, that when they are understood they are seen to contain a
deposited wisdom of the race.


4. _From Clue to Practice_

The wisdom deposited in our moral ideals is heavily obscured at the
present time. We continue to use the language of morality, having no
other which we can use. But the words are so hackneyed that their
meanings are concealed, and it is very hard, especially for young
people, to realize that virtue is really good and really relevant.
[p227] Morality has become so stereotyped, so thin and verbal, so
encrusted with pious fraud, it has been so much monopolized by the
tender-minded and the sentimental, and made so odious by the outcries
of foolish men and sour old women, that our generation has almost
forgotten that virtue was not invented in Sunday schools but derives
originally from a profound realization of the character of human life.

This sense of unreality is, I believe, due directly to the widespread
loss of genuine belief in the premises of popular religion. Virtue is
a product of human experience: men acquired their knowledge of the
value of courage, honor, temperance, veracity, faithfulness, and love,
because these qualities were necessary to their survival and to the
attainment of happiness. But this human justification of virtue does
not carry conviction to the immature, and would not of itself break up
the inertia of their naive impulses. Therefore, virtue which derives
from human insight has to be imposed on the immature by authority;
what was obtained on Sinai was not the revelation of the moral law but
divine authority to teach it.

Now the very thing which made moral wisdom convincing to our ancestors
makes it unconvincing to modern men. We do not live in a patriarchal
society. We do not live in a world which disposes us to a belief
in theocratic government. And therefore insofar as moral wisdom is
entangled with the premises of theocracy it is unreal to us. The
very thing which gave authority to moral insight for our forefathers
obscures moral insight for us. They lived in the kind of world which
disposed them to practice [p228] virtue if it came to them as a divine
commandment. A thoroughly modernized young man to-day distrusts moral
wisdom precisely because it is commanded.

It is often said that this distrust is merely an aspect of the normal
rebellion of youth. I do not believe it. This distrust is due to a
much more fundamental cause. It is due not to a rebellion against
authority but to an unbelief in it. This unbelief is the result of
that dissolution of the ancient order out of which modern civilization
is emerging, and unless we understand the radical character of this
unbelief we shall never understand the moral confusion of this age. We
shall fail to see that morals taught with authority are pervaded with
a sense of unreality because the sense of authority is no longer real.
Men will not feel that wisdom is authentic if they are asked to believe
that it derives from something which does not seem authentic.

We may be quite certain, therefore, that we shall not succeed in making
the traditional morality convincingly authentic to modern men. The
whole tendency of the age is to make it seem less and less authentic.
The effort to impose it, nevertheless, merely deepens the confusion by
converting the discussion of morals from an examination of experience
into a dispute over its metaphysical sanctions. The consequence of this
dispute is to drive men, especially the most sensitive and courageous,
further away from insight into virtue and deeper and deeper into mere
negation and rebellion. What they are actually rebelling against is the
theocratic system in which they do not believe. But because that system
appears to them to claim a vested interest in morality they empty out
the baby with the [p229] bath, and lose all sense of the inwardness of
deposited wisdom.

For that reason the recovery of moral insight depends upon
disentangling virtue from its traditional sanctions and the
metaphysical framework which has hitherto supported it. It will be
said, I know, that this would rob virtue of its popular prestige. My
answer is that in those communities which are deeply under modern
influences the loss of belief in these very traditional sanctions and
this very metaphysical framework has robbed virtue of its relevance.
I should readily grant that for communities and for individuals which
are outside the orbit of modernity, it is neither necessary nor
desirable to disentangle morality from its ancient associations. It is
also impossible to do so, for when the ancestral order is genuinely
alive, there is no problem of unbelief. But where the problem exists,
when the ancient premises of morality have faded into mere verbal
acknowledgments, then these ancient premises obscure vision. They have
ceased to be the sanctions of virtue and have become obstructions to
moral insight. Only by deliberately thinking their way past these
obstructions can modern men recover that innocence of the eye, that
fresh, authentic sense of the good in human relations on which a living
morality depends.

I have tried in these pages to do that for myself. I am under no
illusion as to the present value of the conceptions arrived at.
I regard them simply as a probable clue to the understanding of
modernity. If the clue is the correct one, the more we explore the
modern world the more coherence it will give to our understanding of
it. A true insight is fruitful; it multiplies insight, until at last
it not [p230] only illuminates a situation but provides a practical
guide to conduct. I believe the insight of high religion into the value
of disinterestedness will, if pursued resolutely, untangle the moral
confusion of the age and make plain, as it is not now plain, what we
are really driving at in our manifold activity, what we are compelled
to want, what, rather dimly now, we do want, and how to proceed about
achieving it. To say that is to say that I believe in the hypothesis.
I do believe in it. I believe that this valuation of human life, which
was once the possession of an élite, now conforms to the premises of a
whole civilization.

The proof of that must lie in a detailed and searching examination
of the facts all about us. If the ideal of human character which
is prophesied in high religion is really suitable and necessary in
modern civilization, then an examination ought to show that events
themselves are pregnant with it. If they are not, then all this is
moonshine and cobwebs and castles in the air. Unless circumstance and
necessity are behind it, the insight of high religion is still, as it
has always been hitherto, a noble eccentricity of the soul. For men
will not take it seriously, they will not devote themselves to the
discovery and invention of ways of cultivating maturity, detachment,
and disinterestedness unless events conspire to drive them to it.

The realization of this ideal is plainly a process of education in
the most inclusive sense of that term. But it will not do much good
to tell mothers that they should lead their children away from their
childishness; an actual mother, even if she understood so abstruse a
bit of advice, and did not reject it out of hand as a reflection upon
the [p231] glory of childhood, would insist upon being told very
concretely what this good advice means and how with a bawling infant in
the cradle you go about cultivating his capacity to be disinterested.
It is not much better to offer the advice to school teachers; they will
wish to know what they must not do that they now do, and what they must
do that they leave undone. But the answers to these questions are no
more to be had from the original concept than are rules for breeding
fine cattle to be had from the theory of evolution and Mendel’s law. By
the use of the concept, psychologists and educators may, if the concept
is correct and if they are properly encouraged, thread their way by
dialectic and by experiment to practical knowledge which is actually
usable as a method of education and as a personal discipline.

If they are to do that they will have to see quite clearly just how
and in what sense the ideal of disinterestedness is inherent and
inevitable in the modern world. The remaining chapters of this book are
an attempt to do that by demonstrating that in three great phases of
human interest, in business, in government, and in sexual relations,
the ideal is now implicit and necessary.




