CHAPTER XIV [p284]

LOVE IN THE GREAT SOCIETY


1. _The External Control of Sexual Conduct_

While the changes which modernity implies affect the premises of
all human conduct, the problem as a whole engages the attention of
relatively few persons. The larger number of men and women living
within the orbit of the Great Society are no doubt aware that their
inherited beliefs about religion, politics, business, and sex do not
square entirely with the actual beliefs upon which they feel compelled
to act. But the fundamental alterations in political and economic
ideals which the machine technology is inducing come home to each man
only indirectly and partially. The consequences are subtle, delayed,
and what is even more important, they are outside the scope of the
ordinary man’s personal decision. There is little that is urgent,
immediate, or decisive which he can do, even if he understands them,
about the changes in the structure and purpose of industry and the
state. Most men can manage, therefore, to live without ever attempting
to decide for themselves any fundamental question about business or
politics. But they can neither ignore changes in sexual relations nor
do they wish to. It is possible for a man to be a socialist or an
individualist without ever having to make one responsible decision
in which his theories play any part. But what he thinks [p285]
about divorce and contraception, continence and license, monogamy,
prostitution, and sexual experience outside of marriage, are matters
that are bound at some point in his life to affect his own happiness
immediately and directly. It is possible to be hypocritical about
sex. But it is not possible for any adult who is not anæsthetic to be
indifferent. The affairs of state may be regulated by leaders. But the
affairs of a man and a woman are inescapably their own.

That obviously is the reason why in the popular mind it is immediately
assumed that when morals are discussed it is sexual morals that are
meant. The morals of the politician and the voter, of the shareholder
and executive and employee, are only moderately interesting to the
general public: thus they almost never supply the main theme of popular
fiction. But the relation between boy and girl, man and woman, husband
and wife, mistress and lover, parents and children, are themes which
no amount of repetition makes stale. The explanation is obvious. The
modern audience is composed of persons among whom only a comparatively
negligible few are serenely happy in their personal lives. Popular
fiction responds to their longings: to the unappeased it offers some
measure of vicarious satisfaction, to the prurient an indulgence, to
the worried, if not a way out, then at least the comfort of knowing
that their secret despair is a common, and not a unique, experience.

Yet in spite of this immense preoccupation with sex it is
extraordinarily difficult to arrive at any reliable knowledge of what
actual change in human behavior it reflects. This is not surprising.
In fact this is the very [p286] essence of the matter. The reason it
is difficult to know the actual facts about sexual behavior in modern
society is that sexual behavior eludes observation and control. We know
that the old conventions have lost most of their authority because we
cannot know about, and therefore can no longer regulate, the sexual
behavior of others. It may be that there is, as some optimists believe,
a fine but candid restraint practiced among modern men and women. It
may be that incredible licentiousness exists all about us, as the
gloomier prophets insist. It may be that there is just about as much
unconventional conduct and no more than there has always been. Nobody,
I think, really knows. Nobody knows whether the conversation about
sex reflects more promiscuity or less hypocrisy. But what everybody
must know is that sexual conduct, whatever it may be, is regulated
personally and not publicly in modern society. If there is restraint it
is, in the last analysis, voluntary; if there is promiscuity, it can be
quite secret.

The circumstances which have wrought this change are inherent in modern
ways of living. Until quite recently the main conventions of sex were
enforced first by the parents and then by the husband through their
control over the life of the woman. The main conventions were: first,
that she must not encourage or display any amorous inclinations except
where there was practical certainty that the young man’s intentions
were serious; second, that when she was married to the young man
she submitted to his embraces only because the Lord somehow failed
to contrive a less vile method of perpetuating the species. All the
minor conventions were [p287] subsidiary to these; the whole system
was organized on the premise that procreation was the woman’s only
sanction for sexual intercourse. Such control as was exercised over
the conduct of men was subordinate to this control over the conduct of
women. The chastity of women before marriage was guarded; that meant
that seduction was a crime, but that relations with “lost” or unchaste
women were tolerated. The virtuous man, by popular standards, was one
who before his marriage did not have sexual relations with a virtuous
woman. There is ample testimony in the outcries of moralists that even
in the olden days these conventions were not perfectly administered.
But they were sufficiently well administered to remain the accepted
conventions, honored even in the breach. It was possible, because of
the way people lived, to administer them.

The woman lived a sheltered life. That is another way of saying
that she lived under the constant inspection of her family. She
lived at home. She worked at home. She met young men under the
zealous chaperonage of practically the whole community. No doubt,
couples slipped away occasionally and more went on than was known or
acknowledged. But even then there was a very powerful deterrent against
an illicit relationship. This deterrent was the fear of pregnancy.
That in the end made it almost certain that if a secret affair were
consummated it could not be kept secret and that terrible penalties
would be exacted. In the modern world effective chaperonage has become
impracticable and the fear of pregnancy has been virtually eliminated
by the very general knowledge of contraceptive methods. [p288]

The whole revolution in the field of sexual morals turns upon the fact
that external control of the chastity of women is becoming impossible.


2. _Birth Control_

The Biblical account of how Jehovah slew Onan for disobeying his
father’s commandment to go to his brother’s widow, Tamar, and “perform
the duty of an husband’s brother,” shows that the deliberate prevention
of conception is not a new discovery. Mr. Harold Cox must be right when
he says “it is fairly certain that in all ages and in all countries
men and women have practiced various devices to prevent conception
while continuing to indulge in sexual intercourse.” For while I know
of no positive evidence to support this, it appears to be self-evident
that the human race within historical times has not multiplied up to
the limits of human fecundity. Since it is hardly probable that this
has been due to the continence of husbands, nor wholly to infanticide,
abortion, infant mortality, and postponement of marriage, it is safe to
conclude that birth control is an ancient practice.

Nevertheless, it was not until the Nineteenth Century that the
practice of contraception began to be publicly advocated on grounds
of public policy. Until the industrial age the weight of opinion was
overwhelmingly in favor of very large families. Kings and nobles needed
soldiers and retainers: “As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are
the children of youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of
them. They shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies
in the [p289] gate.” Fathers of families desired many sons. The early
factory owners could use abundant cheap labor. There had been men from
Plato’s time who had their doubts about the value of an indefinitely
growing population. But the substantial opinion down to the end of
the Eighteenth Century was Adam Smith’s that: “the most decisive mark
of the prosperity of any country is the increase of the number of its
inhabitants.”

Apparently it was the sinister character of the early factory system,
and the ominous unrest which pervaded Europe after the French
Revolution, which rather suddenly changed into pessimism this bland
optimism about an ever growing population. Malthus published the first
edition of his _Essay on Population_ in 1798. This book is undoubtedly
one of the great landmarks of human culture, for it focussed the
attention of Europe on the necessity of regulating the growth of
population. Malthus himself, it seems, hoped that this regulation
could be achieved by the postponement of marriage and by continence.
It is not clear whether he disapproved of what is now called
neo-Malthusianism, or whether he did not regard it as practicable.
Nevertheless, within less than twenty-five years James Mill in the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_ had in guarded fashion put forward the
neo-Malthusian principle, and shortly thereafter, that is in 1823, an
active public propaganda was set on foot, most probably by Francis
Place, by means of what were known as the “diabolical handbills.”
These leaflets were addressed to the working classes and contained
descriptions of methods for preventing conception. Some of them were
sent to a good lady named Mrs. Fildes, who [p290] indignantly, but
mistakenly from her point of view, assisted the nefarious propaganda
by exposing it in the public prints. Fifty years later Mr. Bradlaugh
and Mrs. Besant had themselves indicted and tried for selling an
illustrated edition of Knowlton’s _Fruits of Philosophy_. After that
advertisement, neo-Malthusian principles and practices were known and
were, therefore, available to all but the poorest and most illiterate.

No propaganda so threatening to the established moral order ever
encountered such an ineffective opposition. I do not know how much
money has been spent on the propaganda nor how many martyrs have had
to coerce reluctant judges to try them. But it is evident that once it
was known that fairly dependable methods of contraception exist, the
people took the matter into their own hands. For the public reasons by
which neo-Malthusianism was justified were also private reasons. The
social philosopher said that population must be adjusted to the means
of subsistence. Man and wife said that they must have only as many
children as they could afford to rear. The eugenist said that certain
stocks ought not to multiply. Individual women decided that too many
children, or even any children, were bad for their health. But these
were not the only reasons which explain the demand for neo-Malthusian
knowledge. There was also the very plain demand due to a desire to
enjoy sexual intercourse without social consequences.

On this aspect of birth control the liberal reformers have, I think,
been until recently more than a little disingenuous. They have been
arguing for the removal of the prohibitory laws, and they have built
their case on two [p291] main theses. They have argued, first, that
the limitation of births was sound public policy for economic and
eugenic reasons; and second, that it was necessary to the happiness
of families, the health of mothers, and the welfare of children. All
these reasons may be unimpeachable. I think they are. But it was idle
to pretend that the dissemination of this knowledge, even if legally
confined to the instruction of married women by licensed physicians,
could be kept from the rest of the adult population. Obviously that
which all married couples are permitted to know every one is bound
to know. Human curiosity will make that certain. Now this is what
the Christian churches, especially the Roman Catholic, which oppose
contraception on principle, instantly recognized. They were quite
right. They were quite right, too, in recognizing that whether or
not birth control is eugenic, hygienic, and economic, it is the most
revolutionary practice in the history of sexual morals.

For when conception could be prevented, there was an end to the theory
that woman submits to the embrace of the male only for purposes of
procreation. She had to be persuaded to co-operate, and no possible
reason could be advanced except that the pleasure was reciprocal.
She had to understand and inwardly assent to the principle that it
is proper to have sexual intercourse with her husband and to prevent
conception. She had, therefore, to give up the whole traditional theory
which she may have only half-believed anyway, that sexual intercourse
was an impure means to a noble end. She could no longer believe that
procreation alone mitigated the vileness of cohabiting with a man, and
so she had to change her valuation [p292] and accept it as inherently
delightful. Thus by an inevitable process the practice of contraception
led husbands and wives to the conviction that they need not be in the
least ashamed of their desires for each other.

But this transvaluation of values within the sanctity of the marital
chamber could hardly be kept a secret. What had happened was that
married couples were indulging in the pleasures of sex because
they had learned how to isolate them from the responsibilities of
parenthood. When we talk about the unconventional theories of the
younger generation we might in all honesty take this fact into account.
They have had it demonstrated to them by their own parents, by those
in whom the administering of the conventions is vested, that under
certain circumstances it is legitimate and proper to gratify sexual
desire apart from any obligation to the family or to the race. They
have been taught that it is possible to do this, and that it may be
proper. Therefore, the older generation could no longer argue that
sexual intercourse as such was evil. It could no longer argue that it
was obviously dangerous. It could only maintain that the psychological
consequences are serious if sexual gratification is not made incidental
to the enduring partnership of marriage and a home. That may be, in
fact, I think it can be shown to be, the real wisdom of the matter.
Yet if it is the wisdom of the matter, it is a kind of wisdom which
men and women can acquire by experience alone. They do not have it
instinctively. They cannot be compelled to adopt it. They can only
learn to believe it.

That is a very different thing from submitting to a convention upheld
by all human and divine authority. [p293]


3. _The Logic of Birth Control_

With contraception established as a more or less legitimate idea in
modern society, a vast discussion has ensued as to how the practice
of it can be rationalized. In this discussion the pace is set by
those who accept the apparent logic of contraception and are prepared
boldly to revise the sexual conventions accordingly. They take as
their major premise the obvious fact that by contraception it is
possible to dissociate procreation from gratification, and therefore
to pursue independently what Mr. Havelock Ellis calls the primary and
secondary objects of the sexual impulse. They propose, therefore, to
sanction two distinct sets of conventions: one designed to protect
the interests of the offspring by promoting intelligent, secure, and
cheerful parenthood; the other designed to permit the freest and
fullest expression of the erotic personality. They propose, in other
words, to distinguish between parenthood as a vocation involving public
responsibility, and love as an art, pursued privately for the sake of
happiness.

As a preparation for the vocation of parenthood it is proposed
to educate both men and women in the care, both physical and
psychological, of children. It is proposed further that mating for
parenthood shall become an altogether deliberate and voluntary
choice: the argument here is that the duties of parenthood cannot
be successfully fulfilled except where both parents cheerfully and
knowingly assume them. Therefore, it is proposed, in order to avert the
dangers of love at first sight and of mating under the blind compulsion
of instinct, that a period of free experimentation [p294] be allowed
to precede the solemn engagement to produce and rear children. This
engagement is regarded as so much a public responsibility that it is
even proposed, and to some extent has been embodied in the law of
certain jurisdictions, that marriages for parenthood must be sanctioned
by medical authority. In order, too, that no compulsive considerations
may determine what ought to be a free and intelligent choice, it is
argued that women should be economically independent before and during
marriage. As this may not be possible for women without property
of their own during the years when they are bearing and rearing
children, it is proposed in some form or other to endow motherhood.
This endowment may take the form of a legal claim upon the earnings of
the father, or it may mean a subsidy from the state through mothers’
pensions, free medical attention, day nurseries, and kindergartens. The
principle that successful parenthood must be voluntary is maintained
as consistently as possible. Therefore, among those who follow the
logic of their idea, it is proposed that even marriages deliberately
entered into for procreation shall be dissoluble at the will of either
party, the state intervening only to insure the economic security of
the offspring. It is proposed, furthermore, that where women find the
vocation of motherhood impracticable for one reason or another, they
may be relieved of the duty of rearing their children.

Not all of the advanced reformers adopt the whole of this program, but
the whole of this program is logically inherent in the conception of
parenthood as a vocation deliberately undertaken, publicly pursued, and
motivated solely by the parental instincts. [p295]

The separate set of conventions which it is proposed to adopt for the
development of love as an art have a logic of their own. Their function
is not to protect the welfare of the child but the happiness of lovers.
It is very easy to misunderstand this conception. Mr. Havelock Ellis,
in fact, describes it as a “divine and elusive mystery,” a description
which threatens to provide a rather elusive standard by which to fix a
new set of sexual conventions. But baffling as this sounds, it is not
wholly inscrutable, and a sufficient understanding of what is meant can
be attained by clearing up the dangerous ambiguity in the phrase “love
as an art.”

There are two arts of love and it makes a considerable difference
which one is meant. There is the art of love as Casanova, for example,
practiced it. It is the art of seduction, courtship, and sexual
gratification: it is an art which culminates in the sexual act. It
can be repeated with the same lover and with other lovers, but it
exhausts itself in the moment of ecstasy. When that moment is reached,
the work of art is done, and the lover as artist “after an interval,
perhaps of stupor and vital recuperation” must start all over again,
until at last the rhythm is so stale it is a weariness to start at
all; or the lover must find new lovers and new resistances to conquer.
The aftermath of romantic love—that is, of love that is consummated
in sexual ecstasy—is either tedium in middle age or the compulsive
adventurousness of the libertine.

Now this is not what Mr. Ellis means when he talks about love as an
art. “The act of intercourse,” he says, “is only an incident, and not
an essential in love.” Incident to what? His answer is that it is an
incident to an [p296] “exquisitely and variously and harmoniously
blended” activity of “all the finer activities of the organism,
physical and psychic.” I take this to mean that when a man and woman
are successfully in love, their whole activity is energized and
victorious. They walk better, their digestion improves, they think
more clearly, their secret worries drop away, the world is fresh and
interesting, and they can do more than they dreamed that they could
do. In love of this kind sexual intimacy is not the dead end of desire
as it is in romantic or promiscuous love, but periodic affirmation of
the inward delight of desire pervading an active life. Love of this
sort can grow: it is not, like youth itself, a moment that comes and is
gone and remains only a memory of something which cannot be recovered.
It can grow because it has something to grow upon and to grow with;
it is not contracted and stale because it has for its object, not the
mere relief of physical tension, but all the objects with which the
two lovers are concerned. They desire their worlds in each other, and
therefore their love is as interesting as their worlds and their worlds
are as interesting as their love.

It is to promote unions of this sort that the older liberals are
proposing a new set of sexual conventions. There are, however,
reformers in the field who take a much less exalted view of the sexual
act, who regard it, indeed, not only as without biological or social
significance, but also as without any very impressive psychological
significance. “The practice of birth control,” says Mr. C. E. M. Joad,
for example, “will profoundly modify our sexual habits. It will enable
the pleasures of sex to be tasted without its penalties, and it will
remove the most [p297] formidable deterrent to irregular intercourse.”
For birth control “offers to the young ... the prospect of shameless,
harmless, and unlimited pleasure.” But whether the reformers agree with
Mr. Ellis that sexual intimacy is, as he says, a sacrament signifying
some great spiritual reality, or with Mr. Joad that it is a harmless
pleasure, they are agreed that the sexual conventions should be revised
to permit such unions without penalties and without any sense of shame.

They ask public opinion to sanction what contraception has made
feasible. They point out that “a large number of the men and women
of to-day form sexual relationships outside marriage—whether or
not they ultimately lead to marriage—which they conceal or seek to
conceal from the world.” These relationships, says Mr. Ellis, differ
from the extra-marital manifestations of the sexual life of the past
in that they do not derive from prostitution or seduction. Both of
these ancient practices, he adds, are diminishing, for prostitution is
becoming less attractive and, with the education of women, seduction
is becoming less possible. The novelty of these new relations, the
prevalence of which is conceded though it cannot be measured, lies in
the fact that they are entered into voluntarily, have no obvious social
consequences, and are altogether beyond the power of law or opinion to
control. The argument, therefore, is that they should be approved, the
chief point made being that by removing all stigma from such unions,
they will become candid, wholesome, and delightful. The objection of
the reformers to the existing conventions is that the sense of sin
poisons the spontaneous goodness of such relationships. [p298]

The actual proposals go by a great variety of fancy names such as free
love, trial marriage, companionate marriage. When these proposals are
examined it is evident they all take birth control as their major
premise, and then deduce from it some part or all of the logical
consequences. Companionate marriage, for example, is from the point
of view of the law, whatever it may be subjectively, nothing but
a somewhat roundabout way of saying that childless couples may be
divorced by mutual consent. It is a proposal, if not to control, then
at least to register, publicly all sexual unions, the theory being that
this public registration will abolish shame and furtiveness and give
them a certain permanence. Companionate marriage is frankly an attempt
at a compromise between marriages that are difficult to dissolve and
clandestine relationships which have no sanction whatever.

The uncompromising logic of birth control has been stated more clearly,
I think, by Mr. Bertrand Russell than by anyone else. Writing to Judge
Lindsey during the uproar about companionate marriage, Mr. Russell said:

  I go further than you do: the things which your enemies say about
  you would be largely true of me. My own view is that the state
  and the law should take no notice of sexual relations apart from
  children, and that no marriage ceremony should be valid unless
  accompanied by a medical certificate of the woman’s pregnancy.
  But when once there are children, I think that divorce should be
  avoided except for very grave cause. I should not regard physical
  infidelity as a very grave cause and should teach people that
  it is to be expected and tolerated, but should not involve the
  begetting of illegitimate children—not because illegitimacy is
  bad in [p299] itself, but because a home with two parents is
  best for children. I do not feel that the main thing in marriage
  is the feeling of the parents for each other; the main thing is
  cooperation in bearing children.

In this admirably clear statement there is set forth a plan for that
complete separation between the primary and secondary function of
sexual intercourse which contraception makes possible.


4. _The Use of Convention_

It is one thing, however, to recognize the full logic of birth control
and quite another thing to say that convention ought to be determined
by that logic. One might as well argue that because automobiles can be
driven at a hundred miles an hour the laws should sanction driving at
the rate of a hundred miles an hour. Birth control is a device like the
automobile, and its inherent possibilities do not fix the best uses to
be made of it.

What an understanding of the logic of birth control does is to set
before us the limits of coercive control of sexual relations. The law
can, for example, make divorce very difficult where there are children.
It could, as Mr. Bertrand Russell suggests, refuse divorce on the
ground of infidelity. On the other hand the law cannot effectively
prohibit infidelity, and as a matter of fact does not do so to-day.
It cannot effectively prohibit fornication though there are statutes
against it. Therefore, what Mr. Russell has done is to describe
accurately enough the actual limits of effective legal control.

But sexual conventions are not statutes, and it is important to define
quite clearly just what they are. In the [p300] older world they were
rules of conduct enforceable by the family and the community through
habit, coercion, and authority. In this sense of the word, convention
tends to lose force and effect in modern civilization. Yet a convention
is essentially a theory of conduct and all human conduct implies some
theory of conduct. Therefore, although it may be that no convention
is any longer coercive, conventions remain, are adopted, revised, and
debated. They embody the considered results of experience: perhaps the
experience of a lonely pioneer or perhaps the collective experience of
the dominant members of a community. In any event they are as necessary
to a society which recognizes no authority as to one which does. For
the inexperienced must be offered some kind of hypothesis when they
are confronted with the necessity of making choices: they cannot be so
utterly open-minded that they stand inert until something collides with
them. In the modern world, therefore, the function of conventions is to
declare the meaning of experience. A good convention is one which will
most probably show the inexperienced the way to happy experience.

Just because the rule of sexual conduct by authority is dissolving,
the need of conventions which will guide conduct is increasing.
That, in fact, is the reason for the immense and urgent discussion
of sex throughout the modern world. It is an attempt to attain an
understanding of the bewilderingly new experiences to which few men or
women know how to adjust themselves. The true business of the moralist
in the midst of all this is not to denounce this and to advocate that,
but to see as clearly as he can into the meaning of it, so that out
of the chaos of [p301] pain and happiness and worry he may help to
deliver a usable insight.

It is, I think, to the separation of parenthood as a vocation from love
as an end in itself that the moralist must address himself. For this is
the heart of the problem: to determine whether this separation, which
birth control has made feasible and which law can no longer prevent, is
in harmony with the conditions of human happiness.


5. _The New Hedonism_

Among those who hold that the separation of the primary and secondary
functions of the sexual impulse is good and should constitute the major
premise of modern sexual conventions, there are, as I have already
pointed out, two schools of thought. There are the transcendentalists
who believe with Mr. Havelock Ellis that “sexual pleasure, wisely used
and not abused, may prove the stimulus and liberator of our finest and
most exalted activities,” and there are the unpretentious hedonists
who believe that sexual pleasure is pleasure and not the stimulus or
liberator of anything important. Both are, as we say, emancipated:
neither recognizes the legitimacy of objective control unless a child
is born, and both reject as an evil the traditional subjective control
exercised by the sense of sin. Where they differ is in their valuation
of love.

Hedonism as an attitude toward life is, of course, not a new thing in
the world, but it has never before been tested out under such favorable
conditions. To be a successful hedonist a man must have the opportunity
to seek his pleasures without fear of any kind. Theodorus of Cyrene,
[p302] who taught about 310 B.C., saw that clearly, and therefore
to release men from fear openly denied the Olympian gods. But the
newest hedonism has had an even better prospect than the classical:
it finds men emancipated not only of all fear of divine authority
and human custom but of physical and social consequences as well. If
the pursuit of pleasure by carefree men were the way to happiness,
hedonism ought, then, to be proving itself triumphantly in the modern
world. Possibly it is too early to judge, but the fact is nevertheless
highly significant, I think, that the new hedonists should already have
arrived at the same conclusion as the later hedonists in the classical
world. Hegesias, for example, wrote when hedonism had already had a
great vogue: he was called, rather significantly, the “persuader to
die.” For having started from the premise that pleasure is the end of
life, he concluded that, since life affords at least as much pain as
pleasure, the end of life cannot be realized. There is now a generation
in the world which is approaching middle age. They have exercised the
privileges which were won by the iconoclasts who attacked what was
usually called the Puritan or Victorian tradition. They have exercised
the privileges without external restraint and without inhibition. Their
conclusions are reported in the latest works of fiction. Do they report
that they have found happiness in their freedom? Well, hardly. Instead
of the gladness which they were promised, they seem, like Hegesias, to
have found the wasteland.

“If love has come to be less often a sin,” says that very discerning
critic of life and letters, Mr. Joseph Wood Krutch, “it has come also
to be less often a supreme privilege. [p303] If one turns to the
smarter of those novelists who describe the doings of the more advanced
set of those who are experimenting with life—to, for example, Mr.
Aldous Huxley or Mr. Ernest Hemingway,—one will discover in their
tragic farces the picture of a society which is at bottom in despair
because, though it is more completely absorbed in the pursuit of love
than in anything else, it has lost the sense of any ultimate importance
inherent in the experience which preoccupies it; and if one turns to
the graver of the intellectual writers,—to, for example, Mr. D. H.
Lawrence, Mr. T. S. Eliot, or Mr. James Joyce,—one will find both
explicitly and implicitly a similar sense that the transcendental value
of love has become somehow attenuated, and that, to take a perfectly
concrete example, a conclusion which does no more than bring a man and
woman into complete possession of one another is a mere bathos which
does nothing except legitimately provoke the comment, ‘Well, what of
it?’ One can hardly imagine them concerned with what used to be called,
in a phrase which they have helped to make faintly ridiculous, ‘the
right to love.’ Individual freedom they have inherited and assumed
as a right, but they are concerned with something which their more
restricted forefathers assumed—with, that is to say, the value of love
itself. No inhibitions either within or without restrain them, but they
are asking themselves, ‘What is it worth?’ and they are certainly no
longer feeling that it is obviously and in itself something which makes
life worth the living.

“To Huxley and Hemingway—I take them as the most conspicuous exemplars
of a whole school—love is at times only a sort of obscene joke. The
former in particular has [p304] delighted to mock sentiment with
physiology, to place the emotions of the lover in comic juxtaposition
with quaint biological lore, and to picture a romantic pair ‘quietly
sweating palm to palm.’ But the joke is one which turns quickly bitter
upon the tongue, for a great and gratifying illusion has passed away,
leaving the need for it still there. His characters still feel the
psychological urge, and, since they have no sense of sin in connection
with it, they yield easily and continually to that urge; but they
have also the human need to respect their chief preoccupation, and
it is the capacity to do this that they have lost. Absorbed in the
pursuit of sexual satisfaction, they never find love and they are
scarcely aware that they are seeking it, but they are far from content
with themselves. In a generally devaluated world they are eagerly
endeavoring to get what they can in the pursuit of satisfactions which
are sufficiently instinctive to retain inevitably a modicum of animal
pleasure, but they cannot transmute that simple animal pleasure into
anything else. They themselves not infrequently share the contempt with
which their creator regards them, and nothing could be less seductive,
because nothing could be less glamorous, than the description of the
debaucheries born of nothing except a sense of the emptiness of life.”

This “generally devaluated world,” of which Mr. Krutch speaks, what
is it after all, but a world in which nothing connects itself very
much with anything else? If you start with the belief that love is
the pleasure of a moment, is it really surprising that it yields only
a momentary pleasure? For it is the most ironical of all illusions
to suppose that one is free of illusions in contracting any [p305]
human desire to its primary physiological satisfaction. Does a man
dine well because he ingests the requisite number of calories? Is he
freer from illusions about his appetite than the man who creates an
interesting dinner party out of the underlying fact that his guests and
he have the need to fill their stomachs? Would it really be a mark of
enlightenment if each of them filled his stomach in the solitary and
solemn conviction that good conversation and pleasant companionship are
one thing and nutrition is another?

This much the transcendentalists understand well enough. They do
not wish to isolate the satisfaction of desire from our “finest
and most exalted activities.” They would make it “the stimulus and
the liberator” of these activities. They would use it to arouse to
“wholesome activity all the complex and interrelated systems of the
organism.” But what are these finest and most exalted activities which
are to be stimulated and liberated? The discovery of truth, the making
of works of art, meditation and insight? Mr. Ellis does not specify. If
these are the activities that are meant, then the discussion applies to
a very few of the men and women on earth. For the activities of most
of them are necessarily concerned with earning a living and managing
a household and rearing children and finding recreation. If the art
of love is to stimulate and liberate activities, it is these prosaic
activities which it must stimulate and liberate. But if you idealize
the logic of birth control, make parenthood a separate vocation,
isolate love from work and the hard realities of living, and say that
it must be spontaneous and carefree, what have you done? You have
separated [p306] it from all the important activities which it might
stimulate and liberate. You have made love spontaneous but empty, and
you have made home-building and parenthood efficient, responsible, and
dull.

What has happened, I believe, is what so often happens in the first
enthusiasm for a revolutionary invention. Its possibilities are so
dazzling that men forget that inventions belong to man and not man to
his inventions. In the discussion which has ensued since birth control
became generally feasible, the central confusion has been that the
reformers have tried to fix their sexual ideals in accordance with the
logic of birth control instead of the logic of human nature. Birth
control does make feasible this dissociation of interests which were
once organically united. There are undoubtedly the best of reasons
for dissociating them up to a point. But how completely it is wise
to dissociate them is a matter to be determined not by saying how
completely it is possible to dissociate them, but how much it is
desirable to dissociate them.

All the varieties of the modern doctrine that man is a collection of
separate impulses, each of which can attain its private satisfaction,
are in fundamental contradiction not only with the traditional body of
human wisdom but with the modern conception of the human character.
Thus in one breath it is said in advanced circles that love is a series
of casual episodes, and in the next it transpires that the speaker is
in process of having himself elaborately psychoanalyzed in order to
disengage his soul from the effects of apparently trivial episodes
in his childhood. On the one hand it is asserted that sex pervades
everything and on the other that sexual behavior is inconsequential.
[p307] It is taught that experience is cumulative, that we are what
our past has made us and shall be what we are making of ourselves now,
and then with bland indifference to the significance of this we are
told that all experiences are free, equal, and independent.


6. _Marriage and Affinity_

It is not hard to see why those who are concerned in revising sexual
conventions should have taken the logic of birth control rather than
knowledge of human nature as their major premise. Birth control is an
immensely beneficent invention which can and does relieve men and women
of some of the most tragic sorrows which afflict them: the tragedies of
the unwanted child, the tragedies of insupportable economic burdens,
the tragedies of excessive child bearing and the destruction of youth
and the necessity of living in an unrelenting series of pregnancies. It
offers them freedom from intolerable mismating, from sterile virtue,
from withering denials of happiness. These are the facts which the
reformers saw, and in birth control they saw the instrument by which
such freedom could be obtained.

The sexual conventions which they have proposed are really designed to
cure notorious evils. They do not define the good life in sex; they
point out ways of escape from the bad life. Thus companionate marriage
is proposed by Judge Lindsey not as a type of union which is inherently
desirable, but as an avenue of escape from corrupt marriages on the
one hand and furtive promiscuity on the other. The movement for free
divorce comes down to this: it is necessary because so many marriages
[p308] are a failure. The whole theory that love is separate from
parenthood and home-building is supported by the evidence in those
cases where married couples are not lovers. It is the pathology of
sexual relations which inspires the reformers of sexual conventions.

There is no need to quarrel with them because they insist upon remedies
for manifest evils. Deep confusion results when they forget that these
remedies are only remedies, and go on to institute them as ideals.
It is better, without any doubt, that incompatible couples should
be divorced and that each should then be free to find a mate who is
compatible. But the frequency with which men and women have to resort
to divorce because they are incompatible will be greatly influenced by
the notions they have before and during marriage of what compatibility
is, and what it involves. The remedies for failure are important. But
what is central is the conception of sexual relations by which they
expect to live successfully.

They cannot—I am, of course, speaking broadly—expect to live
successfully by the conception that the primary and secondary functions
of sex are in separate compartments of the soul. I have indicated
why this conception is self-defeating and why, since human nature is
organic and experience cumulative, our activities must, so to speak,
engage and imply each other. Mates who are not lovers will not really
cooperate, as Mr. Bertrand Russell thinks they should, in bearing
children; they will be distracted, insufficient, and worst of all they
will be merely dutiful. Lovers who have nothing to do but love each
other are not really to be envied; love and nothing else very soon is
nothing else. The emotion of love, in spite [p309] of the romantics,
is not self-sustaining; it endures only when the lovers love many
things together, and not merely each other. It is this understanding
that love cannot successfully be isolated from the business of living
which is the enduring wisdom of the institution of marriage. Let the
law be what it may be as to what constitutes a marriage contract and
how and when it may be dissolved. Let public opinion be as tolerant
as it can be toward any and every kind of irregular and experimental
relationship. When all the criticisms have been made, when all
supernatural sanctions have been discarded, all subjective inhibitions
erased, all compulsions abolished, the convention of marriage still
remains to be considered as an interpretation of human experience. It
is by the test of how genuinely it interprets human experience that the
convention of marriage will ultimately be judged.

The wisdom of marriage rests upon an extremely unsentimental view of
lovers and their passions. Its assumptions, when they are frankly
exposed, are horrifying to those who have been brought up in the
popular romantic tradition of the Nineteenth Century. These assumptions
are that, given an initial attraction, a common social background,
common responsibilities, and the conviction that the relationship is
permanent, compatibility in marriage can normally be achieved. It is
precisely this that the prevailing sentimentality about love denies.
It assumes that marriages are made in heaven, that compatibility is
instinctive, a mere coincidence, that happy unions are, in the last
analysis, lucky accidents in which two people who happen to suit
each other happen to have met. The convention of marriage rests on
an interpretation of [p310] human nature which does not confuse the
subjective feeling of the lovers that their passion is unique, with
the brutal but objective fact that, had they never met, each of them
would in all probability have found a lover who was just as unique.
“Love,” says Mr. Santayana, “is indeed much less exacting than it
thinks itself. Nine-tenths of its cause are in the lover, for one-tenth
that may be in the object. Were the latter not accidentally at hand,
an almost identical passion would probably have been felt for some one
else; for, although with acquaintance the quality of an attachment
naturally adapts itself to the person loved, and makes that person
its standard and ideal, the first assault and mysterious glow of the
passion is much the same for every object.”

This is the reason why the popular conception of romantic love as the
meeting of two affinities produces so much unhappiness. The mysterious
glow of passion is accepted as a sign that the great coincidence has
occurred; there is a wedding and soon, as the glow of passion cools, it
is discovered that no instinctive and preordained affinity is present.
At this point the wisdom of popular romantic marriage is exhausted. For
it proceeds on the assumption that love is a mysterious visitation.
There is nothing left, then, but to grin and bear a miserably dull and
nagging fate, or to break off and try again. The deep fallacy of the
conception is in the failure to realize that compatibility is a process
and not an accident, that it depends upon the maturing of instinctive
desire by adaptation to the whole nature of the other person and to the
common concerns of the pair of lovers.

The romantic theory of affinities rests upon an immature [p311] theory
of desire. It springs from an infantile belief that the success of
love is in the satisfactions which the other person provides. What
this really means is that in childlike fashion the lover expects
his mistress to supply him with happiness. But in the adult world
that expectation is false. Because nine-tenths of the cause, as Mr.
Santayana says, are in the lover for one-tenth that may be in the
object, it is what the lover does about that nine-tenths which is
decisive for his happiness. It is the claim, therefore, of those
who uphold the ideal of marriage as a full partnership, and reject
the ideal which would separate love as an art from parenthood as a
vocation, that in the home made by a couple who propose to see it
through, there are provided the essential conditions under which
the passions of men and women are most likely to become mature, and
therefore harmonious and disinterested.


7. _The Schooling of Desire_

They need not deny, indeed it would be foolish as well as cruel for
them to underestimate, the enormous difficulty of achieving successful
marriages under modern conditions. For with the dissolution of
authority and compulsion, a successful marriage depends wholly upon the
capacity of the man and the woman to make it successful. They have to
accomplish wholly by understanding and sympathy and disinterestedness
of purpose what was once in a very large measure achieved by habit,
necessity, and the absence of any practicable alternative. It takes
two persons to make a successful marriage in the modern world, and
that fact more than doubles its difficulty. For these reasons alone
the modern state ought to do what it [p312] would none the less be
compelled to do: it ought to provide decent ways of retreat in case of
failure.

But if it is the truth that the convention of marriage correctly
interprets human experience, whereas the separatist conventions are
self-defeating, then the convention of marriage will prove to be the
conclusion which emerges out of all this immense experimenting. It
will survive not as a rule of law imposed by force, for that is now, I
think, become impossible. It will not survive as a moral commandment
with which the elderly can threaten the young. They will not listen.
It will survive as the dominant insight into the reality of love and
happiness, or it will not survive at all. That does not mean that all
persons will live under the convention of marriage. As a matter of fact
in civilized ages all persons never have. It means that the convention
of marriage, when it is clarified by insight into reality, is likely
to be the hypothesis upon which men and women will ordinarily proceed.
There will be no compulsion behind it except the compulsion in each man
and woman to reach a true adjustment of his life.

It is in this necessity of clarifying their love for those who are
closest to them that the moral problems of the new age come to a
personal issue. It is in the realm of sexual relations that mankind is
being schooled amidst pain and worry for the novel conditions which
modernity imposes. It is there, rather than in politics, business, or
even in religion, that the issues are urgent, vivid, and inescapable.
It is there that they touch most poignantly and most radically the
organic roots of human personality. And it is there, in the ordering of
their personal attachments, [p313] that for most men the process of
salvation must necessarily begin.

For disinterestedness in all things, as Dean Inge says, is a mountain
track which the many are likely in the future as in the past to find
cold, bleak, and bare: that is why “the road of ascent is by personal
affection for man.” By the happy ordering of their personal affections
they may establish the type and the quality and the direction of their
desires for all things. It is in the hidden issues between lovers,
more than anywhere else, that modern men and women are compelled, by
personal anguish rather than by laws and preachments or even by the
persuasions of abstract philosophy, to transcend naive desire and to
reach out towards a mature and disinterested partnership with their
world.




