CHAPTER XII [p232]

THE BUSINESS OF THE GREAT SOCIETY


1. _The Invention of Invention_

One of the characteristics of the age we live in is that we are forever
trying to explain it. We feel that if we understood it better we should
know better how to live in it, and should cease to be aliens who do not
know the landmarks of a strange country. There is, however, a school
of philosophic historians who argue that this sense of novelty in the
modern world is an illusion, and that as a matter of fact mankind has
passed before through the same phase of the same inexorable cycle. The
boldest of them, like Oswald Spengler, cite chapter and verse to show
that there have been several of these great cycles of development from
incubation through maturity to decay, and that our western civilization
which began about 900 A.D. is now in the phase which corresponds with
the century after Pericles in the classical world.

That the analogy is striking no reader of Spengler will deny who can
endure Spengler’s procrustean determination to make the evidence fit
the theory. We can see the growth of towns at the expense of the
farms, the rise of capitalism, the growth of international trade and
finance, a development of nationalism, of democracy, attempts at the
abolition of war through international organization, and with it all
a dissolution of the popular religion, of [p233] the traditional
morality, and vast and searching inquiry into the meaning of life.
There is little doubt that the speculation of the Greek philosophers
seems extraordinarily fresh to us, because they were confronted with a
situation in many respects remarkably like our own.

But however nicely such analogies are worked out they are superficial
and misleading. There is something radically new in the modern world,
something for which there is no parallel in any other civilization.
This new thing is usually described as power-driven machinery. Thus
Mr. Charles A. Beard says that “what is called Western or modern
civilization by way of contrast with the civilization of the Orient or
Mediæval times is at bottom a civilization that rests upon machinery
and science as distinguished from one founded on agriculture or
handicraft commerce. It is in reality a technological civilization ...
and ... it threatens to overcome and transform the whole globe.” By way
of illustrating how deeply machinery affects human life, Mr. Beard says
that because they are untouched by this machine civilization “there
are more fundamental resemblances between the culture of a peasant in
a remote village in Spain and that of a peasant in a remote village
in Japan than between the culture of a Christian priest of the upper
Pyrenees and that of a Baptist clergyman in a thriving manufacturing
town in Illinois.”

Mr. H. G. Wells uses much the same argument to show that in spite of
the apparent similarities there is an essential difference between our
civilization and the later phases of the classical. “The essential
difference,” he says, “between the amassing of riches, the extinction
of small farmers and small business men, and the phase of [p234] big
finance in the latter centuries of the Roman republic on the one hand,
and the very similar concentration of capital in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries on the other, lies in the profound difference in
the character of labor that the mechanical revolution was bringing
about. The power of the old world was human power; everything depended
ultimately upon the driving power of human muscle, the muscle of
ignorant and subjugated men. A little animal muscle, supplied by draft
oxen, horse traction, and the like contributed. Where a weight had to
be lifted, men lifted it; where a rock had to be quarried, men chipped
it out; where a field had to be ploughed, men and oxen ploughed it;
the Roman equivalent of the steamship was the galley with its banks of
sweating rowers.... The Roman civilization was built upon cheap and
degraded human beings; modern civilization is being rebuilt upon cheap
mechanical power.”

These differences are genuine enough, and yet it is doubtful whether
Mr. Wells has described the really “new thing in human experience.”
After all a great deal of cheap man power is still used in conjunction
with cheap mechanical power; it is somewhat of an idealization to
talk as if the machine had supplanted the drudge. What Mr. Wells has
in mind, of course, is that in the Roman world a vast proportion of
mankind were doomed to “purely mechanical drudgery” whereas in the
modern world there is tangible hope that they will be released from it.
They are not yet released from it, however, and their hope of release
rests upon the really new element in human experience.

The various mechanical inventions from James Watt’s [p235] steam
engine to the electric dishwasher and vacuum cleaner are not this new
element. All these inventions, singly or collectively, though they have
revolutionized the manner of human life, are not the ultimate reason
why men put such hope in machines. Their hope is not based on the
machines we possess. They are obviously a mixed blessing. Their hope is
based on the machines that are yet to be made, and they have reason to
hope because a really new thing has come into the world. That thing is
the invention of invention.

Men have not merely invented the modern machines. There have been
machines invented since the earliest days, incalculably important, like
the wheel, like sailing ships, like the windmill and the watermill.
But in modern times men have invented a method of inventing, they have
discovered a method of discovery. Mechanical progress has ceased to
be casual and accidental and has become systematic and cumulative. We
know, as no other people ever knew before, that we shall make more
and more perfect machines. When Mr. Beard says that “the machine
civilization differs from all others in that it is highly dynamic,
containing within itself the seeds of constant reconstruction,” he is,
I take it, referring to this supreme discovery which is the art of
discovery itself.


2. _The Creative Principle in Modernity_

Although the disposition to scientific thought may be said to have
originated in remote antiquity, it was not until the Sixteenth Century
of our era that it ceased to appear spasmodically and as if by chance.
The Greeks had their schools on the shores of the Ægean, in Sicily,
[p236] and in Alexandria, and in them some of the conclusions and much
of the spirit of scientific inquiry was imaginatively anticipated.
But the conscious organized effort to relate “general principles to
irreducible and stubborn facts,” as Mr. Whitehead puts it, began about
three hundred years ago. The first society chiefly devoted to science
seems to have been founded by della Porta at Naples in 1560, but it
was closed by the ecclesiastical authorities. Forty years later the
_Accademia dei Lincei_ was founded at Rome with Galileo among its early
members. The Royal Society of London was chartered in 1662. The French
Academy of Sciences began its meetings in 1666, the Berlin Academy in
1700, the American Philosophical Association was proposed by Benjamin
Franklin in 1743 and organized in 1769.

The active pursuit of science is a matter, then, of only a few hundred
years. The practical consequences in the form of useful inventions are
still more recent. Newcomen’s air-and-steam engine dates from 1705,
but it was not until 1764 that James Watt produced a practicable steam
engine. It was not until the beginning of the Nineteenth Century that
invention really got under way and began to transform the structure
of civilization. It was not until about 1850 that the importance of
invention had impressed itself upon the English people, yet they were
the first to experience the effects of the mechanical revolution. They
had seen the first railway, the first steamboat, the illumination
of towns by gas, and the application of power-driven machinery to
manufacture. Professor Bury fixes the Exhibition of London in 1851 as
the event which marks the public recognition of the role of science
[p237] in modern civilization. The Prince Consort who originated the
Exhibition said in his opening speech that it was designed “to give
us a true test and a living picture of the point of development at
which the whole of mankind has arrived in this great task, and a new
starting-point from which the nations will be able to direct their
further exertions.”

But this public recognition was at first rather sentimental and
gaping. The full realization of the place of science in modern life
came slowly, and only in our generation can it be said that political
rulers, captains of industry, and leaders of thought have actually
begun to appreciate how central is science in our civilization, and to
act upon that realization. In our time governments have begun to take
science seriously and to promote research and invention not only in
the art of war, but in the interest of trade, agriculture, and public
hygiene. Great corporations have established laboratories of their
own, not merely for the perfecting of their own processes, but for
the promotion of pure research. Money has become available in great
quantities for scientific work in the universities, and the educational
curriculum down to the lowest grades has begun to be reorganized not
only in order to train a minority of the population for research and
invention, but to train the great majority to understand and use the
machines and the processes which are available.

The motives and the habits of mind which are thus brought into play at
the very heart of modern civilization are mature and disinterested.
That may not be the primary intention, but it is the inevitable
result. No doubt [p238] governments encourage research in order to
have powerful weapons with which to overawe their neighbors; no doubt
industries encourage research because it pays; no doubt scientists
and inventors are in some measure moved by the desire for wealth and
fame; no doubt the general public approves of science because of the
pleasures and conveniences it provides; no doubt there is an intuitive
sense in modern communities that the prospects of survival both for
nations and for individuals are somehow related to their command of
scientific knowledge. But nevertheless, whatever the motives which
cause men to endow laboratories, to work patiently in laboratories or
to buy the products, the fact remains that inside the laboratory, at
the heart of this whole business, the habit of disinterested realism in
dealing with the data is the indispensable habit of mind. Unless this
habit of mind exists in the actual research, all the endowments and
honorary degrees and prize awards will not produce the results desired.
This is an original and tremendous fact in human experience: that a
whole civilization should be dependent upon technology, that this
technology should be dependent upon pure science, and that this pure
science should be dependent upon a race of men who consciously refuse,
as Mr. Bertrand Russell has said, to regard their “own desires, tastes,
and interests as affording a key to the understanding of the world.”

When I say that the refusal is conscious I do not mean merely that
scientists tell themselves that they must ignore their prejudices.
They have developed an elaborate method for detecting and discounting
their prejudices. It consists of instruments of precision, an accurate
vocabulary, [p239] controlled experiment, and the submission not only
of their results but of their processes to the judgment of their peers.
This method provides a body in which the spirit of disinterestedness
can live, and it might be said that modern science, not in its crude
consequences but in its inward principle, not, that is to say, as
manifested in automobiles, electric refrigerators, and rayon silk, but
in the behavior of the men who invent and perfect these things, is
the actual realization in a practicable mode of conduct which can be
learned and practiced, of the insight of high religion. The scientific
discipline is one way in which this insight, hitherto lyrical and
personal and apart, is brought down to earth and into direct and
decisive contact with the concerns of mankind.

It is no exaggeration to say that pure science is high religion
incarnate. No doubt the science we have is not the whole incarnation,
but as far as it goes it translates into a usable procedure what in the
teaching of the sages has been an esoteric insight. Scientific method
can be learned. The learning of it matures the human character. Its
value can be demonstrated in concrete results. Its importance in human
life is indisputable. But the insight of high religion as such could be
appreciated only by those who were already mature; it corresponded to
nothing in the experience and the necessities of the ordinary man. It
could be talked about but not taught; it could inspire only the few who
were somehow already inspired. With the discovery of scientific method
the insight has ceased to be an intangible and somewhat formless idea
and has become an organized effort which moves mankind more profoundly
than anything else in human affairs. Therefore, [p240] what was once
a personal attitude on the part of a few who were somewhat withdrawn
and disregarded has become the central principle in the careers of
innumerable, immensely influential, men.

Because the scientific discipline is, in fact, the creative element in
that which is distinctively modern, circumstances conspire to enhance
its prestige and to extend its acceptance. It is the ultimate source
of profit and of power, and therefore it is assured of protection and
encouragement by those who rule the modern state. They cannot afford
not to cultivate the scientific spirit: the nation which does not
cultivate it cannot hold its place among the nations, the corporation
which ignores it will be destroyed by its competitors. The training of
an ever increasing number of pure scientists, of inventors, and of men
who can operate and repair machinery is, therefore, a sheer practical
necessity. The scientific discipline has become, as Mr. Graham Wallas
would say, an essential part of our social heritage. For the machine
technology requires a population which in some measure partakes of the
spirit which created it.

Naturally enough, however, the influence of the scientific spirit
becomes more and more diluted the further one goes from the work of the
men who actually conceive, discover, invent, and perfect the modern
machines. From Faraday, Maxwell, and Hertz who did the chief work
which made possible the wireless it is a long way to the broker who
sells radio stock or the householder with his six-tube set. I have not
been supposing that these latter partake in any way of the original
spirit which made the radio possible. But it is a fact of enormous
consequences, [p241] cumulative in its effect upon the education of
succeeding generations, that the radio, and all the other contrivances
around which modern civilization is constructed, should be possible
only by the increasing use of a scientific discipline.


3. _Naive Capitalism_

The application of science to the daily affairs of men was acclaimed
at first with more enthusiasm than understanding. “That early people,”
said Buffon, speaking of the Babylonians, “was very happy, because
it was very scientific.” Entranced with the success of the Newtonian
physics and by the dazzling effect of inventions, the intellectuals
of the Eighteenth Century persuaded themselves that science was a
messianic force which would liberate mankind from pain, drudgery, and
error. It was believed that science would somewhat mysteriously endow
mankind with invincible power over the forces of nature, and that men,
if they were released from the bondage of religious custom and belief,
could employ the power of science to their own consummate happiness.
The mechanical revolution, in short, was inaugurated on the theory
that the natural man must be liberated from moral conventions and that
nature must be subjugated by mechanical instruments.

There are intelligible historical reasons why our great grandfathers
adopted this view. They found themselves in a world regulated by the
customs and beliefs of a landed society. They could not operate their
factories successfully in such a society, and they rebelled fiercely
against the customs which restricted them. That rebellion [p242]
was rationalized in the philosophy of _laissez-faire_ which meant in
essence that machine industry must not be interfered with by landlords
and peasants who had feudal rights, nor by governments which protected
those rights. On the positive side this rebellion expressed itself in
declarations of the rights of man. These declarations were a denial of
the vested rights of men under the old landed order and an assertion of
the rights of men, particularly the new middle-class men, who proposed
to make the most of the new industrial and mechanical order. By the
rights of men they meant primarily freedom of contract, freedom of
trade, freedom of occupation—those freedoms, that is to say, which
made it possible for the new employer to buy and sell, to hire and fire
without being accountable to anyone.

The prophet of this new dispensation was Adam Smith. In the _Wealth of
Nations_ he wrote that

  All systems either of preference or of restraint ... being thus
  completely taken away, the obvious and simple system of natural
  liberty establishes itself of its own accord. Every man, as long as
  he does not violate the laws of justice, is left perfectly free to
  pursue his own interest his own way, and to bring both his industry
  and capital into competition with those of any other man, or order
  of men.

The employing class in the early days of capitalism honestly believed,
and indeed its less enlightened members still believe to this very
day, that somehow the general welfare will be served by trusting
naively to the acquisitive instincts of the employing capitalist. Thus
at the outset the machine technology was applied under the direction
of men who scorned as sentimental, when they [p243] did not regard
as subversive, that disinterestedness which alone makes possible the
machine technology itself. They did not understand science. They merely
exploited certain of the inventions which scientists produced. What
they believed, insofar as they had any philosophy, was that there
exists a preestablished harmony in the universe—an “obvious and
simple system of natural liberty,” in Adam Smith’s language, “which
establishes itself of its own accord”—by which if each man naively
pursued his primitive impulse to have and to hold in competition with
other men, peace, prosperity, and happiness would ensue.

They did not ensue. And the social history of the last seventy-five
years has in large measure been concerned with the birth pains of an
industrial philosophy that will really suit the machine technology and
the nature of man. For the notion that an intricate and delicately
poised industrial mechanism could be operated by uneducated men
snatching competitively at profits was soon exposed as a simple-minded
delusion.

It was discovered that if each banker was permitted to do what seemed
to him immediately most profitable, the result was a succession of
disastrous inflations and deflations of credit; that if natural
resources in oil, coal, lumber, and the like were subjected to the
competitive principle, the result was a shocking waste of irreplaceable
wealth; that if the hiring and firing of labor were carried on under
absolute freedom of contract, a whole chain of social evils in the form
of child labor, unsuitable labor for women, sweating, unemployment,
and the importation of cheap and unassimilable labor resulted; that if
business men were left to their own devices the consumer of necessary
[p244] goods was helpless when he was confronted with industries
in which there was an element of monopoly. There is no need here to
recount the well-known story of how in every modern community the
theory of free competition has in the course of the last generation
been modified by legislation, by organized labor, by organized business
itself. So little has _laissez-faire_ worked under actual experience
that all the powers of the government have actually had to be invoked
to preserve a certain amount of compulsory “free competition.” For the
industrial machine, as soon as it passes out of the early phase of
rough exploitation in virgin territory, becomes unmanageable by naively
competitive and acquisitive men.


4. _The Credo of Old-Style Business_

It was frequently pointed out by moralists like Ruskin and William
Morris, and by churchmen as well, that this “obvious and simple system
of natural liberty” by which “every man was left perfectly free to
pursue his own interest his own way,” was not only contrary to the
dogmas of the popular religion but irreconcilable with moral wisdom.
The credo of the unregenerate business man was utterly atheistical in
its premises, for it displaced the notion that there is any higher
will than his own to which the employer is accountable. It was more
than atheistical, however; it was, in Aristotle’s sense of the word,
barbarous in that it implied “the living as one likes” with virtually
complete acquiescence in the supremacy of the acquisitive instinct.

There is no reason to suppose that such theoretical comments on the
credo of naive capitalism did more than [p245] rub off a little
of its unction. Capitalism may be, as Mr. Maynard Keynes has said,
“absolutely irreligious ... often, though not always, a mere congeries
of possessors and pursuers.” Were the credo workable in practice, some
way would have been found of anointing it with attractive phrases. The
real reason for the gradual abandonment of the credo, proclaimed by
Adam Smith and repeated so steadily since his day, is that the credo
of naive capitalism is deeply at variance with the real character
of modern industry. It rests upon false premises, is therefore
contradicted by experience, and has proved to be unworkable.

The system of natural liberty assumes that if each man pursues his own
interest his own way, each man will promote his interest. There is an
unanalyzed fallacy in this theory which makes it utterly meaningless.
It is assumed that each man knows his own interest and can therefore
pursue it. But that is precisely what no man is certain to know, and
what few men can possibly know if they consult only their own impulses.
There is nothing in the natural equipment of man which enables him to
know intuitively whether it will be profitable to increase his output
or reduce it, to enter a new line of business, to buy or to sell, or to
make any of the other thousand and one decisions on which the conduct
of business depends. Since he is not born with this wisdom, since
he does not automatically absorb it from the air, to pursue his own
interest his own way is a fairly certain way to disaster.

The fallacy of the theory of natural liberty is undetected in a
bonanza period of industrial development. Where the business man has
unexhausted natural resources to [p246] draw upon, where there is a
surplus of customers competing for his goods, he can with naive and
furious energy pursue his own interests his own way and reap enormous
profits. There is no real resistance from the outside; there are no
stubborn and irreducible facts to which he must adjust himself. He
can proceed with an infantile philosophy to achieve success. But this
bonanza period when the omnipotence of the capitalist is unthwarted,
and his omniscience therefore assumed, soon comes to an end. In
advanced communities the mere multiplication of industries produces
such a complicated environment that the business man is compelled to
substitute considered policies for his intuitions, objective surveys
for his guesses, and conferences world without end for his natural
liberties.

What has upset the idea of the old-style business man that he knows
what’s what is that the relevant facts are no longer visible. The owner
of a primitive factory might have known all his working men and all
his customers; the keeper of a little neighborhood shop may still, to
a certain extent, know personally his whole business. But for most
men to-day the facts which matter vitally to them are out of sight,
beyond their personal control, intricate, subject to more or less
unpredictable changes, and even with highly technical reporting and
analysis almost unintelligible to the average man.

It is, of course, the machine process itself which has created these
complications. Men are forced to buy and sell in markets that for many
commodities are world-wide: they do not buy and sell in one market
but in many markets, in markets for raw materials, in markets for
semi-finished goods, in wholesale and retail markets, in labor [p247]
markets, in the money market. They employ and are employed in corporate
organizations which are owned here, there, and everywhere. They compete
not only with their obvious competitors in the same line of business,
but with competitors in wholly different lines of business, automobiles
with railroads, railroads with ships, cotton goods with silk and silk
with artificial silk, pianos with furs and cigarettes with chewing gum.
The modern environment is invisible, complex, without settled plan,
subtly and swiftly changing, offering innumerable choices, demanding
great knowledge and imaginative effort to comprehend it.

It is not a social order at all as the Greek city state or the feudal
society was a social order. It is rather a field for careers, an arena
of talents, an ordeal by trial and error, and a risky speculation. No
man has an established position in the modern world. There is no system
of rights and duties to which he is clearly subject. He moves among
these complexities which are shrouded in obscurity, making the best he
can out of what little it is possible for him to know.


5. _Old-Style Reform and Revolution_

Naive capitalism—that is to say, the theory of each for himself
according to such light as he might happen to possess—produced such
monstrous evils the world over that an anti-capitalist reaction was
the inevitable result. What had happened was that the most intricate
and consequential technology which man has ever employed on this
planet was given over to the direction of a class of enterprising,
acquisitive, uneducated, and undisciplined [p248] men. No doubt it
could not have been otherwise. The only discipline that was known was
the discipline of custom in a society of farmers, hand-workers, and
traders. The only education available was one based on the premises
of the past. The revolution in human affairs produced by the machine
began slowly, and no one could have anticipated its course. It would
be absurd, therefore, to complain in retrospect over the fact that
no one was prepared for the industrial changes which took place.
The only absurdity, and it is still a prevalent one, is to go on
supposing that the political philosophy and the “economic laws” which
were extemporized to justify the behavior of the first bewildered
capitalists have any real bearing upon modern industry.

But it is almost equally absurd to take too seriously the “reforms”
and “solutions” which were devised by kindhearted men to alleviate
the pains suffered by those who were hurt by the results of this
early capitalist control of the machine. These proposals, when they
are examined, turn out almost invariably to have been proposals for
coercing or for abolishing the then masters of industry. I do not
mean to deny the utility of the long series of legislative enactments
which began about the middle of the Nineteenth Century and are still
being elaborated. The factory acts, the regulatory laws, the measures
designed to protect the consumers against fraud were, looked at singly,
good, bad, or indifferent. As a whole they were a necessary attempt
to police those who had been left free to pursue their own interest
their own way. But when it has been said that they were necessary,
and that they are still necessary, it is important to realize just
what they [p249] imply. They imply that the masters of industry are
unregenerate and will remain unregenerate. The whole effort to police
capitalism assumes that the capitalist can be civilized only by means
of the police. The trouble with this theory is that there is no way
to make sure that the policemen will themselves be civilized. It
presupposes that somehow politicians and office-holders will be wise
enough and disinterested enough to make business men do what they would
not otherwise do. The fundamental problem, which is to find a way of
directing industry wisely, is not solved. It is merely deposited on the
doorsteps of the politician.

The revolutionary programs sponsored by the socialists in the half
century before the Great War were based on the notion that it is
impossible to police the capitalist-employers and that, therefore, they
should be abolished. In their place functionaries were to be installed.
The theory was that these functionaries, being hired by the state and
being deprived of all incentive for personal profit, would administer
the industrial machine disinterestedly. The trouble with this theory is
in its assumption that the removal of one kind of temptation, namely,
the possibility of direct personal pecuniary profit—will make the
functionaries mature and disinterested men.

This is nothing but a new variant of the ascetic principle that it is
possible to shut off an undesirable impulse by thwarting it. Human
nature does not work that way. The mere frustration of an impulse like
acquisitiveness produces either some new expression of that impulse or
disorders due to its frustration. It produces, that is to say, either
corruption or the lethargy, the pedantry, and the [p250] officiousness
which are the diseases of bureaucracy the world over. The socialists
are right, as the early Christians were right, in their profound
distrust of the acquisitive instinct as the dominant motive in society.
But they are wrong in supposing that by transferring the command of
industry from business men to socialist officials they can in any
fundamental sense alter the acquisitive instinct. That can be done only
by refining the human character through a better understanding of the
environment. I do not mean to say that a revolution like the Russian
does not sweep away a vast amount of accumulated rubbish. I am talking
not about the salutary destruction which may accompany a revolution,
but of the problem which confronts the successful revolutionists when
they have to carry on the necessary affairs of men.

When that time comes they are bound to find that the administration
of industry under socialism no less than under capitalism depends
upon the character of the administrators. Corrupt, stupid, grasping
functionaries will make at least as big a muddle of socialism as
stupid, selfish, and acquisitive employers can make of capitalism.
There is no escape from this elementary truth, and all social policies
which attempt to ignore it must come to grief. They are essentially
utopian. The early doctrine of _laissez-faire_ was utopian because it
assumed that unregenerate men were destined somehow to muddle their
way to a harmonious result. The early socialism was utopian because it
assumed that these same unregenerate men, once the laws of property had
been altered, would somehow muddle their way to a harmonious result.
Both ignored the chief lesson of human experience, which is [p251] the
insight of high religion, that unregenerate men can only muddle into
muddle.

A dim recognition of this truth has helped to inspire the procedure of
the two most recent manifestations of the revolutionary spirit. I refer
to bolshevism and to fascism. It is proper, I believe, to talk of them
as one phenomenon for their fundamental similarities, as most everyone
but the bolshevists and the fascists themselves has noted, are much
greater than their superficial differences. They were attempts to cure
the evils resulting from the breakdown of a somewhat primitive form
of capitalism. In neither Russia nor Italy had modern industrialism
passed beyond its adolescent phase. In both countries the prevailing
social order for the great mass of people was still pre-machine and
pre-industrial. In both countries the acids of modernity had not yet
eaten deeply into the religious disposition of the people. In both
countries the natural pattern of all government was still the primitive
pattern of the hierarchy with an absolute sovereign at the top. The
bolshevik dictatorship and the fascist dictatorship, underneath all
their modernist labels and theories, are feudal military organizations
attempting to subdue and administer the machine technology.

The theorists of the two dictatorships are, however, men educated under
modern influences, and the result is that their theories are an attempt
to explain the primitive behavior of the two dictatorships in terms
which are consistent with modern ideas. The formula reached in both
instances is the same one. The dictatorships are said to be temporary.
Their purpose, we are told, is to put the [p252] new social order
into effect, and to keep it going long enough by dictation from on top
to give time for a new generation to grow up which will be purged of
those vices which would make the new order unworkable. The bolshevists
and fascists regard themselves as ever so much more realistic than
the old democratic socialists and the _laissez-faire_ liberals whom
they have executed, exiled, or dosed with castor oil. In an important
sense they are more realistic. They have recognized that a substitute
for primitive capitalism cannot be inaugurated or administered by a
generation which has been schooled in the ways of primitive capitalism.
And therefore the oligarchy of dictators, as a conscious, enlightened,
superior, and heavily armed minority, propose to administer the
industrial machine as trustees until there is a generation ready to
accept the responsibilities.

It would be idle to predict that they will not succeed. But it is
reasonable, I believe, to predict that if they succeed it will
be because they are administering relatively simple industrial
arrangements. It is precisely because the economic system of Russia is
still fundamentally pre-capitalist and pre-mechanical that the feudal
organization of the bolshevists is most likely to survive. Because
the economic system of Italy is more modern than Russia’s, the future
of the fascist dictatorship is much less assured. For insofar as the
machine technology is advanced, it becomes complex, delicate, and
difficult to manage by commands from the top.


6. _The Diffusion of the Acquisitive Instinct_

While both the bolshevists and the fascists look upon [p253]
themselves as pathfinders of progress, it is fairly clear, I think,
that they are, in the literal meaning of the term, reactionary. They
have won their victories among the people to whom modern large scale
industrial organization is still an unnatural and alien thing. It is no
accident that fascism or bolshevism took root in Italy and Spain, but
not in Germany and England, in Hungary but not in Austria, in Poland
but not in Czechoslovakia, in Russia but not in Scandinavia, in China
but not in Japan, in Central America but not in Canada or the United
States. Dictatorship, based on a military hierarchy, administering
the affairs of the community on behalf of the “nation” or of the
“proletariat,” is nothing but a return to the natural organization of
society in the pre-machine age. Some countries, like Russia, Mexico,
and China, for example, are still living in the pre-machine age.
Others, like Italy, had become only partially industrialized when they
were subjected to such strains by the War that they reverted to the
feudal pattern of behavior. Unable to master the industrial process by
methods which are appropriate to it, the fascists and the bolshevists
are attempting to master it by methods which antedate it. That is why
military dictatorship in a country like Mexico may be looked upon as
the normal type of social control, whereas in Italy it is regressive
and neurotic. Feudal habits are appropriate to a feudal society; in
a semi-industrialized nation they are a social disease. It is the
disease of frightened and despairing men who, having failed to adjust
themselves to the reality of the industrial process, try, by main
force and awkwardness, to adjust the machine process to a pre-machine
mentality. [p254]

The more primitive the machine process is—that is, the more nearly it
resembles the petty handicrafts of earlier days—the better are the
chances for survival of a bolshevist or fascist dictatorship. Where
the machine technology is really established and advanced it is simply
unmanageable by militarized functionaries. For when the process has
become infinitely complicated, the subdivision of function is carried
so far, the internal adjustments are so numerous and so varied that
no collection of oligarchs in a capital city, however much they may
look like supermen, can possibly direct the industrial system. In its
advanced stages, as it now exists in England, Germany, or the United
States, nobody comprehends the system as a whole. One has only to
glance over the financial pages of an American newspaper, to look at
the list of corporations doing business, to try and imagine the myriad
daily decisions at a thousand points which their business involves,
in order to realize the bewildering complexity of modern industrial
society. To suppose that all that can be administered, or even
directed, from any central point by any human brain, by any cabinet of
officeholders or cabal of revolutionists, is simply to have failed to
take it in. Here is the essential reason why bolshevism and fascism
are, as we say, un-American. They are no less un-Belgian, un-German,
un-English. For they are unindustrial.

The same reasons which make dictatorship unworkable are rapidly
rendering obsolete the attempts to reform industry by policing it.
Every year as the machine technology becomes more elaborated, the
legislative control for which the pre-war progressives fought becomes
less [p255] effective. It becomes more and more difficult for
legislatures to make laws to protect the workers which really fit the
rapidly changing conditions of work. Hence the tendency to put the real
law-making power in the hands of administrative officials and judges
who can adjust the general purpose of the law to the unclassifiable
facts of industry. The whole attempt to regulate public utilities in
the interest of the consumer is chaotic, for these organizations, by
their intricacies, their scale, and their constant revolutions in
technology, tend to escape the jurisdiction of officials exercising
a local jurisdiction. The current outcry against the multiplication
of laws and the meddling of legislatures is in part, but not wholly,
the outcry of old-fashioned business men demanding their old natural
liberty to pursue their own interest their own way. The outcry is
due no less to a recognition that the industrial process is becoming
too subtly organized to be policed successfully by the wholesale,
uninformed enactments of legislatures.

Yet the very thing which makes an advanced industrial organization
too complex to be directed by a dictatorship, or to be policed by
democratic politicians, is forcing the leaders of industry to evolve
forms of self-control. When I say that they are being forced to do this
I am not referring to those ostentatiously benevolent things which are
done now and then as sops to Cerberus. There is a certain amount of
reform undertaken voluntarily by men who profess to fear ‘bolshevism,’
and if not bolshevism, then Congress. That is relatively unimportant.
So also is the discovery that it pays to cultivate the good will of
the public. What I am referring to is the fact that the [p256] sheer
complexity of the industrial system would make it unmanageable to
business men, no less than to politicians or dictators, if business men
were not learning to organize its control.

It is the necessity of stabilizing their own business, of directing
technical processes which are beyond the understanding of stockholders,
of adjusting the supply and demand of the multitudinous elements
they deal in, which is the compelling force behind that divorce
between management and ownership, that growing use of experts and of
statistical measurements, and that development of trade associations,
of conferences, committees, and councils, with which modern industry
is honeycombed. The captain of industry in the romantic sense tends to
disappear in highly evolved industrial organizations. His thundering
commands are replaced by the decisions of executives who consult with
representatives of the interests involved and check their opinions
by the findings of experts. The greater the corporation the more
the shareholders and the directors lose the actual direction of the
institution. They cannot direct the corporation because they do
not really know what it is and what it is doing. That knowledge is
subdivided among the executives and bureau chiefs and consultants, all
of them on salary; each of them is so relatively small a factor in the
whole that his personal success is in very large degree bound up with
the success of the institution. A certain amount of jealousy, intrigue,
and destructive pushing, of office politics, in short, naturally
prevails, men being what they are. But as compared with the old-style
business man, the ordinary executive in a great corporation is
something quite strange. He is [p257] so little the monarch of all he
surveys, his experience is so continually with stubborn and irreducible
facts, he is so much compelled to adjust his own preferences to the
preferences of others, that he becomes a relatively disinterested
person. The more clearly he realizes the nature of his position in
industry, the more he tends to submit his desires to the discipline of
objective information. And the more he does this the less dominated
he is by the acquisitiveness of immaturity. He may on the side gamble
acquisitively in the stock market or at the race track, but in relation
to his business his acquisitive instinct tends to become diffused and
to be absorbed in the job itself.


7. _Ideals_

It is my impression that when machine industry reaches a certain scale
of complexity it exerts such pressure upon the men who run it that they
cannot help socializing it. They are subject to a kind of economic
selection under which only those men survive who are capable of taking
a somewhat disinterested view of their work. A mature industry, because
it is too subtly organized to be run by naively passionate men, puts a
premium upon men whose characters are sufficiently matured to make them
respect reality and to discount their own prejudices.

When the machine technology is really advanced, that is to say when it
has drawn great masses of men within the orbit of its influence, when
a corporation has become really great, the old distinction between
public and private interest becomes very dim. I think it is destined
largely to disappear. It is difficult even to-day to say [p258]
whether the great railways, the General Electric Company, the United
States Steel Corporation, the bigger insurance companies and banks are
public or private institutions. When institutions reach a point where
the legal owners are virtually disfranchised, when the direction is in
the hands of salaried executives, technicians, and experts who hold
themselves more or less accountable in standards of conduct to their
fellow professionals, when the ultimate control is looked upon by the
directors not as “business” but as a trust, it is not fanciful to say,
as Mr. Keynes has said, that “the battle of socialism against unlimited
private profit is being won in detail hour by hour.”

Insofar as industry itself evolves its own control, it will regain its
liberty from external interference. To say that is to say simply that
the “natural liberty” of the early business man was unworkable because
the early business man was unregenerate: he was immature, and he was
therefore acquisitive. The only kind of liberty which is workable in
the real world is the liberty of the disinterested man, of the man who
has transformed his passions by an understanding of necessity. He can,
as Confucius said, follow what his heart desires without transgressing
what is right. For he has learned to desire what is right.

The more perfectly we understand the implications of the machine
technology upon which our civilization is based, the easier it will be
for us to live with it. We shall discern the ideals of our industry in
the necessities of industry itself. They are the direction in which it
must evolve if it is to fulfill itself. That is what ideals are. They
are not hallucinations. They are not a collection [p259] of pretty and
casual preferences. Ideals are an imaginative understanding of that
which is desirable in that which is possible. As we discern the ideals
of the machine technology we can consciously pursue them, knowing that
we are not vainly trying to impose our casual prejudices, but that we
are in harmony with the age we live in.




