XIV

SOUNDINGS


I. THE GREAT MYSTERY

No man in his senses can fail to grant the reality of the Great
Mystery, the inscrutable and unspeakable Something which lies back of
us and works in and through us, the vast Cosmic Energy of which we
and all forms of life are manifestations, and in which we live and
move and have our being, call it physical energy or psychic power, or
what you will.

We are not here by our wills; we do not have our eyes and ears,
and the other wonderful mechanisms of our bodies, and all our
varied instincts and capacities and aspirations of our own will and
invention. We have little or nothing to do with the functioning of
our various bodily organs, scarcely more than we have to do with the
color of our eyes, our innate dispositions, and our mental aptitudes.
In something not of us, at least not subject to our wills and
wishes, is to be sought the explanation of our appearance, and that
of all other forms of life, in this world. In other words, we are
an integral part of a system of things which transcends our powers
and baffles our understanding. After we have granted all this, can
we still feel the solid ground beneath our feet in accepting the
explanation and interpretation which any of the formal religious
systems, old or new, place upon it? I think not.

In the presence of the midnight skies, of the creative and
destructive cosmic processes constantly going on in the awful depths
of the sidereal space, of suns and systems coming in and going out
like blooming and fading flowers, in the presence of the geological
and biological histories of the globe, or of the histories of the
different nations and races of the globe, does not most of our
Christian mythology seem utterly childish?

How strange that we should crave a creed or a belief that goes
outside of our experimental knowledge; that is independent of it,
not subject to its tests and limitations; something afar off and
irrational and inexplicable, and beyond the reach of time and change!
Who is the philosopher who said that we are guided by our common
sense in everything but our religious beliefs?

We can taste and see and touch and smell and eat and drink and
measure and accumulate and organize and assimilate scientific
knowledge; it gives us a place whereon to stand our Archimedean lever
with which we can move the world and the whole sidereal system of
worlds. But with our so-called theological knowledge, and with much
of our metaphysical knowledge, it is like trying to move with a lever
the mountain upon which one stands.

Furthermore, grant that the religious sense of mankind is real, one
of the most real things in life,--so real and valuable that the
life, the literature, and the art which have it not seem shallow
and ephemeral,--a living sense of the Infinite Mystery in which we
are embosomed and our constant relation to it,--grant this, I say,
and yet our creeds and systems of salvation do not minister to it.
They are too legal; they know and explain too much. With them the
administration of the universe is as simple and judicial as a police
court, save that in human courts of justice there is no deputed sin
or atonement. This is a gratuitous, manufactured mystery of the
theologians, as are the Trinity and the saving grace of rites and
ceremonies.

Science has real mysteries. Catalysis is one. How or why the presence
of one body should cause two other bodies to unite chemically without
parting with an atom of their own substance--as in several cases in
industrial chemistry--is certainly a mystery. On the strength of such
and similar facts in chemistry, shall we image or invent a whole
category of mysteries which are beyond the reach of verification?

What mystery hovers about all chemical reactions! What a miracle
that two invisible gases, such as oxygen and hydrogen, should, when
chemically united, produce a body so utterly unlike either as is
water! The turning of water into wine is as nothing in comparison,
but even that feat we want to see done if we are to believe it.

What a mystery shrouds the whole subject of electricity and
electro-magnetism! A sort of disembodied force, working its will upon
matter and yet subject to none of the laws of matter. Spirit?--but a
spirit we can evoke at will, and make to do our bidding, to run our
errands, a spirit more friendly than unfriendly. How prone the common
mind is to think that because a thing is mysterious it must be true!

As I have already emphasized, as man is a part of Nature, so are all
his creeds and myths, his religions and his philosophies, a part of
Nature. What validity does that give them? What support is lent to
our creed by the fact that it has been slowly evolved out of the
religious experiences of the centuries? Our sense of truth is also
an evolution, and varies from age to age. That a thing is a part
of Nature does not settle its value. Shadows are a part of Nature;
puff-balls, fungi, marsh-gas, disease-germs, and a thousand other
undesirable things are a part of Nature.

Although the various religious systems of mankind must have their
natural history, I regard them only as so many diverse attempts to
clothe the spirit against the cosmic chill of the vast, unhoused,
unsanctified, immeasurable out-of-doors of the universe. This they
do in varying degrees, and will continue to do, some appealing to
one type of mind, or--shall we say?--one stage of development, some
to another. The philosopher looks on and smiles, or pities, and is
content.


II. THE NATURAL ORDER

Even great thinkers like Mr. Balfour recoil from naturalism and
cheerfully embrace supernaturalism. Mr. Balfour finds the key to the
fundamental problems of life in the miracle of the Incarnation. He
injects into the natural order a theological concept, and the riddle
of man’s life is solved. To the naturalist such a conclusion is as
impossible as to hope to quench his thirst with the symbols, H_{2}O.

We may say every man born of woman is an incarnation of the
Infinite spirit, and the hyperbole may stand, but to affirm that
one particular man in the historic period was an incarnation in an
entirely other and more significant sense, is to read magic into
matters of common sense. It is an imaginary solution. It is an appeal
from the natural to the non-natural. It is offering an artificial
solution to a natural problem. One might as well attribute a failure
of the crops to one of the political parties, or an epidemic of
disease to an historical document. The doctrine of the Incarnation
is as far outside the realm of natural law as is magic, and to see
in this the master key to creation is like ascribing all the sin
and misery of the world to Adam’s transgression in the Garden of
Eden. The childish plan of salvation of our fathers is as good as
any other so long as it holds men up to higher standards of life and
of thought; but the day is fast passing when it can do this; natural
standards must in the end as surely prevail in religion as in our
daily lives.

The nature that we see about us is enough for all forms of life
except man; why should he flatter himself that his appearance and
life demand something extra, some miracle, something mysterious and
incomprehensible? Why not invest the gods we have and know with the
extra power demanded, rather than appeal to gods we know not? How
the fire warms us, how our food nourishes us, how we sprang from a
microscopic germ and grew to be the men we are, are miracles enough.
Every living thing is a miracle as wonderful as the Immaculate
Conception or the Incarnation, but of a different order. If I knew
how the meat and bread which the poet eats is turned into poetry,
or how the pond-lily weaves its satin and gold out of the muck and
slime of the creek-bottom, I should possess a secret that would make
me cease to wonder at the so-called “miracles.” In the face of the
marvels we hourly see about us in living Nature, why should we look
afar off and invent marvels of a new order? Why should we invent
impossible problems, and then invent impossible explanations of them?

The nature gods we know; we live in daily and hourly converse with
them; we see and know that we are dependent upon them every moment
of our lives. These gods--air, water, fire, earth--and the greater
gods whose eyes blink to us in the midnight skies, why not credit
them with the gifts that we ascribe to the imaginary gods of the
supernatural?

The more we search into the ways of Nature, the more wonderful and
potent we find them to be. It may be that if we could penetrate to
the true inwardness of matter, we should find the key to the mystery
of the soul and the master key to all our problems. But we feel that
we must look afar off, we must have recourse to the strange and the
miraculous. How the impossible does attract us! Even the fantastic
may be made the basis of a religious cult. In Florida, in a remote,
secluded place we found a religious sect, embracing men and women
of culture and refinement, who upheld the social and civic virtues
and cultivated the industrial arts, yet who deemed it essential for
their soul’s salvation to disbelieve all our popular astronomy, and
hold to the idea that, instead of living on the outside of a globe,
we live inside of a hollow sphere, and that the sun, moon, and stars
are appendages of this sphere, and not at all what we ordinarily take
them to be. The expounders of this faith are not at all disturbed by
such facts as a ship at sea dropping below the horizon, or an eclipse
of the moon showing the shadow of a round body falling upon it.
Such appearances only confirm their theory. These Florida fanatics
defy common sense and the exact demonstrations of science. Our
supernaturalists superinduce another order above and around the order
we call “natural,” and in a theological concept, the Incarnation,
link the two together. That they are linked at any other point is not
claimed. In the age of miracles they were linked at many points and
on many occasions. Any saint could link them together at will, and
reverse or hold up the processes of the natural order and substitute
those of the supernatural.

Such events as miracles come very easy to the mind imbued with the
old theological concepts. Why should not this omnipotent being who
made and rules the world and all that it holds, and who has a scheme
of his own to carry out with regard to man, step in at any time and
annul natural law or link it up with the supernatural? Belief in the
theory of such a being cuts many knots, while it ties others that
defy all our wits.

Life is so great a mystery that we need not invent others. We have
the proof of life always, what proof have we of the Incarnation? We
know what destroys life, what favors it, what conserves it, but we
do not know its origin. We know something about the stars, and we
know the constellations are only imaginary groupings. The historical
events upon which our creeds are founded are of the same character.
The Trinity is a constellation. The miraculous birth of Christ is a
constellation. The fixed stars of man’s moral nature and religious
aspirations are alone real. All the mythologies built upon them are
as fanciful as Orion and the Big Dipper. All the various religions of
the world, with all their supernatural features, are a part of the
natural history of man’s religious instincts. Man’s craving for the
supernatural is as natural as our discounting of the present moment,
and no more significant. The natural becomes trite and commonplace
to us and we take refuge in an imaginary world above and beyond it.
The understanding becomes sated, and we long for something we cannot
understand.


III. LOGIC AND RELIGIOUS BELIEFS

Of late years I am often moved to say to myself: “Why kick the old
theology after it is dead?”--as I have often been tempted to do.
It is almost like spurning the bodies of one’s father and mother.
The old creeds may be outworn, but they have fathered and mothered
us all. They have served and saved untold generations of men.
Christianity, mythical and irrational as much of it is, has yet been
the salvation of the world for nineteen centuries. Of course it has
been a source of evil as well as of good, as all religions are, but
the good has greatly predominated. In fact, it is the bed-rock upon
which our civilization is founded. It has saved men in this world by
inspiring them with the desire to be worthy of a better and future
world.

We are saved, I often say, not so much by the truth of what we
believe, as by the truth of our belief, by its genuineness, its power
over our imaginations, its hold upon our character, its fostering
of an incentive to right conduct and noble deeds. Whether it be
Catholicism or Calvinism or Methodism or Quakerism or Christian
Science or the Japanese ancestor worship or Buddhism, if it holds us
to higher ideals and gives sobriety and sincerity to our lives, that
is its true function.

In fact, any religion is good which supplies a man or a people with
a workable theory of the universe. In practical matters, in dealing
with real facts and forces, man is compelled to be logical or he
comes to grief--he must keep fire and powder apart. But in his
religion and speculations he is bound by no such necessity; he is
free to indulge the wildest dreams.

Man does not expect fire or flood or frost or wind or rain to favor
him. He does not put fluids in leaky vessels, nor a leaky roof
over his head, nor plant his house on a foundation of sand. His
carpenter’s level does not lie, nor his plumb-line make a mistake.
But in his religion he may be as capricious and fantastic as he
pleases; he has a free hand; he may even flog his gods if they
displease him, and it is all the same. His creed is a passport to an
entirely different world.

The religious sect which I visited in Florida, which held that we
live upon the inside of a hollow sphere, treated our astronomy with
scorn, yet seemed to live sober, sane lives, and to do honest work.
But if they carried out the theory of the hollow sphere in practice,
in their navigation, in their clocks and sun-dials, or in anything
else, how quickly they would come to grief!

Christianity is a workable hypothesis; it solves the problem of
life to vast numbers of persons; but how irrational and puerile its
philosophy, founded upon the myth of the fall of Adam in the Garden
of Eden! Destroy this myth and you have cut off the tap-root of
Christianity. But do we not know, in the light of evolution, that
man’s course has been upward and not downward, that his “fall” was,
in fact, development into a higher state of being?

Thinking men must find some sort of a solution of the problems of the
universe, and feeling men and women must have some tangible, concrete
thing that in a measure satisfies their emotional natures. The human
heart cannot live on cold philosophical abstractions. The ceremonies
and observances and rituals of the Church give one something he can
see and feel. For my own part I do not need this sort of thing. Every
day is a Sabbath day to me. All pure water is holy water, and this
earth is a celestial abode. It has not entered into the mind of any
man to see and feel the wonders and the mysteries and the heavenly
character of this world.

All religions look away from the earth to some fairer and better
abode, quite oblivious of the fact that heaven, wherever we find it,
will be of our own making. If we do not find it here, we shall not
find it anywhere. But the great mass of struggling, toiling, human
kind must be comforted and encouraged by the prospect of emancipation
from the grossness and suffering of this world. Goethe acutely said
to let those who could not have literature or art or science, have
religion.

Think of the many sturdy, God-fearing, church-going, simple folk one
has known in his youth--how impossible their creeds, but how worthy
their lives! It requires the heroic fiber to accept the creed of
Calvinism; it is a proposition that tries a man’s mettle. The current
generation is too frivolous and empty to be impressed by it; not
one in a thousand is man enough to accept it. The movies suit them
better. But what granite stuff went to the making of our Pilgrim
fathers!

Cease all Christian effort, all organized Christian charities, all
Christian enterprises in the fields of education, social betterment,
sanitation, amelioration of the masses, and our civilization would
suffer. Then why rail at the old creeds, I say again. They prepared
the way for science, and for the religion of nature. Carlyle said
to Emerson on that memorable day in 1833 when the two sat down in
their walk over the Scottish hills, “Christ died on the tree: that
built Dunscore kirk yonder: that brought you and me together.” The
old creeds nursed heroic, God-fearing and God-loving men. True, they
sometimes disguised the wolf in sheep’s clothing also, but that is
the fault of human nature.

Let us be as faithful to our day and generation as our fathers were
to theirs. Wendell Phillips said that to be as good as our fathers
were, we must be a good deal better. Shall we rail at our Puritan
ancestors for the hardness of their creeds? Although the Pauline plan
of salvation seems childish to us, it seemed the foundation of the
universe for our fathers. To clinch a nail you need something hard,
and the Calvinistic creed has clinched the resolution of many a man.


IV. A CHIP FROM THE OLD BLOCK

It makes me more charitable toward my neighbor’s creed, childish
though I think it is, to remember that it came out of his life,
or out of the life around him, as truly as did my own. We cannot
separate man, and all that revolves around him, from the totality
of things. There is no depravity or cruelty or perversion in the
world that is not fed by the life of the world. The war that has
depopulated and devastated Europe is just as legitimate a part
of total Nature as were all the fruits of the ages of peace and
prosperity. Everything in the woods is a part of the woods, and bears
their stamp; everything in the sea is a part of the sea. The tumor,
the ulcer, and the disease, are a part of our bodies, and are fed by
its vitality. In our practical lives we are compelled to separate
a part from the whole, to accept this and reject that, but when we
essay to comprehend the whole we must see that all are but parts, and
that our philosophy is lame if it does not see that the so-called
good and the so-called bad are fruit of the same tree.

We are prone to separate ourselves from the rest of Nature and to
claim for ourselves much that we deny to all other animals, such as
the existence of the soul, and its immortality. But we are all of
one stuff. Out of the earth has come a creature that has changed the
surface of the earth over vast areas; that has changed the course of
rivers, and the face of continents; that has harnessed the forces of
the earth and turned them against themselves. How the earth elements
came to organize themselves into this creature--here we can take no
step!


V. A PERSONAL GOD

I once heard an Irish laborer refer solemnly, with an upward lift
of the head, to the man up above. He did not refer to the man down
below, but no doubt might have done so had occasion required. If we
have one, we must have the other to keep the balance. The man up
above must keep his skirts clean, and to admit of this the man down
below must be the scapegoat.

How long has the belief in the reality of these two manlike beings,
the one all good, the other all evil, ruled in the minds and hearts
of men! The old Hebrew prophets were drunk with the idea of a manlike
Jehovah. A terrible man they made of him--a cruel, despotic ruler,
wreaking his vengeance on his enemies, exacting an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth, a lover of righteousness, but a vengeful,
jealous, angry God. And the man down below was his fit counterpart,
blocking and marring or defeating the plans of the man up above.
These conceptions go with the infancy of the human reason.

So many phases of our religious belief are the result of imperfect
knowledge and false conceptions of the world in which we live! They
come down to us from an earlier time, when the earth was regarded as
the center of the universe, all other bodies revolving around it. Man
lifted his eyes and his hands to heaven in an appeal to the heavenly
powers.

It seems as if the religious sense of the mass of mankind was, by
the operation of some psychological law, forced to externize and
visualize, yes, and humanize, the object upon which its interest
centers. Orthodox religion, while proclaiming that God is a spirit,
that He is everywhere, that He fills all nature, that not a sparrow
falls to the ground without his notice, and that heaven is not a
place, but a state of mind, yet makes its God a personal being,
endowed with our human attributes, with likes and dislikes, sorely
tried by our sins and weaknesses; nearer us sometimes than at others,
present everywhere, yet abiding in one particular place called
heaven--these and many other childish and contradictory things.

That keen, clear-minded man, Cardinal Newman, regarded God under the
image of a maker, detached absolutely like any human workman from
the work of his hand. He is the Eternal King, absolutely distinct
from the world as being its center,--“Upholder, Governor, and
Sovereign Lord.” “He created all things out of nothing, and preserves
them every moment, and could destroy them as He made them.” “He is
separated from them by an abyss, and is incommunicable in all his
attributes.” This being is always described and interpreted in terms
of man, or of our own finite human nature, reflecting in his outlines
human history, human political and social institutions, and the aims
and objects of concrete human beings. He does not hesitate to relate
this God to “every movement which has convulsed and refashioned the
surface of the earth,” and hence to make him responsible for the
death and destruction and misery which have attended earthquakes and
have set back the tide of human progress. Of course every noxious
insect, every noxious plant and beast and death-dealing germ is from
Him also. “Wars when just” are from Him also. Who or what are they
from when they are not just, the great Cardinal does not say. Can
both sides be just? Into such absurdities does the conception of a
manlike God lead us.

The modern scientific mind, quite as imaginative--if not more so--as
the typical theological mind, never gets mired in such contradictions
or tangled up in such childish anthropomorphism. Such confusion
arises out of the habit of mind which sees the whole creation
directed to man; his good is its one object and aim, and when his
good suffers, something has miscarried. The cruel and destructive
things in nature can only be accounted for on the theory that some
aboriginal calamity, like the fall of man, had visited the world
before God took charge of things.

The naturalist sees this as the best possible world, sees that Nature
is not an indulgent stepmother, but a strict disciplinarian; that
the good and well-being of all is her aim; that suffering and defeat
are relative; that God’s ways to man are not justified in a day or a
week, or in this place or that, but require ages and continents to
come to their full fruition. The good and the evil that will come
out of the terrible World War will not all be apparent this year, or
next, but only in the perspective of history--in the sum total of
human progress of the ages. Such a view is a slap in the face of our
egotism which demands instant returns, and which makes the individual
supreme.

With Nature, as I have so often said, our standards of good and
evil apply to us alone, and they change with the changing years.
The naturalist sees that pain and delay and defeat are the price
of development; that the world is imperfect, and man is imperfect,
because growth and development are the law of nature; that there is
always a higher level, and always will be, which we realize only when
we look back. A perfect world, as we use the term, would mean the end
of all development.


VI. THE ETERNAL

How much is in a name! When we call the power back of all God,
it smells of creeds and systems, of superstition, intolerance,
persecution; but when we call it Nature, it smells of spring and
summer, of green fields and blooming groves, of birds and flowers and
sky and stars. I admit that it smells of tornadoes and earthquakes,
of jungles and wildernesses, of disease and death, too, but these
things make it all the more real to us.

The word “God” has so long stood for the conception of a being who
sits apart from Nature, who shapes and rules it as its maker and
governor. It is part of the conception of a dual or plural universe,
God and Nature. This offends my sense of the oneness of creation.
It seems to me that there is no other adequate solution of the total
problem of life and Nature than what is called “pantheism,” which
identifies mind and matter, finite and Infinite, and sees in all
these diverse manifestations one absolute being. As Emerson truly
says, pantheism does not belittle God, it magnifies him. God becomes
the one and only ultimate fact that fills the universe and from which
we can no more be estranged than we can be estranged from gravitation.

The moment we seek to interpret the Eternal in terms of our own
psychology, we get into trouble. We cannot measure the Infinite by
the standards of the finite. Our economies, our methods, our aims are
not those of Nature. God, in the sense in which I use the term, does
not plan and design and adapt means to ends as does man. God is no
more the maker than He is the thing made. How natural for us to think
that the air was made for us to breathe, the water for us to drink,
the light for us to see, and the earth for us to inhabit! But these
things are older than we are. I have seen a pumpkin growing in the
fence and fitting exactly into the niche amid the rails, but was not
the fence there before it was?

There is design in Nature, but not in the sense that there is design
in human affairs and contrivances. There is no designer. There are
living machines, but no machinist. Things grow. Evolution is a vital
process. Man’s course is a right line, Nature’s is a circle. Man
aims to cut out the waste, the pain, the failures. How does Nature
trim her trees or renew her forests or weed her gardens? Only by a
survival of the fittest or the luckiest. Every branch that dies and
decays and falls from the tree does so at the risk of the health
and well-being of the whole tree. Often the decayed branch leaves a
hole that in time causes the death of the tree. See how evenly the
pine and spruce and hemlock and oak forests get planted by Nature’s
haphazard method, but think of the time involved! But what is time
to the Eternal? Man cuts out the time and gets his forest quickly.
He trims his wood and avoids the danger of delays and decaying wood.
He selects such plants for his garden as he desires, and avoids the
dangers of the struggle to survive. He takes the side of the weak
against the strong, but Nature favors only the strong.

The rain falls upon the just and the unjust. The weather goes its way
irrespective of you and me. Storm, tempest, frost, drought, sunshine,
are no respecters of persons. The seasons came and went before man
appeared, just as they do now. The Eternal never takes sides as
man takes sides, but because it does not, should we lose faith?
The Eternal takes sides as the sun takes sides, and not otherwise.
The light shines for all. Providence is a universal beneficence.
The clouds go their way. The beneficence is seen in the slow
amelioration of meteoric conditions through countless æons, till the
cloud and the bow appeared, and with them conditions favorable to
life. The impartial rains are oblivious to our human needs, but, as I
so often say, they are on the side of life. They are on the side of
development. They made the sublime drama of evolution possible.

The weather favored us æons before we were born, because it favored
life. Therefore, when we say that the Eternal is neither for us nor
against us, we mean in our special human sense. He is on the side of
the righteous only when the righteous live according to the rule of
Nature or rightness, or in harmony with the eternal order. And he is
against the unrighteous when they transgress this order. In vain do
we pray for victory on the eve of battle, except in so far as prayer
puts courage into our hearts. Victory is for him who marshals the
physical and moral forces the most skillfully. The victory is from
the Eternal whoever wins, because it is the fruit of the order which
It established, or, rather, which It is.

As we cannot get away from Nature, we cannot get away from the
Eternal. He sticketh closer than a brother, closer than the blood in
our own hearts, not always to bless and to cheer, often to hinder
and depress. Not all ease and joy is life; it is as often struggle,
tears, defeat.

Not by placing God afar off in the heavens--a supersensuous,
supermundane, supernatural being--do we make the problem easier.
Not till we bring Him down to earth and incarnate Him (the old myth
of Christ again), and identify Him with everything without us and
within--not till God becomes man--do we see a light under the feet of
Fate; not till then do we see love and fatherhood and brotherhood and
sacrifice and humility and beneficence and altruism in Nature. When
we see man as a part of Nature, we see him as a part of God.

In humanity alone do we see the face of justice, of mercy, of
charity, of forgiveness, of reverence, of renunciation--human
virtues, they, too, come out of the heart of Nature. If this is a
hard gospel, still it is tangible, real, livable. We cannot live
other than on familiar terms with Nature. In her we see the sources
of our power, our help, our health. We know the conditions of our
well-being. We know the price we have to pay for each blessing. Our
reason, our intelligence, we come by honestly and inevitably. Their
fountainhead is in Nature.

Amid the agony and turmoil of war we need not lose faith. We know
that Nature is still Nature. If disease and pestilence and famine
rage, we know that there are weapons with which to fight them. We
know that order comes out of chaos, that life comes out of death. We
have neither to curse our gods nor to praise them, neither to do
penance nor to offer burnt offerings, but only to take and use wisely
the gifts they bestow.


VII. AN IMPARTIAL DEITY

What difficulties and contradictions we fall into the moment we
identify Nature with God, and what equal or greater difficulties we
fall into if we refuse to identify Nature with God! True it is that
in the former case we bring God very near and make him very real; we
see and feel our direct and continuous dependence upon Him--indeed,
that we are a part of Him; that every breath we draw, and every
thought we think, and every pound of energy we put forth is in and
through Him; and that we can no more wander or escape from Him than
we can escape gravity or chemical affinity. There are no skeptics or
atheists in regard to Nature. It alone exists and goes on forever.
But here comes the pinch! God as Nature is not only the author of the
good, He is the author of what we call evil also; He is as many-sided
as Nature is. The savage and merciless aspects of Nature are of
Him also; He is in the jungles of Africa, as well as in the walks
of culture and refinement; in the destroying tornado as well as in
the gentle summer breeze; in the overwhelming floods as well as in
the morning dews. He is as much the author of disease as He is of
health; of war, pestilence, famine, as He is of peace, plenty, and
the progress of the world. He is in the trenches and the slaughter
of the contending armies as truly as in the most peaceful and pious
family or social circle in the world. The asphyxiating gases are his,
and the bursting bombs, no less than the breaking hearts and the
prayerful souls at home. The comets that come like apparitions in the
heavens, and then are gone, and the stars that shine steadfastly,
are all a part of the same scheme. The dragons and monsters that
possessed the earth and the fruits thereof for millions of years in
geologic time were the work of that divinity which shapes our ends
to-day.

We separate ourselves from Nature and flatter ourselves that we
belong to another and higher order; that we alone are of divine
origin, and not involved in the fate of the rest of Creation; but
we are fragments of the same granite that forms the foundation of
the earth. “I am stuccoed with birds and quadrupeds all over,”
says Whitman. The reptile was our ancestor; we were cradled in the
old seas; we are kin to the worm and the mollusk; we derive from
creeping, swimming, noisome things, from the slime and mud of the
old sea bottoms, from the cosmic dust and the solar radiations. Why
should we put on superior airs when not one atom of matter will turn
aside for us, not one law of physics cease to operate to save us from
destruction? The vast army of elemental forces knows us not. We may
divert them and bend them to our will, but they heed us not; they
destroy us the moment we lose control.

Nature does not love us any more than she hates us; she goes her way,
indifferent.

The best we can say about it all is that Nature, or the Natural
Providence, is too big for us to grasp; that in these seas we can
find no soundings. But we are here, the world is beautiful, life is
worth living, love always pays; Nature serves us when we know how to
use her; when we plant and sow wisely God will send the increase.
Friendly or unfriendly, of God or of the Devil, the physical forces
have ministered to us. More things have been for us than have been
against us; more winds have blown our barks into safe harbors than
have dashed us upon the rocks. There are more refreshing showers
than devastating tornadoes; more sunshine than forked lightning;
more fertile land upon the earth than parched deserts; a broader
belt of genial climates than of frigid zones. Thorns and spines
and nettles are the exception in vegetation; stings and venomous
fangs are the exception in animal life. Hawks can catch the smaller
birds, yet there are vastly more small birds than hawks. The weasel
can catch the rabbit and the squirrel and the rat, yet there are
ten-fold, fifty-fold, more of these rodents than there are weasels.
The carnivorous beasts of the plains and of the jungle do not
exterminate the herbivorous; there is more good than evil everywhere;
more peace than war; more kindness than cruelty. The God of Nature
goes his way, but his way is our way; we have arisen out of Nature;
as it is, the chances of life have been in our favor; the stream
makes its own channel; the waters find their way to the sea; they
do not all stagnate on the way. Some of the seed which the winds
sow falls upon barren places, but not the most of it. Some men are
born criminals or cripples or malformed, but not the majority. The
creatures preyed upon always vastly outnumber the creatures that prey
upon them. And in truth, in the whole realm of Nature more things
wait upon man than war upon him.


VIII. FINITE AND INFINITE

The unnamable, the unthinkable, the omnipotent, the omnipresent,
we cannot discuss or define in terms of our humanity. The moment
we try to do so we are involved in contradictions, just as we are
when we try to define the sphere in terms of the plane. The sphere
has no length, it has no breadth, it has no thickness, in the sense
that bodies upon its surface have. It has no weight, and it has no
beginning and no end, and we may say that its motion is eternal rest;
yet rest implies motion, and motion implies rest.

When we say that there is no God, we only mean that there is no
being that we can define or conceive of in terms of man. Nothing in
the finite can help us in dealing with the infinite. The Infinite,
the Omnipotent, the Omnipresent, cannot be a being without sharing
the limitations of being, or without being subject to the bounds
of time and space. If God is everywhere, He is nowhere; if He is
all-powerful, his power has no contrary, and hence ceases to exist.
One after another the human and personal attributes we ascribe to Him
disappear when we try to conceive of Him in terms of the infinite.
The infinite is equivalent to negation. There are no terms in which
we can define the ether; it is the negative of all things that have
length and breadth and thickness, or motion or rest or substance, or
friction or cohesion, or place or power. An infinite being is as much
a contradiction of terms as a square or plane sphere would be. If
God is a person, with human-like attributes and emotions,--though we
call them divine,--it is legitimate to ask, Where is He? where was He
before the solar systems took form? where will He be after they have
again become formless?

Our inevitable anthropomorphism prefigures the Infinite as superman;
He is man magnified to infinity. He is the supreme king or ruler of
the universe. We dream of seeing Him face to face; He has eyes, ears,
hands, feet, and the emotions of love, anger, pity, and the like. Man
thus imposes his own form upon the power that is and upholds the
cosmos. He carves it into his own image, and then seeks to propitiate
it and influence it as He Himself is propitiated and influenced.
Praise is sweet to it, honor is sweet, revenge is sweet, because
these things are sweet to man.

When we call this force Nature, we bring it near to us and can see
and feel our direct relation to it. We are bone of its bone and
flesh of its flesh. We see its impersonal or unpersonal character.
We get light on the vexed problem of good and evil which is such an
insoluble enigma to the theologians.

Nature embraces all; she fathers and mothers all; has no
partialities, knows no exceptions, no miracles, no deputied
atonements, no evil apart from the good and no good apart from the
evil, no life without death and no death without life.


IX. THE INSOLUBLE

What desperate efforts mankind has made to shape this vast, blind,
unconscionable power we call Nature into an image of a God that would
satisfy our moral and spiritual wants and aspirations! Where did men
get their standards of such a God? They have evidently been slowly
evolved through the friction of man with man. They have possessed
survival value. Love, truth, justice, mercy, have contributed to
the fullness of life and to length of days. One may adopt Biblical
language and say that righteousness endureth forever. The triumph
of the wicked is only for a season; it may be a long season, it
may embrace whole periods of human history, and entail measureless
suffering on the human race, but change and retribution surely
come. The way of man’s moral and material progress is like the
stream that now hurries, now tarries, is now disrupted and noisy in
rapids and falls, now sluggish and almost stagnant in long level
reaches, but which does go forward and reach its goal at last. But
is there not some predetermined bent toward righteousness,--not of
the ecclesiastical sort, but of the scientific sort,--toward the
relations of man with man, that results in the greatest good to the
greatest number,--a bent inherent in the nature of things? Would
evolution have taken the road toward man and all the other forms of
life blindly, accidentally? Would it have started at all had there
not been some initial impulse, or some thought, somewhere, of all
that was to follow?

The doctrine of design does not meet the problem; the doctrine of
chance does not meet it. Design in our human world means a designer.
What, then, does it mean in the non-human world? There can be no
design in such a world, because the human mind is not present. There
can be no chance, because a chance jumbling and collision of the
primordial elements could not result in the organized matter that is
life, any more than a thousand of brick dumped upon the ground can
take the form of a house. The brick and mortar demand an architect,
and organized matter demands an organizing principle. Whence its
source? There we are where no further step can be taken. What about
the divine mind? But that is jumping the whole question. If you place
your God here, I shall ask him some embarrassing questions, such as,
Where did you come from? Where have you been all these æons? Why are
you so wasteful and dilatory in your methods? Why have you made the
world so full of misery? Or, I might ask the question a little boy
asked his father: “Why did God make Satan?” The problem, it seems to
me, is quite as embarrassing to us mortals with a God as without one.
It is just as hard to account for a God as to account for the initial
impulse. In both cases we have in our hands a rope with only one end.
In trying to find the other end, we only get ourselves hopelessly
tied up.


X. PAYING THE DEBT

In my youth I often heard the old people speak of death as “paying
the debt of Nature”--“He has paid the debt.” Life puts us in debt to
Nature--the earth, the air, the water--for the elements of our bodies
and the powers of our minds, and the time inevitably comes when we
must settle the account. That we are going to have something left
over--that we have only to pay the debt of the body, and not of the
mind--is one of the dreams that it is hard for most persons to give
up. Will not then the universal mind that pervades Nature claim its
own also? Can you and I hope to remain detached from it forever? Is
that a consummation devoutly to be wished?

Be assured that no particle of soul or body can be lost. But
processes may cease; the flame of the lamp may go out, and the sum
total of force and matter remain the same. When a blade of grass
dies, a process has ended, and as mysterious a process as went on in
Cæsar’s brain and body. And when all life on the earth and in our
universe ceases, if it ever does, the problem would remain just as
puzzling, if we can fancy ourselves still here to puzzle over it. We
are links in an endless cycle of change in which we cannot separate
the material from what we call the spiritual.

The water in our bodies to-day may have flashed as a dewdrop
yesterday, or lent itself to the splendor of the sunrise or sunset,
or played a part in the bow in the clouds. To-morrow it may be
whirling in the vortex of a tornado, or helping to quench the
life of a drowning man, or glistening in the frost figures on the
window-pane. The movements of the brain molecules in which the
phenomena of thought and consciousness are so mysteriously involved,
they, too, are links in the cycle of change.

One of our younger poets, John Russell McCarthy, has had the courage
to say:

            “that we must look for life
      Hereafter, not by one and one,--your soul
      Alone among the souls of other men,
      Drifting and staying, a thing apart forever--
      But we must see when all at last is counted
      And the great sum is made, how one by one
      We have returned to Her, the Mother of All,--
      The bit of soul-stuff that She loaned us.

      For we must live at last a part of Her--
      For we shall be forever as one with Her.”

The reverent old people to whom I just referred paid the debt long
ago, and the day of reckoning for some of us cannot be far off. After
the account is closed who or what has profited by the transaction? We
are prone to put such questions to Nature, but they are irrelevant.
The universe is not run for profit, as we use the term. So far as we
can see, it is run just to satisfy the æsthetic and creative feeling
of the Eternal. When the sidereal systems in space run down, they are
wound up again, and suns and planets are started anew. The great game
never comes to an end; in fact, it is unthinkable that it should ever
have begun, except as the flowers begin in spring, or as a man begins
when he is born. Antecedents! Antecedents!--always. We cannot apply
our standards of loss and gain to the dealings of the Eternal with
us. “That I have positively appeared,” says Whitman, “that is enough.”

Each of us is an incarnation of the universal mind, as is every beast
of the field and jungle, and every fowl of the air, and every insect
that creeps and flies; and we can only look upon creation as an end
in itself. To ask what the great spectacle is for, is to betray our
tradesman habit of mind. Man is a link in an endless chain of being.
If we ask what he is for, the old answer of the catechism is as good
as any--“To glorify God and enjoy Him forever.” In other words, to
make the most of his life and strive for the highest happiness, which
is knowledge and appreciation of the universal. Coleridge says we
glorify God when we work for the well-being of mankind.

How quite impossible it is for us to adjust our minds to the thought
of death--to the thought of the absolute negation of life! When we
torment ourselves about death, about the coldness and darkness of the
grave, about being cut off from all the warm and happy currents of
life that flow about us, we are unconsciously thinking of ourselves
as still living, or as conscious of the gloom and negation that
await us. Thus, when Huxley wrote to a friend (John Morley) that the
thought of extinction disturbed him more and more as he neared the
end of life, he fell into this common fallacy, or contradiction. “It
flashes across me,” he writes, “at all sorts of times with a sort of
horror that in 1900 I shall probably know no more of what is going on
than I did in 1800. I had sooner be in hell, a good deal--” as if he
expected to lie awake nights in his grave lamenting his sad fate and
saying to himself, “I had sooner be in hell,” where also he expected
he would be conscious of his improved condition!

What possible difference could it make to him if he did not know
any more in 1900 than he did in 1800? Did he expect to enjoy his
knowledge in 1900? If not, why worry about it? What he was really
lamenting was that he did not know then and there what he might
know if he lived till 1900. He knew that human knowledge was making
tremendous strides, and the thought that he should not share in its
advancement chilled him.

It is all very human, but very childish. We may to-day dread some
task or ordeal that we are to face to-morrow, because to-morrow we
expect to be alive, but shall we shrink from the to-morrow of death
on the same grounds?

There is wisdom as well as wit in the epitaph in dialogue which a
clever Greek Byzantine composed for Pyrrho:

“Art thou dead, Pyrrho?”

“I do not know.”

If we put the same question to our own dead, if they could answer,
they would say, “We do not know.” If they knew, would not that be
proof that they were not dead? May we not answer Huxley that if
consciousness is extinguished with life, he is not going to lie
awake nights in his grave worrying about it? There is comfort in the
thought that if there is no immortality, we shall not know it.

Rereading that wise and delightful old Frenchman, Montaigne, I find
that more than three hundred years ago he was of the same mind that
I am in this matter: “Why should we fear a thing whose being lost
cannot be lamented?” “To lament that we shall not be alive a hundred
years hence is the same folly as to be sorry we were not alive a
hundred years ago.”

An avaricious man might worry if he knew he would have no more money
on the next Christmas than he had on the last, unless his physician
had assured him that he could not be alive on the next Christmas.
Then, if he worried, it would be on account of his heirs. But one’s
heirs cannot inherit his wisdom; it dies with him.

Death is such an extraordinary, such an unspeakable event that we
cannot think of ourselves as non-existent. When you try to see
yourself in your own coffin, or standing beside your own grave, it
is still as a living man that you thus behold yourself. It is, of
course, as living men and women that we are disturbed over thoughts
of the grave. The future is just as secure for us all as is the past.
A moment between two eternities is life; a spark that draws a brief
line upon the darkness and is gone. The spark has its antecedent
condition in the wood and coal and the processes of combustion
from which it sprang, and it has its subsequent conditions in the
invisible gases into which it has vanished, but as a point of heat
and light, it exists no more. Our wise attitude toward death is, I
think, to forget or ignore it entirely. We shall not know it when it
overtakes us. “_Avida nunquam desinere mortalitas._” “Men must endure
their going hence, even as their coming hither--ripeness is all.”


XI. DEATH


I

In death the elements of the body are not changed--oxygen is still
oxygen, carbon still carbon. What has happened, then? Can it be
explained by saying that a process has been reversed? Does it bear
any true analogy to the redistribution of type after the printer
has set it up and printed his book? The type is the same, but the
relation of all the units has been changed. The printer has arranged
them so that collectively they expressed to him certain meanings or
ideas. These ideas did not exist in the type, but in the order of
its arrangement. In one order or combination the letters meant one
thing; in another order or combination they expressed quite another.
The same type will spell dog or God. When redistributed and returned
to the different fonts, the letters express nothing but themselves.
If this is a true analogy, then, in the case of the living book, man,
what stands for the compositor and printer? We can only call the
compositor the organizing impulse; but whence this impulse, and whose
idea is it trying to express? The redistribution of the elements of
the body is done through the activity of other forms of life--the
micro-organisms--those minute forms reduce the body to its original
elements. As we thus have life at the end of the life of an organism,
do we also have life at the beginning of the organism? Ancestral life
certainly, or the primordial germ; but is there a living principle
back of and before all? Does the logic of the situation force us to
the belief in an original Creator? The human mind is so constituted
that in some form or under definite concepts, we have to postulate a
first or primal Cause; we have to think of a beginning; but is there
any beginning to a circle, or any center to the surface of a sphere?
There may be no beginning or no limit in time or space to the cosmos.
This is unthinkable to us in our present state. Yet in making that
statement I am thinking of the unthinkable. We can deal only with
parts of Nature; as a whole it is beyond our power to grasp. All
bodies on the earth’s surface unsupported fall; this is our universal
experience. All moving bodies come to a standstill unless power from
without is constantly supplied. Perpetual motion is impossible, but
the earth and the other planets are unsupported, and their motion is
perpetual. Or we may say that they fall forever toward the sun and
never reach it, and that the sun falls forever toward some other
sun or system and never reaches it. The laws of force and matter as
we contend with them in our experiences are inoperative in sidereal
space; there is motion without friction, energy without waste,
dissipation without exhaustion. Neither upper nor under, neither
falling nor rising, neither end nor beginning. Cause and effect,
rest and motion, are one. The self-activity of the universe quite
transcends our experiences; the self-maintenance of living bodies
is far beyond our reach; any end to the chain of causal sequence is
quite unthinkable to us. Our minds are made in that way. They are
fashioned in the school of cause and effect.

Nothing can get out of the universe because there is no out to the
universe. Can that which has no ending have a beginning? Can that
which has no circumference have a center? Can we think of anything
so hot that it could not be hotter? Or so small that it could not
be smaller? Or so big that it could not be bigger? No, because our
minds have been schooled in this comparative method. Our sense shows
us a world of degrees. We can think of absolute darkness, but not
of absolute light. In the Mammoth Cave you may realize absolute
darkness; but even on the sun itself would you experience absolute
light? We seem to be able to find an end to the negative, but not to
the positive. We can think of a body as at absolute rest, but can we
conceive of it going so fast that it could not go faster?

Death is our consciousness of a peculiar change in matter, just as
life is our consciousness of the opposite change--one destructive,
the other constructive. The constituents of the body remain
unchanged, but a peculiar activity set up among the particles,
by what, we know not, is instituted in life and ceases in death.
An organism is made up of organs, all working together, but each
subordinated to the whole. The whole, this concerted action, may
cease, and the individual dies, as we say, and yet the minute
subdivisions, the cells, may be alive. Certain ferments in the body
may go on for some time after the life of the man has gone out. And
living cells may go on multiplying endlessly without producing an
organized being.


II

“It is all right,” said Walt Whitman to me as I was leaving his
death-bed and hearing his voice for the last time--“It is all right.”
Of course it was all right, and it will be all right when each and
all of us fall into the last eternal sleep. Else it would not be.
Our being here is all right, is it not? “Friendly and faithful,”
says Whitman, “are the arms that have helped me,” and friendly and
faithful must be the arms that bear us away. If it was good to come,
it will be good to go--good in the large, cosmic sense, good in that
it is in keeping with the spirit of the All. Not the good of our
brief personal successes and triumphs, but good as evolution is good,
as the processes of growth and decay are good. If life is good, death
must be equally good, as each waits upon the other. From what point
of view can we say that death is not all right? Certainly not from
the point of view of this universe. Archimedes could have moved the
world had he had some other world upon which to place his lever, and
we must have some other universe to plant our feet upon to condemn
death.

As I have already said, we look upon death as an evil because we look
upon it from the happy fields of life, and see ourselves as alive in
our graves and lamenting that we are shut off from all the light and
love and movement of the world. Does our prenatal state seem an evil?

Did anything begin _de novo_, when we came into being? Not the
elements of our bodies surely; they were as old as the cosmos; not
the germ of our minds and souls; they were as old as the human
race and older--old as the first dawn of life. Is it the _I_ that
is new?--that which makes you you and me me? And that is probably
nothing more than a new distribution and arrangement of the physical
and psychical elements and forces of which and by which we are made.
The pattern of our personality is new; each of us differs somewhat
from all the myriads of human beings who have lived upon the earth;
but is form, pattern, personality, separable from the material that
composes it?

It may be cheerfully admitted that when we look at the question in
this light, we are whistling to keep our courage up. What of it? The
band plays to keep the courage of the soldiers up when they go into
battle, and what are we but soldiers fighting the good fight of truth
against error, of courage against fear, of the heroic against the
pusillanimous? The whole is greater than any of its parts. Nature is
more than man. We must learn to efface ourselves. The soul knows no
rewards or punishments. If it be heroic to sacrifice life in this
world, it may be equally heroic to sacrifice life in any other world,
so that we prove ourselves worthy of the gods.


XII. HEAVEN AND EARTH

Truly things are not what they seem. When we put heaven and earth
far apart, we think as children. Heaven and earth are pretty close
together. The shortest arm can reach from one to the other. When we
go to heaven we shall not have far to travel, and I dare say the
other place is quite as near, and, if reports be true, the road is
broader and easier to travel. What children we are in such matters!
The wisest men have the language of ignorance and superstition
imposed upon them. How difficult it is not to think of the heavens up
there as a reality, something above us and superior to us, a finer
world, nearer God, lighted by the stars, the abode of spirits, the
source of all good, our final celestial home. Did not Elijah ascend
into heaven? Did not Paul have heavenly visions? Have not the saints
in all ages turned their faces and lifted imploring hands to heaven?
How these things have burnt themselves into our minds! We cannot
escape them.

In our floods of religious emotion we instinctively look away from
the earth. The mystery, the immensity, the purity of the heavens
above us make us turn our faces thitherward, and as naturally make us
turn downward when we consider the source of evil. The poor old earth
which has mothered us and nursed us we treat with scant respect. Our
awe and veneration we reserve for the worlds we know not of. Our
senses sell us out. The mud on our shoes disenchants us. It is only
Whitman with his cosmic consciousness that can closely relate the
heavens and the earth:

      “Underneath the divine soil,
      Overhead the sun.”

To most of us the morning stars that once sang together are of
another stuff. The music of the spheres must be vastly different from
the roar and grind of our old rusty and outworn planet. So we turn
to the heavens, the abode of purity and light. So do we discount and
black-list the earth where we have to pay in struggle and pain the
price of our development. Think you we should not have to pay the
same price in any other world worth living in?

Emerson in his Journal quotes his brother Charles as saying long ago
that “the nap was worn off the earth”; it was become threadbare, like
an outworn garment. Probably it seems so to each of us as time goes
on. In places in Europe the nap must be very short at this time. But
the nap will come again, even on those shell-swept regions, after
Nature has had her way. Nature grows old in geologic or in cosmic
time; the mountains decay, the waters recede; but in man’s time the
earth is endowed with perennial youth.

Science strips us of our illusions and delusions; it strips us of
most of the garments in which the spirit of man has sought in all
ages to clothe itself against the chill of an impersonal universe;
it takes down the protecting roof of the heavens above us and shows
us an unspeakable void strewn with suns and worlds beyond numbers
to compute, but nowhere any signs of the blessed abode to which our
religious aspirations have pointed.

It is interesting, in this connection, to note the attitude of the
old writers, such as Cornaro, the Italian, toward the heavens. They
evidently look upon the heavens as outside of Nature. In speculating
as to why it is that some persons have so little vitality, Cornaro
reckons the influence of the heavens may be one cause. He says he
never could persuade himself to believe that Nature, being the mother
of all, could be so ungenerous to any of her children; hence it must
be some hostile influence from above. Similar notions seem to have
been held in Shakespeare’s time:

                              “It is the stars,
      The stars above us, govern our conditions;
      Else one self mate and make could not beget
      Such different issues.”


XIII. THINKING AND ACTING

It is true we do not, as a rule, act without thinking, or without
some sort of psychic process, but thinking and acting are radically
different. Or, we may say that the practical reason is alone
concerned in action, and the abstract intellect in general reasoning.
When we come to act, we know that we are free to choose between two
or more objects or courses; when we think or reason abstractly, we
know the will is not free. Every act has its antecedent cause. But
we are practically free because we feel no restraint or compulsion.
We feel responsible for our acts. We do not blame our red-haired
father, or our grandfather of Irish blood, for our hasty temper; we
feel that this is our very selves. What we call moral responsibility
rests upon this sense of freedom. We are not aware of the fatality
that binds us, any more than we are of the weight of the atmosphere
that presses upon us so tremendously. At the court of absolute
reason we see what puppets and automata we are, but at the court of
practical justice we see and feel that we are free to do right as we
see the right. The contradictions which Balfour sees, in his chapter
on “Naturalism and Ethics,” between the results of practical life and
of abstract reasoning is of a kind which one sees everywhere in the
universe. The circle is a perpetual contradiction. How can a line go
in all directions?--and in no direction? In our practical lives there
is an upper and an under, an up and a down, but away from the earth,
or considering the earth as a whole, there is no such thing.

Righteous indignation at the misconduct of others, or
self-condemnation, repentance, remorse, are reasonable feelings
because we actually feel them. We have no choice in the matter. To
whatever conclusion abstract reason leads us in regard to them, it
does not affect our practical conduct, because our conduct is founded
upon the sense of freedom. We are here to act, to do, and not to
reason abstractly. This is the tree of the forbidden fruit. When we
eat of it we know things that may stand in the way of our practical
living. Balfour should see that we are determinists or naturists when
we reason, but free agents when we act, and that there is no getting
away from the contradiction.

I may be the duplicate of my father, or of my grandfather; every one
of my traits may be inherited; but that does not prevent me from
feeling that they are my own; they are vital in me as they were in
him, and I feel responsible for my own acts just as he did for his,
though I could not act otherwise. I could not, but I did not know it.
I thought I could act as I pleased.

The world which philosophy reveals to us is vastly different from
the world practical life reveals. We are sure that light and sound
are real entities, but philosophy tells us that one is the sensation
which vibrations in the ether, set going by the sun, make upon the
optic nerve, and that sound is the sensation which vibrations in
the air make upon the auditory nerve. When we know this we do not
change our action in reference to them--they are still just as real
to our senses as ever they were. The moral law is not discredited
or overthrown when we discover through the abstract reason that
fate, or necessity, rules our lives. We made the moral law and we
try to live up to it. We do not always succeed. All trees aim at the
vertical position; it is the position which gravity imposes upon
them; but owing to various accidents and conditions the trees are
not all plumb. How free they seem to grow at almost any angle with
the plane of the earth’s surface! How they run out their branches
horizontally in defiance of the gravity that rules them and lift up
in their trunks and leaves tons of water and other minerals against
the pull of gravity! How free they seem, how they bend to the wind
that would overthrow them, how various they are in form and habit of
growth, in the shape of their leaves, the kinds of their fruits, the
character of their roots! Yet science shows us how the unalterable
physical laws rule them. They lean toward the light and the free air
in obedience to physical and chemical laws. And yet, no doubt, if
the trees were conscious of themselves, as we are, every oak-tree
would say, “I feel free to be an oak,” and every pine-tree and beech
and willow and maple would feel a like freedom. The Irishman feels
no compulsion or necessity in being an Irishman, nor the Frenchman
in being a Frenchman. All life is held in the leash of physical and
chemical laws, and yet knows it not.

We feel that there is beauty in nature; when we reflect, we know
that the feeling for beauty is an emotion of our own minds, and
not a quality of outward things. Scenes radically different awaken
the emotion in us, or may awaken it in one and not in another
(see Emerson’s ecstasy on a bare moor). The world is what we make
it, and duty is what we make it, and the ugly is what we make it.
Putrefaction, repulsive to us, is to science a beautiful chemical
process. Odors that are offensive to us are evidently agreeable to
the dog. Sounds which please us seem to disturb him. The absolute
is outside of life. If the orbs of the heavens were conscious, they
would doubtless feel free to go where they do go; it would be their
choice; it would pain them to do otherwise. The comet rushes toward
the sun with joy; the music of the spheres is the expression of their
freedom and contentment. Can you help winking when the flashlight
goes off, or when a missile passes near your eyes? Our voluntary
actions are equally based upon physical laws.

Balfour, in his “Foundation of Belief,” talks about the beauty of
holiness, the beauty of sanctity, but these things are beautiful
only to a certain type of mind. The time will come when they will
not be looked upon as beautiful or desirable. These conceptions
grew when men lived for another world, when this world stood to
them as the sum of evil. Men then saw nothing holy or divine on
earth except the denying of earth. That state of mind has largely
passed. Holy men have had their day. We see now that this world is
a celestial body, and that all our conceptions of heavenly abodes
are untenable. For my part the most lovable and admirable men and
women I have known had no savor of sanctity. They were wise, kind,
helpful, loving, living with zest the life of every day, intent on
making their earthly lives square with what is generally accepted
as right conduct, and therefore comfortably indifferent to what the
theologians are so concerned about--salvation after death, and the
securing of their “mansions in the skies.” Martyrdom bravely faced
excites our admiration, all heroic acts are beautiful and admirable,
and there are good naturalistic reasons why this should be so. But
our religious history has begotten a whole brood of ideas that must
gradually fade and go out, and our standards will more and more be
those of this world.

Mr. Balfour would hardly deny that the organ with which we do our
thinking and reasoning and form our deductions, the organ which
is the seat of our emotions of the beautiful and of religious
aspirations, is a mass of gray and white matter, and that all these
things are the result of certain molecular changes or movements in
the fluids or solids of the brain substance; in other words, that
there is a physical and physiological basis to all our mental and
emotional life. Does this material side in any way discredit these
faculties and feelings? Does not all that we call the spiritual
adhere in the material? Can we find that inner world, or any clue to
it, by dissecting the brain? Has it, therefore, any reality except in
our imagination? Prove that it exists apart from or independent of
the body, and there is no more to be said.

But what I wanted most to say is that the reason of things, or final
explanation of things seems to take the poetry and romance out of
them. Reduce religion or æsthetics or art to terms of psychology, and
they no longer appeal to the emotions or stimulate the imagination.
Naturalism is true--reason can reach no other conclusion--but the
truths of naturalism do not satisfy the moral and religious nature.

The heart is a big, strong, self-acting, muscular pump, but when
we lay our hand upon the heart and refer our emotions, our love,
our aspirations, to it, we idealize it, we do not then think of its
physical function and character. By this act we are still deferring
to the ancient and outworn belief that in this region resides the
soul--the part of man that loves and hates and hopes and fears.

The brain is the temple of the mind or the vestibule of the spiritual
world, but we can explain it only in terms of anatomy, physiology,
and physics which darken and chill our sensibilities.

Things and movements come about through natural processes, not
through supernatural ones, but when we state these processes in the
only terms in which they can be stated, the religious soul feels
hurt and orphaned. All our religious or theological explanations of
things discredit matter and the material world, discredit Nature and
all her processes. Evolution is anti-religious; that man is of animal
origin is still a hard doctrine to the old-fashioned theologian. Why
is it not equally a hard doctrine to him that we were ever babies
or embryos, carried about and associated with the viscera of our
mothers’ bodies? We have got to exalt the natural, the material, and
free our minds from the illusions of the old theologies before we can
see the truth and beauty of naturalism. The sacred, the celestial,
the divine, the holy, all are terms that date from a prescientific
age, before man’s relation to the universe was understood. They are
significant only in reference to another world and another life of an
entirely different order.

The eternal, immutable moral law to which Balfour refers, what is
it? Who instituted it? Is it other than the law of right and wrong
which mankind is coming more and more clearly to see, and more and
more fully to value in the course of evolution? You may set the
seal of some hypothetical, supernatural power upon it, but what
about supernatural powers in a universe governed by natural laws?
The religious enthusiasm of the race, the saints, the devotees, the
so-called holy ones, have doubtless had their value; they have helped
lubricate the grinding machinery of life; but their day is at an end.
We must invest our fund of love, our veneration, our heroism, our
martyrdom in this world, and not look to the next.

That Nature is irrational, unhuman, no one can deny, not because she
is less, but because she is more; she is above reason, above man.
Our reason calls Nature irrational because the reason is a special
faculty, and is limited; it takes in the arc, so to speak, but
not the full circle. Nature is irrational, not because she is not
suffused with mind, but because she does not count the cost, because
our economies do not fit her especial scheme. Life is synonymous
with intelligence; all organic nature shows the working of the primal
mind--the adaptation of means to specific ends, and the steady
improvement from lower to higher.

What we think, when trying to render an account to the reason of
the enigma of life, often has little relation to what we do, as
practical, struggling beings. We are free to think in all directions,
free to move in but few. Our thoughts are like the vapors that drift
with the winds, or that expand equally in all directions. Our actual
lives are like the waters that must flow in definite channels,
and turn some wheel or irrigate some tract of land, or quench
some creature’s thirst. That naturalism, with minds which take an
interest in it, should result in low standards of life, or in any
form of disorder or failure, I do not believe. Only clear, strong,
truth-loving spirits can accept this explanation of things. Much more
mentality is demanded than is demanded by the old conceptions. Hence
one has to face the terrible realities and discipline the spirit to
accept them. In the old views, in supernaturalism, all this is done
for one by the Church and one is a member of a personally conducted
party to heaven.


XIV. THE TIDE OF LIFE

We cannot find God by thinking. Thinking starts us on an endless
quest. We can find neither end nor beginning to the sequence of
cause and effect. It is a circle that ends and begins forever in
itself. Men find what they call God in action, in experience, because
in these practical dealings with the forces of this world they are
under the law of cause and effect. They find beginnings and endings,
they find an upper and an under side, they find a lower and a higher,
a greater and a smaller: but in thought all things are relative. Some
wise man has said that if there were no God, we should have to invent
one--invent one if we wish to explain the world in the terms of human
experience. Thinking turns the world topsy-turvy.

Our religious natures are still Ptolemaic. The heavens still revolve
around us. We do not with the eye of the flesh see ourselves in this
world as on a sphere--on a celestial body floating in space; we see
ourselves as on an endless plain over and under which the heavenly
bodies pass. It is only with the eye of the mind that we see things
in their true relation and see that there is no up and no down, no
under and no over, apart from the earth, and no God who rules as
a ruler rules. We do not gain the tremendous facts of astronomy
through our everyday experience; our search after scientific truth
reveals them to us. Through this inquiry we see the grand voyage we
are making among the stars, and see that the heavens are not a realm
apart from us, the abode of superior beings, but are our veritable
habitat; that our earth is a celestial body among myriads of others,
and that when we solemnly lift our eyes heavenward, we are lifting
them to other worlds made of the same stuff as our own. Our religious
emotions and aspirations lead us to look away from the earth and
to imagine finer and fairer realms, but disinterested science does
not humor our illusions; it brings us back to earth again, back
to the heaven we despise. Hence the trouble the narrow religious
nature has with science. It experiences a cold shudder before its
revelations and will none of it. It will have beginnings and endings,
boundaries and limitations, heavenly and earthly, and will read the
impersonal laws of the universe in terms of our personal human needs
and relations. It sets up a judge and ruler of creation modeled on
our human plan, and then to get out of the dilemma in which it finds
itself, with all the sin and misery and injustice of the world which
it finds upon its hands, and which omnipotent love and mercy could
never tolerate, dopes itself with theological casuistry that seeks
to justify the ways of God to man. It is a world-old problem. The
only way I see out of it is by purging our minds of the old dogmas
and boldly facing the reality as science shows it to us. Religion
as the world has so long used the term--that human mixture of fear,
reverence, superstition, and selfish desire--has had its day. We
may still marvel and love and admire and rejoice, but let us fear
and plead and tremble no more. There is nothing to be afraid of
worse than ourselves, and nothing to implore and propitiate farther
removed from us than the rain and the sunshine. In the end all things
work together for our good--not always for the good of to-day, or
of to-morrow, or for this man or that man, but for the good of all,
for the good which evolution brings in its train. Evolution brings
what we call evil also, but evil is a term of our human experience,
and the Infinite, the Eternal, knows it not. What is evil to one
creature in the struggle for life we have seen to be good to another,
and often what our religious fears recoil from, science sees as
the beneficent operation of law. In Nature nothing is unclean; her
chemistry meets and appropriates all, even when we flee or faint. Our
physical well-being forces upon us the conception of the clean and
the unclean, but in the processes of the Nature that sustains us both
are one.

We are adjustable creatures. We are neither sugar nor salt, neither
round nor square, neither iron nor lead; we yield and we resist,
we melt and we freeze. We are as adjustable and as adaptive as the
leaves of the forest. The firmly woven texture of the leaf, its
mobile stem, the flexible branch to which it clings, make it secure
against the ordinary vicissitudes to which it is subject.

Man is the most adaptive of all creatures; he is as local as the
turtle, and as cosmopolitan as the eagle. All climes, all conditions
of wet and dry, of plain and mountain, of sea and shore, of island
and continent, are his. His home is the world. Lately he has
conquered the air with forces of the earth. Will he yet conquer the
ether with forces of the air? Already the ether conveys his messages,
but no mechanical contrivance of his can yet lay hands upon it.

Let me again say that by the Natural Providence I mean the general
beneficence of Nature, the blind, undiscriminating, uncalculating,
inevitable beneficence which brought us here and keeps us here,
and makes it good for us to be alive, despite the vicissitudes and
the occasional apparently lesser phases of malevolence to which we
are subject. The changing seasons, the fertile soils, the rains,
the dews, the snows, the blue skies, the green earth, the flowing
streams, the gentle winds, in fact all the conditions that make life
possible and permanent, are expressions of this beneficence. The
whole movement of evolution, with all its dark and forbidding phases,
is an expression of it. Allow time enough and the turbid stream
flows itself clear, and the stream of evolution is fast losing, has
lost, most of its terrible and repellent features. At its flood, in
earlier geologic times, one may say that its waters were charged
with the elements of huge, uncouth, and terrible forms which have
been mostly eliminated; the current has cleared and purified as
it advanced; the dragons and monsters have nearly disappeared; the
reptiles have receded and left the fowl and birds; the saurians are
gone, and in their stead we have the more comely and useful forms
of mammalian life. From our human point of view--and we can have
no other--creation has refined. The tide of life is still like a
river that has its noisome and unlovely margins, but how has it
cleared and sweetened since Permian and Jurassic times! The scale
of animal life has changed, less bone and muscle and more nerve and
brains, less emphasis laid upon size and more upon wit. Only in
the insect world are the dragons and monsters, and the carnival of
blood and slaughter, repeated. In the shade of a summer tree, or in
a clover-field, one may see minute creatures pursuing or devouring
one another which, if enough times magnified, would rival any of the
dragons of the prime.


XV. FAITH FOUNDED UPON A ROCK


I

Probably that overwhelming calamity, the World War, set more good
people adrift upon the sea of religious doubt and skepticism than all
the accumulated evils of the past ten centuries. Men were everywhere
outspoken in their want of faith in the Providence in which they
had so long trusted. I heard of an English clergyman who declared
that if the Germans won in the war he would never open his Bible
again. Another English parson, with the thought of the war weighing
upon him, published a volume of discourses which he called “The
Justification of God.” But judging from my own experiences with the
book, the lay mind will find the grounds for justification as hard a
riddle to read as the original one.

Only a faith founded upon the rock of natural law can weather such a
storm as the world passed through in the Great War, but unfortunately
such a faith is possible to comparatively few--the faith that the
universe is radically good and beneficent, and that the evils of life
grow upon the same tree with the good, and that the fruits called
evil bear only a small proportion to those called good. Persons who
do not read the book of nature as a whole, who do not try their
faith by the records of the rocks and the everlasting stars, who
are oblivious to the great law of evolution which has worked out
the salvation of man and of all living things, through good and ill
report, through delays and sufferings and agonies incalculable, but
the issues of which have been unfailing, who do not see the natural
universal order working in the fiery ordeal through which all nations
during the historic period have passed, who have not learned that
the calamities of men and of peoples are not the result of the wrath
of some offended divinity, but the ups and downs in the long, hard
road of human development, and that, in the nature of things, justice
is meted out to all men--if not in a day, then in a year, or in a
thousand years; if not to the individual, then to his family, or to
his race--those who take no account of all these things soon lose
their reckoning in times like ours.

Every good deed, every noble thought, counts in the counsels of the
Eternal. Every bad deed, every ignoble thought, counts also. But the
stream tends to purify itself; the world is thus made; evil is real,
but short-lived; the remedial forces of life and nature burn it up or
convert it into good. Our fertile landscapes are the result of the
wear and tear of geologic ages; fire, flood, tornadoes, earthquakes,
volcanoes, have all had a share in shaping them. Decay and death have
fed the sources of life. Our own history as a people and the history
of the European countries exhibit a like contrast and mingling of
good and evil. We are too personal in our estimates, too limited in
our perspectives; thoughts of our own comforts and private aims are
too much with us. We must give Providence the advantage of a wiser
perspective.

The thoughtful mind, capable of viewing these things on a bigger
scale, does not need a world calamity to reveal the unsatisfactory
character of the reigning gods. The daily course of events does
that. Infantile paralysis, for example, with its long train of the
crippled, unoffending children, or a man being slowly eaten up with
cancer, or a mother losing her life in trying to save her child from
flood and fire, and scores of other similar things, show what a thin
veneer our theology puts upon ugly facts.

Our ecclesiastical faith must be housed in churches and kept warm
by vestments. The moment we take it out into the open and expose it
to unroofed and unwarmed universal nature, it is bound to suffer
from the cosmic chill. For my part, I do not have to take my
faith in out of the wet and the cold. It is an open-air faith, an
all-the-year-round faith; neither killing frosts nor killing heats
disturb it; not tornadoes nor earthquakes nor wars nor pestilence nor
famine make me doubt for one moment that the universe is sound and
good. The forces which brought us here and provided so lavishly for
our sustenance and enjoyment; that gave us our bodies and our minds;
that endowed us with such powers; that surrounded us with such beauty
and sublimity; that brought us safely through the long and hazardous
journey of evolution; that gave us the summer sun, the midnight
skies, and the revolving seasons; that gave human love and fellowship
and coöperation, childhood, motherhood, and fatherhood, and the sense
of justice and mercy, are beneficent and permanent forces. They are
directed to me personally because they are directed to all that live;
they are the cause of the living, the essence and the sum of all
life of the globe. I do not mind if you call them terrestrial forces;
the terrestrial and the celestial are one. I do not mind if you call
them material forces; the material and the spiritual are inseparable.
I do not mind if you call this view the infidelity (or atheism) of
science; science, too, is divine; all knowledge is knowledge of God.

I have never taken shelter in any form of ecclesiasticism. I
have never tried to clothe myself in the delusive garments of a
superstitious age. I have never pinned my faith to a man-made God,
however venerable. I have inured my mind to the open air of the
universe, to things as they are, to the dealings of a Power that
exacts an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth; a power that deals
on the square. Those apparent outlaws of the heavens, the comets, do
not disturb the naturist; sidereal space strewn with dead worlds and
burnt-out suns do not disturb him; the spectacle of the great planets
rolling through space void of life for untold millions of years, does
not disturb him; and if life should never come to them, and should
ultimately disappear from the earth, he would not lose faith; he
could behold Europe drenched with the blood of a needless, wicked war
and not lose faith; he could see civilization retarded and the unjust
cause triumph, and still know that the Creative Energy has our good
at heart and always will have it.


II

The demand of our day is for a scientific religion--an attitude of
mind toward creation begotten by knowledge, in which fear, personal
hopes, individual good, and the so-called “other world,” play little
part. Virtuous actions, upright conduct, heroic character, the
practice of the Golden Rule, are seen to be their own reward, and
the security of the future is in well-doing and well-being in the
present. This is not religion in the old ecclesiastical sense, but
in the new scientific sense; a religion that moves us to fight vice,
crime, war, intemperance, for self-preservation and in brotherly
love, and not in obedience to theological dogma or the command of a
God; a religion that opens our eyes to the wonder and beauty of the
world, and that makes us at home in this world. The old religion is a
tree that has borne its fruit. It is dying at the top; it is feeble
at the root. It no longer touches men’s lives as of old. The great
things that are done to-day are not done in the name of religion, but
in the name of science, of humanity, of civilization. The brotherhood
that has force and meaning is no longer a sectarian brotherhood; it
is larger than all the churches combined.

The naturist must see all things in the light of his experiences in
this world. He experiences no miracles; he sees the cosmic energy as
no respecter of persons; he sees the rains falling alike upon the
just and the unjust; he sees the vast, impartial, undiscriminating
movements of Nature all about him; he learns that the land cannot
sustain life without the fertilizing rains, yet he beholds the clouds
pouring out their bounty into the sea just as freely as upon the
land; he beholds the inorganic crushing the organic all about him,
and yet he knows that the latter is nothing without the former.

If God and the universal cosmic forces are one, how surely is God
on both sides in all struggles, all causes, all wars, righteous and
unrighteous! We behold warring nations praying to the same God for
victory; we see this same God now apparently favoring one side,
now the other, and we are bewildered. Our theology takes us beyond
soundings. But the naturist is not bewildered; he can read the riddle
and reconcile the contradictions. Napoleon (if it was Napoleon)
was right when he said that God was on the side of the heaviest
artillery--the more power, the more God.

This may be a hard, chilling gospel; it is like going naked into the
storm; but how can we deny it? Can we refuse to face it?




