XII

THE PROBLEM OF EVIL


I

How has the problem of evil tried men’s souls! How have their
gods failed to live up to the character they have given them! How
have they confused our moral standards! The trouble lies in a
misconception of the nature of evil, and in a false idea of the
universe itself.

There is no problem of evil until we have made or imagined an
unnatural and impossible world. When we have enthroned in the
universe a powerful man-made God who is the embodiment of all we
call good and the contemner of all we call evil, then we have our
insoluble problem. To help ourselves out we invent another being who
is the embodiment of all we call evil and enthrone him in regions
below. Upon him we saddle the evil, and thus we try to run the
universe with these two antagonistic principles yoked together, and
no end of confusion in our religious ideas results.

The moment we postulate an all-loving, all-merciful, all-wise, and
just being to rule the affairs of this world, and place him in such
intimate relations with it that not a sparrow falls to the ground
without his will and cognizance, then, indeed, are we in troubled
waters and have lost our reckoning. We cannot excuse such being on
the ground that his ways are inscrutable and past finding out. A
creator who sends into the world the malformed, the half-witted, the
bestial, the naturally depraved, and then holds them to high ethical
standards, is condemned by the ideals which he has implanted within
us.

Now the naturalist has no such trouble. He sees that good and evil
are only relative terms; that they both grow on the same tree; that
we should not know good were there no evil; that there would be no
development were there not what we call evil. Pain and suffering
are inseparable from the human lot. They are a part of the price
we pay for our place in the world. All struggle we look upon as
evil. Disease, failure, death are looked upon as evil, but they
are conditions of our lives. Through sickness we learn the laws
of health. The lower animals have no such troubles--no sickness,
intemperance, or war or avarice. They know without reason how to
live, but man has reason, and the joy of its exercise and the peril
of its failure. Are we not all willing to pay the price?--to take it
on these terms rather than to change places with the brutes?

What a troublesome time the good orthodox brethren have with their
God! He does, or permits such terrible things. Only yesterday He sent
a cyclone through the State of Illinois that killed hundreds of
innocent persons, and destroyed hundreds of peaceful homes, wiping
out at one blow the results of long years of human labor. A few years
ago He sent or permitted the scourge of infantile paralysis that
desolated tens of thousands of homes and left a trail of thousands
of crippled and enfeebled children. Again He sent or permitted the
influenza to sweep over the land, claiming more victims than did
the Great War; and so on. How our fathers, rocked in the cradle of
the old creeds, wrestled with this problem! How could a paternal
and all-loving God do these things? The naturalist reads nature
differently. His god is no better than Nature. In fact, his god and
Nature are one and inseparable. Nature goes her way and her ways are
not our ways. We take our chances in the clash and war of physical
forces. They have developed us and made us what we are.

It was only a few years ago that the President of the United States
asked all good people to assemble in their respective places of
worship and pray to God to stop the tornado of war and crime that
was then devastating Europe. Is it possible to conceive of a being
anywhere in the universe, with power to stop such a world calamity,
who would complacently look on and wait till the sufferers could
unite in a petition to him? What a false man-made god such a
conception holds up to us! No wonder the World War shattered this
conception in thousands of minds, and left them without any faith at
all!

Rogers said in regard to evil that Sir John Mackintosh and Malthus
and another philosopher whose name has escaped me, all agreed that
the attributes of the deity must be in some respects limited, else
there would be no sin and misery in the world.

We use the words “good” and “evil” in a narrow, personal sense. To
the farmer the frost that blights his crops is an evil, but not to
the squirrels who are waiting for the nuts to fall, or to the man who
suffers from hay fever. Rain is a blessing, but how easily it becomes
a curse! A cold wet spring cuts off the insect pests, but delays the
plowing and planting. It is hard on the insectivorous birds, but the
plants and trees profit. The grasshoppers that eat up the farmer’s
pasturage make good provender for his flock of turkeys.

Blight and struggle, frost and drought, weed out the weaklings and
beget a hardier race.

Moral evil--intemperance, avarice, war, lying, cheating--are on
another plane. They are peculiar to man. Nature below him knows them
not. But as they are against nature, they perpetually tend to correct
themselves. The business world has learned that honesty is the best
policy. Cheating is unpopular because, in the long run, it does not
pay.

The most aggressive and warlike nation upon the globe has at last
got its eyes open to the evils of militarism, and has bought its
emancipation at a heavy price. Tyranny and oppression are finally
doomed by the nature of man. Nature’s ways are roundabout, and often
regardless of cost. The chaos and waste and suffering in Europe
to-day are in keeping with her spendthrift methods. She knows that
the most turbulent and muddy stream will clear itself and quiet down.
The track of the cyclone through the forest will in time entirely
disappear. Evil perishes, the good increases more and more. God is
not so bad as we paint him, and we have no need of a devil. All is
good. Gravity would glue our feet to the ground and we have to defeat
it every time we lift a foot, and yet how could we walk or work
without gravity? The bad, or the evil, dogs one’s footsteps, but it
teaches us circumspection, and to beware of dangerous paths.

How easy to put one’s finger on this or that and say, “Here are
positive evils!”--all diseases, smallpox, infantile paralysis,
influenza, and so on--but they are only remote contingencies, and,
on the whole, most of us find life good. There are good germs and
there are bad germs, but the good vastly predominate. And the bad
germs are only bad from our point of view. Our doors and windows let
in the cold or the heat, as the case may be. We have them on these
conditions. Fruits and grains nourish us, but they may injure us also.

In 1916 my naturalist’s faith prompted me to write thus of the World
War: Two world forces are at death grips in this war. In terms of
government it is autocracy against democracy; in terms of biology it
is the unfit against the fit; in terms of man’s moral nature it is
might against right. Whatever triumph Prussian aggressiveness and
ruthlessness may meet with, they must in time meet with defeat, else
Evolution has miscarried, and its latest and highest product, man’s
moral nature, is, in its survival value, but dust and ashes.


II

There is positive good and there is negative good. We may say of
health that it is a positive good, and of sickness that it is a
negative good, because it reveals to us the conditions of health.
In disease the body is struggling to regain its health--to recover
and retain its normal condition. Its well-being is the result of a
certain balance between contending forces. What we call the hostile
forces appear only as the result of wrong living. The lower animals
have none of our distempers because they live according to nature.
Cattle do not get rheumatism by lying upon the wet, cold ground, nor
pneumonia from exposure to cold and storm. In the freedom of the
fields and woods it is quite certain that they would never become
infected with tuberculosis. I doubt if the wild dog or the wolf ever
have dog distemper, or if wild horses ever have crib-bite. Disease,
as we know it, is a product of civilization.

Death, of course, is not an evil when it comes in the regular
course of nature; it is an evil when it comes prematurely. The
various social evils tend to correct themselves. Moral evils--lying,
cheating, selfishness, uncharitableness--also tend to correct
themselves. Righteousness exalteth a nation because righteousness
has great survival value. The unrighteousness of Germany caused her
final downfall. In an earlier age, when ethical standards were lower,
she might have succeeded in dominating Europe. Our susceptibility to
pain is not an evil inasmuch as it safeguards us against a thousand
dangers. What I would say in a score of ways is that there is no evil
in the human world not of our own making. Plagues and famines are
always the result of human folly or short-sightedness. Filth breeds
disease. Typhoid fever is a filth disease and is preventable. There
is no god to blame for our distempers. Nature’s hands are clean. The
wind is never tempered to the shorn lamb, in spite of the proverb,
but the shorn lamb has not been fleeced by Nature. A heavy snowfall
is an evil in towns and cities, but a good thing for the country.
It enables the meadow mice to girdle the apple-trees, but it is a
coverlid that greatly profits the meadows themselves. It is therefore
good to both mice and meadows.

Our greatest philosopher, William James, had a wide grasp of
fundamental questions, but it seems to me that he did not fully grasp
the problem of evil; he saw the universe as a dual universe, two
principles, good and evil, struggling with each other. He seemed to
look upon good and evil as positive entities in themselves, whereas
naturalism sees in them only names which we give to our experiences
with objects and conditions in this world. What favors us, as I have
so often said, we call good, and what antagonizes we call evil;
but absolute good and absolute evil do not exist, any more than do
absolute up and down; or absolute near and far. The absolute admits
of no degrees, but there are all degrees of good and bad. Some
hostile germs are worse than others, and some friendly germs are
better than others. Again I say, we live in a world of relativity.

Naturalism does not see two immeasurable realities, God and Nature,
it sees only one, that all is Nature or all is God, just as you
prefer.

James was fond of quoting Walt Whitman, but he does not see, as
Whitman did, that there is no evil, or, if there is, that it is
just as necessary as the so-called good. From James’s point of view
Nature is a harlot to whom we owe no allegiance, and another world is
demanded to correct and compensate the failures and disappointments
of this.

Our sacred books and traditions tell us of one God who made the
heaven and the earth, and who on looking upon them said that they
were very good. Here is where the trouble begins--a Creator apart
from the universe who looks upon and approves the work of his hands.
This is the early, childish view of mankind. As Bergson says, when we
apply to the universe our idea of a maker and a thing made, trouble
begins. The universe was not made; it is, and always has been. God is
Nature, and Nature is God. If this is pantheism, then we are in good
company, for Goethe said that as a philosopher he was a pantheist.
Even the atheist has a god of his own. He knows that there is
something back of him greater than he is.

Most persons are pantheists without knowing it. Ask any of the
good orthodox folk what God is, and they will say that He is a
spirit. Ask them where He is, and they will answer, He is here,
there, everywhere, in you and in me. And this is pantheism--all
god--cosmotheism.

“Truly all that we know of good and duty proceeds from Nature; but,
none the less so, all that we know of evil.”

“If there be a divine spirit of the universe, Nature, such as we
know her, cannot possibly be its ultimate word to man,” says James.
But does he not see that this term “divine spirit” is born of man’s
narrowness and partiality; that Nature is all of one stuff, divine
or diabolical, just as we elect? He says that the naturalistic
superstition, the worship of God in nature, has begun to lose its
hold upon the educated mind; that the first step toward getting into
healthy relations with the universe is the act of rebellion against
the God of nature.

Poor James Thomson, the British poet whose pessimism, perhaps, caused
him to commit suicide, whom our James loves to quote, hurled his
scorn at a fiction of his own brain when he wrote:

      “Not for all thy power, furled or unfurled,
        For all thy temples to thy glory built,
        Would I assume the ignominious guilt
      Of having made such men in such a world.”

The whole value of philosophy is to help us to a rational view of the
universe, and when it fails to do this, it falls short of fulfilling
its proper function. The contradictions of which James speaks do not
disturb the naturalist at all. Nature would not be Nature without
these contradictions; they do not disturb the unity of Nature.

Empedocles taught that “there is no real creation or annihilation
in the universal round of things, but an eternal mixing--due to the
two eternal powers, Love and Hate--of one world-stuff in its sum
unalterable and eternal.” And Whitman’s large lines mean the same
thing:

      “There was never any more inception than there is now,
      Nor any more youth or age than there is now,
      And will never be any more perfection than there is now,
      Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.”




