XIII

HORIZON LINES


I. THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

In dealing with fundamental questions like the origin of life, how
prone our natural philosophers are to assume the existence of that
which they set out to prove. Thus Pflügler assumes _living_ protein
in the shape of a cyanogen radical, and assumes that this radical
possesses a large amount of internal energy, and thus “introduces
into the _living_ matter energetic internal motion.” As cyanogen and
its compounds arise only in incandescent heat, he concludes that life
is derived from fire, that its germ was in the earth when it was
still an incandescent ball.

“As soon as oxides can be there,” says Moore, “oxides appear.”
“When temperature admits of carbonates, then carbonates are
forthwith formed.” But are oxides and carbonates mere fortuitous
compounds--just chance hits? Moore helps himself out by formulating
what he calls the “Law of Complexity,” a law that holds throughout
all space. But is the law, again, fortuitous? Is it not rather
organized intelligence? “Atoms, molecules, colloids, and living
organisms arise as a result of the operation of this law.” Allen
says, “Life arose at the period when the physical conditions of the
earth came to be nearly what they are at present.” Of course. But is
not this begging the question? We do not know life apart from these
conditions; hence we assume that the conditions beget the life.

What is life anyhow? May we not say that it is a new motion in
matter? It does not introduce a new chemistry, or a new physics, but
it uses these to new ends. New and unstable compounds arise. Solar
energy, says Allen, acting on various carbon and nitrogen compounds,
would set up various anabolic and catabolic reactions which resulted
in life--life of a very humble and rudimentary form, but life.

Troland gets life from the enzymes, but how does he get his enzymes?
He assumes that at some moment in the earth’s history a small amount
of a certain autocatalytic enzyme--a self-created enzyme--suddenly
appeared at a definite time and place within the yet warm ocean
waters which contained in solution various substances reacting very
slowly to produce an oily liquid immiscible with water. Troland
postulates the auto- or self-catalytic character of the initial
enzyme, which is virtually postulating the life-impulse itself.

Osborn, in his work on the “Origin and Evolution of Life,” also
virtually starts by assuming that which he sets out to prove.
He suggests that the initial step in the origin of life was the
coördinating and bringing together of the then primordial elements
of water, nitrates, and carbon dioxide, “which so far as we know had
never been in combined action before.” Was their coming together
a blind, fortuitous affair? Osborn assumes that these elements
were gradually bound by a _new_ form of mutual attraction “out of
which arose a new form of unity in the cosmos, an organic unity or
organism. It was an application of energy new to the cosmos. In fact
it was life.” “When the earth had in the course of its physical
evolution become adapted as the abode of life, living substances came
into being.” By their own independent action, or by what?

In trying to account for happenings on the earth’s surface, we follow
the chain of cause and effect. But when we try to explain origins, we
are dealing with a chain which has only one end.

Picted, a Swiss scientist, concluded that because all chemical action
of the kind which goes on in living things is annihilated at one
hundred degrees below zero Centigrade, therefore chemical action and
life are one. But chemical action is as old as the earth. Is life as
old?


II. THE LIVING AND NON-LIVING WORLDS

I fancy I am not alone in having difficulty in uniting the two
worlds--the living and the non-living--and in seeing them under
the same law. In the one I see something like mind and purpose;
every living thing shows something for which we have no name but
intelligence. Organization demands an organizing principle. There is
purpose in the wings of a bird, the legs of an animal, the fins of a
fish, but where is there purpose in the orbs, in the comets, in the
meteors? Or, to come down to the earth, where is there purpose in
the mountains, in the stratified rocks, in the ocean, or in the air
currents?

In a living body there are organs which function; in a non-living,
there are parts which act and are acted upon. To see mind in all is
the task--to see in gravity, in cohesion, in chemical affinity, in
dissolution, anything at work akin to ourselves. We see irrefragable
law; we see the sequence of cause and effect; we see the weather
system work itself out--evaporation, condensation, precipitation,
resulting in clouds, rainfall, springs, streams, lakes, and seas; we
see the never-failing succession of the seasons; we see the law of
the conservation of force; but do all these things imply the same
intelligence, though unconscious, which we see in the sitting bird,
or in the growing plant or tree? Is the cosmic order akin to the
vital order? Of course mechanics and chemistry are one the universe
over; atoms and molecules are atoms and molecules; but where does
mind end, and law begin? Or, is it all law, or all mind, according
to our point of view? The moral order, which is man’s order, we
know has its limits, but I am trying to see if the rational order
is coexistent with nature. The unity we seek we may find in the old
conception of God, but this saddles all the turmoil and disorder and
evil of the world upon an all-wise, all-good Being.

Shall we adopt the idea of a primal mind as distinct from the human
mind, as the poets do? I grasp at anything that will help me see that
I am akin to the farthest star, in my mind as in my body. I cannot
think of a dual or a divided universe. I want to see myself as strung
upon the same thread as all the rest of nature.

In organic evolution I see the workings of the creative impulse--or
growth, as opposed to mere accretion or accumulation. In the light
of the same law does one not see worlds and suns potential in the
spiral nebulæ? Science helps us to see the evolution of the chemical
elements, or to follow up this defining and differentiating process.
Could we fly to the uttermost parts of the heavens, we should find
the Cosmic Mind there before us.


III. THE ORGANIZING TENDENCY

Is it possible to think of any ingenious contrivance in nature as
the result of chance, or of the fortuitous clashing and jostling of
the elements? Living things are full of these ingenious contrivances
which serve a definite end and keep life going. In the inorganic
world there are no such contrivances; there is not the simplest bit
of machinery--parts adjusted to parts, and the whole adjusted to
some specific end. In all the clashing and jostling of bodies and
forces through all the astronomic and geologic ages, not so much as
the simplest mechanical device--a coiled spring or a carpenter’s
hammer--has been struck out, and never can be. It is true that there
are certain static conditions of matter that suggest design--natural
bridges, natural obelisks, rude architectural and monumental
structures, and human profiles on the rocks; but these are not the
result of a constructive process, of a building-up, but the result
of degradation: the erosive forces carve them out in obedience to
the laws of matter and energy. We easily see how it all came about;
and we can guide these forces so that they will repeat the process.
But we do not see how the living body, with all its marvelous
adjustments and coördinations, came about, and we cannot manipulate
matter so as to produce the simplest living thing. Darwinians
profess to see in natural selection--which is simply a name for an
eliminating or sifting process--the explanation of even man himself.
But the elimination of the weaker forms, which has gone on for whole
geologic ages--for example, in the Grand Cañon of the Colorado--has
not resulted in so much as one perfect, four-square foundation, or
one perfect flying arch. Natural selection is not a creative, but a
purely mechanical, process. We involuntarily personify it, and think
of it as involving will and power of choice; think of it as selecting
this and that, as a man does when he weeds his garden or selects his
seeds, or breeds his animals. But it is not positive at all. It is
negative--a dropping-out process.

Chance, or chance selection, works alike in the organic and the
inorganic realms, but it develops no new forms in the inorganic,
because there is no principle of development, no organizing push.
But in organized matter there is, in and behind all this organizing,
a developing principle or tendency; the living force is striving
toward other forms; in other words, development occurs because there
is something to develop. An acorn develops, but a quartz pebble only
changes.

The living body is placed in a world of non-living bodies and forces,
and it takes its chances; it develops only by their aid; if warmth
and moisture are withheld, it ceases to develop; or, if warmth and
moisture are in excess, it ceases to develop; its well-being is
insured when it rides the inorganic forces, and is not ridden by
them. It is subject to the law of chance of the world in which it is
placed, but that law of chance does not explain its origin or its
development as it does that of the non-living forms.

That it is all the result of design or purpose of an all-wise Being,
working his will upon matter, is equally unthinkable. Yet if it
is the result of chance, then the world of mind and soul is only
a phase of mechanics and chemistry. In that case the head of a
Paul or a Homer is no greater wonder than a volcanic bomb, having
essentially the same origin. If we regard it as the work of design,
we are compelled to saddle all the sin and misery, all the delays and
failures and wastes of the geologic ages, upon Infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, together with all the famine and pestilence and carnage and
miscarriages of history.

For untold millions of years the earth was given up to low,
groveling, all but brainless, bestial forms, devouring and devoured;
for other untold millions it was the scene of a carnival of terrible
dragon-like monsters--in the sea, on the earth, and in the air--a
tragedy of monstrous forms enacted upon an unstable stage that rose
and sank or was overwhelmed by fire and flood. For other long ages
it was the scene of ape-like creatures struggling to be man, living
in caves, contending with savage beasts, hirsute, forbidding, living
by tooth and claw and muscular strength more than by wit, followed
by the long historical period during which man appeared and has
fought his way to his present stage of development, through blood
and carnage and suffering and misdirected activities, dogged by all
the evil and destructive passions, obstructed and thwarted, cut
off by plagues and wars, engulfed by earthquakes, devoured by fire
and flood, blinded by his own ignorance, consumed by his own evil
passions, yet making steady progress toward the position which he now
holds in the animal kingdom.


IV. SCIENCE AND MYSTICISM

The bogey of teleology frightens a good many honest scientific minds.
To recognize anything akin to intelligence in nature, or to believe
that a universal mind is immanent in, or a part of, the cosmos, is
looked upon as disloyalty to the scientific spirit.

Lamarck’s idea of an indwelling directing principle in organic
evolution discredited him with Darwin, and with the leading
biologists since his time. Yet Darwin said he could not look upon the
universe as the result of chance. But he faltered before the other
alternative--that any will or design lay back of it.

It is unfortunate that these words connote things purely human, and
to that extent are likely to lead us astray. But are not all our
terms human, even the word “astray” itself? Can we have any other?
Emerson says that anything may be affirmed or denied of the Infinite,
and that God can be hinted only in signs and symbols. In trying to
describe time, we need a new language that differs as much from our
ordinary speech as algebra differs from arithmetic. The circle and
sphere are the only complete types of Infinity.

In Professor Loeb’s mechanistic conception of life there is no hint
of mind or soul; all is matter and force. All the mechanists and
energists and materialists unconsciously endow their matter and force
with creative power, thus elevating them to the rank of a _Deus_.

Science knows no mysteries; it knows only insoluble problems and
comparatively few of them. But may not one see mysteries in nature
without being a mystic? Physical facts may be inexplicable, but we
do not call them mysteries. The birth and development of the cell is
wonderful, but can we say that it is mysterious? Does not mystery
imply something occult and unknowable? Is a biologist or evolutionist
to be charged with mysticism because he refuses to admit that the
development of species is all a matter of chance? If he believes,
for instance, that the horse as we know him was inevitable in that
small beast of Eocene times, the eohippus, is he to be charged with
a teleological taint? Or if we speak of the predestined course of
evolution are we unfaithful to the true scientific spirit? Is not the
acorn predestined to become an oak? Does growth imply a mysterious
guiding force or principle? The little brown house wren that fusses
and chatters here around its box on my porch has come all the way
from Central America. Did something guide it? Life is full of this
kind of guidance. Not much of nature can be explained by addition and
subtraction; not much of it can be explained by mere mechanics, or
physics; not much of it can be explained by the doctrine of chance.
There are reasons behind reasons. You may give good physiological
reasons why the heart beats, why the liver secretes bile, why the
digestive processes go on and our food nourishes us, but can you find
the mind by dissecting the brain or connect mind with matter?

Mysticism belongs to the sphere of our religious emotions, and when
we read natural phenomena through these emotions we are mystical.
We cannot say that the course of evolution has been directed, and
we cannot say it goes by chance. The changes of the seasons are not
directed; the circuit of the waters from the earth, through the sea
to the clouds and back to the earth, is not directed; the orbs in
their courses are not directed; the sap in the trees, the blood in
our veins, are not directed; neither are these things by chance. “An
inward perfecting principle” is the divinity that shapes the ends of
all organisms.

Many scientific men are so shy of teleology that they tend to the
other extreme and land in a world of chance.

Now, if man and all the other forms of life are the result of chance,
then Chance is a very good god and should be written with a capital.
No matter what we call the power out of which the universe flows, or
with which it is identified, it is a veritable _Deus_.

We cannot affirm that we are the result of chance, nor the result
of design, as we use these words in our daily lives. These words
apply to parts and fragments of which our lives are made up. They
do not help us in dealing with the whole. We share in the life of
the universe; we are a part of it, and what keeps it going keeps us
going. What set evolution on foot and evolved the organic from the
inorganic is the parent of us all. It is not we that are immortal;
it is life, and the universe. We pass like shadows, but the sun
remains--for a season. We say of a thing, or an event, that it came
by chance, when we see no will like unto our own directing it; at
the same time we know that the laws of matter and force control
everything. Not a sparrow falls to the ground without their immutable
decrees. In the same sense the hairs of our heads are numbered.

When we discuss or describe the universe in terms of experience, we
are dealing in half-truths. We cannot describe a sphere in terms of
angles and right lines; no more can we describe or interpret the All
in terms of our own experience.

If it were Chance, or Darwin’s Natural Selection, or orthogenesis, or
whatever it was, that brought me and all other forms of life here,
that gave me my mind and body, that put my two eyes and my two ears
just where they are of most service to me, and my two arms and hands,
and my two legs and feet, and all my internal organs, my double
circulation, my heart to pump the blood and keep the vital machinery
going, my secretions and my excretions, my lungs to lay hold of the
air and purify the blood, my liver and kidneys to eliminate the
poisons and effete matter, my marvelous digestive system to furnish
the fuel that generates the physical power, and, more than all
these things, that looked after my germ in the old Cambrian seas
and brought it safely down through the hazards of the long road
of evolution and developed it and made me a man, and gave me the
capacity to contemplate and enjoy this amazing universe--the power or
the blind force or the law of chance, I say, that could do all this
is god enough for me. I want no other.

Do we expect to see the Natural Providence at work as we see man at
work? Nature works from the inside. In the human sphere there is a
maker and a thing made. Not so in the universe. Things are in their
place without being made. Our concepts of the beginning and the end
do not apply to them. The words “chance” and “design” are born of our
limited knowledge.

That man or an ant or a leaf or a flower could result from the
haphazard jostling together of the molecules of matter, or the units
of force, is unthinkable. Could one get an intelligent sentence, or
one’s own name, by putting the letters of the printer’s type in a
hat and shaking them up till the crack of doom?--an old and trite
comparison, but it seems to state the case fairly. And yet, how can
a naturalist fall back upon teleology? Is not Nature sufficient unto
herself? Must we inject our own little methods and makeshifts into
the ways of the Eternal? We might as well try to walk off the sphere
as try to compass this problem in the terms of our own experience.
The inscrutable, the unthinkable, the unknowable, confront us on all
sides.

So far as I can see the Creative Energy in nature has no plan nor
end. Plans are the ways of the finite, not of the Infinite. Man alone
has plans and ends. The Infinite cannot be defined or interpreted in
terms of our human lives. It transcends all speech. To name any one
thing as the purpose and end of creation is like naming the end of a
sphere, or the direction of a circle. All bodies with which we deal
on the earth have an upper and an under side, but the earth itself is
all top side; there is no under side, though the orbs in the heavens,
to our eye, have a lowest point or bottom side. Every tangible body
with which we deal rests upon some other body, but the orbs float in
vacuity. The irregular solid bodies with which we deal have three
dimensions--length, breadth, and thickness--but, properly speaking,
the sphere has none of these; it has only mass.

When we discuss or attempt to describe what we call God, or what I
call the Eternal, in terms of man, as the theologians do, something
within us rises up and says, No. A magnified man, or a man raised
to the _n_th power, is not God; he is still man. I fancy that with
most men the denial of a God means simply this: there is no God who
can be described in the terms usually employed. One is an atheist
because he cannot accept a God made in man’s image. It belittles the
Mystery. Our belief in God is so radical that we reject half-gods.
The fatherhood of God means no more than the manhood of God, or the
governorship, or the judgeship, of God.

In many respects the manlike God falls below his human prototype,
being more cruel than any human being dares to be.

No, we cannot measure the Infinite Mystery with our foot-rule.
Boundless space is the negation of space. We can say that there is
no space in the sense that we can say that there is no God. There is
no motion unless there is something at rest; there is no Infinite
Good unless there is Infinite Evil. Hence we have invented a hell to
balance heaven, a Devil to offset God.

The universe is a reality, though we cannot define it. Life goes
on, though we cannot account for it. Boundless space exists, though
words fail us in the attempt to fathom it. The earth has its center,
though we do not know whether we should be standing on our heads or
our heels were we to reach it. Heavenly bodies do collide, though we
cannot visualize the collision. Our language fails us when we come to
the ultimate questions.

That this is the best possible world, humanly speaking, I have no
doubt, yet sin and misery are on every hand. Sin and misery are
terms of our own which simply express some of the conditions of our
development. They are like the terms “up” and “down,” “east” and
“west,” and “near” and “far”; they are relative. Nature knows no good
and no bad; all is good; that is, all favors development. The rivers
reach the sea, no matter what the obstacles in the way. The seasons
come and go, no matter how delayed.

Nature’s ends, so far as we can name them, are wholesale--to keep the
game going, to heap the measure, to play one hand against the other.
She is more solicitous about the race than about the individual. The
wreck of worlds or suns in sidereal space matters little; there are
infinite worlds and suns left. What would really matter would be
failure of celestial mechanics. The eclipse of the sun and the moon
occurring exactly on time, “without the untruth of a single second,”
tells how perfectly the great machine runs. The eclipse itself is an
accident, but a harmless one; it is not a necessity in the movements
of our system.

If man is the end of things, as we would fain believe, then why
was he so long a-coming? Why will he as surely disappear from the
earth? Why has he not come to other planets in our system? When he
disappears from our solar system, will not the great procession go
on just the same without him? No doubt of it. He is only an incident,
and maybe an accident--a lucky throw of the dice.


V. IS THERE DESIGN IN NATURE?

We cannot put to Nature the direct questions we put to ourselves.
Namable purposes and designs rule our lives. Not so with the All. I
told Father Goodman the other day, much to his bewilderment, that I
did not think the air was made for us to breathe, nor the water for
us to drink, nor food for us to eat. We breathe and drink and eat
because our organization is adjusted to these things. The shoe is
made over the last, not the last to fit the shoe. The organization
is fitted, or fits itself, to its environment. Nature is first, man
is afterwards. Is the notch in the mountain made for the road to go
through? Is the land-locked harbor made to protect our shipping?
Would it not be as true to say that the wind was made to fill the
ship’s sails, as that air was made to fill our lungs? In dealing with
this question of design many persons get the cart before the horse.

Of course there is purpose or design in living things in a sense that
there is not in the non-living. Every part of a living organization
is purposeful. There is purpose in our lungs, our hearts, our
kidneys, in short in every part of our bodies. There is purpose in
the varnish on leaves, in the down and resin on buds, in the wings
and hooks of seeds, in the colors of flowers and of animals, in
fact, in everything that makes for the well-being of living things.
But not in the same sense is there purpose in the wind, the rain,
the snow, the tides, the heat, the cold, the rocks, the soil, the
fountains. Animate nature struggles; inanimate nature passively
submits. Dead matter forever seeks an equilibrium; living matter
forever struggles against an equilibrium. The waters separate the
clay and the sand and the pebbles from the soil and deposit each
in its own place; but it is not a struggle or an effort; it is
mechanical adjustment. It is not an effort for certain liquids to
form crystals, or for certain elements to combine with certain other
elements and form new compounds, but it is an effort for a tree
to resist the wind, to lift up tons of water and minerals against
gravity, to force its roots through the soil or grip the rock, and it
is an effort for the mother to bear and nurse her young. For anything
to live and grow, effort is needful; not commonly a painful effort,
but a joyous one.

So, when we ask, Is there design in Nature? we must make clear what
part or phase of Nature we refer to. Can we say that the cosmos as
a whole shows any design in our human sense of the word? I think
not. The Eternal has no purpose that our language can compass.
There can be neither center nor circumference to the Infinite. The
distribution of land and water on the globe cannot be the result of
design any more than can the shapes of the hills and mountains, or
Saturn’s rings, or Jupiter’s moons. The circular forms and orbits
of the universe must be the result of the laws of matter and force
that prevail in celestial mechanics; this is not a final solution of
the riddle, but is as near as we can come to it. One question stands
on another question, and that on another, and so on, and the bottom
question we can never reach and formulate. The earth rests on nothing
and floats as lightly as a feather. All matter is probably only a
phase of the ether, but the ether defies all proof and all negation.

How quickly we get where no step can be taken! We cannot step off
the planet, though we may step off from every object on its surface.
There is no heat in sunlight till it reaches the earth; heat is an
experience of our bodies, and beings on the remotest planets, if
there are any, may and must receive adequate heat, and beings on
Mercury and Venus no more. Terrestrial physics and celestial physics
must be the same, and yet celestial mechanics find no place on the
surface of our planet. The laws of the cosmos bring to naught our
mundane conceptions. Where are up and down, east and west, over
and under, out in sidereal space? We balk at perpetual motion, yet
in the heavens, and in the interior of matter, behold perpetual
motion! Behold motion without friction and energy without waste or
dissipation! On the earth every visible body rests on some other
body, everything has a beginning and an end, but where is the
beginning or the ending of the cosmos? Where, then, in this quest do
we touch bottom? Nowhere. There is no bottom. Only measurable, finite
things have bottoms and bounds. The immeasurable, the Infinite, is
over us and under us, and our lives are like sparks against the
night. But, just as we live in the heavens and do not know it, so we
live and move and have our being in the Eternal. It is not afar off;
it is here; we are a part of it, and as inseparable from it as from
gravity.

We are not like beings who have moved into a house, made and
furnished and provisioned in anticipation of our coming. We are
creatures born in a house, or amid an environment to which we
must slowly and more or less painfully fit ourselves. We are the
consequent, not the antecedent. In a different world we should have
been differently constituted. In a bigger world no doubt our bodies
would have been bigger and our strength greater; with less or with
more oxygen in the air, no doubt our lungs would have been different.
With less light no doubt our eyes would have been larger, and with
more light they would probably have been smaller. We do not feel
the pressure of the atmosphere, but make the pressure more or less,
and we are at once disturbed. The deep-sea fishes fairly explode
when brought to the surface, and no doubt the surface fishes would
be crushed in the deep sea bottoms. Just as we adjust our flying
machines to the tenuity of the air, and our oversea and undersea
boats to the density and weight of the water, so Nature adjusts her
organisms to their environment.

Man avails himself of all possible aids. His voluntary conquests of
nature are many and are constantly increasing, but his involuntary
dependencies upon her are many also. He did not launch himself into
this world, and he did not give his body, with all its wonderful
organs and powers, the shape it has, or elect to breathe or see or
hear or breed or eat or sleep. Something else determined all these
things for him. What is that something else? Our fathers called it
God; we call it Nature, because we live in a scientific and not in a
theological age. We are pantheistic and not theistic. Our gods are
everywhere, in everything created. Our minds are no longer hampered
by the idea of a maker and a thing made, a ruler or a governor and a
thing ruled or governed. The unity of Nature and God is a conception
fostered by science. We are compelled to adjust our minds to the idea
of a causeless universe, to a universe without beginning and without
ending, without a maker or a designer.

Our conception of cause and effect, or beginning and ending,
applies only on the surface of the earth; where currents and
counter-currents, action and reaction and interaction, are in
perpetual see-saw; where every body rests upon some other body, and
every cause has its antecedent cause; where we can live only by
dealing with parts and fragments, and by separating one thing from
another. The astronomic laws and conditions, or our conceptions of
them, are thrown into confusion the moment we try to apply them in
our practical mundane lives. In vain we try to abolish friction
and achieve perpetual motion, but the heavenly bodies move without
friction, and move forever and ever. Motion is the prime condition
of the universe. It is the condition or necessity we are under in
this world, on the surface of this planet, that sets us on the
quest of final causes and gives rise to our conceptions of the made
and the maker, the good and the bad, the end and the beginning. We
cannot say that we are watched over by the gods--our personification
of the universal mind that pervades nature--nor that we are not
watched over by them, because that were to use the language of our
surface existence. All we can say is that we are a part of the
cosmos, fragments of the total scheme of things, and share its laws
and conditions, and that the more perfectly we adjust the nature
within us to the nature without us, the better we fare. With the
Infinite there is no time and no space, only an everlasting here, an
everlasting now.

Yet how can puny man interpret the universe or say aught of it in
terms of his mundane experiences?


VI. OUR IMPARTIAL MOTHER

The laws and processes of Nature which to us are so beneficent, and
which seem made for our especial benefit, were in full operation
before life as we know it had become established. In fact, the
fatherhood and motherhood of Nature are all thoughts of our own,
inventions of our necessities. The paternity of gravitation and the
maternity of frost and snow are in no respect different. We are
the chance children--chance from our limited point of view--of an
impersonal, unhuman, universal mother. We may say, humanly speaking,
that Nature takes forethought of her children, but not afterthought.
She provides that they shall actually appear in due time in this
universe of conflicting and struggling forces, then lets them shift
for themselves. They are born on the firing-line, in the field of
perpetual war, and none escape unscathed. Indeed, they are moulded
and adjusted and equipped by the very conditions in which the peril
of their destruction lies. Gravity crushes them, and gravity gives
them their powers. Fire consumes them, and water drowns them, and yet
out of these things they came.

It is as if some god had planned the universe as a vast plant for
the production of the myriad forms of life, each in its own place
and season. In our little corner of it at a given hour of the great
geologic clock one form appears, or many forms; at another hour
other forms emerge, till man himself emerges as the culmination of a
long line of lowly forms, many vestiges of which still cling to him.
But the world is no more for man than for the mice and vermin that
pester him. It is for all.

The mystery back of all--what shall we say of it? And the good and
the evil that are so inextricably blended with it--what of them?


VII. BAFFLING TRUTHS

The grand movements of Nature, both in the heavens and in the earth,
are on such a scale of time and distance that without the aid of
science we could get little or no hint of them. Immeasurably slow
and slight they are, according to our standards. The stars are
fixed points in the sky to our unaided vision. Throughout the whole
historic period they have shown little or no change in their relative
positions, though they are moving in varying directions at the rate
of many miles a second. Come back in a thousand years and there is
no change; in thirty or forty thousand years, and changes of place
might be barely perceptible to an unaided eye. Not till hundreds
of thousands of years would Orion, or the Big Dipper, have become
noticeably distorted, and probably not till millions of years would
the heavens present combinations of stars forming new constellations.
The Pole Star will after millions of years probably drift far from
its present position, and the Milky Way be found in another part of
the heavens. When viewed from the extreme points in space one hundred
and eighty millions of miles apart which the earth’s orbit around the
sun gives us, the fixed stars remain fixed, they show little or no
parallax. To touch but the skirts of the Infinite exhausts our powers.

The geological changes upon the surface of this earth--mere
mustard-seed in space that it is--are on such a scale of time that
only an unfaltering scientific faith can take them in. The mountains
and the valleys seem eternal, but to the eye of the geologist they
are as flitting as the summer clouds. Look upon a Catskill landscape
with its long, flowing mountain-lines curving over summits three or
four thousand feet high, and its deep, broad, cradle-like valleys
checkered with fertile farms and homesteads, and try to think of it
as all the work of the slow and gentle rains and snows--geologic
time stroking them almost as gently as a mother caresses her baby.
Tried by human standards we live in a stable universe; change stops
with the hills and the stars; but, tried by geologic and astronomic
standards, it is as unsubstantial as the snows of winter or the dews
of summer. Perpetual flux and transition mark even the stars in their
courses. Astronomers calculate the weight of the earth in terms of
its own tons, something like six sextillion tons, but in and of
itself it weighs nothing; its weight is the pull of some other body,
in itself pound balances pound; it is only by detachment from it
that bodies have weight. As we approach the center, a pound would
be less and less; halfway down it would weigh eight ounces only; at
the center weight would disappear, the pull of matter on all sides
would be equal, there would no longer be up or down. Gravitation is
not a demon at the center of the earth, pulling all things toward
him; it is a force in every atom, pulling and being pulled in every
direction. Seek the center of the pulling, and all power vanishes.

The globe is on such a scale of size with reference to our lives and
powers that by no effort of the imagination can we adjust ourselves
to the contradictions presented. It is not by experience, nor by
living and acting, that we know it as a sphere, but by thinking and
speculating. Even if we travel round it, we get no other impression
than that it is an endless plain. We find no under side; it is all
top side. The practical inferences we draw from looking at the moon
are all contradicted by our experiences here. The lower limb of the
moon is not lower, as we should find if we were to go there, and the
under side of the earth is also the upper side.

Our astronomy is sound, but our actual life gives us no clue to its
truths. Only when we turn philosophers do we know the tremendous
voyage we are making, and then we only know it abstractly. We never
can know it concretely. The swift turning of the planet under our
feet, and its enormous speed in its orbit around the sun, are not
revealed to our sense as motion, but as changes from night to day
and from one season to another. Slow, soft, still, the moon and the
sun rise and drift across the heavens, and the impassive earth seems
like a ship becalmed. No hint at all of the more than rifle-bullet
speed through space. It is all too big for us. The celestial machine
is no machine at all to our senses, but its vast movements go on as
gently and as easily as the falling of the dew or the blooming of the
flowers, and almost as unconsciously to us as the circulation of the
blood in our hearts.

We are in the heavens and are a part of the great astronomical whirl
and procession, and know it not. It is symbolical of our lives
generally. We do not realize that we are a part of Nature till we
begin to think about it. Our lives proceed as if we were two--man
and Nature--two great antagonistic or contrary facts, but the two
are one; there is only Nature. We can draw circle within circle, and
circle around circle, but we cannot circumscribe Nature. That is the
fact over all.

As struggling human beings we diverge from one another, oppose one
another, defeat one another. All our differences and antagonisms
arise from our need of action and of living. The lesson of the sphere
is hard to learn, hard to state. Our powers of detachment are hardly
equal to it. Our lives are rounded by the great astronomic curves.
The contradictions which the intellect reveals, the unthinkable
mysteries that surround us, the heavens over us, the earth under us
always--the relativity of all things--thus does thought set us adrift
on a shoreless sea.


VIII. SENSE CONTRADICTIONS

Bergson says that we are in trouble the moment we think of a creator
and a thing created; in other words, the moment we apply to the
universe as a whole the concepts which our practical lives yield us.
The only alternative I see is to think of the universe as uncreated,
which, I confess, does not make the problem much easier. I try to
help myself out by saying that our concepts are formed in a world
in which we deal with parts and fragments, lines and angles on the
surface of a sphere, and not with the sphere as a whole. Our senses
do not reveal the earth to us as a globe, but as a boundless plain
with no under side; we find no limits, and if we continue our search
long enough, we come back to the place from which we set out, but
from the opposite direction.

When we try to think in terms of spheres and solar systems, our
everyday concepts avail us very little; in fact, they set us down
wrong-end up. We look at the moon or the sun and we say, Surely if
we were at the South Pole of either of these bodies, we should be as
truly on the under side of it as the fly is when it alights at the
South Pole of the globe in our study. We should be in a position
opposite to that which we should occupy at the North Pole. That every
point on the surface of a cosmic sphere should be on top, or rather
that there should be no top, and no bottom; that these concepts
should be abolished; that if two inhabited globes should come in
collision, each would seem to the people upon the other to be falling
down out of the heavens upon them; that out in sidereal space not
even the Huns could drop bombs, or send up balloons, because there
would be no up and no down--when we grasp these facts, I say, we are
at the end of our tether; we not only do not know “where we are at,”
but we find there is no “at.” Our minds can deal with the cosmos
only in an abstract or mathematical way. As a concrete fact even our
little earth is too much for us. Not merely too big, it contradicts
all our experience. If we could build a sphere a mile through, or
ten miles or a hundred miles, or ten thousand miles through, could
we stand upon it at the South Pole? When we think of the daily
revolutions of the earth upon its axis, we are compelled to think of
it as turning over, because it brings the sun above us by day and
beneath us by night, and hence the puzzle to the unlettered mind as
to why the lakes and ponds do not all spill out.

Among the heavenly bodies other laws prevail; there is motion without
friction or dissipation of energy; there is no body at rest; there
is no motion in right lines, but only in curved lines; there is no
beginning nor ending; there is only eternal progression; and this is
a condition of things that throws our mental adjustments all out of
gear. The problem of God, the problem of creation, the problem of
future life, throw our mental adjustments out of gear in the same way.

There is order and harmony in our own solar system and doubtless in
countless others in the immensity of space, but the cosmos as a whole
does not seem to present this harmony, as collisions actually occur.
Astronomers tell us that the units of the starry hosts are moving in
all directions and that collisions are inevitable, though at such
vast intervals, owing to the inconceivable spaces, that human time
can take no note of them. A billion of our years, like a billion of
our miles, count for but little in the infinitudes of the universe.

When we try to think that the universe had a creator, that there
was a time when it did not exist, that it was called into being by
a power apart from itself, do we not fall down completely? We can,
of course, think in arbitrary terms; our imaginations are equal to
almost any feat (Lewis Carroll’s was equal to “Alice in Wonderland”;
Dante’s was equal to making the world shudder over his pictures of
the inferno): but the understanding has to have solid ground to go
upon, and where is the solid ground in our idea of creation? We are
off the sphere, alone in space, face to face with the Infinite, and
we have no language in which to express ourselves.


IX. MAN A PART OF NATURE

We habitually think or speak of ourselves as something apart from
Nature, as belonging to some higher order of reality, when, in fact,
we are as much a part of the total scheme of things as are the trees
and the beasts of the field. True, we are separated from them by a
gulf, but the gulf has been bridged, and bridged by Nature, and both
sides are equally her territory.

Nature is the one supreme reality, the sum total of the visible
and invisible bodies and forces that surround us, out of which we
came and of which we form a part. Nature is all things to all men,
because she is the larger fact, and holds an infinite diversity in an
all-embracing unity.

When we come to look upon man in this light, when we see his whole
civilization and all his achievements upon the earth--his science,
his philosophy, his art, his religion, yea, his follies and crimes
and superstitions, his wars and hatreds, as well as his heroism and
devotion--as parts of Nature, as expressions of the same total cosmic
energy as are all things else, we have gained an astronomic point of
view; we see things in orbic completeness.

Nature is all-inclusive. We cannot draw a circle around that circle.
We have so long been wont to solve our riddles by invoking the
supernatural that the habit has become ingrained. We can only do
as Carlyle did, feed our minds with words and fall back upon the
natural-supernatural.

Our attitudes toward Nature differ as widely as do our occupations,
our characters, and our temperaments. There is the direct, practical
attitude of the farmer, the miner, the engineer, the sailor, the
sportsman, the traveler, and the explorer; there is the gay and
holiday attitude of the camper-out and the picnicker; there is the
sympathetic and appreciative attitude of the nature-lover; there is
the imaginative and creative attitude of the artist and the poet;
there is the more or less rapt and mystical attitude of the religious
enthusiast; there is the inquisitive and experimental attitude of the
man of science; and there is the meditative and speculative attitude
of the philosopher.

We almost invariably personify Nature and read our own traits and
limitations into her. We say she is wise or she is foolish; she
is cruel or she is kind; she fails or she succeeds. The early
philosophers said that Nature abhorred a vacuum. Darwin says that
she “tells us in the most emphatic manner that she abhors perpetual
self-fertilization.” There are times when the most rigid man of
science humanizes Nature in this way. We look upon ourselves as
taking liberties with her; we discipline her and train her in the
ways she should go for our good; we pit her forces against one
another. Her flowers, her birds, her sunsets, her rainbows, her
waterfalls, her mountain lakes, her ocean-shores, her midnight skies,
at times move us and lift us above ourselves. On the other hand,
there are times when we frown upon her, or despitefully use her and
call her hard names. When her storms or her frosts or her blights or
her droughts or her insect hordes destroy our crops, or lay waste our
forests or sweep away our buildings or kill our cattle or inundate
our towns and villages, we instinctively look upon her as our enemy,
and, so far as we are able, arm ourselves against her. Emerson
speaks of Nature as that “terrific or beneficent force.” It is both.
Indeed, we may use a stronger adjective and say that at times it is a
malevolent force.

We ascribe all our human qualities and traits to Nature. Indeed, we
can hardly speak of her without personifying her. As we are a part of
her, how can we fail to see our own traits in her? At least, how else
can we interpret her except in terms of our own being? Early man did
this entirely. All the natural forces and appearances took on his own
image, and were for or against him. When we seek to interpret Nature
we still do it in the terms of literature, of poetry. We humanize
her, which means, of course, that we interpret ourselves. Nature
reflects the spirit we bring to her. She is gay, somber, beautiful,
winsome, repellent, wise or foolish, just in the degree in which we
ourselves are capable of these emotions or possess these qualities.
She is terrifying because we have a capacity for terror. She is
soothing when we are in a mood to be soothed. She is sublime only so
far as we have the capacity to experience this emotion.

It is our reactions to Nature that give rise to the qualities we
ascribe to her. The music of the æolian harp is not in the wind; its
origin is the reaction of the harp to the wind, but it is not music
until it reaches the human ear. The colors of the landscape are not
in the rocks and trees and waters, but in the experiences of the eye
when the vibrations of ether which we call light are reflected back
to it from these objects.

We create the world in which we live. I love Nature, but Nature does
not love me. Love is an emotion which rocks and clouds do not feel.
Nature loves me in my fellow beings. The breezes caress me, the
morning refreshes me, the rain on the roof soothes me--that is, when
I am in a mood to be caressed and refreshed and soothed. The main
matter is the part I play in these things. All is directed to me and
you because we are adjusted to all. No more is the kite or the sail
adjusted to the wind, the water-wheel to the falling water, than are
we adjusted to outward Nature. She is the primary and everlasting
fact; we, as living beings, are the secondary and temporary facts.


X. THE FITTEST TO SURVIVE

The survival of the fittest does not mean the survival of the best
from the human point of view. The lower orders of humanity are better
fitted to survive than the higher orders--hardier, more prolific,
having a fuller measure of life. The cultivated plants--wheat, corn,
rye, barley, oats--are less fitted to survive than what we call
weeds. The latter can shift for themselves, but the former cannot.

We lament the decay of the native Anglo-Saxon stock in this country,
and the increase of the races from southern Europe and from the
Orient. They stand our pitiless sunlight better than do the
descendants of our Puritan ancestors. From our point of view this
rule of natural selection will not result in a superior race, but in
an inferior; not in better men, but in better animals. Character and
intellect win in those fields where character and intellect tell, but
where muscle and brawn and vitality tell more they fail.

The Japanese have great power of survival; they are hardy, prolific
and pushing. The Germans also have great survival power, greater
than the French; they are more prolific, more materialistic, nearer
the brutes; they are not handicapped with much soul. They are
morally blind, but intellectually clever. Their moral blindness and
insensibility have resulted in their downfall. Great Britain leads
the European nations because she is not only hardy and prolific, but
she also has the gift of empire; she builds upon law and order; she
establishes justice and fair play.

In the Darwinian sense the Jews are the fittest to survive of all the
races of man. They are prolific and grasping; they will always get
what belongs to them, and a little more; they are bound to possess
the earth. The only drawback I see is that they do not take kindly to
the soil. Trade alone will not give a nation the supremacy.


XI. THE POWER OF CHOICE

Think how we come into the world, what an important thing it is to
each of us and to the world, and yet how fortuitous and haphazard it
all is, and what precautions are often taken to prevent our coming!

See the deformed, the half-witted, the low-browed, the degenerate,
that come. The great army of the common, the few capable of higher
and finer things. Nature apparently finds her account in one class
the same as in the other, in Pat as well as in Paul, in the inferior
races as well as in the higher.

In our manufacturing affairs we aim to turn out the best article
possible--the best shoe, the best hat, the best gun, the best book;
but Nature makes no such effort in the case of man, though she does
in the case of the lower orders. Probably every individual bird or
bug or four-footed beast in a state of nature is perfect of its
kind, that is, suited to its place in the scheme of organic life. But
how different with man! It is the price he pays for his freedom, his
power of choice. The birds and the beasts have no power of choice,
they are entirely in the hands of Nature. They are all moulded to one
pattern.

The advantage that comes to man from his power of choice is greater
variation, hence greater progress. He crosses or reverses or turns
aside the laws of Nature, or bends them to his will, and for this
privilege he pays the price of idiocy, deformity, and the vast mass
of commonplace humanity. His gain is now and then men of exceptional
ability, geniuses, who lead the race forward. We know that every
improved breed of chicken or sheep or swine will come true, but we
do not know in anything like the same degree of certainty that the
Emersons and the Lincolns and the Tennysons will repeat and continue
the type. Cultivated fruit relapses in the seed, and cultivated
persons often do the same.

On the other hand, rude and ordinary humanity now and then far
transcends itself in its offspring, just as the new and choice apple
or peach or plum has its humble origin in a seedling.


XII. ILLUSIONS

In his “Conduct of Life” Emerson has an essay on “Illusions” in which
he describes the semblance to midnight skies paved with stars which
the guide produces in the Mammoth Cave by hiding himself and throwing
the rays of his torch athwart the ceiling set thick with transparent
rock crystals. The effect is quite startling. For the moment it is
hard to resist the conviction that you are actually looking upon the
cloudless sky at night. But in reality is not the noonday sky just as
much of an illusion, except that there are no mimic stars? The blue
dome overhead is an illusion. There is no dome there. The sky is a
mere apparition. It is not a body or a reality as it seems to be;
it is mere empty space, though it has the effect upon us of a vast
blue dome. How genial and inviting it looks when we see it peeping
through the clouds, and how glorious when we see it swept free from
clouds! Its purity, its serenity, its elevated character, move us to
regard it as the abode of superior beings. The telescope dispels our
illusions; the sky is not a transparent realm, but only an extension
of earthly conditions. Heaven, the abode of the blest, takes its name
from this negation of vacancy. Our notions of a personal God are
similar illusions. God is as real as the sky is, and no more so, even
though in our devout moods we lift our eyes heavenward and identify
him with this comforting illusion.

All our life illusions brood over us. The night is only a shadow--the
negation of light; and yet it plays a part in our lives as real as
that of health or friends or climate, as real, but of another kind.

Time itself is an illusion. The future does not exist nor the past;
yet how are our lives influenced by the memory of the one and our
anticipations of the other!

The world is, indeed, full of illusion. We fancy that luminous
bodies shoot out rays of light such as we appear to see when we look
at them. We see beams and scintillations when we look at the stars
and the sun; but is it not all a trick of the eye? The light from a
luminous body goes out in all directions, not in separated rays, but
as vibrations in the ether. When we throw a stone into a still pool
of water a wave motion is set up which spreads in concentric circles.
But the vibrations called “light,” considered as a whole, assume the
form of a sphere; they go from the luminous body to every point of
a hollow sphere. We see a star as a bright point in the sky, but if
the universe were full of eyes, every eye could see that star; its
light goes to every point of the hollow sphere of Infinity. But no
more than does the light of the candle in your hand, or the lamp on
your table go to Infinity, if unobstructed. Stars which cannot be
seen by the most powerful telescope must yet radiate their light into
infinite space. Is that light lost? Modern science seems to hold to
the view that in the ether of space no rays of light can ever be
lost. What becomes of them? It is certain that a wavelet in a lake
can be lost if the lake is large enough. It soon dies out. It becomes
dissipated. Energy cannot be destroyed, but it can be scattered or
turned into heat or light or electricity, and the waves that break
and die upon the beach, no matter how cold they are, give up their
energy as heat. They must raise the temperature some fraction of a
degree.


XIII. IS NATURE SUICIDAL?

Emerson never committed himself to a belief in immortality as usually
understood--continued existence in another world; but he was always
on the lookout for hints and suggestions to spur his lagging faith on
the subject. He read Martial and praised his literary faculty. He is
the true writer, he said, a chemical and not a mechanical mixture:
“Martial suggests again, as every purely literary book does, the
immortality. We see we are wiser than we were: we are older. Can
Nature afford to lose such improvements? Is Nature a suicide?” The
same questions I have heard Whitman ask, questions asked probably by
thoughtful men in all ages.

But are not such questions prompted by our own petty economies? We
must save what we have gained. Not so Nature. Gain and loss with her
are one. All is hers. She has infinite time, and infinite abundance.
How can she afford so many dead worlds and burnt-out suns scattered
throughout sidereal space, like boulders in a New England field? How
can she afford to wait millions of years before life comes to the
superior planets, if it ever comes? What economy is that which strews
the way of evolution with untold numbers of extinct species? What
economy is that which makes one species prey upon another?--which
undoes with one hand what she achieves with the other? Nature was
millions of years in bringing man out of the earth,--the end and
flower of her whole scheme from our point of view,--and probably
in far less time he will have disappeared from the earth. How can
she afford it? “Is Nature suicidal?” She certainly is, tried by
our standards. Not that she is less than we, but so inconceivably
more. She plays the game for her own amusement. She evaporates the
rivers and the seas, confident that the water will come back again.
She keeps the currents going; the ebb and flow never cease. Night
and day, life and death, go hand in hand. Her “improvements” are
improvements for a day, an hour, a moment--like snowflakes on the
river--“a moment white, then gone forever.” They are crystals that
perish, flowers that fall. Nature knows no exhaustion; she can repeat
the process continuously. Only the unlimited is inexhaustible. The
infinite goes on forever. Our economics pale in the face of Nature’s
prodigalities. A race like the Greeks perishes, and Nature’s treasury
is still full. Every spring in our climate the marvel of leaf and
flower is repeated in the plants and forests, and every fall the work
is undone. The great, the noble, the heroic, youth, age, manhood,
womanhood, fail and disappear, and still the game goes on. The rivers
drain the hills and mountains, and still they never run dry. Spring
and summer do not exhaust the fertility of Nature. The rivers carry
the soil into the sea, but they do not carry it off the globe. We
cannot defertilize the earth. What the seas lose, the clouds gain;
what the clouds lose, the earth gains; what the hills lose, the sea
gains; and so the circle is complete.

Nature has her own economies that answer to our own. In the use of
means to an end, as in the living world, there must be economy of
time, of space, of power; there must be adjustments, compensations,
and so on. In the tropics vegetation takes its time. No hurry; the
heat does not fail. In the temperate zone there is less time, and
the pace of vegetation is faster. In the frigid zone it is faster
still, the time is brief; there is no prodigality of leaf and stalk
and flower; hurry up is the cry. The stalk is short, the flowering is
brief, the goal is the seed which must be matured. In our climate,
if a plant gets a later start, or is cut down and compelled to bloom
again,--for example, the burdock,--how it hastens, how it pushes out
its seed-vessels from the main stalk! The late fall dandelions do not
indulge in long stalks; they bloom close to the ground and develop
their down-seed balloons or parachutes at once. In the Far North the
willow and birch are mere running vines, but they achieve fruit.

The economy of living nature is the basis of our economy; we improve
upon it, we take a short cut, we save time and save power. We trim
our trees, we remove obstructions, we fertilize, we graft, we sow
and plant. Nature is prodigal of her spawn and pollen to offset the
element of chance that enters into the action of the winds and the
waves.

The wild creatures have their instinctive economies and ways of
getting on in the world. They prepare for the winter; they provide
for their young; they practice the arts of concealment; they are
wise for their own good; they do not commit suicide. The plants have
their economies, and the insects have theirs, but when we talk of
the economy of Nature, we are beyond soundings. Nature cannot spend
more than she earns; her ledgers always balance; her capital cannot
be impaired. There is no waste, in our sense, in the universe. Can
you destroy magnetism by pulverizing the magnet? Would electricity be
quenched if no storm-cloud ever again appeared in the sky?


XIV. THE PERSISTENCE OF ENERGY

Is it not reassuring to know that we cannot get out of the
universe--that whatever is real about us cannot be destroyed, but can
only suffer change? All the elements that enter into my body must
persist; they always have persisted through all the vicissitudes of
astronomic and geologic time. We are as sure of that as we are sure
of anything, and we are sure that they will continue in some form
to exist. We believe it without proof. Our scientific faith carries
us over this gulf--our faith in the oneness and integrity of the
universe. Is there anything real, in the same sense, in what we call
our minds or souls? Huxley was convinced that consciousness was as
real as matter and energy, and must persist like them--persist in
other persons who follow us; but how about our individual selves?
And how about consciousness when the race of man becomes extinct?
We can only take refuge in the thought that consciousness will
dawn and continue in other worlds through all time, or rather
endless time, since the all of a thing implies limits. Equally to
make consciousness coeval with matter and energy, we must think
of it as having existed in other worlds throughout an endless and
beginningless past. But my consciousness and your consciousness
are bound up with certain combinations of matter which we know are
unstable--in fact, are the result, in a sense, of their instability,
their ceaseless change.

In the final change, which we call death, what happens to
consciousness? When we try to think of it in terms of our actual
experience with tangible bodies, we think of it as gone out,
non-existent, as truly so as is the flame of the candle when we blow
it out, or as is the star form of the snowflake when it is melted.
Does it help us any to think of the soul, or consciousness, in terms
of the imponderable bodies--light, electricity, radio-activity?
Do all these wireless messages that go forth into the air, go on
forever? Do these impulses reach the farthest stars, and still
persist? Do our thoughts persist upon the ether? Here, in this room,
here in this air that you may inclose with your two hands, are
vibrating wireless messages from far and near, though we are not
able to detect them. Here also the ether may be tremulous with the
thoughts of our friends on the other side of the globe, yes, and with
the thoughts of our friends who have ceased to live, as we know life.
The ether of space may still be vibrating with the thoughts of Plato
and Aristotle, of Moses and Solomon.

Do we impress ourselves momentarily upon the ether around us,
and is this what the mediums and the clairvoyants recover? Is
the persistence of our thoughts upon the ether the secret of the
mind-reader’s art, and of all the marvelous things disclosed by
psychic research? Is this the only immortality, the immortality of
the endless persistence of vibrations from our brains? Or must we
think of our personalities as disembodied and drifting about as
separate entities in the great Nowhere?

Though a dreamer and an idealist, I am only truly interested in a
natural explanation of things--an explanation that is in harmony with
our experiences in this world. The so-called supernatural explanation
does not interest me at all. We cannot grasp it and bring it to the
test of reason and experience. It is like a bridge with one or more
spans missing--only faith can carry us over, and faith that has
nothing to stand upon cannot really carry us over. It travels in a
circle, and leaves us where it found us.

Energy is certainly one of the realities of the cosmos, though we may
not be able to form a concept of it as we do of matter. We cannot
visualize it. We know it only through its effects upon tangible
bodies. Why may there not be a principle of life or vitality as
real as is energy--another form of energy which we can know only
through its effects upon matter; inseparably bound up with matter as
energy is; not with all matter, but with a limited amount of matter,
as is magnetism--a peculiar form of force or energy, dependent
for its manifestations upon well-defined conditions and reaching
its highest manifestations in the mind or consciousness of man.
Spirit, as we name it, is only a word which stands for no verifiable
reality--something separable from matter and independent of it.
What victims we are of words! When we get a name for a thing we are
persuaded the thing exists. The vital process is inseparable from
the physical processes; it supplements or controls them, but is more
than they are. Life is not a spirit, but a form of energy potential
in matter, and developed and active when the conditions are right.
A living body is moved by a new force just as truly as a piece of
magnetized steel is moved by a new force, or as truly as a new force
streams through the telegraph-wires--a transformation of other
forces, and behaving in a new way, and producing new results. There
is nothing new under the sun; all are made of one stuff; but there
are endless transformations and permutations of this one stuff, and
one of them is the phenomenon of life, or vitality.

Electricity is not matter, but it is the most unmistakable and
ubiquitous form of energy known to us. The human mind is a phenomenon
of matter; how related to the electro-magnetic world we know not, but
undoubtedly in some way bound up with it.

To discuss the soul or attempt to interpret it in terms of these
mundane forces will, of course, offend the so-called spiritualists.
So long have we been taught to look upon the soul as belonging to
another world, another order of things from that of the body. Whitman
says that soul and body are one, and leaves his puzzled reader to
solve the riddle as best he can. Heaven and earth are one in the same
sense--there is nothing alien or irreconcilable between them. The
flower and its stalk, the perfume and the root, are one in the same
sense. The mind resides in the gray matter of the brain, and depends
upon the food we eat as truly as does the body.

When we discuss these questions in terms of our religious training
we reach far different conclusions, or, rather, we start with far
different conclusions; but how can we relate these conclusions to the
concrete facts as we know them?

There is enough that is verifiable in clairvoyance and mind-reading
and mental healing to convince us that we are immersed in a world
of subtle forces that ordinarily we wot not of; that in some way a
process of give and take between us and these things is constantly
going on, and that our relation to them is at least one form or
suggestion of our immortality. We are a part of the wave of energy
that sweeps through the cosmos, as truly as the drops of the sea hold
and convey the tidal impulse. We know, or think we know, the sources
of this tidal impulse, but the attraction between earth and moon and
sun is reciprocal--a give-and-take process--and is only a phase of
the sum total (if the Infinite can be said to have a sum total) of
the energy of the cosmos.

The magnet and magnetism are one. If you melt or pulverize the
magnet, you dissipate, but do not destroy the magnetism. The clouds
come and go; now we see them, and then there is only blue sky where
they were. Change, but not destruction. When the thunder-cloud
disperses, where are its terrible bolts? Withdrawn, probably, or
redistributed into the inmost recesses of matter or of the ether. The
energy of the human brain and body cannot be destroyed by death, only
changed. If consciousness is a force, then it, too, must persist. It
seems, in some way, the equivalent of the force of the body, at least
one of its phenomena. But is it anything more than the analogue of
the light which the electric spark emits, and which is light only
to the eye? Consciousness is such only to itself; it cannot be seen
or felt or known by other consciousnesses. What we know about the
consciousnesses of others, we know through our own.

In the presence of the death of our friends no doubt this is a
cheerless and depressing kind of philosophy, but in the pursuit of
truth, if we are sincere, we do not seek to administer to, or to warm
and cheer our human affections. Our seriousness will be measured
by the extent to which we put all these things behind us. Heroic
self-denial finds a field here as well as in the struggles of life.
We do not want to cheer ourselves with illusions, no matter how
welcome they are. “All’s right with the world.” The laws of life and
death are as they should be. The laws of matter and force are as they
should be; and if death ends my consciousness, still is death good.
I have had life on those terms, and somewhere, somehow, the course
of nature is justified. I shall not be imprisoned in that grave where
you are to bury my body. I shall be diffused in great Nature, in the
soil, in the air, in the sunshine, in the hearts of those who love
me, in all the living and flowing currents of the world, though I may
never again in my entirety be embodied in a single human being. My
elements and my forces go back into the original sources out of which
they came, and these sources are perennial in this vast, wonderful,
divine cosmos.




