VII

THE FAITH OF A NATURALIST


I

To say that man is as good as God would to most persons seem like
blasphemy; but to say that man is as good as Nature would disturb
no one. Man is a part of Nature, or a phase of Nature, and shares
in what we call her imperfections. But what is Nature a part of,
or a phase of?--and what or who is its author? Is it not true that
this earth which is so familiar to us is as good as yonder morning
or evening star and made of the same stuff?--just as much in the
heavens, just as truly a celestial abode as it is? Venus seems to us
like a great jewel in the crown of night or morning. From Venus the
earth would seem like a still larger jewel. The heavens seem afar off
and free from all stains and impurities of earth; we lift our eyes
and our hearts to them as to the face of the Eternal, but our science
reveals no body or place there so suitable for human abode and human
happiness as this earth. In fact, this planet is the only desirable
heaven of which we have any clue. Innumerable other worlds exist in
the abysses of space which may be the abodes of beings superior, and
of beings inferior, to ourselves. We place our gods afar off so as
to dehumanize them, never suspecting that when we do so we discount
their divinity. The more human we are,--remembering that to err is
human,--the nearer God we are. Of course good and bad are human
concepts and are a verdict upon created things as they stand related
to us, promoting or hindering our well-being. In the councils of the
Eternal there is apparently no such distinction.

Man is not only as good as God; some men are a good deal better,
that is, from our point of view; they attain a degree of excellence
of which there is no hint in nature--moral excellence. It is
not until we treat man as a part of nature--as a product of the
earth as literally as are the trees--that we can reconcile these
contradictions. If we could build up a composite man out of all
the peoples of the earth, including even the Prussians, he would
represent fairly well the God in nature.

Communing with God is communing with our own hearts, our own best
selves, not with something foreign and accidental. Saints and
devotees have gone into the wilderness to find God; of course they
took God with them, and the silence and detachment enabled them to
hear the still, small voice of their own souls, as one hears the
ticking of his own watch in the stillness of the night. We are not
cut off, we are not isolated points; the great currents flow through
us and over us and around us, and unite us to the whole of nature.
Moses saw God in the burning bush, saw him with the eyes of early
man whose divinities were clothed in the extraordinary, the fearful,
or the terrible; we see him in the meanest weed that grows, and hear
him in the gentle murmur of our own heart’s blood. The language of
devotion and religious conviction is only the language of soberness
and truth written large and aflame with emotion.

Man goes away from home searching for the gods he carries with him
always. Man can know and feel and love only man. There is a deal of
sound psychology in the new religion called Christian Science--in
that part which emphasizes the power of the mind over the body,
and the fact that the world is largely what we make it, that evil
is only the shadow of good--old truths reburnished. This helps us
to understand the hold it has taken upon such a large number of
admirable persons. Good and evil are relative terms, but evil is only
the shadow of good. Disease is a reality, but not in the same sense
that health is a reality. Positive and negative electricity are both
facts, but positive and negative good belong to a different order.
Christian Science will not keep the distemper out of the house if
the sewer-gas gets in; inoculation will do more to prevent typhoid
and diphtheria than “declaring the truth” or saying your prayers or
counting your beads. In its therapeutical value experimental science
is the only safe guide in dealing with human corporal ailments.

We need not fear alienation from God. I feed Him when I feed a
beggar. I serve Him when I serve my neighbor. I love Him when I love
my friend. I praise Him when I praise the wise and good of any race
or time. I shun Him when I shun the leper. I forgive Him when I
forgive my enemies. I wound Him when I wound a human being. I forget
Him when I forget my duty to others. If I am cruel or unjust or
resentful or envious or inhospitable toward any man, woman, or child,
I am guilty of all these things toward God: “Inasmuch as ye have done
it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto
me.”


II

I am persuaded that a man without religion falls short of the proper
human ideal. Religion, as I use the term, is a spiritual flowering,
and the man who has it not is like a plant that never blooms. The
mind that does not open and unfold its religious sensibilities in the
sunshine of this infinite and spiritual universe, is to be pitied.
Men of science do well enough with no other religion than the love
of truth, for this is indirectly a love of God. The astronomer, the
geologist, the biologist, tracing the footsteps of the Creative
Energy throughout the universe--what need has he of any formal,
patent-right religion? Were not Darwin, Huxley, Tyndall, and Lyell,
and all other seekers and verifiers of natural truth among the most
truly religious of men? Any of these men would have gone to hell for
the truth--not the truth of creeds and rituals, but the truth as it
exists in the councils of the Eternal and as it is written in the
laws of matter and of life.

For my part I had a thousand times rather have Huxley’s religion than
that of the bishops who sought to discredit him, or Bruno’s than that
of the church that burnt him. The religion of a man that has no other
aim than his own personal safety from some real or imaginary future
calamity, is of the selfish, ignoble kind.

Amid the decay of creeds, love of nature has high religious
value. This has saved many persons in this world--saved them from
mammon-worship, and from the frivolity and insincerity of the crowd.
It has made their lives placid and sweet. It has given them an
inexhaustible field for inquiry, for enjoyment, for the exercise
of all their powers, and in the end has not left them soured and
dissatisfied. It has made them contented and at home wherever they
are in nature--in the house not made with hands. This house is
their church, and the rocks and the hills are the altars, and the
creed is written in the leaves of the trees and in the flowers of
the field and in the sands of the shore. A new creed every day and
new preachers, and holy days all the week through. Every walk to
the woods is a religious rite, every bath in the stream is a saving
ordinance. Communion service is at all hours, and the bread and wine
are from the heart and marrow of Mother Earth. There are no heretics
in Nature’s church; all are believers, all are communicants. The
beauty of natural religion is that you have it all the time; you do
not have to seek it afar off in myths and legends, in catacombs, in
garbled texts, in miracles of dead saints or wine-bibbing friars.
It is of to-day; it is now and here; it is everywhere. The crickets
chirp it, the birds sing it, the breezes chant it, the thunder
proclaims it, the streams murmur it, the unaffected man lives it.
Its incense rises from the plowed fields, it is on the morning
breeze, it is in the forest breath and in the spray of the wave. The
frosts write it in exquisite characters, the dews impearl it, and
the rainbow paints it on the cloud. It is not an insurance policy
underwritten by a bishop or a priest; it is not even a faith; it is a
love, an enthusiasm, a consecration to natural truth.

The God of sunshine and of storms speaks a less equivocal language
than the God of revelation.

Our fathers had their religion and their fathers had theirs, but
they were not ours, and could not be in those days and under those
conditions. But their religions lifted them above themselves; they
healed their wounds; they consoled them for many of the failures
and disappointments of this world; they developed character; they
tempered the steel in their nature. How childish to us seems the plan
of salvation, as our fathers found it in the fervid and, I freely
say, inspired utterances of Saint Paul! But it saved them, it built
character, it made life serious, it was an heroic creed which has
lost credence in our more knowing and more frivolous age. We see how
impossible it is, but we do not see the great natural truths upon
which it rests.

A man is not saved by the truth of the things he believes, but by the
truth of his belief--its sincerity, its harmony with his character.
The absurdities of the popular religions do not matter; what matters
is the lukewarm belief, the empty forms, the shallow conceptions of
life and duty. We are prone to think that if the creed is false, the
religion is false. Religion is an emotion, an inspiration, a feeling
of the Infinite, and may have its root in any creed or in no creed.
What can be more unphilosophical than the doctrines of the Christian
Scientists? Yet Christian Science is a good practical religion.
It makes people cheerful, happy, and helpful--yes, and helps make
them healthy too. Its keynote is love, and love holds the universe
together. Any creed that ennobles character and opens a door or a
window upon the deeper meanings of this marvelous universe is good
enough to live by, and good enough to die by. The Japanese-Chinese
religion of ancestor worship, sincerely and devoutly held, is better
than the veneer of much of our fashionable well-dressed religion.

Guided by appearances alone, how surely we should come to look upon
the sun as a mere appendage of the earth!--as much so as is the moon.
How near it seems at sunrise and sunset, and as if these phenomena
directly involved the sun, extending to it and modifying its light
and heat! We do not realize that these are merely terrestrial
phenomena, and that the sun, so to speak, knows them not.

Viewed from the sun the earth is a mere speck in the sky, and the
amount of the total light and heat from the sun that is received on
the earth is so small that the mind can hardly grasp it. Yet for all
practical purposes the sun shines for us alone. Our relation to it
could not be any more direct and sustaining if it were created for
that purpose. It is immanent in the life of the globe. It is the
source of all our energy and therefore of our life. Its bounties are
universal. The other planets find it is their sun also. It is as
special and private to them as to us. We think the sun paints the bow
on the cloud, but the bow follows from the laws of optics. The sun
knows it not.

It is the same with what we call God. His bounty is of the same
universal, impersonal kind, and yet for all practical purposes it
exists especially for us, it is immanent every moment in our lives.
There is no special Providence. Nature sends the rain upon the just
and the unjust, upon the sea as upon the land. We are here and
find life good because Providence is general and not special. The
conditions are not too easy, the struggle has made men of us. The
bitter has tempered the sweet. Evil has put us on our guard and keeps
us so. We pay for what we get.


III

That wise old Roman, Marcus Aurelius, says, “Nothing is evil which
is according to nature.” At that moment he is thinking especially of
death which, when it comes in the course of nature, is not an evil,
unless life itself is also an evil. After the lamp of life is burned
out, death is not an evil, rather is it a good. But premature death,
death by accident or disease, before a man has done his work or used
up his capital of vitality, is an evil. Disease itself is an evil,
but if we lived according to nature there would be no disease; we
should die the natural, painless death of old age. Of course there
is no such thing as absolute evil or absolute good. Evil is that
which is against our well-being, and good is that which promotes
it. We always postulate the existence of life when we speak of good
and evil. Excesses in nature are evil to us because they bring
destruction and death in their train. They are disharmonies in the
scheme of things, because they frustrate and bring to naught. The war
which Marcus Aurelius was waging when he wrote those passages was an
evil in itself, though good might come out of it.

Everything in organic nature--trees, grasses, flowers, insects,
fishes, mammals--is beset by evil of some kind. The natural order
is good because it brought us here and keeps us here, but evil has
always dogged our footsteps. Leaf-blight is an evil to the tree,
smallpox is an evil to man, frost is an evil to the insects, flood an
evil to the fishes.

Moral evil--hatred, envy, greed, lying, cruelty, cheating--is of
another order. These vices have no existence below the human sphere.
We call them evils because they are disharmonies; they are inimical
to the highest standard of human happiness and well-being. They make
a man less a man, they work discord and develop needless friction.
Sand in the engine of your car and water in the gasoline are evils,
and malice and jealousy and selfishness in your heart are analogous
evils.

In our day we read the problem of Nature and God in a new light, the
light of science, or of emancipated human reason, and the old myths
mean little to us. We accept Nature as we find it, and do not crave
the intervention of a God that sits behind and is superior to it. The
self-activity of the cosmos suffices. We accept the tornadoes and
earthquakes and world wars, and do not lose faith. We arm ourselves
against them as best we can. We accept the bounty of the rain, the
sunshine, the soil, the changing seasons, and the vast armory of
non-living forces, and from them equip or teach ourselves to escape,
endure, modify, or ward off the destructive and non-human forces that
beset our way. We draw our strength from the Nature that seems and
is so regardless of us; our health and wholeness are its gifts. The
biologic ages, with all their carnival of huge and monstrous forms,
had our well-being at heart. The evils and dangers that beset our
way have been outmatched by the good and the helpful. The deep-sea
fish would burst and die if brought to the surface; the surface life
would be crushed and killed in the deep sea. Life adapts itself
to its environment; hard conditions make it hard. Winds, floods,
inclement seasons, have driven it around the earth; the severer the
cold, the thicker the fur; compensations always abound. If Nature
is not all-wise and all-merciful from our human point of view, she
has placed us in a world where our own wisdom and mercy can be
developed; she has sent us to a school in which we learn to see her
own shortcomings and imperfections, and to profit by them.

The unreasoning, unforeseeing animals suffer more from the accidents
of nature--drought, flood, lightning--than man does; but man suffers
more from evils of his own making--war, greed, intemperance,
pestilence--so that the development in both lines goes on, and life
is still at the flood.

Good and evil are inseparable. We cannot have light without shade,
or warmth without cold, or life without death, or development without
struggle. The struggle for life, of which Darwinism makes so much,
is only the struggle of the chick to get out of the shell, or of
the flower to burst its bud, or of the root to penetrate the soil.
It is not the struggle of battle and hate--the justification of war
and usurpation--it is for the most part a beneficent struggle with
the environment, in which the fittest of the individual units of a
species survive, but in which the strong and the feeble, the great
and the small of species alike survive. The lamb survives with the
lion, the wren with the eagle, the Esquimo with the European--all
manner of small and delicate forms survive with the great and robust.
One species of carnivora, or of rodents, or herbivora, does not, as
a rule, exterminate another species. It is true that species prey
upon species, that cats eat mice, that hawks eat smaller birds, and
that man slays and eats the domestic animals. Probably man alone
has exterminated species. But outside of man’s doings all the rest
belongs to Nature’s system of checks and balances, and bears no
analogy to human or inhuman wars and conquests.

Life struggles with matter, the tree struggles with the wind and with
other trees. Man struggles with gravity, cold, wet, heat, and all the
forces that hinder him. The tiniest plant that grows has to force its
root down into the soil; earlier than that it has to burst its shell
or case. The corn struggles to lift itself up after the storm has
beaten it down; effort, effort, everywhere in the organic world. Says
Whitman:

      “Urge and urge and urge,
      Always the procreant urge of the world.”


IV

Every few years we have an ice-storm or a snowstorm that breaks down
and disfigures the trees. Some trees suffer much more than others.
The storm goes its way; the laws of physical force prevail; the great
world of mechanical forces is let loose upon the small world of vital
forces; occasionally a tree is so crushed that it never entirely
recovers; but after many years the woods and groves have repaired
the damages and taken on their wonted thrifty appearance. The evil
was only temporary; the world of trees has suffered no permanent
set-back. But had the trees been conscious beings, what a deal of
suffering they would have experienced! An analogous visitation to
human communities entails a heritage of misery, but in time it too
is forgotten and its scars healed. Fire, blood, war, epidemics,
earthquakes, are such visitations, but the race survives them and
reaps good from them.

We say that Nature cares nothing for the individual, but only for
the race or the species. The whole organic world is at war with the
inorganic, and as in human wars the individuals are sacrificed that
the army, the whole, may live; so in the strife and competition of
nature, the separate units fall that the mass may prosper.

It is probably true that in the course of the biological history of
the earth, whole species have been rendered extinct by parasites,
or by changing outward conditions. But this has been the exception,
and not the rule. The chestnut blight now seems to threaten the very
existence of this species of tree in this country, but I think the
chances are that this fungus will meet with some natural check.

In early summer comes the June drop of apples. The trees start with
more fruit than they can carry, and if they are in vigorous health,
they will drop the surplus. It is a striking illustration of Nature’s
methods. The tree does its own thinning. But if not at the top of its
condition, it fails to do this. It takes health and strength simply
to let go; only a living tree drops its fruit or its leaves; only a
growing man drops his outgrown opinions.

If we put ourselves in the place of the dropped apples, we must look
upon our fate as unmixed evil. If we put ourselves in the place of
the tree and of the apples that remain on it, the June drop would
appear an unmixed good--finer fruit, and a healthier, longer-lived
tree results. Nature does not work so much to specific as to
universal ends. The individual may go, but the type must remain. The
ranks may be decimated, but the army and its cause must triumph.
Life in all its forms is a warfare only in the sense that it is a
struggle with its outward conditions, in which, other things being
equal, the strongest force prevails. Small and weak forms prevail
also, because the competing forms are small and weak, or because
at the feast of life there is a place for the small and weak also.
But lion against lion, man against man, mouse against mouse, the
strongest will, in the end, be the victor.

Man’s effort is to save waste, to reduce friction, to take short
cuts, to make smooth the way, to seize the advantage, to economize
time, but the physical forces know none of these things.

Go into the woods and behold the evil the trees have to contend
with--all typical of the evil we have to contend with--too crowded
in places, one tree crushing another by its fall, specimens on every
hand whose term of life might be lengthened by a little wise surgery;
borers, blight, disease, insect pests, storm, wreckage, thunderbolt
scars, or destruction--evil in a hundred forms besetting every tree,
and sooner or later leaving its mark. A few escape--oaks, maples,
pines, elms--and reach a greater age than the others, but they fail
at last, and when they have rounded out their green century, or ten
centuries, and go down in a gale, or in the stillness of a summer
night, how often younger trees are marred or crushed by their fall!
But come back after many long years, and their places are filled, and
all the scars are healed. The new generation of trees is feeding
upon the accumulations of the old. Evil is turned to good. The
destruction of the cyclone, the ravages of fire, the wreckage of the
ice-storm, are all obliterated and the forest-spirit is rank and full
again.

There is no wholesale exemption from this rule of waste and struggle
in this world, nor probably in any other. We have life on these
terms. The organic world develops under pressure from within and from
without. Rain brings the perils of rain, fire brings the perils of
fire, power brings the perils of power. The great laws go our way,
but they will break us or rend us if we fail to keep step with them.
Unmixed good is a dream; unmixed happiness is a dream; perfection is
a dream; heaven and hell are both dreams of our mixed and struggling
lives, the one the outcome of our aspirations for the good, the other
the outcome of our fear of evil.

The trees in the woods, the plants in the fields encounter hostile
forces the year through; storms crash or overthrow them; visible
and invisible enemies prey upon them; yet are the fields clothed
in verdure and the hills and plains mantled with superb forests.
Nature’s haphazard planting and sowing and her wasteful weeding
and trimming do not result in failure as these methods do with us.
A failure of hers with one form or species results in the success
of some other form. All successes are hers. Allow time enough and
the forest returns in the path of the tornado, but maybe with other
species of trees. The birds and squirrels plant oaks and chestnuts
amid the pines and the winds plant pines amid the oaks and chestnuts.
The robins and the cedar-birds sow the red cedar broadcast over the
landscape, and plant the Virginia creeper and the poison-ivy by
every stub and fence-post. The poison-ivy is a triumph of Nature
as truly as is the grapevine or the morning-glory. All are hers.
Man specializes; he selects this or that, selects the wheat and
rejects the tares; but Nature generalizes; she has the artist’s
disinterestedness; all is good; all are parts of her scheme. She
nourishes the foul-smelling cat-brier as carefully as she does the
rose. Each creature, with man at the head, says, “The world is mine;
it was created for me.” Evidently it was created for all, at least
all forms are at home here. Nature’s system of checks and balances
preserves her working equilibrium. If a species of forest worm
under some exceptionally favoring conditions gets such a start that
it threatens to destroy our beech and maple forests, presently a
parasite, stimulated by this turn in its favor, appears and restores
the balance. For two or three seasons the beech-woods in my native
town were ravaged by some kind of worm or beetle; in midsummer the
sunlight came into them as if the roof had been taken off; later
they swarmed with white millers. But the scourge was suddenly
checked--some parasite, probably a species of ichneumon-fly, was on
hand to curtail the dangerous excess.

I am only trying to say that after we have painted Nature as black
as the case will allow, after we have depicted her as a savage
beast, a devastating storm, a scorching desert, a consuming fire, an
all-engulfing earthquake, or as war, pestilence, famine, we have only
depicted her from our limited human point of view. But even from that
point of view the favoring conditions of life are so many, living
bodies are so adaptive, the lift of the evolutionary impulse is so
unconquerable, the elemental laws and forces are so overwhelmingly on
our side, that our position in the universe is still an enviable one.
“Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.” Slain, I shall nourish
some other form of life, and the books will still balance--not my
books, but the vast ledgers of the Eternal.

In the old times we accounted for creation in the simple terms of the
Hebrew Scriptures--“In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth.” We even saw no discrepancy in the tradition that creation
took place in the spring. But when we attempt to account for creation
in the terms of science or naturalism, the problem is far from being
so simple. We have not so tangible a point from which to start. It is
as if we were trying to find the end or the beginning of the circle.
Round and round we go, caught in the endless and beginningless
currents of the Creative Energy; no fixity or finality anywhere;
rest and motion, great and small, up and down, heat and cold, good
and evil, near and far, only relative; cause and effect merging and
losing themselves in each other; life and death perpetually playing
into each other’s hands; interior within interior; depth beneath
depth; height above height; the tangible thrilled and vibrating with
the intangible; the material in bonds to the non-material; invisible,
impalpable forces streaming around us and through us; perpetual
change and transformation on every hand; every day a day of creation,
every night a revelation of unspeakable grandeur; suns and systems
forming in the cyclones of stardust; the whole starry host of heaven
flowing like a meadow brook, but where, or whence, who can tell? The
center everywhere, the circumference nowhere; pain and pleasure,
good and evil, inextricably mixed; the fall of man a daily and
hourly occurrence; the redemption of man, the same! Heaven or hell
waiting by every doorstep, boundless, beginningless, unspeakable,
immeasurable--what wonder that we seek a short cut through this
wilderness and appeal to the supernatural?

When I look forth upon the world and see how, regardless of man and
his well-being, the operations of Nature go on--how the winds and
the storms wreck him or destroy him, how the drought or the floods
bring to naught his industries, how not the least force in heaven or
earth turns aside for him, or makes any exception to him; in short,
how all forms of life are perpetually ground between the upper and
the nether millstones of the contending and clashing natural material
forces, I ask myself: “Is there nothing, then, under the sun, or
beyond the sun, that has a stake in our well-being? Is life purely
a game of chance, and is it all luck that we are here in a world so
richly endowed to meet all our requirements?” Serene Reason answers:
“No, it is not luck as in a lottery. It is the good fortune of the
whole. It was inherent in the constitution of the whole, and it
continues because of its adaptability; life is here because it fits
itself into the scheme of things; it is flexible and compromising.”
We find the world good to be in because we are adapted to it, and
not it to us. The vegetable growth upon the rocks where the sea is
forever pounding is a type of life; the waves favor its development.
Life takes advantage of turbulence as well as of quietude, of drought
as well as of floods, of deserts as well as of marshes, of the
sea-bottom as well as of the mountain-tops. Both animal and vegetable
life trim their sails to the forces that beat upon them. The image
of the sail is a good one. Life avails itself of the half-contrary
winds; it captures and imprisons their push in its sails; by yielding
a little, it makes headway in the teeth of the gale; it gives and
takes; without struggle, without opposition, life would not be life.
The sands of the shore do not struggle with the waves, nor the waves
with the sands; the buffeting ends where it began. But trees struggle
with the wind, fish struggle with the flood, man struggles with his
environment; all draw energy from the forces that oppose them. Life
gains as it spends; its waste is an investment. Not so with purely
material bodies. They are like the clock, they must be perpetually
wound from without. A living body is a clock, perpetually self-wound
from within.

The faith and composure of the naturalist or naturist are proof
against the worst that Nature can do. He sees the cosmic forces only;
he sees nothing directly mindful of man, but man himself; he sees the
intelligence and beneficence of the universe flowering in man; he
sees life as a mysterious issue of the warring element; he sees human
consciousness and our sense of right and wrong, of truth and justice,
as arising in the evolutionary sequence, and turning and sitting in
judgment upon all things; he sees that there can be no life without
pain and death; that there can be no harmony without discord; that
opposites go hand in hand; that good and evil are inextricably
mingled; that the sun and blue sky are still there behind the clouds,
unmindful of them; that all is right with the world if we extend our
vision deep enough; that the ways of Nature are the ways of God if we
do not make God in our own image, and make our comfort and well-being
the prime object of Nature. Our comfort and well-being are provided
for in the constitution of the world, but we may say that they are
not guaranteed; they are contingent upon many things, but the chances
are upon our side. He that would save his life shall lose it--lose
it in forgetting that the universe is not a close corporation, or a
patented article, and that it exists for other ends than our own. But
he who can lose his life in the larger life of the whole shall save
it in a deeper, truer sense.




