II

MANIFOLD NATURE


Few persons, I fancy, ever spend much time in thinking seriously of
this vast, ever-present reality which we call Nature; what our true
relations to it are, what its relations are to what we call God, or
what God’s relations are to it; whether God and Nature are two or
one--God and Nature, or only Nature, or only God.

When we identify Nature with God we are at once in sore straits
because Nature has a terrible side to her, but the moment we separate
God from Nature we are still more embarrassed. We create a hiatus
which we must find something to fill. We must invent a Devil upon
whom to saddle the evil that everywhere dogs the footsteps of the
good. So we have both a God and a Devil, or two gods, on our hands
contending with each other. Even our good friends in the churches
talk glibly of the God of Nature, or Nature’s God, little heeding the
terrible black depths that lie under their words.

The Nature that the poets sing and that nature-writers exploit is
far from being the whole story. When we think of Nature as meaning
only birds and flowers and summer breezes and murmuring streams, we
have only touched the hem of her garment--a garment that clothes
the whole world with the terrific and the destructive, as well as
with the beautiful and the beneficent. Yet her fairer forms and
gentler influences are undoubtedly the expression of those forces and
conditions that go hand in hand with the things that make for our
development and well-being.

Probably not till flowers bloomed and birds sang was the earth ripe
for man. Not till the bow appeared on the retreating storm-cloud
was anything like human life possible. Of savage, elemental Nature,
black in tempest and earthquake, hideous in war and pestilence, our
poets and nature-students make little, while devout souls seem to
experience a cosmic chill when they think of these things.

The majority of persons, I fancy, when they consider seriously the
problem, look upon Nature as a sort of connecting link between man
and some higher power, neither wholly good nor wholly bad; divine
in some aspects, diabolical in others; ministering to our bodies,
but hampering and obstructing our souls. They see her a goddess one
hour, and a fury the next; destroying life as freely as she gives it;
arming one form to devour another; crushing or destroying the fairest
as soon as the ugliest; limited in her scope and powers, and not
complete in herself, but demanding the existence of something above
and beyond herself.

Under the influence of Christianity man has taken himself out of the
category of natural things, both in his origin and in his destiny.
Such a gulf separates him from all other creatures, and his mastery
over them is so complete that he looks upon himself as exceptional,
and as belonging to another order. Nature is only his stepmother,
and treats him with the harshness and indifference that often
characterize that relation.

When Wordsworth declared himself a worshiper of Nature, was he
thinking of Nature as a whole, or only of an abridged and expurgated
Nature--Nature in her milder and more beneficent aspects? Was it not
the Westmoreland Nature of which he was a worshiper?--a sweet rural
Nature, with grassy fells and murmuring streams and bird-haunted
solitudes? What would have been his emotion in the desert, in the
arctic snows, or in the pestilential forests and jungles of the
tropics? Very likely, just what the emotion of most of us would be--a
feeling that here are the savage and forbidding and hostile aspects
of Nature against which we need to be on our guard. That creative eye
and ear to which Wordsworth refers is what mainly distinguishes the
attitude of the modern poet toward Nature from the ancient. Sympathy
is always creative--“thanks to the human heart by which we live.”

The Wordsworthian Nature was of the subjective order; he found it
in his own heart, in his dreams by his own fireside, in moments of
soul dilation on his Westmoreland hills, when the meanest flowers
that blow could bring to him “thoughts that do often lie too deep for
tears.”

The Nature that to Wordsworth never betrays us, and to Milton was
“wise and frugal,” is a humanized, man-made Nature. The Nature we
know and wrest our living from, and try to drive sharp bargains
with, is of quite a different order. It is no more constant than
inconstant, no more wise and frugal than foolish and dissipated; it
is not human at all, but unhuman.

When we infuse into it our own idealism, or recreate it in our
own image, then we have the Nature of the poets, the Nature that
consciously ministers to us and makes the world beautiful for our
sake.

When in his first book, “Nature,” Emerson says that the aspect of
Nature is devout, like the figure of Jesus when he stands with bended
head and hands folded upon the breast, we see what a subjective and
humanized Nature, a Nature of his own creation, he is considering.
His book is not an interpretation of Nature, but an interpretation
of his own soul. It is not Nature which stands in an attitude of
devotion with bowed head, but Emerson’s own spirit in the presence
of Nature, or of what he reads into Nature. Yet the Emerson soul
is a part of Nature--a peculiar manifestation of its qualities and
possibilities, developed through centuries of the interaction of man
upon man, through culture, books, religion, meditation.

“The ruin or the blank that we see when we look at Nature,” he says,
“is in our own eye.” Is it not equally true that the harmony and
perfection that we see are in our own eye also? In fact, are not
all the qualities and attributes which we ascribe to Nature equally
the creation of our own minds? The beauty, the sublimity, the power
of Nature are experiences of the beholder. The drudge in the fields
does not experience them, but the poet, the thinker, the seer,
does. Nature becomes very real to us when we come to deal with her
practically, when we seek her for specific ends, when we go to her to
get our living. But when we go to her in the spirit of disinterested
science, the desert, the volcano, the path of the cyclone, are full
of the same old meanings, the playground of the same old elements
and forces. Nature is what we make her. In his Journal Emerson for a
moment sees Nature as she is: “Nature is a swamp, on whose purlieus
we see prismatic dew-drops, but her interiors are terrific.”

Man is the only creature that turns upon Nature and judges her; he
turns upon his own body and mind and judges them; he judges the work
of his own hands; he is critical toward all things that surround him;
he brings this faculty of judgment into the world.

Emerson refers to “the great Nature in which we rest as the earth
lies in the soft arms of the atmosphere.” The earth lies in the soft
arms of the atmosphere in the same sense that it lies in the soft
arms of its own grasses and flowers; the atmosphere is an appendage
of the earth. If the earth literally lies in anything, it is in the
soft arms of the all-pervasive ether. Emerson’s statement is the
inevitable poetizing of Nature in which we all indulge. We make soft
arms for our thoughts to lie in, and peaceful paths for our feet to
walk in, whatever the literal truth may be. This is the way of art,
of poetry, of religion. The way of science and of practical life is
a different way. The soft arms become hard with purpose, and rest
and contemplation give place to intense activity. I would not have
the poet change his way; Nature as reflected in his mind soothes and
charms us; it takes on hues from that light which never was on sea
or land. But we cannot dispense with the way of science, which makes
paths and highways for us through the wilderness of impersonal laws
and forces that surge and roar around us. One gives us beauty and one
gives us power; one brings a weapon to the hand, the other brings
solace to the spirit.

When Bryant identifies God with tempests and thunderbolts, with
“whirlwinds that uproot the woods and drown the villages,” or with
the tidal wave that overwhelms the cities, “with the wrath of the
mad, unchained elements”--“tremendous tokens of thy power”--does
he make God more lovable or desirable? Well may he say, “From
these sterner aspects of thy face, spare me and mine.” By way of
contrast let me recall that when an earthquake shook California,
John Muir cheered himself and friends by saying it was only Mother
Earth trotting her children fondly upon her knee! If we identify
God with all of Nature, this wrathful Hebrew Jehovah of Bryant is a
legitimate conception. There are times when the aerial forces behave
like a raving maniac bent upon the destruction of the world--the
insensate powers run amuck upon all living things. This is not the
God we habitually love and worship, but it is a God from whom there
is no escape. As the result of the inevitable action of the natural
irrational or unrational forces, tempests and earthquakes and tidal
waves do not disturb us; but as the will and purpose of an Almighty
Being, Creator of heaven and earth, they give all pious souls a
fearful shake-up. We take refuge in such phrases as “the inscrutable
ways of God,” or “the mysteries of Providence,” a Providence whose
ways are assuredly “past finding out.”

Our State Commissioner of Education, Dr. Finley, in an agricultural
address on “Potatoes and Boys,” showed God coöperating with the
farmer in a way that amused me. “The Almighty,” the Commissioner
said, “can make, unaided of man, potatoes, but only small potatoes,
and of acrid taste. He had to make a primitive man and even teach
him to use a hoe, before He, the Omnipotent One, could grow a patch
of potatoes.” The wild potato, he implied, like the wild grape, the
wild apple, the wild melon, was the work of God before he had man to
help him; now, with man’s help, we have all the improved varieties of
potatoes and fruits. We have heard a good deal about the coöperation
of man with God, and as a concrete example this potato-growing
partnership is very interesting. How far from our habitual attitude
of mind is the thought that the Higher Powers concern themselves
about our potatoes or our turnips or our pumpkin crop, or have any
part or lot in it! Emerson in his Journal expresses another view:
“One would think that God made fig-trees and dates, grapes and
olives, but the Devil made Baldwin apples and pound pears, cherries
and whortle berries, Indian corn and Irish potatoes.”

Sir Thomas Browne called Nature the art of God. Viewed in this light
we get a new conception of Nature, the artistic conception. We do not
ask: Is it good or bad, for us or against us? we are intent on its
symbolical or ideal character. Through it God expresses himself as
the artist does, be he painter, poet, or musician, through his work,
blending the various elements--the light and shade, the good and the
bad, the positive and the negative--into a vital, harmonious whole.
Creation becomes a picture, or a drama, or a symphony, in which
all life plays its part, in which all scenes and conditions, all
elemental processes and displays, play their part and unite to make
a vast artistic whole. The contradictions in life, the high lights,
the deep shadows, the imperfections, the neutral spaces, are but the
devices of the artist to enhance the total effect of his work. In
ethics and religion we ask of a thing: “Is it good?” In philosophy:
“Is it true?” In science: “Is it a fact, and verifiable?” But in art
we ask: “Is it beautiful?” or “Is it a real creation?” “Is it one
with the vital and flowing currents of the world?”

The artist alone is the creator among men; he is disinterested; he
has no purpose but to rival Nature; he subordinates the parts to
the whole; he illustrates the divine law of indirections. The bald,
literal truth is not for him, but the illusive, the suggestive, the
ideal truth. He does not ask what life or Nature are for, or are they
good or bad, but he interprets them in terms of the relation of their
parts, he reads them in the light of his own soul. He knows there
is no picture without shadows, no music without discords, no growth
without decay. The artist has “no axe to grind”; to him all is right
with the world, however out of joint it may be in our self-seeking
lives. Art is synthetic, and puts a soul under the ribs of Death.
Science is a straight line, but Art is symbolized by the curve.

To regard Nature, therefore, as the art of God, is to see it complete
in itself; all the disharmonies vanish, all our perplexing problems
are solved. The earth and the heavens are not for our private good
alone, but for all other things. Opposites are blended. Good and
bad are relative; heaven and hell are light and shade in the same
picture. Our happiness or our misery are secondary; they are the
pigments on the painter’s palette. The beauty of Nature is its
harmony with our constitution; its terror emphasizes our weakness.

Where does the great artist get his laws of art but from his insight
into the spirit and method of Nature? They are reflected in his own
heart; the act of creation repeats itself in his own handiwork. The
true artist has no secondary aims--not to teach or to preach, nor
to praise nor condemn; but to portray, and to show us, through the
particular, the road to the universal.

Eckermann reports Goethe as saying to him that “Nature’s intentions
are always good”; but if questioned, Goethe would hardly have
maintained that the clouds, the winds, the streams, the tides,
gravity, cohesion, and so on, have intentions of any sort, much less
intentions directed to us or away from us. Even the wisest among
us thus make man the aim and object of Nature. We impose our own
psychology upon the very rock and trees.

Goethe always read into Nature his own human traits; always when he
speaks of her he speaks as an artist and poet. He says to Eckermann
that Nature “is always true, always serious, always severe; she is
always right, and the errors and faults are always those of man. The
man who is incapable of appreciating her, she despises; and only to
the apt, the pure, the true, does she resign herself and reveal her
secrets. The understanding will not reach her; man must be capable
of elevating himself to the highest Reason to come into that contact
with the Divinity which manifests in the primitive phenomena which
dwell behind them and from which they proceed. The divinity works
in the living, not in the dead; in the becoming and changing, not
in the become and the fixed. Therefore, reason, with its tendency
toward the divine, has only to do with the becoming, the living; but
understanding has to do with the become, the already fixed, that
it may make use of it.” In this last we see the germ of Bergson’s
philosophy. The divinity that dwells behind phenomena, and from which
they proceed, is the attempt of the human mind to find the end of
that which has no end, the law of causation.




