



  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  A subscript is denoted by _{x}, for example H_{2}O.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                        ACCEPTING THE UNIVERSE

              [Illustration: (Frontispiece; the author)]




                               ACCEPTING
                             THE UNIVERSE

                        _ESSAYS IN NATURALISM_

                                  BY

                            JOHN BURROUGHS


                      [Illustration: (colophon)]


                          BOSTON AND NEW YORK
                       HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
                     The Riverside Press Cambridge




                  COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY JOHN BURROUGHS

                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




                  ..._And heard great argument
      About it and about: but evermore
      Came out by the same door wherein I went._
                                           THE RUBÁIYÁT




PREFACE


A wheel may have many spokes, but can have but one hub. So I
may say of this volume of mine that there are many themes and
chapter-headings, but there is but one central thought into which
they all converge, and that is that the universe is good, and that
it is our rare good fortune to form a part of it. As this collection
of essays does not aim to be a systematic treatise on any one theme,
but rather a series of sallies, excursions, into the world of
semi-philosophical speculation, there is inevitably much repetition;
there may even be some contradiction. But I have concluded to let
them stand, as I find myself an interested spectator of the workings
of my own mind when, in following different roads, it arrives at
the same truth. As all roads lead to Rome, so in the realm in which
my mind works in this volume, all roads lead to the conclusion that
this is the best possible world, and these people in it are the best
possible people.

The heart of Nature is sound. I feel toward the great Mother somewhat
as a man does who takes out a policy in an insurance company: he
believes the company is solvent and will meet its obligations. I
look upon the universe as solvent and worthy of trust. In other
words this is a book of radical optimism. It might be described as an
attempt to justify the ways of God to man on natural grounds.

My reader need hardly be told that theological grounds do not count
with me. I want nothing less than a faith founded upon a rock,
faith in the constitution of things. The various man-made creeds
are fictitious, like the constellations--Orion, Cassiopeia’s Chair,
the Big Dipper; the only thing real in them is the stars, and the
only thing real in the creeds is the soul’s aspiration toward the
Infinite. This abides, though creeds and dogmas change or vanish.

Empedocles says:

      “O, wretched he whose care
      Is shadowy speculation on the gods.”

But is not speculation better than indifference? Curiosity about the
gods may lead to a better acquaintance with them. I feel that each of
these chapters might be called an altar to the Unknown God.

                                                      JOHN BURROUGHS




CONTENTS


     I. SHALL WE ACCEPT THE UNIVERSE?                        3

    II. MANIFOLD NATURE                                     19

   III. EACH FOR ITS OWN SAKE                               30

    IV. THE UNIVERSAL BENEFICENCE                           54

     V. THE GOOD DEVILS                                     73

    VI. THE NATURAL PROVIDENCE                              90

   VII. THE FAITH OF A NATURALIST                          112

  VIII. A FALLACY MADE IN GERMANY                          134

    IX. THE PRICE OF DEVELOPMENT                           138

     X. TOOTH AND CLAW                                     158

    XI. MEN AND TREES                                      173

   XII. THE PROBLEM OF EVIL                                193

  XIII. HORIZON LINES:

         I. THE ORIGIN OF LIFE                             203

        II. THE LIVING AND NON-LIVING WORLDS               205

       III. THE ORGANIZING TENDENCY                        207

        IV. SCIENCE AND MYSTICISM                          211

         V. IS THERE DESIGN IN NATURE?                     219

        VI. OUR IMPARTIAL MOTHER                           225

       VII. BAFFLING TRUTHS                                226

      VIII. SENSE CONTRADICTIONS                           230

        IX. MAN A PART OF NATURE                           233

         X. THE FITTEST TO SURVIVE                         237

        XI. THE POWER OF CHOICE                            238

       XII. ILLUSIONS                                      239

      XIII. IS NATURE SUICIDAL?                            242

       XIV. THE PERSISTENCE OF ENERGY                      245

   XIV. SOUNDINGS:

         I. THE GREAT MYSTERY                              253

        II. THE NATURAL ORDER                              257

       III. LOGIC AND RELIGIOUS BELIEFS                    261

        IV. A CHIP FROM THE OLD BLOCK                      265

         V. A PERSONAL GOD                                 266

        VI. THE ETERNAL                                    270

       VII. AN IMPARTIAL DEITY                             275

      VIII. FINITE AND INFINITE                            278

        IX. THE INSOLUBLE                                  280

         X. PAYING THE DEBT                                282

        XI. DEATH                                          288

       XII. HEAVEN AND EARTH                               293

      XIII. THINKING AND ACTING                            296

       XIV. THE TIDE OF LIFE                               304

        XV. FAITH FOUNDED UPON A ROCK                      309

  XV. THE POET OF THE COSMOS                               316

    _The frontispiece, showing Mr. Burroughs at his woodpile at
    Riverby, is from a photograph taken in 1920 by_ Mr. HERBERT
    S. ARDELL




ACCEPTING THE UNIVERSE




I

SHALL WE ACCEPT THE UNIVERSE?


I

It is reported of Margaret Fuller that she said she accepted the
universe. “Gad, she’d better!” retorted Carlyle. Carlyle himself
did not accept the universe in a very whole-hearted manner. Looking
up at the midnight stars, he exclaimed: “A sad spectacle! If they
be inhabited, what a scope for misery and folly; if they be na
inhabited, what a waste of space!”

It ought not to be a hard thing to accept the universe, since it
appears to be a fixture, and we have no choice in the matter; but
I have found it worth while to look the gift in the mouth, and
convince myself that it is really worth accepting. It were a pity to
go through life with a suspicion in one’s mind that it might have
been a better universe, and that some wrong has been done us because
we have no freedom of choice in the matter. The thought would add a
tinge of bitterness to all our days. And so, after living more than
four score years in the world, and pondering long and intently upon
the many problems which life and nature present, I have come, like
Margaret Fuller, to accept the universe, have come frankly to accept
that first verdict pronounced upon creation, namely, that it is very
good--good in its sum total up to this astronomic date, whatever
phases it may at times present that lead us to a contrary conclusion.

Not that cold and hunger, war and pestilence, tornadoes and
earthquakes, are good in a positive sense, but that these and kindred
things are vastly overbalanced by the forces and agencies that make
for our well-being,--that “work together for good,”--the sunshine,
the cooling breezes, the fertile soil, the stability of land and sea,
the gentle currents, the equipoise of the forces of the earth, air,
and water, the order and security of our solar system, and, in the
human realm, the good-will and fellowship that are finally bound to
prevail among men and nations.

In remote geologic ages, before the advent of man, when the earth’s
crust was less stable, when the air was yet loaded with poisonous
gases, when terrible and monstrous animal forms held high carnival in
the sea and upon the land, it was not in the same sense good--good
for beings constructed as we are now. In future astronomic time, when
the earth’s air and water and warmth shall have disappeared--a time
which science predicts--and all life upon the globe fails, again
it will not be good. But in our geologic, biologic, and astronomic
age, notwithstanding the fact that cold and suffering, war and
pestilence, cyclones and earthquakes, still occur upon the relatively
tiny ball that carries us through the vast sidereal spaces, good is
greatly in the ascendancy. The voyage is not all calm and sunshine,
but it is safe, and the dangers from collision and shipwreck are very
remote. It is a vast and lonely sea over which we are journeying,
no other ships hail us and bid us Godspeed, no messages, wireless
or other, may reach us from other shores, or other seas; forces and
influences do play upon us from all parts of the empyrean, but, so
far as we are aware, no living thing on other spheres takes note of
our going or our coming.

In our practical lives we are compelled to separate good from
evil--the one being that which favors our well-being, and the other
that which antagonizes it; but, viewed as a whole, the universe is
all good; it is an infinite complex of compensations out of which
worlds and systems of worlds, and all which they hold, have emerged,
and are emerging, and will emerge. This is not the language of the
heart or of the emotions--our anthropomorphism cries out against
it--but it is the language of serene, impartial reason. It is good
for us occasionally to get outside the sphere of our personal life
and view things as they are in and of themselves. A great demand
is made upon our faith--faith in the absolute trustworthiness of
human reason, and in the final beneficence of the forces that rule
this universe. Not to solve the mysteries, but to see that they are
insoluble, and to rest content in that conclusion, is the task we set
ourselves here.

Evidently the tide of life is still at the flood on this planet; its
checks and counter-currents arise inevitably in a universe whose
forces are always, and always must be, in unstable equilibrium.

The love of the Eternal for mankind, and for all other forms of
life, is not a parental love--not the love of the mother for her
child, or of the father for his son; it is more like the love which a
general has for his army; he is to lead that army through hardships,
through struggles, through sufferings, and through death, but he is
leading it to victory. Many will perish that others may live; the
battle is being won daily. Evolution has triumphed. It has been a
long and desperate battle, but here we are and we find life sweet.
The antagonistic forces which have been overcome have become sources
of power. The vast army of living forms moving down the geologic
ages has been made strong through the trials and obstacles it has
surmounted, till now we behold it in the fullness of its power with
man at its head.


II

There is a paragraph in Emerson’s Journal on Providence, written when
he was twenty-one, which is as broad and as wise and as heterodox as
anything he ever wrote. The Providence he depicts is the Providence
I see in Nature:

“Providence supports, but does not spoil its children. We are
called sons, not darlings, of the Deity. There is ever good in
store for those who love it; knowledge for those who seek it; and
if we do evil, we suffer the consequences of evil. Throughout the
administration of the world there is the same aspect of stern
kindness; of good against your will; good against your good; ten
thousand channels of active beneficence, but all flowing with the
same regard to general, not particular profit.... And to such an
extent is this great statute policy of God carried, that many, nay,
most, of the great blessings of humanity require cycles of a thousand
years to bring them to their height.”

A remarkable statement to be made in 1824, in New England, and by
a fledgling preacher of the orthodox faith and the descendant of a
long line of orthodox clergymen. It is as broad and as impartial
as science, and yet makes a strong imaginative appeal. Good at the
heart of Nature is the purport of it, not the patent-right good of
the creeds, but good, free to all who love it, a “stern kindness,”
and no partial, personal, vacillating Providence whose ear is open
only to the password of some sect or cult, or organization--“good
against your good,” your copyrighted good, your personal, selfish
good (unless it is in line with equal good to others), the broad,
universal beneficence of Nature which brought us here and keeps
us here, and showers its good upon us as long as we keep in right
relations with it; but which goes its appointed way regardless of the
sore needs of warring nations or the desperate straits of struggling
men. That is the Providence that lasts, that does not change its
mind, that is not indulgent, that does not take sides, that is
without variableness or shadow of turning. Suppose the law of gravity
were changeable, or the law of chemical reactions, or the nature of
fire, or air, or water, or cohesion? Gravity never sleeps nor varies,
yet see bodies rise, see others fall, see the strong master of the
weak, see the waters flow and the ground stay. The laws of fluids are
fixed, but see the variety of their behavior, the forms in which they
crystallize, their solvent power, their stability or instability,
their capacity to absorb or conduct heat--flux and change everywhere
amid fixity and law. Nature is infinitely variable, which opens the
door to all forms of life; her goings and comings are on such a large
scale, like the rains, the dews, the sunlight, that all creatures
get an equal benefit. She sows her seed with such a generous hand
that enough of them are bound to fall upon fertile places. Such as
are very limited in range, like those of the swamp plants, are yet
cast forth upon the wind so liberally that sooner or later some of
them fall upon conditions suitable to them. Nature will cover a whole
township with her wind-sown seeds in order to be sure that she hits
the small swamp in one corner of it.

A stream of energy, not described by the adjective “inexhaustible,”
bears the universe along, and all forms of life, man with the rest,
take their chances amid its currents and its maelstroms. The good
Providence shows itself in the power of adaptation which all forms
of life possess. Some forms of sea-weed or sea-grass grow where the
waves pound the shore incessantly. How many frail marine creatures
are wrecked upon the shore, but how many more are not wrecked! How
many ships go down in the sea, but how many more are wafted safely
over it!

The Providence in Nature seems intent only on playing the game,
irrespective of the stakes, which to us seem so important. Whatever
the issue, Nature is the winner. She cannot lose. Her beneficence is
wholesale. Her myriad forms of life are constantly passing through
“the curtain of fire” of her inorganic forces, and the casualties are
great, but the majority get through. The assault goes on and will
ever go on. It is like a stream of water that is whole and individual
at every point, but fixed and stable at no point. To play the game,
to keep the currents going--from the depths of sidereal space to the
shallow pool by the roadside; from the rise and fall of nations, to
the brief hour of the minute summer insects, the one overarching
purpose seems to be to give free rein to life, to play one form
against another, to build up and tear down, to gather together and to
scatter--no rest, no end, nothing final--rocks decaying to build more
rocks, worlds destroyed to build more worlds, nations disintegrating
to build more nations, organisms perishing to feed more organisms,
life playing into the hands of death everywhere, and death playing
into the hands of life, sea and land interchanging, tropic and arctic
meeting and mingling, day and night, winter and summer chasing each
other over the earth--what a spectacle of change, what a drama never
completed! Vast worlds and systems in fiery flux; one little corner
of the cosmos teeming with life, vast areas of it, like Saturn and
Jupiter, dead and barren through untold millions of years; collisions
and disruptions in the heavens, tornadoes and earthquakes and wars
and pestilence upon the earth--surely it all sounds worse than it is,
for we are all here to see and contemplate the great spectacle; it
sounds worse than it is to us because we are a part of the outcome
of all these raging and conflicting forces. Whatever has failed, we
have succeeded, and the beneficent forces are still coming our way.
As I write these lines I see my neighbor and his boys gathering the
hay from the meadows and building it into a great stack beside their
glutted barns. I see a chipmunk carrying stores to his den, I see
butterflies dancing by on painted wings, I see and hear the happy
birds, and the August sun beams his best upon all the land.

The greatest of human achievements and the most precious is that
of the great creative artist. In words, in color, in sounds, in
forms, man comes nearest to emulating the Creative Energy itself.
It seems as if the pleasure and the purpose of the Creative Energy
were endless invention--to strike out new forms, to vary perpetually
the pattern. She presents myriads of forms, myriads of types,
inexhaustible variety in air, earth, water, ten thousand ways to
achieve the same end, a prodigality of means that bewilders the mind;
her aim to produce something new and different, an endless variety
of forms that fly, that swim, that creep, in the sea, in the air,
on the earth, in the fields, in the woods, on the shore. How many
ways Nature has of scattering her seeds, how many types of wings, of
hooks, of springs! In some she offers a wage to bird or quadruped in
the shape of fruit, others she forcibly attaches to the passer-by. In
all times and places there is a riot of invention.


III

Are we not men enough to face things as they are? Must we be cosseted
a little? Can we not be weaned from the old theological pap? Can we
not rest content in the general beneficence of Nature’s Providence?
Must you and I have a special hold upon the great Mother’s apron
strings?

I see the Nature Providence going its impartial way. I see drought
and flood, heat and cold, war and pestilence, defeat and death,
besetting man at all times, in all lands. I see hostile germs in
the air he breathes, in the water he drinks, in the soil he tills.
I see the elemental forces as indifferent toward him as toward
ants and fleas. I see pain and disease and defeat and failure
dogging his footsteps. I see the righteous defeated and the ungodly
triumphant--this and much more I see; and yet I behold through the
immense biological vista behind us the race of man slowly--oh, so
slowly!--emerging from its brute or semi-human ancestry into the
full estate of man, from blind instinct and savage passion into
the light of reason and moral consciousness. I behold the great
scheme of evolution unfolding despite all the delays and waste and
failures, and the higher forms appearing upon the scene. I see
on an immense scale, and as clearly as in a demonstration in a
laboratory, that good comes out of evil; that the impartiality of
the Nature Providence is best; that we are made strong by what we
overcome; that man is man because he is as free to do evil as to do
good; that life is as free to develop hostile forms as to develop
friendly; that power waits upon him who earns it; that disease,
wars, the unloosened, devastating elemental forces, have each and
all played their part in developing and hardening man and giving
him the heroic fiber. The good would have no tang, no edge, no
cutting quality without evil to oppose it. Life would be tasteless
or insipid, without pain and struggle and disappointment. Behold
what the fiery furnace does for the metals--welding or blending or
separating or purifying them, and behold the hell of contending and
destructive forces out of which the earth came, and again behold
the grinding and eroding forces, the storms and earthquakes and
eruptions and disintegrations that have made it the green inhabitable
world that now sustains us! No, the universal processes do not need
disinfecting; the laws of the winds, the rains, the sunlight do not
need rectifying. “I do not want the constellations any nearer,” says
Whitman. I do not want the natural Providence any more attentive. The
celestial laws are here underfoot and our treading upon them does
not obliterate or vulgarize them. Chemistry is incorruptible and
immortal, it is the handmaid of God; the yeast works in the elements
of our bread of life while we sleep; the stars send their influences,
the earth renews itself, the brooding heaven gathers us under its
wings, and all is well with us if we have the heroic hearts to see it.

In the curve of the moon’s or of the planets’ disks, all broken or
irregular lines of the surface are lost to the eye--the wholeness of
the sphere form subordinates and obliterates them all: so all the
failures and cross-purposes and disharmonies in nature and life do
not suffice to break or mar the vast general beneficence; the flowing
universal good is obvious above all.

So long as we think of the Eternal in terms of our experience--of
the knowledge of concrete things and beings which life discloses to
us--we are involved in contradictions. The ancients visualized their
gods and goddesses--Jove, Apollo, Minerva, Juno, and all the others.
Shall we do this for the Eternal and endow it with personality? Into
what absurdities this leads us! The unspeakable, the unseeable, the
unthinkable, the inscrutable, and yet the most obvious fact that life
yields to us! Nearer and more vital than our own bodies, than our own
parents, and yet eluding our grasp; vehemently denied, passionately
accepted, scoffed, praised, feared, worshiped, giving rise to deism,
atheism, pantheism, to idolatry, to persecution, to martyrdom, the
great Reality in which we live and move and have our being, and yet
for that very reason, because it is a part of us, or rather we are
a part of it, are we unable to define it or seize it as a reality
apart from ourselves. Our denial proves it; just as we use gravity
to overcome gravity, so we use God to deny God. Just as pure light
is of no color, but split up makes all the colors that we see, so
God divided and reflected makes all the half-gods we worship in
life. Green and blue and red and orange are not in the objects that
reflect them, but are an experience of the eye. We might with our
tongues deny the air, but our spoken words prove it. We cannot lift
ourselves over the fence by our own waistbands; no more can we by
searching find God, because He is not an object that has place and
form and limitations. He is the fact of the fact, the life of the
life, the soul of the soul, the incomprehensible, the sum of all
contradictions, the unit of all diversity; he who knows Him, knows
Him not; he who is without Him, is full of Him; turn your back upon
Him, then turn your back upon gravity, upon air, upon light. He
cannot be seen, but by Him all seeing comes. He cannot be heard, yet
by Him all hearing comes. He is not a being, yet apart from Him there
is no being--there is no apart from Him. We contradict ourselves when
we deny Him; it is ourselves we deny, and equally do we contradict
ourselves when we accept Him; it is something apart from ourselves
which we accept.

When half-gods go, says Emerson, the gods arrive. But half-gods
never go; we can house and entertain no other. What can we do with
the Infinite, the Eternal? We can only deal with things in time
and space--things that can be numbered and measured. What can we
do with the infinitely little, the infinitely great? All our gods
are half-gods made in our own image. No surer does the wax take the
imprint of the seal than does the Infinite take the imprint of our
finite minds. We create a Creator, we rule a Ruler, we invent a
heaven and hell; they are laws of our own being, seen externally.

How, then, shall we adjust our lives to the conception of a
universal, non-human, non-finite, algebraic God? They adjust
themselves. Do your work, deal justly, love rightness, make the most
of yourself, cherish the good, the beautiful, the true, practice the
Christian and the heathen virtues of soberness, meekness, reverence,
charity, unselfishness, justice, mercy, singleness of purpose; obey
the commandments, the Golden Rule, imbue your spirit with the wisdom
of all ages, for thus is the moral order of the world upheld.

The moral order and the intellectual order go hand in hand. Upon one
rests our relation to our fellows, upon the other rests our relation
to the cosmos.

We must know, and we must love; we must do, and we must enjoy; we
must warm judgment with feeling, and illume conscience with reason.

Admit, if we must, that we are in the grip of a merciless power,
that outside of our own kind there is nothing that shows us mercy
or consideration, that the Nature of which we form a part goes her
own way regardless of us; yet let us keep in mind that the very fact
that we are here and find life good is proof that the mercilessness
of Nature has not been inconsistent with our permanent well-being.
The fact that flowers bloom and fruit and grains ripen, that the
sun shines, that the rain falls, that food nourishes us, that love
warms us, that evolution has brought us thus far on our way, that
our line of descent has survived all the hazards of the geologic
ages, all point to the fact that we are on the winning side, that
our well-being is secured in the constitution of things. For all
the cataclysms and disruptions, the globe has ripened on the great
sidereal tree, and has become the fit abode of its myriad forms of
life. Though we may be run down and crushed by the great terrestrial
forces about us, just as we may be run down and crushed in the
street, yet these forces play a part in the activities that sustain
us; without them we should not be here to suffer at their hands.

Our life depends from moment to moment upon the air we breathe, yet
its winds and tempests may destroy us; it depends from day to day
upon the water we drink, yet its floods may sweep us away. We walk
and climb and work and move mountains by gravity, and yet gravity may
break every bone in our bodies. We spread our sails to the winds and
they become our faithful servitors, yet the winds may drive us into
the jaws of the breakers. How are our lives bound up and identified
with the merciless forces that surround us! Out of the heart of fate
comes our freedom; out of the reign of death comes our life; out of
the sea of impersonal energy come our personalities; out of the rocks
comes the soil that sustains us; out of the fiery nebulæ came the
earth with its apple-blossoms and its murmuring streams; out of the
earth came man. If the cosmic forces were not merciless, if they did
not go their own way, if they made exceptions for you and me, if in
them there _were_ variableness and even a shadow of turning, the vast
inevitable beneficence of Nature would vanish, and the caprice and
uncertainty of man take its place. If the sun were to stand still for
Joshua to conquer his enemies, there would be no further need for it
to resume its journey. What I am trying to get rid of is the pitying
and meddling Providence which our feeble faith and half-knowledge
have enthroned above us. We need stronger meat than the old theology
affords us. We need to contemplate the ways of a Providence that has
not been subsidized; we need encouragement in our attitude of heroic
courage and faith toward an impersonal universe; we need to have
our petty anthropomorphic views of things shaken up and hung out in
the wind to air. The universe is not a schoolroom on the Montessori
lines, nor a benevolent institution run on the most modern improved
plan. It is a work-a-day field where we learn from hard knocks, and
where the harvest, not too sure, waits upon our own right arm.




