CHAPTER VII.

LOCAL FATE OF MAN IN THE ASTRONOMIC UNIVERSE.

ACCORDING to the imagining of some speculative geologists, perhaps
this earth first floated in the abyss as a volume of vapor,
wreathing its enormous folds of mist in fantastic shapes as it was
borne along on the idle breath of law. Ages swept by, until this
stupendous fog ball was condensed into an ocean of fire, whose
billows heaved their lurid bosoms and reared their ashy crests
without a check, while their burning spray illuminated its track
around the sable vault. During periods which stagger computation,
this molten world was gradually cooled down; constant rivers wrung
from the densely swathing vapor poured over the heated mass and at
last submerged its crust in an immense sea. Then, for unknown
centuries, fire, water, and wind waged a Titanic war, that
imagination shudders to think of, jets of flame licking the stars,
massive battlements and columns of fire piled to terrific heights,
now the basin of the sea suddenly turned into a glowing caldron
and the atmosphere saturated with steam, again explosions hurling
mountains far into space and tearing the earth open in ghastly
rents to its very heart. At length the fire was partially subdued,
the peaceful deep glassed the sky in its bosom or rippled to the
whispers of the breeze, and from amidst the fertile slime and
mould of its sheltered floor began to sprout the first traces of
organic life, the germs of a rude species of marine vegetation.
Thousands of years rolled on. The world ocean subsided, the peaks
of mountains, the breasts of islands, mighty continents, emerged,
and slowly, after many tedious processes of preparation, a
gigantic growth of grass, every blade as large as our vastest oak,
shot from the soil, and the incalculable epoch of ferns commenced,
whose tremendous harvest clothed the whole land with a deep carpet
of living verdure. While unnumbered growths of this vegetation
were successively maturing, falling, and hardening into the dark
layers of inexhaustible coal beds, the world, one waving
wilderness of solemn ferns, swept in its orbit, voiceless and
silent, without a single bird or insect of any kind in all its
magnificent green solitudes, the air everywhere being heavily
surcharged with gases of the deadliest poison. Again innumerable
ages passed, and the era of mere botanic growths reaching its
limit, the lowest forms of animal life moved in the waters, the
earliest creatures being certain marine reptiles, worms, and bugs
of the sea. Then followed various untimed periods, during which
animal life rose by degrees from mollusk and jellyfish, by
plesiosaurus and pterodactyl, horrible monsters, hundreds of feet
in length, whose tramp crashed through the woods, or whose flight
loaded the groaning air, to the dolphin and the whale in the sea,
the horse and the lion on the land, and the eagle, the
nightingale, and the bird of paradise in the air. Finally, when
millions of aons had worn away, the creative process culminated in
Humanity, the crown and perfection of all; for God said, "Let us
make man in our own image;" and straightway Adam, with upright
form, kingly eye, and reason throned upon his brow, stood on the
summit of the world and gave names to all the races of creatures
beneath.1

At this stage two important questions arise. The first is, whether
man is the final type of being intended in the Divine plan for
this world, or whether he too is destined in his turn to be
superseded by a higher race, endowed with form, faculties, and
attributes transcending our conceptions, even as our own
transcended the ideas of the previous orders of existence.
Undoubtedly, had the ichthyosaurus, ploughing through the deep and
making it boil like a pot, or one of those mammoth creatures of
the antediluvian age who browsed half a dozen trees for breakfast,
crunched a couple of oxen for luncheon and a whole flock of sheep
for his dinner, been consulted on a similar problem, he would have
replied, without hesitation, "I exhaust the uses of the world.
What animal can there be superior to me? beyond a question, my
race shall possess the earth forever!" The mastodon could not know
any uses of nature except those he was fitted to experience, nor
imagine a being with the form and prerogatives of man. Therefore
he would not believe that the mastodon race would ever be
displaced by the human. We labor under the same disqualification
for judgment. There may be in the system of nature around us
adaptations, gifts, glories, as much higher than any we enjoy as
our noblest powers and privileges are in advance of those of the
tiger or the lark.

It is a remarkable fact that the mature states of the antediluvian
races correspond with the foetal states of the present races, and
that the foetal states of embryonic man are counterparts of the
mature states of the lower races now contemporaneous with him.
This great discovery of modern science, though perhaps destitute
of logical value, suggests to the imagination the thought that man
may be but the foetal state of a higher being, a regent
temporarily presiding here until the birth and inauguration of the
true king of the world, and destined himself to be born from the
womb of this world into the free light and air of the spirit
kingdom!

The resources of God are inexhaustible; and in the evolution of
his prearranged ages it may be that there will arise upon the
earth a race of beings of unforetold majesty, who shall disinter
the remnant bones and ponder the wrecked monuments of forgotten
man as we do those of the disgusting reptiles of the Saurian
epoch. But this is a mere conceit of possibility; and, so far as
the data for forming an opinion are in our hands, it is altogether
incredible. So far as appears, the adaptation between man and the
earth is exhaustive. He is able to subdue all her forces, reign
over all her provinces, enjoy all her delights, and gather into
his consciousness all her prophecies. And our practical conviction
is absolute that the race of men is the climax of being destined
for this earth, and that they will occupy its hospitable bosom
forever with their toils and their homes, their sports and their
graves.2

The other question is this: Was the subjection of the human race
to physical death a part of the Creator's original plan, or the
retributive result of a subsequent dislocation of that plan by
sin? a part of the great harmony of nature, or a discord marring
the happy destiny

1 Harris, The Pre Adamite Earth.

2 Agassiz says no higher creature than man is to be expected on
earth, because the capacities of the earthly plan of organic
creation are completed and exhausted with him. Introduction to
Study of Natural History, p. 57.


of man? Approaching this problem on grounds of science and reason
alone, there can be no hesitation as to the reply. There are but
two considerations really bearing upon the point and throwing
light upon it; and they both force us to the same conclusion.
First, it is a fact admitting no denial that death was the
predetermined natural fate of the successive generations of the
races that preceded man. Now, what conceivable reason is there for
supposing that man, constructed from the same elements, living
under the same organic laws, was exempt from the same doom? There
is not in the whole realm of science a single hint to that effect.
Secondly, the reproductive element an essential feature in the
human constitution, leading our kind to multiply and replenish the
earth is a demonstration that the office of death entered into
God's original plan of the world. For otherwise the earth at this
moment could not hold a tithe of the inhabitants that would be
demanding room. When God had permitted this world to roll in space
for awful ages, a lifeless globe of gas, fire, water, earth, and
then let it be occupied for incommensurable epochs more by snails,
vermin, and iguanodons, would he wind up the whole scene and
destroy it when the race of man, crowning glory of all, had only
flourished for a petty two thousand years? It is not credible. And
yet it must have been so unless it was decreed that the successive
generations should pass away and thus leave space for, the new
comers. We conclude, then, that it is the will of God and was in
the beginning that the human race shall possess the earth through
all the unknown periods of the future, the parents continually
passing off the stage in death as the children rise upon it to
maturity. We cannot discern any authority in those old traditions
which foretell the impending destruction of the world. On what
grounds are we to believe them? The great system of things is a
stable harmony. There is no wear or tear in the perfect machinery
of the creation, rolling noiseless in its blue bearings of ether.
It seems, comparatively speaking, to have just begun. Its
oscillations are self adjusted, and science prophesies for
humanity an illimitable career on this earthly theatre. The swift
melting of the elements and restoration of chaos is a mere heathen
whim or a poetic figment. It is the bards who sing,

"The earth shall shortly die. Her grave is dug. I see the worlds,
night clad, all gathering In long and dark procession. And the
stars, Which stand as thick as glittering dewdrops on The fields
of heaven, shall pass in blazing mist."

Such pictures are delusion winning the imagination, not truth
commanding the reason. In spite of all the Cassandra screams of
the priesthood, vaticinating universal ruin, the young old earth,
fresh every spring, shall remain under God's preserving
providence, and humanity's inexhaustible generations renewedly
reign over its kingdoms, forever. Plotinus said, "If God repents
having made the world, why does he defer its destruction? If he
does not yet repent, he never will, as being now accustomed to it,
and becoming through time more friendly to it."

3 Lucan says, "Our bones and the stars shall be mingled on one
funeral pyre." Communis mundo superest rogus, ossibus astra
Misturus.

But to receive such a good piece of poetry as veritable prevision
is surely a puerile error which a mature mind in the nineteenth
century should be ashamed to commit.

The most recently broached theory of the end of the world is that
developed from some remarkable speculations as to the composition
and distribution of force. The view is briefly this. All force is
derived from heat. All heat is derived from the sun.4 The
mechanical value of a cubic mile of sunlight at the surface of the
earth is one horse power for a third of a minute; at the sun it is
fifteen thousand horse power for a minute. Now, it is calculated
that enough heat is radiated from the sun to require for its
production the annual consumption of the whole surface of the sun
to the depth of from ten to twenty miles. Of course, ultimately
the fuel will be all expended; then the forces of the system will
expire, and the creation will die.5 This brilliant and sublime
theorem assumes, first, that the heat of the sun arises from
consumption of matter, which may not be true; secondly, that it is
not a self replenishing process, as it certainly may be. Some have
even surmised that the zodiacal light is an illuminated tornado of
stones showering into the sun to feed its tremendous
conflagration. The whole scheme is a fine toy, but a very faint
terror. Even if it be true, then we are to perish at last from
lack of fire, and not, as commonly feared, from its abundance!

The belief of mankind that a soul or ghost survives the body has
been so nearly universal as to appear like the spontaneous result
of an instinct. We propose to trace the history of opinions
concerning the physical destination of this disembodied spirit,
its connection with localities, to give the historical topography
of the future life.

The earliest conception of the abode of the dead was probably that
of the Hebrew Sheol or the Greek Hades, namely, the idea born from
the silence, depth, and gloom of the grave of a stupendous
subterranean cavern full of the drowsy race of shades, the
indiscriminate habitation of all who leave the land of the living.
Gradually the thought arose and won acceptance that the favorites
of Deity, peerless heroes and sages, might be exempt from this
dismal fate, and migrate at death to some delightful clime beyond
some far shore, there, amidst unalloyed pleasures, to spend
immortal days. This region was naturally located on the surface of
the earth, where the cheerful sun could shine and the fresh
breezes blow, yet in some untrodden distance, where the gauntlet
of fact had not smitten the sceptre of fable. The paltry portion
of this earth familiar to the ancients was surrounded by an
unexplored region, which their fancy, stimulated by the legends of
the poets, peopled with mythological kingdoms, the rainbow bowers
and cloudy synods of Olympus, from whose glittering peak the
Thunderer threw his bolts over the south; the Golden Garden of the

3 Ennead ii. lib. ix.: Contra Gnosticos, cap. 4.

4 Helmholtz, Edinburgh Phil. Msg., series iv. vol. xi.:
Interaction of Natural Forces.

5 Thomson, Ibid. Dec. 1854: Mechanical Energies of the Solar
System.


Hesperides, whose dragons lay on guard in the remote west; the
divine cities of Meru, whose encircling towers pierced the eastern
sky; the Banquet Halls of Ethiopia, gleaming through the fiery
desert; the fragrant Islands of Immortality, musical and luring in
the central ocean; the happy land of the Hyperboreans, beyond the
snowy summits of northern Caucasus:

"How pleasant were the wild beliefs That dwelt in legends old!
Alas! to our posterity Will no such tales be told. We know too
much: scroll after scroll Weighs down our weary shelves: Our only
point of ignorance Is centred in ourselves."

There was a belief among the Persians that Kaf, a mountain two
thousand miles high, formed a rim to the flat world and prevented
travellers from ever falling off.6 The fact that the earth is a
globe inhabited on all sides is a comparatively recent piece of
knowledge. So late as in the eighth century Pope Zachary accused
Virgilius, an Irish mathematician and monk, of heresy for
believing in the existence of antipodes.7 St. Boniface wrote to
the Pope against Virgilius; and Zachary ordered a council to be
held to expel him from the Church, for "professing, against God
and his own soul, so perverse and wicked a doctrine." To the
ancients all beyond the region they had traversed was an unknown
land, clothed in darkness, crowded with mystery and allurement.
Across the weltering wastes of brine, in a halcyon sea, the Hindu
placed the White Isle, the dwelling of translated and immortalized
men.8 Under the attraction of a mystic curiosity, well might the
old, wearied Ulysses say,

"Come, my friends, 'Tis not too late to seek a newer world. Push
off, and, sitting well in order, smite The sounding furrows; for
my purpose holds To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths Of all
the western stars, until I die. It may be that the gulfs will wash
us down: It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, And see the
great Achilles, whom we knew."

Decius Brutus and his army, as Florus relates, reaching the coast
of Portugal, where, for the first time, they saw the sun setting
in the blood tinged ocean, turned back their standards with horror
as they beheld "the huge corpse of ruddy gold let down into the
deep." The Phoenician traders brought intelligence to Greece of a
people, the Cimmerians, who dwelt on the borders of Hades in the
umbered realms of perpetual night. To the dying Roman, on the
farthest verge of the known horizon hovered a vision of Elysian
Fields. And the American

6 Adventures of Hatim Tai, p. 36, note.

7 Whewell, Hist. Inductive Sciences, vol. i. book iv. ch. i. sect.
7.

8 Wilford, Essays on the Sacred Isles, In Asiatic Researches,
vols. viii. xi.


Indian, sinking in battle or the chase, caught glimpses of happier
Hunting Grounds, whose woods trooped with game, and where the
arrows of the braves never missed, and there was no winter. There
was a pretty myth received among some of the ancient Britons,
locating their paradise in a spot surrounded by tempests, far in
the Western Ocean, and named Flath Innis, or Noble Island.9 The
following legend is illustrative. An old man sat thoughtful on a
rock beside the sea. A cloud, under whose squally skirts the
waters foamed, rushed down; and from its dark womb issued a boat,
with white sails bent to the wind, and hung round with moving
oars. Destitute of mariners, itself seemed to live and move. A
voice said, "Arise, behold the boat of heroes: embark, and see the
Green Isle of those who have passed away!" Seven days and seven
nights he voyaged, when a thousand tongues called out, "The Isle!
the Isle!" The black billows opened before him, and the calm land
of the departed rushed in light on his eyes. We are reminded by
this of what Procopius says concerning the conveyal of the soul of
the barbarian to his paradise. At midnight there is a knocking at
the door, and indistinct voices call him to come. Mysteriously
impelled, he goes to the sea coast, and there finds a frail, empty
wherry awaiting him. He embarks, and a spirit crew row him to his
destination.10

"He finds with ghosts His boat deep freighted, sinking to the edge
Of the dark flood, and voices hears, yet sees No substance; but,
arrived where once again His skiff floats free, hears friends to
friends Give lamentable welcome. The unseen Shore faint resounds,
and all the mystic air Breathes forth the names of parent,
brother, wife."

During that period of poetic credulity while the face of the earth
remained to a great extent concealed from knowledge, wherever the
Hebrew Scriptures were known went the cherished traditions of the
Garden of Eden from which our first parents were driven for their
sin. Speculation naturally strove to settle the locality of this
lost paradise. Sometimes it was situated in the mysterious bosom
of India; sometimes in the flowery vales of Georgia, where roses
and spices perfumed the gales; sometimes in the guarded recesses
of Mesopotamia. Now it was the Grand Oasis in the Arabian desert,
flashing on the wilted pilgrim, over the blasted and blazing
wastes, with the verdure of palms, the play of waters, the smell
and flavor of perennial fruits. Again it was at the equator, where
the torrid zone stretched around it as a fiery sword waving every
way so that no mortal could enter. In the "Imago Mundi," a Latin
treatise on cosmography written early in the twelfth century, we
read, "Paradise is the extreme eastern part of Asia, and is made
inaccessible by a wall of fire surrounding it and rising unto
heaven." At a later time the Canaries were thought to be the
ancient Elysium, and were accordingly named the Fortunate Isles.
Indeed, among the motives that animated

9 Macpherson, Introduction to the History of Great Britain and
Ireland, pp. 180-186.

10 Procopius, Gothica, lib. iv.


Columbus on his adventurous voyage no inferior place must be
assigned to the hope of finding the primeval seat of Paradise.11
The curious traveller, exploring these visionary spots one by one,
found them lying in the light of common day no nearer heaven than
his own natal home; and at last all faith in them died out when
the whole surface of the globe had been surveyed, no nook left
wherein romance and superstition might any longer play at hide and
seek.

Continuing our search after the local abode of the departed, we
now leave the surface of the earth and descend beneath it. The
first haunted region we reach is the realm of the Fairies, which,
as every one acquainted with the magic lore of old Germany or
England knows, was situated just under the external ground, and
was clothed with every charm poets could imagine or the heart
dream. There was supposed to be an entrance to this enchanted
domain at the Peak Cavern in Derbyshire, and at several other
places. Sir Walter Scott has collected some of the best legends
illustrative of this belief in his "History of Demonology." Sir
Gawaine, a famous knight of the Round Table, was once admitted to
dine, above ground, in the edge of the forest, with the King of
the Fairies:

"The banquet o'er, the royal Fay, intent
To do all honor to King Arthur's knight,
Smote with his rod the bank on which they leant,
And Fairy land flash'd glorious on the sight;
Flash'd, through a silvery, soft, translucent mist,
The opal shafts and domes of amethyst;
Flash'd founts in shells of pearl, which crystal walls
And phosphor lights of myriad hues redouble.
There, in the blissful subterranean halls,
When morning wakes the world of human trouble
Glide the gay race; each sound our discord knows,
Faint heard above, but lulls them to repose."

To this empire of moonlit swards and elfin dances, of jewelled
banks, lapsing streams, and enchanting visions, it was thought a
few favored mortals might now and then find their way. But this
was never an earnest general faith. It was a poetic superstition
that hovered over fanciful brains, a legendary dream that pleased
credulous hearts; and, with the other romance of the early world,
it has vanished quite away.

The popular belief of Jews, Greeks, Etruscans, Romans, Germans,
and afterwards of Christians, was that there was an immense world
of the dead deep beneath the earth, subdivided into several
subordinate regions. The Greenlanders believed in a separated
heaven and hell, both located far below the Polar Ocean. According
to the old classic descriptions of the under world, what a scene
of colossal gloom it is! Its atmosphere murmurs with a breath of
plaintive sighs. Its population, impalpable ghosts timidly
flitting at every motion,

11 Irving, Life of Columbus: Appendix on the Situation of the
Terrestrial Paradise. By far the most valuable book ever published
on this subject is that of Schulthess, Das Paradies, das irdische
und uberirdische historische, mythische und mystische, nebst einer
kritischen Revision der allgemelnen biblischen Geographie.


crowd the sombre landscapes in numbers surpassing imagination.
There Cocytus creeps to the seat of doom, his waves emitting
doleful wails. Styx, nine times enfolding the whole abode, drags
his black and sluggish length around. Charon, the slovenly old
ferryman, plies his noiseless boat to and fro laden with shadowy
passengers. Far away in the centre grim Pluto sits on his ebony
throne and surveys the sad subjects of his dreadful domain. By his
side sits his stolen and shrinking bride, Proserpine, her
glimmering brows encircled with a wreath of poppies. Above the
subterranean monarch's head a sable rainbow spans the infernal
firmament; and when, with lifted hand, he announces his decrees,
the applause given by the twilight populace of Hades is a rustle
of sighs, a vapor of tears, and a shudder of submission.

The belief in this dolorous kingdom was early modified by the
reception of two other adjacent realms, one of reward, one of
torture; even as Goethe says, in allusion to the current Christian
doctrine, "Hell was originally but one apartment: limbo and
purgatory were afterwards added as wings." Passing through Hades,
and turning in one direction, the spirit traveller would arrive at
Elysium or Abraham's bosom:

"To paradise the gloomy passage winds Through regions drear and
dismal, and through pain, Emerging soon in beatific blaze Of
light."

There the blessed ones found respite and peaceful joys in flowery
fields, pure breezes, social fellowship, and the similitudes of
their earthly pursuits. In this placid clime, lighted by its own
constellations, favored souls roamed or reposed in a sort of
ineffectual happiness. According to the pagans, here were such
heroes as Achilles, such sages as Socrates, to remain forever, or
until the end of the world. And here, according to the Christians,
the departed patriarchs and saints were tarrying expectant of
Christ's arrival to ransom them. Dante thus describes that great
event:

"Then he, who well my covert meaning knew,
Answer'd, Herein I had not long been bound,
When an All puissant One I saw march through,
With victory's radiant sign triumphal crown'd.
He led from us our Father Adam's shade,
Abel and Noah, whom God loved the most,
Lawgiving Moses, him who best obey'd,
Abraam the patriarch, royal David's ghost;
Israel, his father, and his sons, and her
Whom Israel served for, faithfully and long,
Rachel, with more, to bliss did He transfer:
No souls were saved before this chosen throng." 12

At the opposite extremity of Hades was supposed to be an opening
that led down into Tartarus, "a place made underneath all things,
so low and horrible that hell is its heaven." Here the old earth
giants, the looming Titans, lay, bound, transfixed with
thunderbolts, their

12 Parsons's trans. Dell' Inferno, canto iv. ii. 55-63.


mountainous shapes half buried in rocks, encrusting lava, and
ashes. Rivers of fire seam the darkness, whose borders are braided
with sentinel furies. On every hand the worst criminals,
perjurers, blasphemers, ingrates, groan beneath the pitiless
punishments inflicted on them without escape. Any realization of
the terrific scenery of this whole realm would curdle the blood.13
There were fabled entrances to the dread under world at Acherusia,
in Bithynia, at Avernus, in Campania, where Ulysses evoked the
dead and traversed the grisly abodes, through the Sibyl's cave at
Cuma, at Hermione, in Argolis, where the people thought the
passage below so near and easy that they neglected to give the
dying an obolus to pay ferriage to Charon, at Tanarus, the
southern most point of Peloponnesus, where Herakles went down and
dragged the three headed dog up into day, at the cave of
Trophonius, in Lebadea, and at several other places.

Similar conceptions have been embodied in the ecclesiastical
doctrine which has generally prevailed in Christendom. Locating
the scene in the hollow of the earth, thus has it been described
by Milton,

"A dungeon horrible on all sides round As one great furnace
flamed; yet from those flames No light, but rather darkness
visible, Served only to discover sights of woe, Regions of
anguish, doleful shades, where peace Nor hope can come, but
torture without end Still urges, and a fiery deluge fed With ever
burning sulphur unconsumed;" wherein, confined by adamantine
walls, the fallen angels and all the damned welter overwhelmed
with floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire. Shapes once
celestially fair and proud, but now scarred from battle and
darkened by sin into faded forms of haggard splendor, support
their uneasy steps over the burning marl. Everywhere shrieks and
moans resound, and the dusky vault of pandemonium is lighted by a
blue glare cast pale and dreadful from the tossings of the flaming
lake. This was hell, where the wicked must shrink and howl
forever. Etna, Vesuvius, Stromboli, Hecla, were believed to be
vent holes from this bottomless and living pit of fire. The famous
traveller, Sir John Maundeville, asserted that he found a descent
into hell "in a perilous vale" in the dominions of Prester John.
Many a cavern in England still bears the name of "Hell hole." In a
dialogue between a clerk and a master, preserved in an old Saxon
catechism, the following question and reply occur: "Why is the sun
so red when she sets?" "Because she looks down upon hell."
Antonius Rusca, a learned professor at Milan, in the year 1621,
published a huge quarto in five books, giving a detailed
topographical account of the interior of the earth, hell,
purgatory, and limbo.14 There is a lake in the south of Ireland in
which is an island containing a cavern said to open down into
hell. This cave

13 Descriptions of the sufferings of hell, according to the
popular notions at different periods, are given in the work
published at Weimar in 1817, Das Rad der ewigen Hollenqual. In den
Curiositaten der physisch literarisch artistisch historischen Vor
und Mitwelt, band vi. st. 2.

14 De Inferno et Statn Damonum ante Mundi Exitium.


is called St. Patrick's Purgatory, and the pretence obtained quite
general credit for upwards of five centuries. Crowds of pilgrims
visited the place. Some who had the hardihood to venture in were
severely pinched, beaten, and burned, by the priests within,
disguised as devils, and were almost frightened out of their wits
by the diabolical scenes they saw where

"Forth from the depths of flame that singed the gloom Despairing
wails and piercing shrieks were heard."

Several popes openly preached in behalf of this gross imposition;
and the Church virtually authorized it by receiving the large
revenues accruing from it, until at last outraged common sense
demanded its repudiation and suppression.15

Few persons now, as they walk the streets and fields, are much
disturbed by the thought that, not far below, the vivid lake of
fire and brimstone, greedily roaring for new food, heaves its
tortured surges convulsed and featured with souls. Few persons now
shudder at a volcanic eruption as a premonishing message freshly
belched from hell.16 In fact, the old belief in a local physical
hell within the earth has almost gone from the public mind of to
day. It arose from pagan myths and figures of speech based on
ignorant observation and arbitrary fancy, and with the growth of
science and the enlightenment of reason it has very extensively
fallen and faded away. No honest and intelligent inquirer into the
matter can find the slightest valid support for such a notion. It
is now a mere tradition, upheld by groundless authority. And yet
the dim shadow of that great idea of a subterranean hell which
once burned so fierce and lurid in the brain of Christendom still
vaguely haunts the modern world. The dogma still lies in the
prevalent creeds, and is occasionally dragged out and brandished
by fanatic preachers. The transmitted literature and influences of
the past are so full of it that it cannot immediately cease.
Accordingly, while the common understanding no longer grasps it as
a definite verity, it lingers in the popular fancy as a half
credible image. The painful attempts made now and then by some
antiquated or fanatical clergyman to compel attention to it and
belief in it as a tangible fact of science, as well as an
unquestionable revelation of Scripture, scarcely win a passing
notice, but provoke a significant smile. Father Passaglia, an
eminent Jesuit theologian, in 1856 published in Italy a work on
the Literality of Hell Fire and the Eternity of the Punishments of
the Damned. He says, "In this world fire burns by chemical
operations; but in hell it burns by the breath of the Lord!" The
learned and venerable Faber, a voluminous author and distinguished
English divine, published in the year 1851 a large octavo entitled
"The Many Mansions in the House of the Father," discussing with
elaborate detail the question as to the locality of the scenes
awaiting souls after death. His grand conclusion the unreasonableness
of which will be apparent without comment is as follows:
"The saints having first risen with Christ into the highest
regions of the air, out of reach of the dreadful heat, the
tremendous flood of fire hitherto detained inside the earth will
be let loose, and an awful conflagration rage till the whole
material globe is dissipated into sublimated particles. Then the
world will be formed anew, in three parts. First, there will be

15 Wright, St. Patrick's Purgatory: an Essay on the Legends of
Paradise, Hell, and Purgatory, current during the Middle Ages.

16 Patuzzi, De Sede inferni in Terris quarenda.


a solid central sphere of fire the flaming nucleus of Gehenna two
thousand miles in diameter. Secondly, there shall roll around this
central ball on all sides an ignited ocean of liquid fire two
thousand miles in depth, the peculiar residence of the wicked, the
sulphurous lake spoken of in the Apocalypse. Thirdly, around this
infernal sea a vast spherical arch will hang, a thousand miles
thick, a massive and unbroken shell, through which there are no
spiracles, and whose external surface, beautiful beyond
conception, becomes the heaven of the redeemed, where Christ
himself, perfect man as well as perfect God, fixes his residence
and establishes the local sovereignty of the Universal Archangel."
17 A comfortable thought it must be for the saints, as they roam
the flowery fields, basking in immortal bliss, to remember that
under the crust they tread, a soundless sea of fire is forever
plunging on its circular course, all its crimson waves packed with
the agonized faces of the damned as thick as drops! The whole
scheme is without real foundation. Science laughs at such a
theory. Its scriptural supports are either ethnic figments or
rhetorical tropes. Reason, recollecting the immateriality of the
soul, dissipates the ghastly dream beyond the possibility of
restoration to belief.

Following the historic locations of the abode of departed souls,
we next ascend from the interior of the earth, and above the
surface of the earth, into the air and the lofty realms of ether.
The ancient Caledonians fixed the site of their spirit world in
the clouds. Their bards have presented this conception in manifold
forms and with the most picturesque details. In tempests the
ghosts of their famous warriors ride on the thunderbolts, looking
on the earth with eyes of fire, and hurling lances of lightning.
They float over the summits of the hills or along the valleys in
wreaths of mist, on vapory steeds, waving their shadowy arms in
the moonlight, the stars dimly glimmering through their visionary
shapes. The Laplanders also placed their heaven in the upper air,
where the Northern Lights play. They regarded the auroral
streamers as the sport of departed spirits in the happy region to
which they had risen. Such ideas, clad in the familiar imagery
furnished by their own climes, would naturally be suggested to the
ignorant fancy, and easily commended to the credulous thoughts, of
the Celts and Finns. Explanation and refutation are alike
unnecessary.

Plutarch describes a theory held by some of the ancients locating
hell in the air, elysium in the moon.18 After death all souls are
compelled to spend a period in the region between the earth and
the moon, the wicked in severe tortures and for a longer time, the
good in a mild discipline soon purging away all their stains and
fitting them for the lunar paradise. After tarrying a season
there, they were either born again upon the earth, or transported
to the divine realm of the sun. Macrobius, too, says, "The
Platonists reckon as the infernal

17 Part iv. chap. ix. p. 417. Dr. Cumming (The End, Lect. X.)
teaches the doctrine of the literal resurrection of the flesh, and
the subsequent residence of the redeemed on this globe as their
eternal heaven under the immediate rule of Christ. Quite a full
detail of the historic and present belief in this scheme may be
found in the recent work of its earnest advocate, D. T. Taylor,
The Voice of the Church on the Coming of the Redeemer, or a
History of the Doctrine of the Reign of Christ on Earth.

18 In his Essay on the Face in the Orb of the Moon.


region the whole space between the earth and the moon."19 He also
adds, "The tropical signs Cancer and Capricorn are called the
gates of the sun, because there he meets the solstice and can go
no farther. Cancer is the gate of men, because by it is the
descent to the lower regions; Capricorn is the gate of gods,
because by it is a return for souls to the rank of gods in the
seat of their proper immortality." 20 The Manicheans taught that
souls were borne to the moon on leaving their bodies, and there
washed from their sins in water, then taken to the sun and further
cleansed in fire. They described the moon and sun as two splendid
ships prepared for transferring souls to their native country, the
world of perfect light in the heights of the creation.21

The ancient Hebrews thought the sky a solid firmament overarching
the earth, and supporting a sea of inexhaustible waters, beyond
which God and his angels dwelt in monopolized splendor. Eliphaz
the Temanite says, "Is not God in the height of heaven? And behold
the stars, how high they are; but he walketh upon the arch of
heaven!" And Job says, "He covereth the face of his throne, and
spreadeth his clouds under it. He hath drawn a circular bound upon
the waters to the confines of light and darkness." From the
dazzling realm above this supernal ocean all men were supposed,
until after the resurrection of Christ, to be excluded. But from
that time the belief gradually spread in Christendom that a way
was open for faithful souls to ascend thither. Ephraim the
Syrian,22 and Ambrose, located paradise in the outermost East on
the highest summit of the earth, stretching into the serene
heights of the sky. The ancients often conceived the universe to
form one solid whole, whose different provinces were accessible
from each other to gods and angels by means of bridges and golden
staircases. Hence the innumerable paradisal legends associated
with the mythic mountains of antiquity, such as Elborz, Olympus,
Meru, and Kaf. Among the strange legends of the Middle Age,
Gervase of Tilbury preserves the following one, illustrative of
this belief in a sea over the sky: "One Sunday the people of an
English village were coming out of church, a dark, gloomy day,
when they saw the anchor of a ship hooked to one of the
tombstones, the cable, tightly stretched, hanging down the air.
Presently they saw a sailor sliding down the rope to unfix the
anchor. When he had just loosened it the villagers seized hold of
him; and, while in their hands, he quickly died, as though he had
been drowned!" There is also a famous legend called "St. Brandon's
Voyage." The worthy saint set sail from the coast of Ireland, and
held on his way till he arrived at the moon, which he found to be
the location of hell. Here he saw Judas Iscariot in execrable
tortures, regularly respited, however, every week from Saturday
eve till Sunday eve!

The thought so entirely in accordance with the first impression
made by the phenomenon of the night sky on the ignorant senses and
imagination that the stars are set in a firm revolving dome, has
widely prevailed; and the thought that heaven lies beyond that
solid arch, in the unknown space is a popular notion lingering
still. The scriptural image declaring that the convulsions of the
last day will shake the stars from their sockets in the

19 In Somnium Scipionis, lib. i. cap. xi.

20 Ibid. cap. xii.

21 Augustine, De Natura Boni, cap. xliv.

22 De Paradiso Eden, Sermo I.


heavenly floor, "as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs when she
is shaken of a mighty wind," although so obviously a figure of
speech, has been very generally credited as the description of a
literal fact yet to occur. And how many thousands of pious
Christians have felt, with the sainted Doddridge,

"Ye stars are but the shining dust Of my Divine abode,  The
pavement of those heavenly courts Where I shall see my God!"

The universal diffusion in civilized nations of the knowledge that
the visible sky is no substantial expanse, but only an illimitable
void of space hung with successive worlds, has by no means
banished the belief, originally based on the opposite error, in a
physical heaven definitely located far overhead, the destination
of all ransomed souls. This is undoubtedly the most common idea at
the present time. An English clergyman once wrote a book,
afterwards translated into German, to teach that the sun is hell,
and that the black spots often noticed on the disk of that orb are
gatherings of damned souls.23 Isaac Taylor, on the contrary,
contends with no little force and ingenuity that the sun may be
the heaven of our planetary system, a globe of immortal
blessedness and glory.24 The celebrated Dr. Whiston was convinced
that the great comet which appeared in his day was hell. He
imagined it remarkably fitted for that purpose by its fiery vapor,
and its alternate plunges, now into the frozen extremity of space,
now into the scorching breath of the sun. Tupper fastens the
stigma of being the infernal prison house on the moon, in this
style:

"I know thee well, O Moon, thou cavern'd realm, Sad satellite,
thou giant ash of death, Blot on God's firmament, pale home of
crime, Scarr'd prison house of sin, where damned souls Feed upon
punishment: Oh, thought sublime, That amid night's black deeds,
when evil prowls Through the broad world, thou, watching sinners
well, Glarest o'er all, the wakeful eye of Hell!"

Bailey's conception is the darker birth of a deeper feeling:

"There is a blind world, yet unlit by God, Rolling around the
extremest edge of light, Where all things are disaster and decay:
That black and outcast orb is Satan's home That dusky world man's
science counteth not Upon the brightest sky. He never knows How
near it comes to him; but, swathed in clouds, As though in plumed
and palled state, it steals, Hearse like and thief like, round the
universe, Forever rolling, and returning not,

23 Swinden, On the Nature and Location of Hell.

24 Physical Theory of Another Life, chap. xvi.


Robbing all worlds of many an angel soul,  With its light hidden
in its breast, which burns With all concentrate and superfluent
woe."

In the average faith of individuals to day, heaven and hell exist
as separate places located somewhere in the universe; but the
notions as to the precise regions in which they lie are most vague
and ineffectual when compared with what they formerly were.

The Scandinavian kosmos contained nine worlds, arranged in the
following order:  Gimle, a golden region at the top of the
universe, the eternal residence of Allfather and his chosen ones;
next below that, Muspel, the realm of the genii of fire; Asgard,
the abode of the gods in the starry firmament; Vindheim, the home
of the air spirits; Manheim, the earth, or middle realm;
Jotunheim, the world of the giants, outside the sea surrounding
the earth; Elfheim, the world of the black demons and dwarfs, just
under the earth's surface; Helheim, the domain of the goddess of
death, deep within the earth's bosom; and finally, Niflheim, the
lowest kingdom of horror and pain, at the very bottom of the
creation. The Buddhist kosmos, in the simplest form, as some of
them conceived it, was composed of a series of concentric spheres
each separated from the next by a space, and successively
overarching and under arching each other with circular layers of
brightness above and blackness beneath; each starry hollow
overhead being a heaven inhabited by gods and blessed souls, each
lurid hollow underfoot being a hell filled with demons and wicked
souls in penance. The Arabian kosmos, beginning with the earth,
ascended to a world of water above the firmament, next to a world
of air, then to a world of fire, followed in rising order by an
emerald heaven with angels in the form of birds, a heaven of
precious stones with angels as eagles, a hyacinth heaven with
angels as vultures, a silver heaven with angels as horses, a
golden and a pearl heaven each peopled with angel girls, a crystal
heaven with angel men, then two heavens full of angels, and
finally a great sea without bound, each sphere being presided over
by a chief ruler, the names of all of whom were familiar to the
learned Arabs. The Syrian kosmos corresponded closely to the
foregoing. It soared up the mounting steps of earth, water, air,
fire, and innumerable choruses successively of Angels, Archangels,
Principalities, Powers, Virtues, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubim
and Seraphim, unto the Expanse whence Lucifer fell; afterwards to
a boundless Ocean; and lastly to a magnificent Crown of Light
filling the uppermost space of all.25

It is hard for us to imagine the aspects of the universe to the
ancients and the impressions it produced in them, all seemed so
different then, in the dimness of crude observation, from the
present appearance in the light of astronomic science. Anaximander
held that the earth was of cylindrical form, suspended in the
middle of the universe and surrounded by envelopes of water, air,
and fire, as by the coats of an onion, but that the exterior
stratum was broken up and collected into masses, and thus
originated the sun, moon, and stars, which are carried around by
the three spheres in which they are fixed.26 Many of the Oriental
nations believed the planets to be animated beings, conscious
divinities, freely marching around their high realms, keeping
watch and ward over the creation, smiling their favorites on to
happy fortune,

25 Dupuis, L'Origine de tous les Cultes, Planche No. 21.

26 Arist. de Coel. ii. 13.


fixing their baleful eyes and shedding disastrous eclipse on
"falling nations and on kingly lines about to sink forever." This
belief was cherished among the later Greek philosophers and Roman
priests, and was vividly held by such men as Philo, Origen, and
even Kepler. It is here that we are to look for the birth of
astrology, that solemn lore, linking the petty fates of men with
the starry conjunctions, which once sank so deeply into the mind
of the world, but is now wellnigh forgotten:

"No more of that, ye planetary lights! Your aspects, dignities,
ascendancies, Your partite quartiles, and your plastic trines, And
all your heavenly houses and effects, Shall meet no more devout
expounders here.

The joy of Jupiter, The exaltation of the Dragon's head, The sun's
triplicity and glorious Day house on high, the moon's dim
detriment, And all the starry inclusions of all signs, Shall rise,
and rule, and pass, and no one know That there are spirit rulers
of all worlds, Which fraternize with earth, and, though unknown,
Hold in the shining voices of the stars Communion on high and
everywhere."

The belief that the stars were living beings, combining with the
fancy of an unscientific time, gave rise to the stellar apotheosis
of heroes and legendary names, and was the source of those
numerous asterisms, out lined groups of stars, which still bedeck
the skies and form the landmarks of celestial topography. It was
these and kindred influences that wrought together

"To make the firmament bristle with shapes Of intermittent motion,
aspect vague, And mystic bearings, which o'ercreep the earth,
Keeping slow time with horrors in the blood;" the Gorgon's
petrific Head, the Bear's frightful form, Berenice's streaming
Hair, the curdling length of Ophiuchus, and the Hydra's horrid
shape. The poetic eye of old religion saw gods in the planets
walking their serene blue paths,

"Osiris, Bel, Odin, Mithras, Brahm, Zeus, Who gave their names to
stars which still roam round The skies all worshipless, even from
climes Where their own altars once topp'd every hill."

By selected constellations the choicest legends of the antique
world are preserved in silent enactment. On the heavenly sea the
Argonautss keep nightly sail towards the Golden Fleece. There
Herakles gripes the hydra's heads and sways his irresistible club;
Arion with his harp rides the docile Dolphin; the Centaur's right
hand clutches the Wolf; the Hare flees from the raging eye and
inaudible bark of the Dog; and space crawls with the horrors of
the Scorpion.

In consequence of the earth's revolution in its orbit, the sun
appears at different seasons to rise in connection with different
groups of stars. It seems as if the sun made an annual journey
around the ecliptic. This circuit was divided into twelve parts
corresponding to the months, and each marked by a distinct
constellation. There was a singular agreement in regard to these
solar houses, residences of the gods, or signs of the zodiac,
among the leading nations of the earth, the Persians, Chaldeans,
Hebrews, Syrians, Hindus, Chinese, Arabians, Japanese, Siamese,
Goths, Javanese, Mexicans, Peruvians, and Scandinavians. 27 Among
the various explanations of the origin of these artificial signs,
we will notice only the one attributed by Volney to the Egyptians.
The constellations in which the sun successively appeared from
month to month were named thus: at the time of the overflow of the
Nile, the stars of inundation, (Aquarius;) at the time of
ploughing, stars of the ox, (Taurus;) when lions, driven forth by
thirst, appeared on the banks of the Nile, stars of the lion,
(Leo;) at the time of reaping, stars of the sheaf, (Virgo;) stars
of the lamb and two kids, (Aries,) when these animals were born;
stars of the crab, (Cancer,) when the sun, touching the tropic,
returned backwards; stars of the wild goat, (Capricorn,) when the
sun reached the highest point in his yearly track; stars of the
balance, (Libra,) when days and nights were in equilibrium; stars
of the scorpion, (Scorpio,) when periodical simooms burned like
the venom of a scorpion; and so on of the rest.28

The progress of astronomical science from the wild time when men
thought the stars were mere spangles stuck in a solid expanse not
far off, to the vigorous age when Ptolemy's mathematics spanned
the scope of the sky; from the first reverent observations of the
Chaldean shepherds watching the constellations as gods, to the
magnificent reasonings of Copernicus dashing down the innumerable
crystalline spheres, "cycle on epicycle, orb on orb," with which
crude theorizers had crowded the stellar spaces; from the uncurbed
poetry of Hyginus writing the floor of heaven over with romantic
myths in planetary words, to the more wondrous truth of Le Verrier
measuring the steps from nimble Mercury flitting moth like in the
beard of the sun to dull Neptune sagging in his cold course twenty
six hundred million miles away; from the half inch orb of
Hipparchus's naked eye, to the six feet speculum of Rosse's awful
tube; from the primeval belief in one world studded around with
skyey torch lights, to the modern conviction of octillions of
inhabited worlds all governed by one law constitutes the most
astonishing chapter in the history of the human mind. Every step
of this incredible progress has had its effect in modifying the
conceptions of man's position and importance in nature and of the
connection of his future fate with localities. Of old, the entire
creation was thought to lie pretty much within the comprehension
of man's unaided senses, and man himself was supposed to be the
chief if not the sole object of Divine providence. The deities
often came down in incarnations and mingled with their favorites
and rescued the earth from evils. Every thing was anthropomorphized.
Man's relative magnitude and power were believed to be such
that he fancied during an eclipse that, by screams, the crashing
of gongs, and magic rites, he could scare away the monsters

27 Pigott, Scandinavian Mythology, chap. i. p. 31.

28 Volney, Ruins, chap. xxii. sect. 3. Maurice, Hist. Hindostan,
vol. i. pp. 145-147.


who were swallowing the sun or the moon. Meteors shooting through
the evening air the Arabs believed were fallen angels trying to
get back into heaven but hurled from the crystal battlements by
the flaming lances of the guardian watchers. Then the gazer saw
"The top of heaven full of fiery shapes, Of burning cressets."

Now the student contemplates an abyss swarming with orbs each out
weighing millions of our earth. Then they read their nativities in
the planets and felt how great must be the state overwatched by
such resplendent servitors. Now "They seek communion with the stars
that they may know How petty is this ball on which they come and go."

Then the hugest view of the extent of the universal sphere was
that an iron mass would require nine days and nights to plunge
from its Olympian height to its Tartarean depth. Now we are told
by the masters of science that there are stars so distant that it
would take their light, travelling at a rate of nearly twelve
million miles a minute, thirty million years to reach us. The
telescope has multiplied the size of the creation by hundreds of
millions, and the grandest conception of the stellar universe
possible to the most capacious human mind probably bears no larger
proportion to the fact than an orrery does to the solar system.
Our earth is a hundred million miles from the sun, whose diameter
is so monstrous that a hundred such orbs strung in a straight line
would occupy the whole distance. The sun, with all his attendant
planets and moons, is sweeping around his own centre supposed by
some to be Alcyone at the rate of four hundred thousand miles a
day; and it will take him eighteen million years to complete one
revolution. Our firmamental cluster contains, it has been
calculated, in round numbers about twenty million stars. There are
many thousands of such nebula visible, some of them capable of
packing away in their awful bosoms hundreds of thousands of our
galaxies. Measure off the abysmal space into seven hundred
thousand stages each a hundred million miles wide, and you reach
the nearest fixed stars, for instance, the constellation of the
Lyre. Multiply that inconceivable distance by hundreds of
thousands, and still you will discern enormous sand banks of stars
obscurely glittering on the farthest verge of telescopic vision.
And even all this is but a little corner of the whole.

Coleridge once said, "To some infinitely superior Being, the whole
universe may be as one plain, the distance between planet and
planet being only as the pores in a grain of sand, and the spaces
between system and system no greater than the intervals between
one grain and the grain adjacent." One of the vastest thoughts yet
conceived by any mortal mind is that of turning the universe from
a mechanical to a chemical problem, as illustrated by Prof.
Lovering.29 Assuming the acknowledged truths in physics, that the
ultimate particles of matter never actually touch each other, and
that water in evaporating expands into eighteen hundred times its
previous volume, he demonstrates that the porosity of our solar
system is no greater than that of steam. "The porosity of granite
or gold may be equal to that of steam,

29 Cambridge Miscellany, 1842.


the greater density being a stronger energy in the central
forces." And the conclusion is scientifically reached that "the
vast interval between the sun and Herschel is an enormous pore,
while the invisible distance that separates the most closely
nestled atoms is a planetary space, a stupendous gulf when
compared with the little spheres between which it flows." Thus we
may think of the entire universe as a living organism, like a
ripening orange, its component atoms worlds, the sidereal
movements its vital circulation.

Surely, when a man looks up from his familiar fields and household
roof to such incommensurable objects as scientific imagination
reveals in the sparkling sword handle of Perseus and the hazy
girdle of Andromeda, overpowering humility will fill his breast,
an unutterable solemnity will "fall on him as from the very
presence chamber of the Highest." And will he not, when he
contemplates the dust like shoals of stars, the shining films of
firmaments, that retreat and hover through all the boundless
heights, the Nubecula nebula, looking like a bunch of ribbons
disposed in a true love's knot, that most awful nebula whirled
into the shape and bearing the name of the Dumb Bell, the Crab
nebula, hanging over the infinitely remote space, a sprawling
terror, every point holding millions of worlds,  thinking of these
all transcendent wonders, and then remembering his own
inexpressible littleness, how that the visible existence of his
whole race does not occupy a single tick of the great Sidereal
Clock, will he not sink under helpless misgivings, will he not
utterly despair of immortal notice and support from the King of
all this? In a word, how does the solemn greatness of man, the
supposed eternal destiny of man, stand affected by the modern
knowledge of the vastness of creation? Regarding the immensities
receding over him in unfathomable abysses bursting with dust heaps
of suns, must not man be dwarfed into unmitigated contempt, his
life and character rendered absolutely insignificant, the utmost
span of his fortunes seeming but as the hum and glitter of an
ephemeron in a moment's sunshine? Doubtless many a one has at
times felt the stupendous truths of astronomy thus palsying him
with a crushing sense of his own nothingness and burying him in
fatalistic despair. Standing at night, alone, beneath the august
dome studded from of old with its ever blazing lights, he gazes up
and sees the innumerable armies of heaven marshalled forth above
him in the order and silence of their primeval pomp. Peacefully
and forever they shine there. In nebula separated from nebula by
trillions of leagues, plane beyond plane, they stretch and glitter
to the feet of God. Falling on his knees, he clasps his hands in
speechless adoration, but feels, with an intolerable ache of the
heart, that in this infinitude such an one as he can be of no
consequence whatever. He waits passively for the resistless round
of fate to bear him away, ah, whither? "Conscious that he dwells
but as an atom of dust on the outskirts of a galaxy of
inconceivable glory" moving through eternity in the arms of law,
he becomes, in his own estimation, an insensible dot lost in the
uncontainable wilderness of firmamental systems. But this
conclusion of despair is a mistake as sophistical as it is
injurious, as baseless in reality as it is natural in seeming. Its
antidote and corrective are found in a more penetrative thought
and juster understanding of the subject, which will preserve the
greatness and the immortal destiny of man unharmed despite the
frowning vastitudes of creation. This will appear from fairly
weighing the following considerations.

In the first place, the immensity of the material universe is an
element entirely foreign to the problem of human fate. When
seeking to solve the question of human destiny, we are to study
the facts and prophecies of human nature, and to conclude
accordingly. It is a perversion of reason to bring from far an
induction of nebular magnitudes to crush with their brute weight
the plain indications of the spirit of humanity. What though the
number of telescopic worlds were raised to the ten thousandth
power, and each orb were as large as all of them combined would
now be? what difference would that make in the facts of human
nature and destiny? It is from the experience going on in man's
breast, and not from the firmaments rolling above his head, that
his importance and his final cause are to be inferred. The human
mind, heart, and conscience, thought, love, faith, and piety,
remain the same in their intrinsic rank and capacities whether the
universe be as small as it appeared to the eyes of Abraham or as
large as it seems in the cosmical theory of Humboldt. Thus the
spiritual position of man really remains precisely what it was
before the telescope smote the veils of distance and bared the
outer courts of being.

Secondly, if we do bring in the irrelevant realms of science to
the examination of our princely pretensions, it is but fair to
look in both directions. And then what we lose above we gain
below. The revelations of the microscope balance those of the
telescope. The animalcula magnify man as much as the nebulsa
belittle him. We cannot help believing that He who frames and
provides for those infinitesimal animals quadrillions of whom
might inhabit a drop of water or a leaf and have ample room and
verge enough, and whose vital and muscular organization is as
complicated and perfect as that of an elephant, will much more
take care of man, no matter how numerous the constellations are.
Let us see how far scientific vision can look beneath ourselves as
the question is answered by a few well known facts. In each drop
of human blood there are three million vitalized corpuscular
disks. Considering all the drops made up in this way, man is a
kosmos, his veins galaxies through whose circuits these red
clustering planets perform their revolutions. How small the
exhaling atoms of a grain of musk must be, since it will perfume
every breath of air blowing through a hall for a quarter of a
century, and then not be perceptibly diminished. An ounce of gold
may be reduced into four hundred and thirty two billion parts,
each microscopically visible.30 There is a deposit of slate in
Bohemia covering forty square miles to the depth of eight feet,
each cubic inch of which Ehrenberg found by microscopic
measurement to contain forty one thousand million infusorial
animals. Sir David Brewster says, "A cubic inch of the Bilin
polieschiefer slate contains above one billion seven hundred and
fifty thousand millions of distinct individuals of Galionella
ferruginea."31 It is a fact that the size of one of these insects
as compared with the bulk of a man is virtually as small as that
of a man compared with the whole scheme of modern astronomy. Thus,
if the problem of our immortal consequence is prejudicially
vitiated by contemplating the immense extremity of vision, it is
rectified by gazing on the opposite extremity. If man justly
scrutinized, without comparisons, is fitted for and worthy of
eternity,

30 Lardner, Hand Book of Natural Philosophy, book i. chap. v.31
More Worlds than One, ch. viii. note 3.


no foreign facts, however magnificent or minute, should alter our
judgment from the premises.

Thirdly, is it not evident that man's greatness keeps even pace
along the scale of magnitude with the widening creation, since it
is his mind that sees and comprehends how wondrous the dimensions
of the universe are? The number of stars and the limits of space
are not more astounding than it is that he should be capable of
knowing such things, enumerating and staking them off. When man
has measured the distance and weighed the bulk of Sirius, it is
more appropriate to kneel in amazement before the inscrutable
mystery of his genius, the irrepressible soaring of his soul, than
to sink in despair under the swinging of those lumps of dirt in
their unapproachable spheres because they are so gigantic! The
appearance of the creation to man is not vaster than his
perception of it. They are exactly correlated by the very terms of
the statement. As the astronomic world expands, the astronomer's
mind dilates and must be as large as it in order to contain it in
thought. What we lose in relative importance from the enlargement
of the boundaries of the universe we gain from the new revelation
of our capacities that is made through these transcendent
achievements of our science. That we are favorites of the Creator
and destined for immortal glories is therefore logically and
morally just as credible after looking through Herschel's forty
feet reflector and reading La Place's Mecanique Celeste as it
would be were this planet, suspended in a hollow dome, the
entirety of material being.

Furthermore, we can reason only from the data we have; and, doing
that, we should conclude, from the intrinsic and incomparable
superiority of spirit to matter, that man and his kindred
scattered in families over all the orbs of space were the especial
objects of the infinite Author's care. They are fitted by their
filial attributes to commune with Him in praise and love. They
know the prodigious and marvellous works of mechanical nature;
mechanical nature knows nothing. Man can return his Maker's
blessing in voluntary obedience and thanks; matter is inanimate
clay for the Potter's moulding. Turning from the gleaming
wildernesses of star land to the intellect and heart, appreciating
the infinite problems and hopes with which they deal and aspire,
we feel the truth expressed by Wordsworth in his tremendous lines:

"I must, aloft ascending, breathe in worlds To which the heaven of
heavens is but a veil. Not chaos, darkest pit of Erebus, Nor aught
of blinder vacancy, scoop'd out By help of dreams, can breed such
fear and awe As fall upon us often when we look Into our minds,
into the mind of man."

Is not one noble thought of truth, one holy emotion of love, one
divine impulse of devotion, better than a whole planet of mud, a
whole solar system of gas and dust? Who would not rather be the
soul that gauges the deeps, groups the laws, foretells the
movements, of the universe, writing down in a brief mathematical
formula a complete horoscope of the heavens as they will appear on
any given night thousands of years hence, than to be all that
array of swooping systems? To think the world is to be superior to
the world. That which appreciates is akin to that which makes; and
so we are the Creator's children, and these crowding nebula,
packed with orbs as thick as the ocean beach with sands, are the
many mansions of the House fitted up for His abode and ours. An
only prince would be of more consideration than a palace, although
its foundation pressed the shoulders of Serpentarius, its turret
touched the brow of Orion, and its wings reached from the Great
Bear to the Phoenix. So a mind is of more importance than the
material creation, and the moral condition of a man is of greater
moment than the aspect of stellar firmaments.

Another illustration of the truth we are considering is to be
drawn from the idealist theory, to which so many of the ablest
thinkers of the world have given their devoted adhesion, that
matter is merely phenomenal, no substantial entity, but a
transient show preserved in appearance for some ulterior cause,
and finally, at the withdrawal or suspension of God's volition, to
return into annihilating invisibility as swiftly as a flash of
lightning. The solid seeming firmaments are but an exertion of
Divine force projected into vision to serve for a season as a
theatre for the training of spirits. When that process is
complete, in the twinkling of an eye the phantasmal exhibition of
matter will disappear, leaving only the ideal realm of
indestructible things, souls with their inward treasures remaining
in their native sphere of the infinite, while the outward universe
"Doth vanish like a ghost before the sun."

The same practical result may also be reached by a different path,
may be attained by the road of physics as well as by that of
transcendental metaphysics. For Newton has given in his Principia
a geometrical demonstration of the infinite compressibility of
matter. All the worlds, therefore, that cluster in yon swelling
vault can be condensed into a single globe of the size of a
walnut; and then, on that petty lump of apparent substance, the
enfranchised soul might trample in an exultation of magnanimous
scorn upon the whole universe of earths, and soar through its own
unlimited dominion, Monarch of Immortality, the snatched glory of
shrunken firmaments flashing from its deathless wings.

Finally, a proper comprehension of the idea of God will neutralize
the skepticism and despondency sometimes stealthily nourished or
crushingly impressed by contemplations of the immensity of nature.
If one, from regarding the cold and relentless mechanism of the
surrounding system, tremble for fear of there being no kind
Overruler, let him gaze on the warm beauty that flushes the
countenance of day, the mystic meditativeness that hangs on the
pensive and starry brow of night, let him follow the commanding
instincts of his own heart, and he will find himself clinging in
irresistible faith and filial love to the thought of an infinite
Father. If still the atheistic sentiment obtrudes upon him and
oppresses him, let him observe how every spot of immensity whereon
the eye of science has fallen is crowded with unnumbered amazing
examples of design, love, beneficence, and he will perceive that
the irrefragable lines of argument drawn through the boundless
spaces of creation light up the stupendous contour of God and show
the expression of his features to be love. It seems as though any
man acquainted with the truths and magnitudes of astronomy, who,
after seeing the star strewn abysses, would look in his mirror and
ask if the image reflected there is that of the greatest being in
the universe, would need nothing further to convince him that a
God, the Creator, Preserver, Sovereign, lives. And then, if,
mistakenly judging from his own limitations, he thinks that the
particular care of all the accumulated galaxies of worlds, every
world perhaps teeming with countless millions of conscious
creatures, would transcend the possibilities even of God, a
moment's reflection will dissolve that sophistry in the truth that
God is infinite, and that to his infinite attributes globule and
globe are alike, the oversight of the whole and of each part a
matter of instantaneous and equal ease. Still further: if this
abstract truth be insufficient to support faith and bestow peace,
what will he say to the visible fact that all the races of beings,
and all the clusters of worlds, from the motes in a sunbeam to the
orbs of the remotest firmament, are now taken care of by Divine
Providence? God now keeps them all in being and order, unconfused
by their multiplicity, unoppressed by their magnitude, and not for
an instant forgetting or neglecting either the mightiest or the
least. Morbidly suspicious, perversely incredulous, must be the
mind that denies, since it is so now in this state, that it may be
so as well in the other state and forever! Grasping the conception
of one God, who creates, rules, and loves all, man may
unpresumptuously feel himself to be a child of the Infinite and a
safe heir of immortality. Looking within and without, and soaring
in fancy amidst the blue and starry altitudes interspersed with
blazing suns and nebulous oceans, he may cry, from a sober
estimate of all the experimental and phenomenal facts within his
reach,

"Even here I feel,
Among these mighty things, that as I am
I am akin to God; that I am part
Of the use universal, and can grasp
Some portion of that reason in the which
The whole is ruled and founded; that I have
A spirit nobler in its cause and end,
Lovelier in order, greater in its powers,
Than all these bright and swift immensities."

Perhaps the force of these arguments may be better condensed and
expressed by help of an individual illustration. While the pen is
forming these words, the announcement of the death of Dr. Kane
saddens the world. Alas that the gallant heart no longer beats,
the story of whose noble generosity and indomitable prowess has
just thrilled the dull nations of men of meaner mould! Who even
though standing before a telescope under the full architecture of
the heavens can believe that that maiden soul of heroism and
devotion is now but an extinguished spark, that the love, honor,
intelligence, self sacrificing consecration which enswathed him as
with a saintly halo have all gone out? Turning from that pale
form, stretched on the couch of death in fatal Cuba, through the
receding gulfs of space where incomputable systems of worlds are
wheeling on their eternal courses, and then looking back again
from the noiseless glitter and awful bulk of the creation, do you
despair of the immortal consequence of the poor sufferer whose
fleshly moorings to existence are successively loosening at every
gasp? Ah, remember that Matter and the Soul are not alone! Far
above that clay bound, struggling soul, and far above those
measureless, firmamental masses, is God, the Maker of them both,
and the Lover of his child. Glancing in His omniscience down upon
that human death couch, around which affectionate prayers are
floating from every part of the earth, and from whose pallid
occupant confiding sighs are rising to His ear, He sees the
unutterable mysteries of yearning thought, emotion, and power,
which are the hidden being of man, and which so ally the filial
spirit to the parent Divinity. As beneath His gaze the faithful
soul of Elisha Kane slowly extricating itself from its overwrought
tabernacle, and also extricating itself from the holy network of
heart strings which sixty millions of men speaking one speech have
flung around him, if haply so they might retain him to earth to
take their love and waiting honors rises into the invisible,
seeking to return, bearing its virgin purity with it, to the bosom
of God, will He overlook it, or carelessly spurn it into night,
because the banks of stars are piled up so thick and high that
they absorb His regards? My soul, come not thou into the counsels
of them that think so! It should not be believed though astronomy
were a thousand times astronomy. But it shall rather be thought
that, ere now, the brave American has discovered the Mariner whom
he sought, though sailing on far other seas, where there is no
destroying winter and no need of rescue.

In association with the measureless spaces and countless worlds
brought to light by astronomic science naturally arises the
question whether the other worlds are, like our earth, peopled
with responsible intelligences. In ancient times the stars were
not generally thought to be worlds, but to be persons, genii or
gods. At the dawn of creation "the morning stars sang together;"
that is, "the sons of God shouted for joy." The stars were the
living army of "Jehovah of hosts." At the time when the
theological dogmas now prevalent were first conceived, the
greatness and glory of the universe were supposed to centre on
this globe. The fortunes of man wellnigh absorbed, it was
imagined, the interest of angels and of God. The whole creation
was esteemed a temporary theatre for the enactment of the sublime
drama of the fall and redemption of man. The entire heavens with
all their host were thought to revolve in satellite dependence
around this stationary and regal planet. For God to hold long,
anxious, repeated councils to devise means to save us, was not
deemed out of keeping with the relative dignity of the earth and
the human race. But at length the progress of discovery put a
different aspect on the physical conditions of the problem. The
philosopher began to survey man's habitation and history, and to
estimate man's comparative rank and destiny, not from the stand
point of a solitary planet dating back only a few thousand years,
but in the light of millions of centuries of duration and from a
position among millions of crowded firmaments whence our sun
appears as a dim and motionless star. This new vision of science
required a new construction of theology. The petty and monstrous
notions of the ignorant superstition of the early age needed
rectification. In the minds of the wise and devout few this was
effected; but with the great majority the two sets of ideas
existed side by side in unreconciled confusion and contradiction,
as they even continue to do unto this day.

When it came to be believed that the universe teemed with suns,
moons, and planets, composed of material substances, subject to
day and night, and various other laws and changes, like our own
abode, it was natural to infer that these innumerable worlds were
also inhabited by rational creatures akin to ourselves and capable
of worshipping God. Numerous considerations, possessing more or
less weight, were brought forward to confirm such a conclusion.
The most striking presentation ever made of the argument, perhaps,
is that in Oersted's essay on the "Universe as a Single
Intellectual Realm." It became the popular faith, and is
undoubtedly more so now than ever before. Towards the end of the
seventeenth century a work was published in explicit support of
this faith by Fontenelle. It was entitled "Conversations on the
Plurality of Worlds," and had marked success, running through many
editions. A few years later, Huygens wrote a book, called
"Cosmotheoros," in maintenance of the same thesis. The more this
doctrine obtained root and life in the convictions of men, the
more strongly its irreconcilableness with the ordinary theology
must have made itself felt by fearless and competent thinkers.
Could a quadrillion firmaments loaded with stars, each inhabited
by its own race of free intelligences, all be burned up and
destroyed in the Day of Judgment provoked on this petty grain of
dust by the sin of Adam? 32 Were the stars mere sparks and
spangles stuck in heaven for us to see by, it would be no shock to
our reason to suppose that they might be extinguished with our
extinction; but, grasping the truths of astronomy as they now lie
in the brain of a master in science, we can no longer think of God
expelling our race from the joys of being and then quenching the
splendors of his hall "as an innkeeper blows out the lights when
the dance is at an end." God rules and over rules all, and
serenely works out his irresistible ends, incapable of wrath or
defeat. Would it be more incongruous for Him to be angry with an
ant hill and come down to trample it, than to be so with the earth
and appear in vindictive fire to annihilate it?

From time to time, in the interests of the antiquated ideas,
doubts have been raised as to the validity of the doctrine of
stellar worlds stocked with intellectual families.33 Hegel, either
imbued with that Gnostic contempt and hatred for matter which
described the earth as "a dirt ball for the extrication of light
spirits," or from an obscure impulse of pantheistic thought,
sullies the stars with every demeaning phrase, even stigmatizing
them as "pimples of light." Michelet, a disciple of Hegel,
followed his example, and, in a work published in 1840, strove
vigorously to aggrandize the earth and man at the expense of the
accepted teachings of astronomy.34 With argument and ridicule, wit
and reason, he endeavored to make it out that the stars are no
better than gleaming patches of vapor. We are the exclusive
autocrats of all immensity. Whewell has followed up this species
of thought with quite remarkable adroitness, force, and
brilliance.35 Whether his motive in this undertaking is purely
scientific and artistic, or whether he is impelled by a fancied
religious animus, having been bitten by some theological fear
which has given him the astrophobia, does not clearly appear.

32 As specimens of the large number of treatises which have been
published asserting the destruction of the whole creation in the
Day of Judgment, the following may be consulted. Osiander, De
Consummatione Saculi Dissertationum Pentus. Lund, De Excidio
Universi Totali et Substantiali. Frisch, Die Welt im Feuer, oder
das wahre Vergehen und Ende der Welt durch den letzen Sundenbrand.
For a century past the opinion has been gaining favor that the
great catastrophe will be confined to our earth, and that even
this is not to be annihilated, but to be transformed, purged, and
beautified by the crisis. See, e. g., Brumhey, Ueber die endliche
Umwandlung der Erde durch Feuer.

33 Kurtz, Bibel and Astronomie. Simonton's Eng. trans., ch. vi.
sect. 14: Incarnation of God.

34 Vorlesungen uber die ewige Personlichkeit des Geistes. 35 Of a
Plurality of Worlds: An Essay.


Brewster has replied to Whewell's disturbing essay in a volume
which more commands our sympathies and carries our reason,
but is less sustained in force and less close in logic.36 Powell
has still more recently published a very valuable treatise on the
subject;37 and with this work the discussion rests thus far,
leaving, as we believe, the popular faith in an astronomic
universe of inhabited worlds unshaken, however fatal the
legitimate implications of that faith may be to other doctrines
simultaneously held.38 It is curious to observe the shifting
positions taken up by skepticism in science, now, with powerful
recoil from the narrow bigotries of theology, eagerly embracing
the sublimest dreams of astronomic speculation, and now inclining
to the faith that the remoter stars are but brilliant globules
trickling from the poles of some terrible battery in the godless
heights of space. But if there be any thing sure in science at
all, it is that the material creation is inconceivably vast,
including innumerable systems, and all governed by invariable
laws. But let us return from this episode.

The foregoing sixfold argument, preserving us from the remorseless
grasp of annihilation, leaves to us unchanged the problem of the
relations which shall be sustained by the disembodied soul to time
and space, the question as to the locality of the spirit world,
the scene of our future life. Sheol, Hades, Tartarus, Valhalla
with its mead brimmed horns, Blessed Isles, Elysium, supernal
Olympus, firmamental Heaven, paradisal Eden, definite sites of
celestial Worlds for departed souls, the Chaldee's golden orbs,
the Sanscrit Meru, the Indian Hunting Ground, the Moslem's love
bowers, and wine rivers, and gem palaces thronged with dark eyed
houris, these notions, and all similar ones, of material
residences for spirits, located and bounded, we must dismiss as
dreams and cheats of the childish world's unripe fancy. There is
no evidence for any thing of that coarse, crude sort. The
fictitious theological Heaven is a deposit of imagination on the
azure ground of infinity, like a bird's nest on Himalaya. What,
then, shall we say? Why, in the first place, that, while there are
reasons enough and room enough for an undisheartened faith in the
grand fact of human immortality, it is beyond our present powers
to establish any detailed conclusions in regard to its locality or
its scenery.

But surely, in the second place, we should say that it becomes us,
when reflecting on the scenes to be opened to us at death, to rise
to a more ideal and sublime view than any of those tangible
figments which were the products of untrained sensual imagination
and gross materialistic theory. When the fleshly prison walls of
the mind fall, its first inheritance is a stupendous freedom. The
narrow limits that caged it here are gone, and it lives in an
ethereal sphere with no impeding bounds. Leaving its natal
threshold of earth and the lazar house of time, its home is
immensity, and its lease is eternity. Even in our present state,
to a true

36 More Worlds than One the Creed of the Philosopher and the Hope
of the Christian.

37 Essay on the Unity or Plurality of Worlds. See, furthermore, in
Westminster Review, July, 1858, Recent Astronomy and the Nebular
Hypothesis.

38 Volger, Erde and Ewigkeit. (Natural History of the Earth as a
Periodical Process of Development in Opposition to the Unnatural
Geology of Revolutions and Catastrophes.) Treise, Dag Endlose der
grossen und der kleinen materiellen Welt.


thinker there is no ascent or descent or terminating wall in
space, but equal motion illimitably in all directions; and no
absolute standard of duration, only a relative and variable one
from the insect of an hour, to man, to an archangel, to that
incomprehensible Being whose shortest moments are too vast to be
noted by the awful nebula of the Hour Glass, although its rushing
sands are systems of worlds. The soul emerges from earthly bondage
emancipated into eternity, while "The ages sweep around him with
their wings, Like anger'd eagles cheated of their prey."

We have now sufficient premonitions and examples of this wondrous
enlargement to base a rational belief on. What hems us in when we
think, feel, and imagine? And what is the heaven that shall dawn
for us beyond the veil of death's domain but the realm of Thought,
the sphere of the spirit's unhampered powers? There are often
vouchsafed to us here hours of outsoaring emotion and conception
which make the enclosures in which the astronomer loiters seem
narrow. "His skies are shoal, and imagination, like a thirsty
traveller, pants to be through their desert. The roving mind
impatiently bursts the fetters of astronomical orbits, like
cobwebs in a corner of its universe, and launches itself to where
distance fails to follow, and law, such as science has discovered,
grows weak and weary." There are moods of spiritual expansion and
infinite longing that illustrate the train of thought so well
expressed in the following lines:

"Even as the dupe in tales Arabian
Dipp'd but his brow beneath the beaker's brim,
And in that instant all the life of man
From youth to age roll'd its slow years on him,
And, while the foot stood motionless, the soul
Swept with deliberate wing from pole to pole;
So when the man the Grave's still portal passes,
Closed on the substances or cheats of earth,
The Immaterial, for the things earth glasses,
Shapes a new vision from the matter's dearth:
Before the soul that sees not with our eyes
The undefined Immeasurable lies." 39

Then we realize that the spiritual world does not form some now
unseen and distant region of the visible creation, but that the
astronomic universe is a speck lying in the invisible bosom of the
spiritual world. "Space is an attribute of God in which all matter
is laid, and other attributes he may have which are the home of
mind and soul." We suppose the difference between the present
embodied and the future disembodied state to be so vast that the
conditions of the latter cannot be intelligibly illustrated by the
analogies of the former. It is not to be expected that the human
soul will ever be absolutely independent of time and space,
literally transcending them, but only relatively so as compared
with its earthly predicament.

39 Bulwer, King Arthur, book xi.


For, as an able thinker and writer a philosopher of the
Swedenborgian school, too has said, "The conception of a mind
absolutely sundered from all connection with space is a mere
pretence which words necessarily repudiate."

The soul on the hypothesis that there is a soul is now in the
body. Evidently, on leaving the body, it must either be nowhere,
and that is annihilation, which the vehement totality of our
thought denies; or everywhere, and that implies infinity, the loss
of finite being in boundless Deity, a conclusion which we know of
nothing to warrant; or somewhere,  and that predicates a surviving
individuality related to surrounding externals, which is the
prophesied and satisfactory result in which we rest in faith,
humbly confessing our ignorance as to all the minutia. It does not
necessarily follow from this view, however, that the soul is
limited to a fixed region in space. It may have the freedom of the
universe. More wonders, and sublimer than mortal fancies have ever
suspected, are waiting to be revealed when we die:

"For this life is but being's first faint ray, And heaven on
heaven make up God's dazzling day."

We are here living unconsciously engirt by another universe than
the senses can apprehend, thinly veiled, but real, and waiting for
us with hospitable invitation. "What are those dream like and
inscrutable thoughts which start up in moments of stillness,
apparently as from the deeps, like the movement of the leaves
during a silent night, in prognostic of the breeze that has yet
scarce come, if not the rustlings of schemes and orders of
existence near though unseen?" Perchance the range of the abode
and destiny of the soul after death is all immensity. The
interstellar spaces, which we usually fancy are barren deserts
where nonentity reigns, may really be the immortal kingdom
colonized by the spirits who since the beginning of the creation
have sailed from the mortal shores of all planets. They may be the
crowded aisles of the universal temple trod by bright throngs of
worshipping angels. The soul's home, the heaven of God, may be
suffused throughout the material universe, ignoring the existence
of physical globes and galaxies. So light and electricity pervade
some solid bodies, as if for them there were no solidity. So,
doubtless, there are millions of realities around us utterly
eluding our finest senses. "A fact," Emerson says, "is the last
issue of spirit," and not its entire extent. "The visible creation
is the terminus of the invisible world," and not the totality of
the universe. There are gradations of matter and being, from the
rock to the flower, from the vegetable to man. Is it most probable
that the scale breaks abruptly there, or that other ranks of
spiritual existence successively rise peopling the seeming abysses
unto the very confines of God?

"Can every leaf a teeming world contain,
Can every globule gird a countless race,
Yet one death slumber in its dreamless reign
Clasp all the illumed magnificence of space?
Life crowd a grain, from air's vast realms effaced?
The leaf a world, the firmament a waste?"

An honest historical criticism forces us, however reluctantly, to
loose our hold from the various supposed localities of the soul's
destination, which have pleased the fancies and won the assent of
mankind in earlier times. But it cannot touch the simple and
cardinal fact of an immortal life for man. It merely forces us to
acknowledge that while the fact stands clear and authoritative to
instinct, reason, and faith, yet the how, and the where, and all
such problems, are wrapped in unfathomable mystery. We are to obey
and hope, not dissect and dogmatize. However the fantastic dreams
of the imagination and the subtle speculations of the intellect
may shift from time to time, and be routed and vanish, the deep
yearning of the heart remains the same, the divine polarity of the
reason changes not, and men will never cease fondly to believe
that although they cannot tell where heaven is, yet surely there
is a heaven reserved for them somewhere within the sheltering
embrace of God's infinite providence. We may not say of that
kingdom, Lo, here! or Lo, there! but it is wherever God's
approving presence extends: and is that not wherever the pure in
heart are found? 40

Let every elysian clime the breezes blow over, every magic isle
the waves murmur round, every subterranean retreat fancy has
devised, every cerulean region the moon visits, every planet that
hangs afar on the neck of night, be disenchanted of their
imaginary charms, and brought, by the advance of discovery, within
the relentless light of familiarity, for the common gaze of
fleshly eyes and tread of vulgar feet, still the prophetic MIND
would not be robbed of its belief in immortality; still the
unquenchable instincts of the HEART would retain, uninjured, the
great expectation of ANOTHER WORLD, although no traveller returns
from its voiceless bourne to tell in what local direction it lies,
no voyager comes back from its mystic port to describe its
latitude and longitude on the chartless infinite of space.

Turn we now from the lateral distribution of notions as to a
future life, to their lineal development. We have seen that the
development of belief as to the locality of our future destination
has been a chase of places, over the earth, under the earth,
through the sky, as fast as the unknown was brought within the
known, until it has stopped at the verge of the unknowable. There
we stand, confessing our inability to fix the scene. The doctrine
of the conditions and contents of the future life has followed the
same course as that of its locality.

In the first stage of belief the future life consists of the gross
conditions and materials of the known present reflected, under the
impulse of the senses, into the unknown future. This style of
faith prevailed for a vast period, and is not yet obsolete. When
the King of Dahomey has done a great feat, he kills a man to carry
the tidings to the ghost of his royal father. When he dies
himself, a host are killed, that he may enter Deadland with a
becoming cortege. His wives also are slain, or commit suicide,
that they may rejoin him.

The second stage of belief is reached when, under the ethical
impulse, only certain refined elements of the present,
discriminated portions of the products of reason, imagination and
sentiment, are reflected into the future, and accepted as the
facts of the life there. Critical processes, applied to thought
and faith, cause the rejection of much that was received. That
alone which answers to our wants, and has coherence, continues to
be held

40 Chalmers, Sermon, Heaven a Character and not a Locality.


as truth. An example is afforded by Augustine in his essay, De
Libero Arbitrio. He argues that the wicked are kept in being on
the out skirts of the material universe; partly wretched, partly
happy; too bad for heaven, too good for annihilation; incapable of
attaining the summit of their beatified destiny. Not the crude
reflection of the present state, but a criticized and purged
portion of the results of speculation on it, is thrown forward,
and composes the doctrine of the future life. This is the
condition of faith in which civilized mankind, for the most part,
now are.

The third stage of development is that wherein the thinker
perceives that it is illegitimate to reflect into the future any
of the realities or relations of the present, and then to regard
them as the truths of the experience which awaits him after death.
His experience here is the resultant of his faculties as related
to the universe. Destroy his organization, and what follows? One
will say, "Nonentity." Another, more wise and modest, will say,
"Something necessarily unknown as yet." We have no better right to
project into the ideal space of futurity the ingredients of our
thoughts than we have to project there the objects of our senses.
Bunsen, whose thought and scholarship included pretty much all the
knowledge of mankind, represents this stage of faith. He stands on
the religious side of the movement of Science, believing in
immortality without defining it. Comte stands on the positivist
side, blankly denying all objective immortality. These two
represent the results in which, advancing from its opposite sides,
the logical development of the doctrine of a future life ends.
With Comte, atheistic dogmatism crushing every eternal hope; with
Bunsen, Christian faith pointing the child to an eternal home in
the Father. For all but fetichistic minds the only choice lies
between these two.

The organic evolution of the doctrine of a life to come is,
therefore, a process of faith beginning with the crude
transference of the elements of the present into the future,
continuing with refined modifications of that transference, ending
with an entire cessation of it as inapplicable and incompetent.
Having examined all the historic, experimental, and scientific
data within our reach, we pause on the edge of the PART which we
know, and wait, with serene trust, though with bowed head and
silent lip, before the UNKNOWABLE WHOLE.

