CHAPTER II.

MEDIAVAL DOCTRINE OF A FUTURE LIFE.

THE period of time covered by the present chapter reaches from the
close of the tenth century to the middle of the sixteenth, from
the first full establishment of the Roman Catholic theology and
the last general expectation of the immediate end of the world to
the commencing decline of mediaval faith and the successful
inauguration of the Protestant Reformation. The principal mental
characteristic of that age, especially in regard to the subject of
the future life, was fear. "Never," says Michelet, "can we know in
what terrors the Middle Age lived." There was all abroad a living
fear of men, fear of the State, fear of the Church, fear of God,
fear of the devil, fear of hell, fear of death. Preaching
consisted very much in the invitation, "Submit to the guidance of
the Church while you live," enforced by the threat, "or you shall
go to hell when you die." Christianity was practically reduced to
some cruel metaphysical dogmas, a mechanical device for rescuing
the devil's captives from him, and a system of ritual magic in the
hands of a priesthood who wielded an authority of supernatural
terrors over a credulous and shuddering laity. It is true that the
genuine spirit and contents of Christianity were never wholly
suppressed. The love of God, the blessed mediation of the
benignant Jesus, the lowly delights of the Beatitudes, the
redeeming assurance of pardon, the consoling, triumphant
expectation of heaven, were never utterly banished even from the
believers of the Dark Age. Undoubtedly many a guilty but repentant
soul found forgiveness and rest, many a meek and spotless breast
was filled with pious rapture, many a dying disciple was comforted
and inspired, by the good tidings proclaimed from priestly lips
even then. No doubt the sacred awe and guarded peace surrounding
their precincts, the divine lessons inculcated within their walls,
the pathetic prayers breathed before their altars, the traditions
of saintly men and women who had drawn angelic visitants down to
their cells and had risen long ago to be angels themselves, the
strains of unearthly melody bearing the hearts of the kneeling
crowd into eternity, no doubt these often made cathedral and
convent seem "islands of sanctity amidst the wild, roaring,
godless sea of the world." Still, the chief general feeling of the
time in relation to the future life was unquestionably fear
springing from belief, the wedlock of superstitious faith and
horror.

During the six centuries now under review the Roman Catholic
Church and theology were the only Christianity publicly
recognised. The heretics were few and powerless, and the papal
system had full sway. Since the early part of the period
specified, the working theology of the Roman Church has undergone
but few, and, as pertaining to our subject, unimportant, changes
or developments. Previous to that time her doctrinal scheme was
inchoate, gradually assimilating foreign elements and developing
itself step by step. The principal changes now concerning us to
notice in the passage from patristic eschatology as deducible, for
instance, from the works of Chrysostom, or as seen in the
"Apostles' Creed" to mediaval eschatology  as displayed in the
"Summa" of Thomas Aquinas or in the Catechism of Trent are these.
The supposititious details of the under world have been definitely
arranged in greater subdivision; heaven has been opened for the
regular admission of certain souls; the loose notions about
purgatory have been completed and consolidated; and the whole
combined scheme has been organized as a working instrument of
ecclesiastical power and profit.

These changes seem to have been wrought out, first, by
continual assimilations of Christianity to paganism,1 both in
doctrine and ceremony, to win over the heathen; and, secondly, by
modifications and growths to meet the exigencies of doctrinal
consistency and practical efficiency, exigencies repeatedly
arising from philosophical discussion and political opposition.

The degree in which papal Christianity was conformed to the
prejudices and customs of the heathen believers, whose allegiance
was sought, is astonishing. It extended to hundreds of
particulars, from the most fundamental principles of theological
speculation to the most trivial details of ritual service. We
shall mention only a few instances of this kind immediately
belonging to the subject we are treating. In the first place, the
hierophant in the pagan Mysteries, and the initiatory rites, were
the prototypes of the Roman Catholic bishop and the ceremonies
under his direction.2 Christian baptism was made to be the same as
the pagan initiation: both were supposed to cleanse from sin and
to secure for their subject a better fate in the future life: they
were both, therefore, sometimes delayed until just before death.3
The custom of initiating children into the Mysteries was also
common, as infant baptism became.4 When the public treasury was
low, the magistrates sometimes raised a fund by recourse to the
initiating fees of the Mysteries, as the Christian popes
afterwards collected money from the sale of pardons.

In the second place, the Roman Catholic canonization was the same
as the pagan apotheosis. Among the Gentiles, the mass of mankind
were supposed to descend to Hades at death; but a few favored ones
were raised to the sky, deified, and a sort of worship paid to
them. So the Roman Church taught that nearly all souls passed to
the subterranean abodes, but that martyrs and saints were admitted
to heaven and might lawfully be prayed to.5

Thirdly, the heathen under world was subdivided into several
regions, wherein different persons were disposed according to
their deserts. The worst criminals were in the everlasting penal
fire of Tartarus; the best heroes and sages were in the calm
meadows of Elysium; the hapless children were detained in the
dusky borders outside the grim realm of torture; and there was a
purgatorial place where those not too guilty were cleansed from
their stains. In like manner, the Romanist theologians divided the
under world into four parts: hell for the final abode of the
stubbornly wicked; one limbo for the painless, contented tarrying
of the good patriarchs who died before the advent of Christ had
made salvation possible, and another limbo for the sad and pallid
resting place of those children who died unbaptized; purgatory, in
which expiation is offered in agony for sins committed on earth
and unatoned for.6

1 Middleton, Letter from Rome, showing an exact conformity between
Popery and Paganism.

2 Lobeck, Aglaophamus, lib. i. sect. 6. Mosheim's Comm., ch. i.
sect. 13.

3 Warburton, Div. Leg., book ii. sect. 4.

4 Terence, Phormio, act i scene 1.

5 Council of Trent, sess. vi. can. xxx. Sess. xxv.: Decree on
Invocation of Saints.

6 See Milman, Hist. Latin Christianity, book xiv. ch. ii.


Before proceeding further, we must trace the prevalence and
progress of the doctrine of purgatory a little as it was known
before its embodiment in mediaval mythology, and then as it was
embodied there. The fundamental doctrine of the Hindu hell was
that a certain amount of suffering undergone there would expiate a
certain amount of guilt incurred here. When the disembodied soul
had endured a sufficient quantity of retributive and purifying
pain, it was loosed, and sent on earth in a new body. It was
likewise a Hindu belief that the souls of deceased parents might
be assisted out of this purgatorial woe by the prayers and
offerings of their surviving children.7 The same doctrine was held
by the Persians. They believed souls could be released from
purgatory by the prayers, sacrifices, and good deeds of righteous
surviving descendants and friends. "Zoroaster said he could, by
prayer, send any one he chose to heaven or to hell." 8 Such
representations are found obscurely in the Vendidad and more fully
in the Bundehesh. The Persian doctrine that the living had power
to affect the condition of the dead is further indicated in the
fact that, from a belief that married persons were peculiarly
happy in the future state, they often hired persons to be espoused
to such of their relatives as had died in celibacy.9 The doctrine
of purgatory was known and accepted among the Jews too. In the
Second Book of Maccabees we read the following account:  "Judas
sent two thousand pieces of silver to Jerusalem to defray the
expense of a sin offering to be offered for the sins of those who
were slain, doing therein very well and honestly, in that he was
mindful of the resurrection. For if he had not hoped that they who
were slain should rise again, it had been superfluous and vain to
pray for the dead. Whereupon he made an atonement for the dead,
that they might be delivered from sin."10 The Rabbins taught that
children by sin offerings could help their parents out of their
misery in the infernal world.11 They taught, furthermore, that all
souls except holy ones, like those of Rabbi Akiba and his
disciples, must lave themselves in the fire river of Gehenna; that
therein they shall be like salamanders; that the just shall soon
be cleansed in the fire river, but the wicked shall be lastingly
burned.12 Again, we find this doctrine prevailing among the
Romans. In the great Forum was a stone called "Lapis Manalis,"
described by Festus, which was supposed to cover the entrance to
hell. This was solemnly lifted three times a year, in order to let
those souls flow up whose sins had been purged away by their
tortures or had been remitted in consideration of the offerings
and services paid for them by the living. Virgil describes how
souls are purified by the action of wind, water, and fire.13 The
feast day of purgatory observed by papal Rome corresponds to the
Lemuria celebrated by pagan Rome, and rests on the same doctrinal
basis. In the Catholic countries of Europe at the present time, on
All Saints' Day, festoons of sweet smelling flowers are hung on
the tomb stones, and the people kneeling there repeat the prayer
prescribed for releasing the souls of their relatives and friends
from the plagues of purgatory. There is a notable coincidence
between the Buddhist

7 See references to "Sraddha" in index to Vishnu Purana.

8 Atkinson's trans. of the Shah Nameh, p. 386.

9 Richardson, Dissertation on the Language, Literature, and
Manners of the Eastern Nations, p. 347.

10 Cap. xii. 42-45.

11 Eisenmenger, Entdecktes Judenthum, th. ii. kap. vi. s. 357.

12 Kabbala Denudata, tom ii. pars. i. pp. 108, 109, 113.

13 Aneid, lib. vi. 1. 739.


and the Romanist usages. Throughout the Chinese Empire, during the
seventh moon of every year, prayers are offered up accompanied by
illuminations and other rites for the release of souls in
purgatory. At these times the Buddhist priests hang up large
pictures, showing forth the frightful scenes in the other world,
to induce the people to pay them money for prayers in behalf of
their suffering relatives and friends in purgatory.14

Traces of belief in a purgatory early appear among the Christians.
Many of the gravest Fathers of the first five centuries naturally
conceived and taught, as is indeed intrinsically reasonable, that
after death some souls will be punished for their sins until they
are cleansed, and then will be released from pain. The Manichaans
imagined that all souls, before returning to their native heaven,
must be borne first to the moon, where with good waters they would
be washed pure from outward filth, and then to the sun, where they
would be purged by good fires from every inward stain.15 After
these lunar and solar lustrations, they were fit for the eternal
world of light. But the conception of purgatory as it was held by
the early Christians, whether orthodox Fathers or heretical sects,
was merely the just and necessary result of applying to the
subject of future punishment the two ethical ideas that punishment
should partake of degrees proportioned to guilt, and that it
should be restorative. Jeremy Taylor conclusively argues that the
prayers for the dead used by the early Christians do not imply any
belief in the Papal purgatory.16 The severity and duration of the
sufferings of the dead were not supposed to be in the power of the
living, either their relatives or the clergy, but to depend on the
moral and physical facts of the case according to justice and
necessity, qualified only by the mercy of God.

Pope Gregory the Great, in the sixth century, either borrowing
some of the more objectionable features of the purgatory doctrine
previously held by the heathen, or else devising the same things
himself from a perception of the striking adaptedness of such
notions to secure an enviable power to the Church, constructed,
established, and gave working efficiency to the dogmatic scheme of
purgatory ever since firmly defended by the papal adherents as an
integral part of the Roman Catholic system.17 The doctrine as
matured and promulgated by Gregory, giving to the representatives
of the Church an almost unlimited power over purgatory, rapidly
grew into favor with the clergy and sank with general conviction
into the hopes and fears of the laity. Venerable Bede, in the
eighth century, gives a long account of the fully developed
doctrine concerning purgatory, hell, paradise, and heaven. It is
narrated in the form of a vision seen by Drithelm, who, in a
trance, visits the regions which, on his return, he describes. The
whole thing is gross, literal, horrible, closely resembling
several well known descriptions given under similar circumstances
and preserved in ancient heathen writers.18 The Church, seeing how
admirably this instrument was calculated to promote her interest
and deepen her power, left hardly any means untried to enlarge its
sweep and intensify its operation. Accordingly, from the ninth to
the sixteenth century, no doctrine was so central, prominent, and
effective in the common teaching and

14 Asiatic Journal, 1840, p. 210, note.

15 Mosheim, Comm., III. Century, sect. 49, note 3.

16 Dissuasive from Popery, part ii. book ii. sect. 2.

17 Edgar, Variations of Popery, ch. xvi.

18 Hist. Ecc., lib. v. cap. xii. See also lib. iii. cap. xix.


practice of the Church, no fear was so widely spread and vividly
felt in the bosom of Christendom, as the doctrine and the fear of
purgatory.

The Romanist theory of man's condition in the future life is this,
in brief. By the sin of Adam, heaven was closed against him and
all his posterity, and the devil acquired a right to shut up their
disembodied souls in the under world. In consequence of the
"original sin" transmitted from Adam, every human being, besides
suffering the other woes flowing from sin, was helplessly doomed
to the under world after death. In addition to this penalty, each
one must also answer for his own personal sins. Christ died to
"deliver mankind from sin," "discharge the punishment due them,"
and "rescue them from the tyranny of the devil." He "descended
into the under world," "subdued the devil," "despoiled the
depths," "rescued the Fathers and just souls," and "opened
heaven."19 "Until he rose, heaven was shut against every child of
Adam, as it still is to those who die indebted." "The price paid
by the Son of God far exceeded our debts." The surplus balance of
merits, together with the merits accruing from the supererogatory
good works of the saints and from the Divine sacrifice continually
offered anew by the sacrament of the mass, constituted a reserved
treasure upon which the Church was authorized to draw in behalf of
any one she chose to favor. The localities of the future life were
these:20 Limbus Patrum, or Abraham's Bosom, a place of peace and
waiting, where the good went who died before Christ; Limbus
Infantum, a mild, palliated hell, where the children go who, since
Christ, have died unbaptized; Purgatory, where all sinners suffer
until they are purified, or are redeemed by the Church, or until
the last day; Hell, or Gehenna, whither the hopelessly wicked have
always been condemned; and Heaven, whither the spotlessly good
have been admitted since the ascension of Jesus. At the day of
judgment the few human souls who have reached Paradise, together
with the multitudes that crowd the regions of Gehenna, Purgatory,
and Limbo, will reassume their bodies: the intermediate states
will then be destroyed, and when their final sentence is
pronounced all will depart forever,  the acquitted into heaven,
the condemned into hell. In the mean time, the poor victims of
purgatory, by the prayers of the living for them, by the transfer
of good works to their account, above all, by the celebration of
masses in their behalf, may be relieved, rescued, translated to
paradise. The words breathed by the spirit of the murdered King of
Denmark in the ears of the horror stricken Hamlet paint the
popular belief of that age in regard to the grisly realm where
guilty souls were plied with horrors whereof, but that they were
forbidden:

"To tell the secrets of their prison house, They could a tale
unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy
young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
spheres, Thy knotted and combined locks to part, And each
particular hair to stand on end Like quills upon the fretful
porcupine."

19 Catechism of the Council of Trent.

20 Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologia, pars Suppl. Quast. 69.


A few specimens of the stories embodying the ideas and
superstitions current in the Middle Age may better illustrate the
characteristic belief of the time than much abstract description.
An unquestioning faith in the personality, visibility, and
extensive agency of the devil was almost universal. Ascetics,
saints, bishops, peasants, philosophers, kings, Gregory the Great,
Martin Luther, all testified that they had often seen him. The
mediaval conception of the devil was sometimes comical, sometimes
awful. Grimm says, "He was Jewish, heathenish, Christian,
idolatrous, elfish, titanic, spectral, all at once." He was "a
soul snatching wolf," a "hell hound," a "whirlwind hammer;" now an
infernal "parody of God" with "a mother who mimics the Virgin
Mary," and now the "impersonated soul of evil."21 The well known
story of Faust and the Devil, which in so many forms spread
through Christendom, is so deeply significant of the faith and
life of the age in which it arose that a volume would be required
to unfold all its import. There was an old tradition that the
students of necromancy or the black art, on reaching a certain
pitch of proficiency, were obliged to run through a subterranean
hall, where the devil literally caught the hindmost unless he sped
so swiftly that the arch enemy could only seize his shadow, and in
that case, a veritable Peter Schlemihl, he never cast a shadow
afterwards! A man stood by his furnace one day casting eyes for
buttons. The devil came up and asked what he was doing. "Casting
eyes," replied the man. "Can you cast a pair for me?" quoth the
devil. "That I can," says the man: "will you have them large or
small?" "Oh, very large," answered the devil. He then ties the
fiend on a bench and pours the molten lead into his eyes. Up jumps
the devil, with the bench on his back, flees howling, and has
never been seen since! There was also in wide circulation a wild
legend to the effect that a man made a compact with the devil on
the condition that he should secure a new victim for hell once in
a century. As long as he did this he should enjoy life, riches,
power, and a limited ubiquity; but failing a fresh victim at the
end of each hundred years his own soul should be the forfeit. He
lived four or five centuries, and then, in spite of his most
desperate efforts, was disappointed of his expected victim on the
last night of the century; and when the clock struck twelve the
devil burst into his castle on a black steed and bore him off in a
storm of lightning amidst the crash of thunders and the shrieks of
fiends. St. Britius once during mass saw the devil in church
taking account of the sins the congregation were committing. He
covered the parchment all over, and, afraid of forgetting some of
the offences, seized the scroll in his teeth and claws to stretch
it out. It snapped, and his head was smartly bumped against the
wall. St. Britius laughed aloud. The officiating priest rebuked
him, but, on being told what had happened, improved the accident
for the edification of his hearers.22 On the bursting of a certain
glacier on the Alps, it is said the devil was seen swimming down
the Rhone, a drawn sword in one hand, a golden ball in the other:
opposite the town of Martigny, he cried, "Rise," and instantly the
obedient river swelled above its banks and destroyed the town.

Ignes fatui, hovering about marshes and misty places, were thought
to be the spirits of unbaptized children endeavoring to guide
travellers to the nearest water. A kindred fancy

21 Deutsche Mythologie, cap. xxxiii.: Teufel.

22 Quarterly Review, Jan. 1820: Pop. Myth. of the Middle Ages.


also heard a spectral pack, called "yell hounds," afterwards
corrupted to "hell hounds," composed of the souls of unbaptized
children, which could not rest, but roamed and howled through the
woods all night.23 A touching popular myth said, the robin's
breast is so red because it flies into hell with drops of water in
its bill to relieve the children there, and gets scorched.

In 1171, Silo, a philosopher, implored a dying pupil of his to
come back and reveal his state in the other world. A few days
after his death the scholar appeared in a cowl of flames covered
with logical propositions. He told Silo that he was from
purgatory, that the cowl weighed on him worse than a tower, and
said he was doomed to wear it for the pride he took in sophisms.
As he thus spoke he let fall a drop of sweat on his master's hand,
piercing it through. The next day Silo said to his scholars, "I
leave croaking to frogs, cawing to crows, and vain things to the
vain, and hie me to the logic which fears not death."

"Linquo coax ranis, cras corvis, vanaque vanis, Ad logicen pergo
qua mortis non timet ergo." 24

In the long, quaint poem, "Vision of William concerning Piers
Ploughman," written probably by Robert Langland about the year
1362, there are many things illustrative of our subject. "I,
Trojanus, a true knight, after death was condemned to hell for
dying unbaptized. But, on account of my mercy and truth in
administering the laws, the pope wished me to be saved; and God
mercifully heard him and saved me without the help of masses."25
"Ever since the fall of Adam, Age has shaken the Tree of Human
Life, and the devil has gathered the fruit into hell."26 The
author gives a most spirited account of Christ's descent into the
under world after his death, his battle with the devils there, his
triumph over them, his rescue of Adam, and other particulars.27 In
this poem, as in nearly all the extant productions of that period,
there are copious evidences of the extent and power of the popular
faith in the devil and in purgatory, and in their close connection
with the present life, a faith nourishingly embodied in thousands
of singular tales. Thomas Wright has collected many of these in
his antiquarian works. He relates an amusing incident that once
befell a minstrel who had been borne into hell by a devil. The
devils went forth in a troop to ensnare souls on earth. Lucifer
left the minstrel in charge of the infernal regions, promising, if
he let no souls escape, to treat him on the return with a fat monk
roasted, or a usurer dressed with hot sauce. But while the fiends
were away St. Peter came, in disguise, and allured the minstrel to
play at dice, and to stake the souls which were in torture under
his care. Peter won, and carried them off in triumph. The devils,
coming back and finding the fires all out and hell empty, kicked
the hapless minstrel out, and Lucifer swore a big oath that no
minstrel should ever darken the door of hell again!

The mediaval belief in a future life was practically concentrated,
for the most part, around the ideas of Satan, purgatory, the last
judgment, hell. The faith in Christ, God,

23 Allies, Antiquities of Worcestershire, 2d ed. p. 256.

24 Michelet, Hist. de France, livre iv. chap. ix.

25 Vision of Dowell, part iii.

26 Vision of Dobet, part ii.

27 Ibid., part iv.


heaven, was much rarer and less influential. Neander says, "The
inmost distinction of mediaval experience was an awful sense of
another life and an invisible world." A most piteous illustration
of the conjoined faith and fear of that age is furnished by an old
dialogue between the "Soul and the Body" recently edited by
Halliwell, an expression of humble trust and crouching horror
irresistibly pathetic in its simplicity.28 A flood of revealing
light is given as to the energy with which the doctrine of
purgatory impressed itself on the popular mind, by the two facts,
first, that the Council of Auxerre, in 1578, prohibited the
administration of the eucharist to the dead; and, secondly, that
in the eleventh and twelfth centuries "crosses of absolution" that
is, crosses cut out of sheet lead, with the formula of absolution
engraved on them were quite commonly buried with the dead.29 The
eager sincerity of the mediaval belief in another life is
attested, too, by the correspondence of the representations of the
dead in their legends to the appearance, disposition, and pursuits
they had in life. No oblivious draught, no pure spiritualization,
had freed the departed souls from earthly bonds and associations.
Light pretexts drew them back to their wonted haunts. A buried
treasure allowed them no rest till they had led some one to raise
it. An unfinished task, an uncancelled obligation, forced them
again to the upper world. In ruined castles the ghosts of knights,
in their accustomed habiliments, held tournaments and carousals.
The priest read mass; the hunter pursued his game; the spectre
robber fell on the benighted traveller.30 It is hard for us now to
reproduce, even in imagination, the fervid and frightful
earnestness of the popular faith of the Middle Age in the
ramifying agency of the devil and in the horrors of purgatory. We
will try to do it, in some degree, by a series of illustrations
aiming to show at once how prevalent such a belief and fear were,
and how they became so prevalent.

First, we may specify the teaching of the Church whose authority
in spiritual concerns bore almost unquestioned sway over the minds
of more than eighteen generations. By the logical subtleties of
her scholastic theologians, by the persuasive eloquence of her
popular preachers, by the frantic ravings of her fanatic devotees,
by the parading proclamation of her innumerable pretended
miracles, by the imposing ceremonies of her dramatic ritual,
almost visibly opening heaven and hell to the over awed
congregation, by her wonder working use of the relics of martyrs
and saints to exorcise demons from the possessed and to heal the
sick, and by her anathemas against all who were supposed to be
hostile to her formulas, she infused the ideas of her doctrinal
system into the intellect, heart, and fancy of the common people,
and nourished the collateral horrors, until every wave of her wand
convulsed the world. In a pastoral letter addressed to the
Carlovingian prince Louis, the grandson of Charlemagne,  a letter
probably composed by the famous Hincmar, bearing date 858, and
signed by the Bishops of Rheims and Rouen, a Gallic synod
authoritatively declared that Charles Martel was damned; "that on
the opening of his tomb the spectators were affrighted by a smell
of fire and the aspect of a horrid dragon, and that a saint of the
times was indulged with a pleasant vision of the soul and body of
this great hero burning to all eternity in the abyss of hell."

28 Early English Miscellanies, No. 2.

29 London Antiquaries' Archaologis, vol. xxxv. art. 22.

30 Thorpe, Northern Mythology, vol. i., appendix.


A tremendous impulse, vivifying and emphasizing the eschatological
notions of the time, an impulse whose effects did not cease when
it died, was imparted by that frightful epidemic expectation of
the impending end of the world which wellnigh universally
prevailed in Christendom about the year 1000. Many of the charters
given at that time commence with the words, "As the world is now
drawing to a close." 31 This expectation drew additional strength
from the unutterable sufferings famine, oppression, pestilence,
war, superstition  then weighing on the people. "The idea of the
end of the world," we quote from Michelet, "sad as that world was,
was at once the hope and the terror of the Middle Age. Look at
those antique statues of the tenth and eleventh centuries, mute,
meager, their pinched and stiffened lineaments grinning with a
look of living suffering allied to the repulsiveness of death. See
how they implore, with clasped hands, that desired yet dreaded
moment when the resurrection shall redeem them from their
unspeakable sorrows and raise them from nothingness into existence
and from the grave to God."

Furthermore, this superstitious character of the mediaval belief
in the future life acquired breadth and intensity from the
profound general ignorance and trembling credulousness of that
whole period on all subjects. It was an age of marvels, romances,
fears, when every landscape of life "wore a strange hue, as if
seen through the sombre medium of a stained casement." While
congregations knelt in awe beneath the lifted Host, and the image
of the dying Savior stretched on the rood glimmered through clouds
of incense, perhaps an army of Flagellants would march by the
cathedral, shouting, "The end of the world is at hand!" filling
the streets with the echoes of their torture as they lashed their
naked backs with knotted cords wet with blood; and no soul but
must shudder with the infection of horror as the dreadful notes of
the "Dies Iioe" went sounding through the air. The narratives of
the desert Fathers, the miracles wrought in convent cells, the
visions of pillar saints, the thrilling accompaniments of the
Crusades, and other kindred influences, made the world a perpetual
mirage. The belching of a volcano was the vomit of uneasy hell.
The devil stood before every tempted man, Ghosts walked in every
nightly dell. Ghastly armies were seen contending where the aurora
borealis hung out its bloody banners. The Huns under Attila,
ravaging Southern Europe, were thought to be literal demons who
had made an irruption from the pit. The metaphysician was in peril
of the stake as a heretic, the natural philosopher as a magician.
A belief in witchcraft and a trust in ordeals were universal, even
from Pope Eugenius, who introduced the trial by cold water, and
King James, who wrote volumes on magic, to the humblest monk who
shuddered when passing the church crypt, and the simplest peasant
who quaked in his homeward path at seeing a will o' the wisp.
"Denounced by the preacher and consigned to the flames by the
judge, the wizard received secret service money from the Cabinet
to induce him to destroy the hostile armament as it sailed before
the wind." As a vivid writer has well said, "A gloomy mist of
credulity enwrapped the cathedral and the hall of justice, the
cottage and the throne. In the dank shadows of the universal
ignorance a thousand superstitions, like foul animals of night,
were propagated and nourished."

31 Hallam, Middle Ages, ch. ix.


The beliefs and excitements of the mediaval period partook of a
sort of epidemic character, diffusing and working like a
contagion.32 There were numberless throngs of pilgrims to famous
shrines, immense crowds about the localities of popular legends,
relics, or special grace. In the magnetic sphere of such a fervid
and credulous multitude, filled with the kindling interaction of
enthusiasm, of course prodigies would abound, fables would
flourish, and faith would be doubly generated and fortified. In
commemoration of a miraculous act of virtue performed by St.
Francis, the pope offered to all who should enter the church at
Assisi between the eve of the 1st and the eve of the 2d of August
each year that being the anniversary of the saint's achievement a
free pardon for all the sins committed by them since their
baptism. More than sixty thousand pilgrims sometimes flocked
thither on that day. Every year some were crushed to death in the
suffocating pressure at the entrance of the church. Nearly two
thousand friars walked in procession; and for a series of years
the pilgrimage to Portiuncula might have vied with that to the
temple of Juggernaut.33

Nothing tends more to strengthen any given belief than to see it
everywhere carried into practice and to act in accordance with it.
Thus was it with the mediaval doctrine of the future life. Its
applications and results were constantly and universally thrust
into notice by the sale of indulgences and the launching of
excommunications. Early in the ninth century, Charlemagne
complained that the bishops and abbots forced property from
foolish people by promises and threats: "Suadendo de coelestis
regni beatitudine, comminando de oeterno supplicio inferni."34 The
rival mendicant orders, the Franciscans and the Dominicans,
acquired great riches and power by the traffic in indulgences.
They even had the impudence to affirm that the members of their
orders were privileged above all other men in the next world.
Milton alludes to those who credited these monstrous assumptions:
"And they who, to be sure of Paradise, Dying, put on the weeds of
Dominic, Or in Franciscan think to pass disguised."

The Council of Basle censured the claim of the Franciscan monks
that their founder annually descended to purgatory and led thence
to heaven the souls of all those who had belonged to his order.
The Carmelites also asserted that the Virgin Mary appeared to
Simon Stockius, the general of their order, and gave him a solemn
promise that the souls of such as left the world with the
Carmelite scapulary upon their shoulders should be infallibly
preserved from eternal damnation. Mosheim says that Pope Benedict
XIV. was an open defender of this ridiculous fiction.35

If any one would appreciate the full mediaval doctrine of the
future life, whether with respect to the hair drawn scholastic
metaphysics by which it was defended, or with respect to the
concrete forms in which the popular apprehension held it, let him
read the Divina Commedia of Dante; for it is all there. Whoso with
adequate insight and sympathy peruses

32 Hecker, Epidemics of the Middle Ages.

33 Quarterly Review, July, 1819: article on Monachism.

34 Perry, History of the Franks, p. 467.

35 Eccl. Hist., XIII. Century, part ii. ch. 2, sect. 29.


the pages of the immortal Florentine at whom the people pointed as
he walked the streets, and said, "There goes the man who has been
in hell" will not fail to perceive with what a profound sincerity
the popular breast shuddered responsive to ecclesiastical threats
and purgatorial woes.

The tremendous moral power of this solitary work lies in the fact
that it is a series of terrific and fascinating tableaux,
embodying the idea of inflexible poetic justice impartially
administered upon king and varlet, pope and beggar, oppressor and
victim, projected amidst the unalterable necessities of eternity,
and moving athwart the lurid abyss and the azure cope with an
intense distinctness that sears the gazer's eyeballs. The Divina
Commedia, with a wonderful truth, also reflects the feeling of the
age when it was written in this respect, that there is a grappling
force of attraction, a compelling realism, about its "Purgatory"
and "Hell" which are to be sought in vain in the delineations of
its "Paradise." The mediaval belief in a future life had for its
central thought the day of judgment, for its foremost emotion
terror.36

The roots of this faith were unquestionably fertilized, and the
development of this fear quickened, to a very great extent, by
deliberate and systematic delusions. One of the most celebrated of
these organized frauds was the gigantic one perpetrated under the
auspices of the Dominican monks at Berne in 1509, the chief actors
in which were unmasked and executed. Bishop Burnet has given an
extremely interesting account of this affair in his volume of
travels. Suffice it to say, the monks appeared at midnight in the
cells of various persons, now impersonating devils, in horrid
attire, breathing flames and brimstone, now claiming to be the
souls of certain sufferers escaped from purgatory, and again
pretending to be celebrated saints, with the Virgin Mary at their
head. By the aid of mechanical and chemical arrangements, they
wrought miracles, and played on the terror and credulity of the
spectators in a frightful manner.37 There is every reason to
suppose that such deceptions  miracles in which secret speaking
tubes, asbestos, and phosphorus were indispensable38 were most
frequent in those ages, and were as effective as the actors were
unscrupulous and the dupes unsuspicious. Here is revealed one of
the foremost of the causes which made the belief of the Dark Age
in the numerous appearances of ghosts and devils so common and so
intense that it gave currency to the notion that the swarming
spirits of purgatory were disembogued from dusk till dawn. So the
Danish monarch, revisiting the pale glimpses of the moon, says to
Hamlet, "I am thy father's spirit, Doom'd for a certain time to walk the
night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul
crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away."

36 If any one would see in how many forms the faith in hell and in
the devil appeared, let him look over the pages of the
"Dictionnaire Infernal," by J. Collin de Plancy.

37 Maclaine's trans, of Mosheim's Eccl. Hist., vol. ii. p. 10,
note.

38 Manufactures of the Ancients, pub. by Harper and Brothers,
1845, part iv. ch. 3.


When the shadows began to fall thick behind the sunken sun, these
poor creatures were thought to spring from their beds of torture,
to wander amidst the scenes of their sins or to haunt the living;
but at the earliest scent of morn, the first note of the cock,
they must hie to their fire again. Midnight was the high noon of
ghostly and demoniac revelry on the earth. As the hour fell with
brazen clang from the tower, the belated traveller, afraid of the
rustle of his own dress, the echo of his own footfall, the
wavering of his own shadow, afraid of his own thoughts, would
breathe the suppressed invocation, "Angels and ministers of grace
defend us!" as the idea crept curdling over his brain and through
his veins, "It is the very witching time of night, When
churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out Contagion to this
world."

Working in alliance with the foregoing forces of superstition was
the powerful influence of the various forms of insanity which
remarkably abounded in the Middle Age. The insane person, it was
believed, was possessed by a demon. His ravings, his narratives,
were eagerly credited; and they were usually full of infernal
visions, diabolical interviews, encounters with apparitions, and
every thing that would naturally arise in a deranged and
preternaturally sensitive mind from the chief conceptions then
current concerning the invisible world.39

The principal works of art exposed to the people were such as
served to impress upon their imaginations the Church doctrine of
the future life in all its fearfulness, with its vigorous dramatic
points. In the cathedral at Antwerp there is a representation of
hell carved in wood, whose marvellous elaborateness astonishes,
and whose painful expressiveness oppresses, every beholder. With
what excruciating emotions the pious crowds must have contemplated
the harrowingly vivid paintings of the Inferno, by Orcagna, still
to be seen in the Campo Santo of Pisa! In the cathedral at
Canterbury there was a window on which was painted a detailed
picture of Christ vanquishing the devils in their own domain; but
we believe it has been removed. However, the visitor still sees on
the fine east window of York Cathedral the final doom of the
wicked, hell being painted as an enormous mouth; also in the west
front of Lincoln Cathedral an ancient bas relief representing hell
as a monstrous mouth vomiting flame and serpents, with two human
beings walking into it. The minster at Freyburg has a grotesque
bas relief over its main portal, representing the Judgment. St.
Nicholas stands in the centre, and the Savior is seated above him.
On the left, an angel weighs mankind in a huge pair of scales, and
a couple of malicious imps try to make the human scale kick the
beam. Underneath, St. Peter is ushering the good into Paradise. On
the right is shown a devil, with a pig's head, dragging after him
a throng of the wicked. He also has a basket on his back filled
with figures whom he is in the act of flinging into a reeking
caldron stirred by several imps. Hell is typified, on one side, by
the jaws of a monster crammed to the teeth with reprobates, and
Satan is seen sitting on his throne above them. A recent traveller
writes from

39 De Boismont, Rational Hist. of Hallucivatious, ch. xiv.


Naples, "The favorite device on the church walls here is a
vermilion picture of a male and a female soul, respectively up to
the waist [the waist of a soul!] in fire, with an angel over each
watering them from a water pot. This is meant to get money from
the compassionate to pay for the saying of masses in behalf of
souls in purgatory." Ruskin has described some of the church
paintings of the Last Judgment by the old masters as possessing a
power even now sufficient to stir every sensibility to its depths.
Such works, gazed on day after day, while multitudes were kneeling
beneath in the shadowy aisles, and clouds of incense were floating
above, and the organ was pealing and the choir chanting in full
accord, must produce lasting effects on the imagination, and thus
contribute in return to the faith and fear which inspired them.

Villani as also Sismondi gives a description of a horrible
representation of hell shown at Florence in 1304 by the
inhabitants of San Priano, on the river Arno. The glare of flames,
the shrieks of men disguised as devils, scenes of infernal
torture, filled the night. Unfortunately, the scaffolding broke
beneath the crowd, and many spectators were burned or drowned, and
that which began as an entertaining spectacle ended as a direful
reality. The whole affair is a forcible illustration of the
literality with which the popular mind and faith apprehended the
notion of the infernal world.

Another means by which the views we have been considering were
both expressed and recommended to the senses and belief of the
people was those miracle plays that formed one of the most
peculiar features of the Middle Age. These plays, founded on, and
meant to illustrate, Scripture narratives and theological
doctrines, were at first enacted by the priests in the churches,
afterwards by the various trading companies or guilds of
mechanics. In 1210, Pope Gregory "forbade the clergy to take any
part in the plays in churches or in the mummings at festivals." A
similar prohibition was published by the Council of Treves, in
1227. The Bishop of Worms, in 1316, issued a proclamation against
the abuses which had crept into the festivities of Easter, and
gives a long and curious description of them.40 There were two
popular festivals, of which Michelet gives a full and amusing
description, one called the "Fete of the Tipsy Priests," when they
elected a Bishop of Unreason, offered him incense of burned
leather, sang obscene songs in the choir, and turned the altar
into a dice table; the other called the "Fete of the Cuckolds,"
when the laymen crowned each other with leaves, the priests wore
their surplices wrong side out and threw bran in each others'
eyes, and the bell ringers pelted each other with biscuits. There
is a religious play by Calderon, entitled "The Divine Orpheus," in
which the entire Church scheme of man's fall the devil's empire,
Christ's descent there, and the victorious sequel is embodied in a
most effective manner. In the priestly theology and in the popular
heart of those times there was no other single particular one
tenth part so prominent and vivid as that of Christ's entrance
after his death into hell to rescue the old saints and break down
Satan's power.41

40 Early Mysteries and Latin Poems of the XII. and XIII.
Centuries, edited by Thomas Wright. See the eloquent sermon on
this subject preached by Luis de Granada in the sixteenth century.
Ticknor's Hist. Spanish Lit., vol. iii. pp. 123-127.


Peter Lombard says, "What did the Redeemer do to the despot who
had us in his bonds? He offered him the cross as a mouse trap, and
put his blood on it as bait." 42 About that scene there was an
incomparable fascination for every believer. Christ laid aside his
Godhead and died. The devil thought he had secured a new victim,
and humanity swooned in grief and despair. But, lo! the Crucified,
descending to the inexorable dungeons, puts on all his Divinity,
and suddenly "The captive world awakt, and founde The pris'ner
loose, the jailer bounde!" 43

A large proportion of the miracle plays, or Mysteries, turned on
this event. In the "Mystery of the Resurrection of Christ" occurs
the following couplet: "This day the angelic King has risen,
Leading the pious from their prison." 44

The title of one of the principal plays in the Towneley Mysteries
is "Extractio Animarum ab Inferno." It describes Christ descending
to the gates of hell to claim his own. Adam sees afar the gleam of
his coming, and with his companions begins to sing for joy. The
infernal porter shouts to the other demons, in alarm, "Since first
that hell was made and I was put therein, Such sorrow never ere I
had, nor heard I such a din. My heart begins to start; my wit it
waxes thin; I am afraid we can't rejoice, these souls must from
us go. Ho, Beelzebub! bind these boys: such noise was never heard
in hell."

Satan vows he will dash Beelzebub's brains out for frightening him
so. Meanwhile, Christ draws near, and says, "Lift up your gates,
ye princes, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the
King of glory shall come in." The portals fly asunder. Satan
shouts up to his friends, "Dyng the dastard down;" but Beelzebub
replies, "That is easily said." Jesus and the devil soon meet,
face to face. A long colloquy ensues, in the course of which the
latter tells the former that he knew his Father well by sight! At
last Jesus frees Adam, Eve, the prophets, and others, and ascends,
leaving the devil in the lowest pit, resolving that hell shall
soon be fuller than before; for he will walk east and he will walk
west, and he will seduce thousands from their allegiance. Another
play, similar to the foregoing, but much more extensively known
and acted, was called the "Harrowing of Hell." Christ and Satan
appear on the stage and argue in the most approved scholastic
style for the right of possession in the human race. Satan says,
"Whoever purchases any thing, It belongs to him and to his
children. Adam, hungry, came to me;

42 Sententia, lib. iii. distinctio 19.

43 Hone, Ancient Mysteries.

44 "Resurrexit hodie Rex angelorum Ducitur de tenebris turba
piorum."


I made him do me homage: For an apple, which I gave him, He and
all his race belong to me." But Christ instantly puts a different
aspect on the argument, by replying, "Satan! it was mine, The
apple thou gavest him. The apple and the apple tree Both were made
by me. As he was purchased with my goods, With reason will I have
him." 45

In a religious Mystery exhibited at Lisbon as late as the close of
the eighteenth century, the following scene occurs. Cain kicks his
brother Abel badly and kills him. A figure like a Chinese
mandarin, seated in a chair, condemns Cain and is drawn up into
the clouds. The mouth of hell then appears, like the jaws of a
great dragon: amid smoke and lightning it casts up three devils,
one of them having a wooden leg. These take a dance around Cain,
and are very jocose, one of them inviting him to hell to take a
cup of brimstone coffee, and another asking him to make up a party
at whist. Cain snarls, and they tumble him and themselves headlong
into the squib vomiting mouth.

Various books of accounts kept by the trading companies who
celebrated these Mysteries of the expenses incurred have been
published, and are exceedingly amusing. "Item: payd for kepyng of
fyer at hellmothe, four pence." "For a new hoke to hang Judas, six
pence." "Item: payd for mendyng and payntyng hellmouthe, two
pence." "Girdle for God, nine pence." "Axe for Pilatte's son, one
shilling." "A staff for the demon, one penny." "God's coat of
white leather, three shillings." The stage usually consisted of
three platforms. On the highest sat God, surrounded by his angels.
On the next were the saints in Paradise, the intermediate state of
the good after death. On the third were mere men yet living in the
world. On one side of the lowest stage, in the rear, was a fearful
cave or yawning mouth filled with smoke and flames, and denoting
hell. From this ever and anon would issue the howls and shrieks of
the damned. Amidst hideous yellings, devils would rush forth and
caper about and snatch hapless souls into this pit to their
doom.46 The actors, in their mock rage, sometimes leaped from the
pageant into the midst of the laughing, screaming, trembling
crowd. The dramatis personoe included many queer characters, such
as a "Worm of Conscience," "Deadman," (representing a soul
delivered from hell at the descent of Christ,) numerous "Damned
Souls," dressed in flame colored garments, "Theft," "Lying,"
"Gluttony." But the devil himself was the favorite character; and
often, when his personified vices jumped on him and pinched and
cudgelled him till he roared, the mirth of the honest audience
knew no bounds. For there were in the Middle Age two sides to the
popular idea of the devil and of all appertaining to him. He was a
soul harrowing bugbear or a rib shaking jest according to the hour
and one's

45 Halliwell's edition of the Harrowing of Hell, p. 18.

46 Sharp, Essay on the Dramatic Mysteries, p. 24.


humor. Rabelais's Pantagruel is filled with irresistible
burlesques of the doctrine of purgatory. The ludicrous side of
this subject may be seen by reading Tarlton's "Jests" and his
"Newes out of Purgatorie." 47 Glimpses of it are also to be caught
through many of the humorous passages in Shakspeare. Dromio says
of an excessively fat and greasy kitchen wench, "If she lives till
doomsday she'll burn a week longer than the whole world!" And
Falstaff, cracking a kindred joke on Bardolph's carbuncled nose,
avows his opinion that it will serve as a flaming beacon to light
lost souls the way to purgatory! Again, seeing a flea on the same
flaming proboscis, the doughty knight affirmed it was "a black
soul burning in hell fire." In this element of mediaval life, this
feature of mediaval literature, a terrible belief lay under the
gay raillery. Here is betrayed, on a wide scale, that natural
reaction of the faculties from excessive oppression to sportive
wit, from deep repugnance to superficial jesting, which has often
been pointed out by philosophical observers as a striking fact in
the psychological history of man.

One more active and mighty cause of the dreadful faith and fear
with which the Middle Age contemplated the future life was the
innumerable and frightful woes, crimes, tyrannies, instruments of
torture, engines of persecution, insane superstitions, which then
existed, making its actual life a hell. The wretchedness and
cruelty of the present world were enough to generate frightful
beliefs and cast appalling shadows over the future. If the earth
was full of devils and phantoms, surely hell must swarm worse with
them. The Inquisition sat shrouded and enthroned in supernatural
obscurity of cunning and awfulness of power, and thrust its
invisible daggers everywhere. The facts men knew here around them
gave credibility to the imagery in which the hereafter was
depicted. The flaming stakes of an Auto da Fe around which the
victims of ecclesiastical hatred writhed were but faint emblems of
what awaited their souls in the realm of demons whereto the tender
mercies of the Church consigned them. Indeed, the fate of myriads
of heretics and traitors could not fail to project the lurid
vision of hell with all its paraphernalia into the imaginations of
the people of the Dark Age. The glowing lava of purgatory heated
the soil they trod, and a smell of its sulphur surcharged the air.
A stupendous revelation of terror, bearing whole volumes of
direful meaning, is given in the single fact that it was a common
belief of that period that the holy Inquisitors would sit with
Christ in the judgment at the last day.48 If king or noble took
offence at some uneasy retainer or bold serf, he ordered him to be
secretly buried in the cell of some secluded fortress, and he was
never heard of more. So, if pope or priest hated or feared some
stubborn thinker, he straightway, "Would banish him to wear a
burning chain In the great dungeons of the unforgiven, Beneath
the space deep castle walls of heaven."

It was an age of cruelty, never to be restored, when the world was
boiling in tempest and men rode on the crests of fear.

47 Recently edited by Halliwell and published by the Shakspeare
Society.

48 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 205.


Researches made within the last century among the remains of
famous mediaval edifices, both ecclesiastic and state, have
brought to light the dismal records of forgotten horrors. In many
a royal palace, priestly building, and baronial castle, there were
secret chambers full of infernal machinery contrived for
inflicting tortures, and under them concealed trap doors opening
into rayless dungeons with no outlet and whose floors were covered
with the mouldering bones of unfortunate wretches who had
mysteriously disappeared long ago and tracelessly perished there.
Sometimes these trap doors were directly above profound pits of
water, in which the victim would drown as he dropped from the
mangling hooks, racks, and pincers of the torture chamber. There
were horrible rumors current in the Middle Age of a machine called
the "Virgin," used for putting men to death; but little was known
about it, and it was generally supposed to be a fable, until, some
years ago one of the identical machines was discovered in an old
Austrian castle. It was a tall wooden woman, with a painted face,
which the victim was ordered to kiss. As he approached to offer
the salute, he trod on a spring, causing the machine to fly open,
stretch out a pair of iron arms, and draw him to its breast
covered with a hundred sharp spikes, which pierced him to death.49

Ignorance and alarm, in a suffering and benighted age, surrounded
by sounds of superstition and sights of cruelty, must needs breed
and foster a horrid faith in regard to the invisible world.
Accordingly, the common doctrine of the future life prevailing in
Christendom from the ninth century till the sixteenth was as we
have portrayed it. Of course there are exceptions to be admitted
and qualifications to be made; but, upon the whole, the picture is
faithful. Fortunately, intellect and soul could not slumber
forever, nor the mediaval nightmares always keep their torturing
seat on the bosom of humanity. Noble men arose to vindicate the
rights of reason and the divinity of conscience. The world was
circumnavigated, and its revolution around the sun was
demonstrated. A thousand truths were discovered, a thousand
inventions introduced. Papacy tottered, its prestige waned, its
infallibility sunk. The light of knowledge shone, the simplicity
of nature was seen, and the benignity of God was surmised.
Thought, throwing off many restrictions and accumulating much
material, began to grow free, and began to grow wise. And so,
before the calm, steady gaze of enlightened and cheerful reason,
the live and crawling smoke of hell, which had so long enwreathed
the mind of the time with its pendent and breathing horrors,
gradually broke up and dissolved, "Like a great superstitious
snake, uncurled From the pale temples of the awakening world."

49 The Kiss of the Virgin, in the Archaologia published by the
Antiquaries of London, vol. xxviii.


