CHAPTER VII.

RESURRECTION OF CHRIST.

OF all the single events that ever were supposed to have occurred
in the world, perhaps the most august in its moral associations
and the most stupendous in its lineal effects, both on the outward
fortunes and on the inward experience of mankind, is the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. If, therefore, there
is one theme in all the range of thought worthy of candid
consideration, it is this. There are two ways of examining it. We
may, as unquestioning Christians, inquire how the New Testament
writers represent it, what premises they assume, what statements
they make, and what inferences they draw. Thus, without
perversion, without mixture of our own notions, we should
construct the Scripture doctrine of the resurrection of the
Savior. Again as critical scholars and philosophical thinkers, we
may study that doctrine in all its parts, scrutinize it in all its
bearings, trace, as far as possible, the steps and processes of
its formation, discriminate as well as we can, by all fair tests,
whether it be entirely correct, or wholly erroneous, or partly
true and partly false. Both of these methods of investigation are
necessary to a full understanding of the subject. Both are
obligatory upon the earnest inquirer. Whoso would bravely face his
beliefs and intelligently comprehend them, with their grounds and
their issues, with a devout desire for the pure truth, whatsoever
it may be, putting his trust in the God who made him, will never
shrink from either of these courses of examination. Whoso does
shrink from these inquiries is either a moral coward, afraid of
the results of an honest search after that truth of things which
expresses the will of the Creator, or a spiritual sluggard,
frightened by a call to mental effort and torpidly clinging to
ease of mind. And whoso, accepting the personal challenge of
criticism, carries on the investigation with prejudice and
passion, holding errors because he thinks them safe and useful,
and rejecting realities because he fancies them dangerous and
evil, is an intellectual traitor, disloyal to the sacred laws by
which God hedges the holy fields and rules the responsible
subjects of the realm of truth. We shall combine the two modes of
inquiry, first singly asking what the Scriptures declare, then
critically seeking what the facts will warrant, it being
unimportant to us whether these lines exactly coincide or diverge
somewhat, the truth itself being all. We now pass to an
examination of Christ's resurrection from five points of view:
first, as a fact; second, as a fulfilment of prophecy; third, as a
pledge; fourth, as a symbol; and fifth, as a theory.

The writers of the New Testament speak of the resurrection of
Christ, in the first place, as a fact. "Jesus whom ye slew and
hanged on a tree, him hath God raised up." It could not have been
viewed by them in the light of a theory or a legend, nor, indeed,
as any thing else than a marvellous but literal fact. This appears
from their minute accounts of the scenes at the sepulchre and of
the disappearance of his body. Their declarations of this are most
unequivocal, emphatic, iterated, "The Lord is risen indeed." All
that was most important in their faith they based upon it, all
that was most precious to them in this life they staked upon it.
"Else why stand we in jeopardy every hour?" They held it before
their inner vision as a guiding star through the night of their
sufferings and dangers, and freely poured out their blood upon the
cruel shrines of martyrdom in testimony that it was a fact.
That they believed he literally rose from the grave in visible
form also appears, and still more forcibly, from their descriptions
of his frequent manifestations to them. These show that in their
faith he assumed at his resurrection the same body in which he had
lived before, which was crucified and buried. All attempts, whether
by Swedenborgians or others, to explain this Scripture language as
signifying that he rose in an immaterial body, are futile.1 He
appeared to their senses and was recognised by his identical
bodily form. He partook of physical food with them. "They gave him
a piece of broiled fish and of an honey comb; and he ate before
them." The marks in his hands and side were felt by the
incredulous Thomas, and convinced him. He said to them, "Handle
me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me
have." To a candid mind there can hardly be a question that the
gospel records describe the resurrection of Christ as a literal
fact, that his soul reanimated the deceased body, and that in it
he showed himself to his disciples. Yet that there are a few texts
implying the immateriality of his resurrection body that there are
two accounts of it in the gospels we cannot deny.

We advance to see what is the historical evidence for the fact of
the resurrection of Christ. This argument, of course, turns
chiefly on one point, namely, the competency of the witnesses, and
the validity of their testimony.2 We will present the usually
exhibited scheme of proof as strongly as we can.3 In the first
place, those who testified to the resurrection were numerous
enough, so far as mere numbers go, to establish the fact beyond
question. Paul declares there were above five hundred who from
their personal knowledge could affirm of the Lord's resurrection.
But particularly there were the eleven apostles, the two Marys,
Cleopas, and the disciples from whom Joseph and Matthias the
candidates for Judas Iscariot's apostleship were selected,
consisting probably of most of the seventy. If the evidence of any
number of men ought to convince us of the alleged event, then,
under the existing circumstances, that of twelve ought. Important
matters of history are often unhesitatingly received on the
authority of a single historian. If the occurrences at the time
were sufficient to demonstrate to a reasonable mind the reality of
the resurrection, then the unanimous testimony of twelve men to
those occurrences should convince us. The oaths of a thousand
would be no stronger.

These men possessed sufficient abilities to be trusted, good
powers of judgment, and varied experience. The selection of them
by Him who "knew what was in man," the boldness and efficiency of
their lives, the fruits of their labors everywhere, amply prove
their

1 The opposite view is ably argued by Bush in his valuable
treatise on the Resurrection.

2 Sherlock, Trial of the Witnesses.

3 Ditton, Demonstration of the Resurrection of Christ. For a
sternly faithful estimate of the cogency of this argument, it must
be remembered that all the data, every fact and postulate in each
step of the reasoning, rest on the historical authority of the
four Gospels, documents whose authorship and date are lost in
obscurity. Even of "orthodox" theologians few, with any claims to
scholarship, now hold that these Gospels, as they stand, were
written by the persons whose names they bear. They wander and
waver in a thick fog. See Milman's "History of Christianity," vol.
i. ch. ii. appendix ii.


general intelligence and energy. And they had, too, the most
abundant opportunities of knowledge in regard to the facts to
which they bore witness. They were present in the places, at the
times, when and where the events occurred. Every motive would
conspire to make them scrutinize the subject and the attendant
circumstances. And it seems they did examine; for at first some
doubted, but afterwards believed. They had been close companions
of Jesus for more than a year at the least. They had studied his
every feature, look, gesture. They must have been able to
recognise him, or to detect an impostor, if the absurd idea of an
attempted imposition can be entertained. They saw him many times,
near at hand, in the broad light. Not only did they see him, but
they handled his wounded limbs and listened to his wondrous voice.
If these means of knowing the truth were not enough to make their
evidence valid, then no opportunities could be sufficient.

Whoso allows its full force to the argument thus far will admit
that the testimony of the witnesses to the resurrection is
conclusive, unless he suspects that by some cause they were either
incapacitated to weigh evidence fairly, or were led wilfully to
stifle the truth and publish a falsehood. Very few persons have
ever been inclined to make this charge, that the apostles were
either wild enthusiasts of fancy, or crafty calculators of fraud;
and no one has ever been able to support the position even with
moderate plausibility. Granting, in the first place,
hypothetically, that the disciples were ever so great enthusiasts
in their general character and conduct, still, they could not have
been at all so in relation to the resurrection, because, before it
occurred, they had no belief, expectations, nor thoughts about it.
By their own frank confessions, they did not understand Christ's
predictions, nor the ancient supposed prophecies of that event.
And without a strong faith, a burning hopeful desire, or something
of the kind, for it to spring from, and rest on, and be nourished
by, evidently no enthusiasm could exist. Accordingly, we find that
previous to the third day after Christ's death they said nothing,
thought nothing, about a resurrection; but from that time, as by
an inspiration from heaven, they were roused to both words and
deeds. The sudden astonishing change here alluded to is to be
accounted for only by supposing that in the mean time they had
been brought to a belief that the resurrection had occurred. But,
secondly, it is to be noticed that these witnesses were not
enthusiasts on other subjects. No one could be the subject of such
an overweening enthusiasm as the hypothesis supposes, without
betraying it in his conduct, without being overmastered and led by
it as an insane man is by his mania. The very opposite of all this
was actually the case with the apostles. The Gospels are
unpretending, dispassionate narratives, without rhapsody,
adulation, or vanity. Their whole conduct disproves the charge of
fanaticism. Their appeals were addressed more to reason than to
feeling; their deeds were more courageous than rash. They avoided
tumult, insult, and danger whenever they could honorably do so;
but, when duty called, their noble intrepidity shrank not. They
were firm as the trunks of oaks to meet the agony and horror of a
violent death when it came; yet they rather shunned than sought to
wear the glorious crown from beneath whose crimson circlet drops
of bloody sweat must drip from a martyr's brows. The number of the
witnesses for the resurrection, the abilities they possessed,
their opportunities for knowing the facts, prove the impossibility
of their being duped, unless we suppose them to have been blind
fanatics. This we have just shown they were not. Would it not,
moreover, be most marvellous if they were such heated fanatics,
all of them, so many men?

But there is one further foothold for the disbeliever in the
historic resurrection of Christ. He may say, "I confess the
witnesses were capable of knowing, and undoubtedly did know, the
truth; but, for some reason, they suppressed it, and proclaimed a
deception." As to this charge, we not only deny the actuality, but
even the possibility, of its truth. The narratives of the
evangelists contain the strongest evidences of their honesty. The
many little unaccountable circumstances they recount, which are so
many difficulties in the way of critical belief, the real and the
apparent inconsistencies, none of these would have been permitted
by fraudulent authors. They are the most natural things in the
world, supposing their writers unsuspiciously honest. They also
frankly confess their own and each others' errors, ignorance,
prejudices, and faults. Would they have done this save from
simple hearted truthfulness? Would a designing knave voluntarily
reveal to a suspicious scrutiny actions and traits naturally
subversive of confidence in him? The conduct of the disciples
under the circumstances, through all the scenes of their after
lives, proves their undivided and earnest honesty. The cause they
had espoused was, if we deny its truth, to the last degree
repulsive in itself and in its concomitants, and they were
surrounded with allurements to desert it. Yet how unyielding,
wonderful, was their disinterested devotedness to it, without
exception! Not one, overcome by terror or bowed by strong anguish,
shrank from his self imposed task and cried out, "I confess!" No;
but when they, and their first followers who knew what they knew,
were laid upon racks and torn, when they were mangled and devoured
alive by wild beasts, when they were manacled fast amidst the
flames till their souls rode forth into heaven in chariots of
fire, amidst all this, not one of them ever acknowledged fraud or
renounced his belief in the resurrection of Jesus. Were they not
honest? Others have died in support of theories and opinions with
which their convictions and passions had become interwoven: they
died rather than deny facts which were within the cognizance of
their senses. Could any man, however firm and dauntless, under the
circumstances, go through the trials they bore, without a feeling
of truth and of God to support him?

These remarks are particularly forcible in connection with the
career of Paul. Endowed with brilliant talents, learned, living at
the time and place, he must have been able to form a reliable
opinion. And yet, while all the motives that commonly actuate men
loudmouthed consistency, fame, wealth, pride, pleasure, the rooted
force of inveterate prejudices  all were beckoning to him from the
temples and palaces of the Pharisaic establishment, he spurned the
glowing visions of his ambition and dashed to earth the bright
dreams of his youth. He ranged himself among the Christians, the
feeble, despised, persecuted Christians; and, after having suffered
every thing humanity could bear, having preached the resurrection
everywhere with unflinching power, he was at last crucified, or
beheaded, by Nero; and there, expiring among the seven hills of
Rome, he gave the resistless testimony of his death to the
resurrection of Jesus, gasping, as it were, with his last breath,
"It is true." Granting the honesty of these men, we could not have
any greater proof of it than we have now.

But dishonesty in this matter was not merely untrue; it was also
impossible. If fraud is admitted, a conspiracy must have been
formed among the witnesses. But that a conspiracy of such a
character should have been entered into by such men is in itself
incredible, in the outset. And then, if it had been entered into,
it must infallibly have broken through, been found out, or been
betrayed, in the course of the disasters, perils, terrible trials,
to which it and its fabricators were afterwards exposed. Prove
that a body of from twelve to five hundred men could form a plan
to palm off a gross falsehood upon the world, and could then
adhere to it unfalteringly through the severest disappointments,
dangers, sufferings, differences of opinion, dissension of feeling
and action, without retiring from the undertaking, letting out the
secret, or betraying each other in a single instance in the course
of years, prove this, and you prove that men may do and dare, deny
and suffer, not only without motives, but in direct opposition to
their duty, interest, desire, prejudice, and passion. The
disciples could not have pretended the resurrection from
sensitiveness to the probable charge that they had been miserably
deceived; for they did not understand their Master to predict any
such event, nor had they the slightest expectation of it. They
could not have pretended it for the sake of establishing and
giving authority to the good precepts and doctrines Jesus taught;
because such a course would have been in the plainest antagonism
to all those principles themselves, and because, too, they must
have known both the utter wickedness and the desperate hazards and
forlornness of such an attempt to give a fictitious sanction to
moral truths. In such an enterprise there was before them not the
faintest probability of even the slightest success. Every selfish
motive would tend to deter them; for poverty, hatred, disgrace,
stripes, imprisonment, contempt, and death stared in their faces
from the first step that way. Dishonesty, deliberate fraud, then,
in this matter, was not merely untrue, but was impossible. The
conclusion from the whole view is, therefore, the conviction that
the evidence of the witnesses for the resurrection of Jesus is
worthy of credence.

There are three considerations, further, worthy of notice in
estimating the strength of the historic argument for the
resurrection. First, the conduct of the Savior himself in relation
to the subject. The charge of unbalanced enthusiasm is
inconsistent with the whole character and life of Jesus; but
suppose on this point he was an enthusiast, and really believed
that three days after his death he would rise again. In that case,
would not his mind have dwelt upon the wonderful anticipated
phenomenon? Would not his whole soul have been wrapped up in it,
and his speech have been almost incessantly about it? Yet he spoke
of it only three or four times, and then with obscurity. Again:
suppose he was an impostor. An impostor would hardly have risked
his reputation voluntarily on what he knew could never take place.
Had he done so, his only reliance must have been upon the
credulous enthusiasm of his followers. He would then have made it
the chief topic, would have striven strenuously to make it a
living and intense hope, an immovable, all controlling faith,
concentrating on it their desires and expectations, heart and
soul. But he really did not do this at all. He did not even make
them understand what his vaticinations of the resurrection meant.
And when they saw his untenanted body hanging on the cross, they
slunk away in confusion and despair. Admit, again, that Christ was
enthusiast, or impostor, or both: these qualities exist not in the
grave. Here was their end. They could neither raise him from the
dead nor move him from the tomb. No considerations in any way
connected with Christ himself, therefore, can account for the
occurrences that succeeded his death.

Secondly, if the resurrection did not take place, what became of
the Savior's body? We have already given reasons why the disciples
could not have falsely pretended the resurrection. It is also
impossible that they obtained, or surreptitiously disposed of, the
dead and interred body; because it was in a tomb of rock securely
sealed against them, and watched by a guard which they could
neither bribe nor overpower; because they were too much
disheartened and alarmed to try to get it; because they could not
possibly want it, since they expected a temporal Messiah, and had
no hope of a resurrection like that which they soon began
proclaiming to the world. And as for the story told by the watch,
or rather by the chief priests and Pharisees, it has not
consistency enough to hold together. Its foolish unlikelihood has
always been transparent. It is unreasonable to suppose that fresh
guards would slumber at a post where the penalty of slumbering was
death. And, if one or two did sleep, it is absurd to think all
would do so. Besides, if they slept, how knew they what transpired
in the mean time? Could they have dreamed it? Dreams are not taken
in legal depositions; and, furthermore, it would be an astounding,
gratuitous miracle if they all dreamed the same thing at the same
time.

Finally, a powerful collateral argument in proof of the
resurrection of Christ is furnished by the conduct of the Jews. It
might seem that if the guards told the chief priests, scribes, and
Pharisees, of the miracles which occurred at the sepulchre, they
must immediately have believed and proclaimed their belief in the
Messiahship and resurrection of the crucified Savior. But they had
previously remained invulnerable to as cogent proof as this would
afford. They had acknowledged the miracles wrought by him when he
was alive, but attributed them even his works of beneficence to
demoniacal power. They said, "He casteth out devils by the power
of Beelzebub, the prince of devils." So they acted in the present
case, and, notwithstanding the peerless miracle related by the
sentinels, still persisted in their alienation from the Christian
faith. Their intensely cherished preconceptions respecting the
Messiah, their persecution and crucifixion of Jesus, the glaring
inconsistency of his teachings and experience with most that they
expected, these things compelled their incredulity to every proof
of the Messiahship of the contemned and murdered Nazarene. For, if
they admitted the facts on which such proof was based, they would
misinterpret them and deny the inferences justly drawn from them.
This was plainly the case. It may be affirmed that the Jews
believed the resurrection, because they took no fair measures to
disprove it, but threatened those who declared it. Since they had
every inducement to demonstrate its falsity, and might, it seems,
have done so had it been false, and yet never made the feeblest
effort to unmask the alleged fraud, we must suspect that they were
themselves secretly convinced of its truth, but dared not let it
be known, for fear it would prevail, become mighty in the earth,
and push them from their seats. In the rage and blindness of their
prejudices, they cried, "His blood be on us and on our children!"
And from that generation to our own, their history has afforded a
living proof of the historic truth of the gospel, and of the
stability of its chief corner stone, the resurrection of Christ.
The triumphal progress of Christianity from conquering to
conquering, together with the baffled plans and complete
subjection of the Jews, show that their providential preparatory
mission has been fulfilled. If God is in history, guiding the
moral drift of human affairs, then the dazzling success of the
proclamation of the risen Redeemer is the Divine seal upon the
truth of his mission and the reality of his apotheosis. Planting
himself on this ground, surrounding himself with these evidences,
the reverential Christian will at least for a long time to come
cling firmly to the accepted fact of the resurrection of Christ,
regardless of whatever misgivings and perplexities may trouble the
mind of the iconoclastic and critical truth seeker.

The Christian Scriptures, assuming the resurrection of Christ as a
fact, describe it as a fulfilment of prophecy. Luke reports from
the risen Savior the words, "O fools, and slow of heart to believe
all that the prophets have spoken! Ought not Christ to have
suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?" "Thus it is
written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from
the dead the third day." Peter declares that the patriarch David
before "spake of the resurrection of Christ." And Paul also
affirms, "That the promise which was made unto the fathers, God
hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath
raised up Jesus again." One can scarcely hesitate in deciding the
meaning of these words as they were used by the apostles. The
unanimous opinion and interpretation of the Christians of the
first centuries, and of all the Church Fathers, leave no shadow of
a doubt that it was believed that the resurrection of Jesus was
repeatedly foretold in the Old Testament, expected by the
prophets, and fulfilled in the event as a seal of the inspired
prophecy. Furthermore, Jesus himself repeatedly prophesied his own
resurrection from the dead,  though his disciples did not
understand his meaning until the event put a clear comment on the
words. He charged those who saw his transfiguration on the mount,
"Tell it to no man until the Son of Man be risen again from the
dead." The chief priests told Pilate that they remembered that
Jesus said, while he was yet alive, "After three days I will rise
again." Standing in the temple at Jerusalem, Jesus said once,
"Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up."
"When, therefore, he was risen from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he had said this unto them;" and then they
understood that "he had spoken of the temple of his body." It is
perfectly plain that the New Testament represents the resurrection
of Christ as the fulfilment of prophecies, those prophecies having
been so expounded by him.

There are few problems presented to the candid Christian scholar
of to day more perplexing than the one involved in the subject of
these prophecies. Paul declares to King Agrippa, "I say none other
things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should
come: that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first
that should rise from the dead and should show light unto the
Gentiles." It is vain to attempt to disguise the fact that the
ingenuous student cannot find these prophecies in the Old
Testament as we now have it. He will search it through in vain,
unless his eyes create what they see. Let any man endeavor to
discover a passage in the Hebrew Scriptures which, taken with its
context, can fairly bear such a sense. There is not a shadow of
valid evidence of any kind to support the merely traditional
notions on this subject. The only way of discerning predictions of
a death, descent, and ascent, of the Messiah, in the law and the
prophets, is by the application of Cabalistic methods of
interpretation, theories of occult types, double senses, methods
which now are not tolerable to intelligent men. That Rabbinical
interpretation which made the story of Ishmael and Isaac, the two
children borne to Abraham by Hagar and Sarah, an allegory
referring to the two covenants of Judaism and Christianity, could
easily extract any desired meaning from any given text. Bearing in
mind the prevalence of this kind of exegesis among the Jews, and
remembering also that they possessed in the times of Jesus a vast
body of oral law, to which they attributed as great authority as
to the written, there are two possible ways of honestly meeting
the difficulty before us.

First: in God's counsels it was determined that a Messiah should
afterwards arise among the Jews. The revealed hope of this stirred
the prophets and the popular heart. It became variously and
vaguely hinted in their writings, still more variously and
copiously unfolded in their traditions. The conception of him
gradually took form; and they began to look for a warrior prophet,
a national deliverer, a theocratic king. Jesus, being the true
Messiah, though a very different personage from the one meant by
the writers and understood by the people, yet being the Messiah
foreordained by God, applied these Messianic passages to himself,
and explained them according to his experience and fate. This will
satisfactorily clear up the application of some texts. And others
may be truly explained as poetical illustrations, rhetorical
accommodations, as when he applies to Judas, at the Last Supper,
the words of the Psalm, "He that eateth with me lifteth up his
heel against me;" and when he refers to Jonah's tarry in the
whale's belly as a symbol of his own destined stay beneath the
grave for a similar length of time. Or, secondly, we may conclude
that the prophecies under consideration, referred to in the New
Testament, were not derived from any sacred documents now in our
possession, but either from perished writings, or from oral
sources, which we know were abundant then. Justin Martyr says
there was formerly a passage in Jeremiah to this effect: "The Lord
remembered the dead who were sleeping in the earth, and went down
to them to preach salvation to them." 4 There were floating in the
Jewish mind, at the time of Christ, at least some fragmentary
traditions, vague expectations, that the Messiah was to die,
descend to Sheol, rescue some of the captives, and triumphantly
ascend. It is true, this statement is denied by some; but the
weight of critical authorities seems to us to preponderate in its
favor, and the intrinsic historical probabilities leave hardly a
doubt of it in our own minds.5 Now, three alternatives are offered
us. Either Jesus interpreted Moses, the Psalms, and the Prophets,
on the Rabbinical ground of a double sense, with mystic
applications; or he accepted the prophecies referred to, from oral
traditions held by his countrymen; or the apostles misunderstood,
and in consequence partially misreported, him. All we can
positively say is that these precise predictions are plainly not
in the Jewish Scriptures, undoubtedly were in the oral law, and
were certainly received by the apostles as authoritative.

Continuing our inquiry into the apostolic view of the resurrection
of Christ, we shall perceive that it is most prominently set forth
as the certificate of our redemption from the

4 Dial. cum Tryph. sect. lxxii.

5 Discussed, with full list of references, in Strauss's Life of
Jesus, part iii. cap. i. sect.
112.


kingdom of death to the same glorious destiny which awaited him
upon his ascension into heaven. The apostles regarded his
resurrection as a supernatural seal set on his mission, warranting
his claims as an inspired deliverer and teacher. Thereby, they
thought, God openly sanctioned and confirmed his promises.
Thereby, they considered, was shown to men God's blessed grace,
freely forgiving their sins, and securing to them, by this pledge,
a deliverance from the doom of sin as he had risen from it, and an
acceptance to a heavenly immortality as he had ascended to it. The
resurrection of Christ, then, and not his death, was to them the
point of vital interest, the hinge on which all hung. Does not the
record plainly show this to an impartial reader? Wherever the
apostles preach, whenever they write, they appeal not to the death
of a veiled Deity, but to the resurrection of an appointed
messenger; not to a vicarious atonement or purchase effected by
the mortal sufferings of Jesus, but to the confirmation of the
good tidings he brought, afforded by the Father's raising him from
the dead. "Whereof he hath given assurance unto all, in that he
hath raised him from the dead," Paul proclaimed on Mars Hill. In
the discourses of the apostles recorded in the Book of Acts, we
find that, when they preached the new religion to new audiences,
the great doctrine in all cases set forth as fundamental and
absorbing is the resurrection; not an atoning death, but a
justifying resurrection. "He died for our sins, and rose for our
justification." Some of the Athenians thought Paul "a setter forth
of two strange gods, Jesus and Resurrection." And when they desire
to characterize Christ, the distinguishing culminating phrase
which they invariably select shows on what their minds rested as
of chief import: they describe him as the one "whom God hath
raised from the dead." "If we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with
him." "That ye may know what is the exceeding greatness of God's
power toward us who believe, according to the working of his
mighty power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from
the dead and set him at his own right hand in heaven." It is plain
here that the dying of Christ is regarded merely as preliminary to
his rising, and that his resurrection and entrance into heaven are
received as an assurance that faithful disciples, too, shall
obtain admission into the heavenly kingdom.

The Calvinistic doctrine is that the unutterable vicarious agonies
of the death of Christ placated the wrath of God, satisfied his
justice, and ransomed the souls of the elect from the tortures of
hell, and that his resurrection was simply his victorious return
from a penal conflict with the powers of Satan. The Unitarian
doctrine is that the violent death of Christ was an expression of
self sacrificing love, to exert a moral power on the hearts of
men, and that his resurrection was a miraculous proof of the
authority and truth of his teachings, a demonstration of human
immortality. We maintain that neither of these views fully
contains the true representation of the New Testament. The
artificial horrors of the former cannot be forced into nor wrung
out of the written words; while the natural simplicity and
meagerness of the latter cannot be made to fill up the written
words with adequate significance. There is a medium doctrine,
based on the conceptions prevalent at the time the Christian
system was constructed and written; a doctrine which equally
avoids the credulous excess of the Calvinistic interpretation and
the skeptical poverty of the Unitarian; a doctrine which fully
explains all the relevant language of the New Testament without
violence; a doctrine which, for our own part, we feel sure
accurately represents the ideas meant to be conveyed by the
Scripture authors. We will state it, and then quote, for its
illustration and for their own explanation, the principal texts
relating to the resurrection of Jesus.

On account of sin, which had alienated man from God and unfitted
him for heaven, he was condemned after death to descend as a
disembodied soul into the dark kingdom of the grave, the under
world. In that cheerless realm of helpless shades and stillness
all departed human spirits were prisoners, and must be, until the
advent of the Messiah, when they, or a part of them, should rise.
This was the Jewish belief. Now, the apostles were Jews, who had
the ideas of their countrymen, to which, upon becoming Christians,
they added the new conceptions formed in their minds by the
teachings, character, deeds, death, resurrection, of Christ, mixed
with their own meditations and experience. Accepting, with these
previous notions, the resurrection of Christ as a fact and a
fulfilment of prophecy, they immediately supposed that his
triumphant exit from the prison of the dead and return to heaven
were the prefiguration of the similar deliverance of others and
their entrance into heaven. They considered him as "the first born
from the dead," "the first fruits of the dead." They emphatically
characterize his return to life as a "resurrection out from among
the dead," "[non-ASCII characters], plainly implying that the rest
of the dead still remained below.6 They received his experience in
this respect as the revealing type of that which was awaiting his
followers. So far as relates to the separate existence of the
soul, the restoration of the widow's son by Elijah, or the
resurrection of Lazarus, logically implies all that is implied in
the mere resurrection of Christ. But certain notions of
localities, of a redemptive ascent, and an opening of heaven for
the redeemed spirits of men to ascend thither, were associated
exclusively with the last. When, through the will of God, Christ
rose, "then first humanity triumphant passed the crystal ports of
light, and seized eternal youth!" Their view was not that Christ
effected all this by means of his own; but that the free grace of
God decreed it, and that Christ came to carry the plan into
execution. "God, for his great love to us, even when we were dead
in sins, has quickened us together with Christ." This was effected
as in dramatic show: Christ died, which was suffering the fate of
a sinner; he went in spirit to the subterranean abode of spirits,
which was bearing the penalty of sin; he rose again, which was
showing the penalty of sin removed by Divine forgiveness; he
ascended into heaven,  which was revealing the way for our ascent
thrown open. Such is the general scope of thought in close and
vital connection with which the doctrine of the resurrection of
Christ stands. We shall spare enlarging on those parts of it which
have been sufficiently proved and illustrated in preceding
chapters, and confine our attention as much as may be to those
portions which have direct relations with the resurrection of
Christ. It is our object, then, to show what we think will plainly
appear in the light of the above general statement that, to the
New Testament writers, the resurrection, and not the death, of
Christ is the fact of central moment, is the assuring seal of our
forgiveness, reconciliation, and heavenly adoption.

6 Wood, The Last Things, pp. 31-44.


They saw two antithetical starting points in the history of
mankind: a career of ruin, beginning with condemned Adam in the
garden of Eden at the foot of the forbidden tree, dragging a
fleshly race down into Sheol; a career of remedy, beginning with
victorious Christ in the garden of Joseph at the mouth of the rent
sepulchre, guiding a spiritual race up into heaven.

The Savior himself is reported as saying, "I lay down my life that
I may take it again:" the dying was not for the sake of
substitutional suffering, but for the sake of a resurrection.
"Except a corn of wheat die, it abideth alone; but, if it die, it
bringeth forth much fruit." "A woman when she is in travail hath
sorrow; but as soon as she is delivered of the child she
remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into
the world." The context here shows the Savior's meaning to be that
the woe of his death would soon be lost in the weal of his
resurrection. The death was merely the necessary antecedent to the
significant resurrection. "Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his abundant mercy, hath
begotten us again unto a living hope by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead unto an inheritance, incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you
who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation
ready to be revealed." "Him hath God raised on high by his right
hand, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins." How
clear it is here that not the vicarious death of Christ buys off
sinners, but his resurrection shows sins to be freely forgiven,
the penalty remitted! "Remember that Jesus Christ was raised from
the dead, according to my gospel: therefore I endure all things
for the elect's sake, that they may obtain the salvation which is
in Christ Jesus with eternal glory." "Be it known unto you,
therefore, men, brethren, that through Him whom God raised again
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins." The passage in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, ninth chapter, from the twenty third verse
to the twenty seventh, most emphatically connects the annulling of
sin through the sacrifice of Christ with his ascended appearance
in heaven. "Jesus who was delivered for our offences and was
raised again for our justification:" that is, Jesus died because
he had entered the condition of sinful humanity, the penalty of
which was death; he was raised to show that God had forgiven us
our sins and would receive us to heaven instead of banishing us to
the under world. "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved." Belief in the resurrection of
Christ is here undeniably made the great condition of salvation.
No text can be found in which belief in the death, or blood, or
atoning merits, of Christ is made that condition. And yet nine
tenths of Christendom by their creeds are to day proclaiming,
"Believe in the vicarious sufferings of Christ, and thou shalt be
saved; believe not in them, and thou shalt be damned!" "God hath
both raised up the Lord and will also raise up us." "If Christ be
not raised, your faith is vain: ye are yet in your sins." This
text cannot be explained upon the common Calvinistic or Unitarian
theories. Whether Christ was risen or not made no difference in
their justification before God if his death had atoned for them,
made no difference in their moral condition, which was as it was;
but if Christ had not risen, then they were mistaken in supposing
that heaven had been opened for them: they were yet held in the
necessity of descending to the under world, the penalty of their
sins. The careful reader will observe that, in many places in the
Scriptures where a burden and stress of importance seem laid upon
the death of Christ, there immediately follows a reference to his
resurrection, showing that the dying is only referred to as the
preparatory step to the rising, the resurrection being the
essential thing. "The Apostle Paul scarcely speaks of the death of
the Savior except in connection with his resurrection," Bleek
says, in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews. "It is
Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen again and is now at
the right hand of God."

"If we believe that Jesus died and rose again." "To this end
Christ both died, and rose and lived again." "He died for them and
rose again." We confidently avow, therefore, that the Christian
Scriptures concentrate the most essential significance and value
of the mission of Jesus in his resurrection, describing it as the
Divine seal of his claims, the visible proof and pledge of our
redemption, by God's freely forgiving grace, from the fatal
bondage of death's sepulchral domain to the blessed splendors of
heaven's immortal life.

There remain a class of passages to be particularly noticed, in
which an extraordinary emphasis seems to be laid on Christ's
sufferings, Christ's blood, Christ's death, three phrases that
mean virtually the same thing and are used interchangeably. The
peculiar prominence given to the idea of the sacrifice of Christ
in the instances now referred to is such as might lead one to
suppose that some mysterious efficacy was meant to be attributed
to it. But we think an accurate examination of the subject will
show that these texts are really in full harmony with the view we
have been maintaining. Admitting that the resurrection of Christ
was the sole circumstance of ultimate meaning and importance,
still, his violent and painful death would naturally be spoken of
as often and strongly as it is, for two reasons. First, the chief
ground of wonder and claim for gratitude to him was that he should
have left his pre existent state of undisturbed bliss and glory,
and submitted to such humiliation and anguish for others, for
sinners. Secondly, it was the prerequisite to his resurrection,
the same, in effect, with it, since the former must lead to the
latter; for, as the foremost apostle said, "It was not possible
that he should be holden in death."

The apostolical writers do not speak of salvation by the blood of
Christ any more plainly than they do of salvation by the name of
Christ, salvation by grace, and salvation by faith. If at one time
they identify him with the sacrificial "lamb," at another time
they as distinctively identify him with the "high priest offering
himself," and again with "the great Shepherd of the sheep," and
again with "the mediator of the new covenant," and again with "the
second Adam." These are all figures of speech, and, taken
superficially, they determine nothing as to doctrine. The
propriety and the genuine character and force of the metaphor are
in each case to be carefully sought with the lights of learning
and under the guidance of a docile candor. The thoughts that, in
consequence of transmitted sin, all departed souls of men were
confined in the under world that Christ, to carry out and
revealingly exemplify the free grace of the Father, came into the
world, died a cruel death, descended to the prison world of the
dead, declared there the glad tidings, rose thence and ascended
into heaven, the forerunner of the ransomed hosts to follow, these
thoughts enable us to explain, in a natural, forcible, and
satisfactory manner, the peculiar phraseology of the New Testament
in regard to the death of Christ, without having recourse to the
arbitrary conceptions and mystical horror usually associated with
it now.

For instance, consider the passage in the second chapter of the
Epistle to the Ephesians, from the eleventh verse to the
nineteenth. The writer here says that "the Gentiles, who formerly
were far off, strangers from the covenants of promise, are now
made nigh by the blood of Christ." This language he clearly
explains as meaning that through the death and resurrection of
Christ "the middle wall of partition between Jews and Gentiles was
broken down" and a universal religion inaugurated, free from all
invidious distinctions and carnal ordinances. In his bodily death
and spiritual ascension the Jewish ritual law was abolished and
the world wide moral law alone installed. From his spirit, rising
into heaven, all national peculiarities fell away, and through him
Jews and Gentiles both had access, by communion with his ascended
and cosmopolitan soul, unto the Father. A careful study of all the
passages in the New Testament which speak of Christ as delivering
men from the wrath of God will lead, it seems to us, almost every
unprejudiced person to agree with one of the ablest German
critics, who says that "the technical phrase 'wrath of God' here
means, historically, banishment of souls into the under world, and
that the fact of Christ's triumph and ascent was a precious pledge
showing to the Christians that they too should ascend to eternal
life in heaven."7 The doctrine of the descent of Christ among the
dead and of his redemptive mission there has of late wellnigh
faded from notice; but if any one wishes to see the evidence of
its universal reception and unparalleled importance in the
Christian Church for fifteen hundred years, presented in
overwhelming quantity and irresistible array, let him read the
learned work devoted to this subject recently published in
Germany.8 He can hardly peruse this work and follow up its
references without seeing that, almost without an exception, from
the days of Peter and Paul to those of Martin Luther, it has been
held that "the death and resurrection of Christ are the two poles
between which," as Guder says, "his descent into the under world
lies." The phrase "blood of Christ" is often used in Scripture in
a pregnant sense, including the force of meaning that would be
expressed by his death, descent, resurrection, and ascension, with
all their concomitants. As a specimen of innumerable passages of
like import which might be cited, we will quote a single
expression from Epiphanius, showing that the orthodox teachers in
the fourth century attributed redeeming efficacy to Christ's
resurrection rather than to his death." As the pelican restores
its dead offspring by dropping its own blood upon their wounds, so
our Lord Jesus Christ dropped his blood upon Adam, Eve, and all
the dead, and gave them life by his burial and resurrection." 9

It was a part of the Mosaic ritual, laid down in the sixteenth
chapter of Leviticus, that on the great annual day of expiation
there should be two goats chosen by lot, one for the Lord and one
for Azazel. The former the high priest was to slay, and with his
blood sprinkle

7 Bretschneider, Religiose Glaubenslehre, sect. 59: Christus der
Erloser vom Tode.

8 Guder, Die Lehre von der Erscheinung Jesu Christi unter den
Todten: In ihrem Zusammenhange mit der Lehre von den Letzten
Dingen.

9 Physiol., cap. 8: De Pelecano.


the mercy seat. The latter, when the high priest's hands had been
laid on his head and all the iniquities of the children of Israel
confessed over him, was to be sent into the wilderness and loosed.
The former goat is called "a sin offering for the people." The
latter is called "a scape goat to make an atonement with the
Lord." The blood of the sin offering could not have been supposed
to be a substitute purchasing the pardon of men's offences,
because there is no hint of any such idea in the record, and
because it was offered to reconcile "houses," "tabernacles,"
"altars," as well as to reconcile men. It had simply a ceremonial
significance. Such rites were common in many of the early
religions. They were not the efficient cause of pardon, but were
the formal condition of reconciliation. And then, in regard to the
scapegoat, it was not sacrificed as an expiation for sinners; it
merely symbolically carried off the sins already freely forgiven.
All these forms and phrases were inwrought with the whole national
life and religious language of the Jews. Now, when Jesus appeared,
a messenger from God, to redeem men from their sins and to promise
them pardon and heaven, and when he died a martyr's death in the
fulfilment of his mission, how perfectly natural that this
sacrificial imagery these figures of blood, propitiation,
sprinkling the mercy seat should be applied to him, and to his
work and fate! The burden of sins forgiven by God's grace in the
old covenant the scape goat emblematically bore away, and the
people went free. So if the words must be supposed to have an
objective and not merely a moral sense when the Baptist cried,
"Behold the Lamb of God, that beareth off the sin of the world,"
his meaning was that Jesus was to bear off the penalty of sin that
is, the Hadean doom which God's free grace had annulled and open
heaven to the ranks of reconciled souls. There is not the least
shadow of proof that the sacrifices in the Mosaic ritual were
Divinely ordained as types pre figuring the great sacrifice of
Christ. There is no such pretence in the record, no such tradition
among the people, not the slightest foundation whatever of any
sort to warrant that arbitrary presumption. All such applications
of them are rhetorical; and their historical force and moral
meaning are clearly explicable on the views which we have
presented in the foregoing pages, but are most violently strained
and twisted by the Calvinistic theory to meet the severe
exigencies of a theoretical dogma.

If any one, granting that the central efficacy of the mission of
Christ, dogmatically and objectively considered, lay in his
descent into Hades and in his resurrection, maintains that still
certain passages in the New Testament do ascribe an expiatory
effect directly to his death as such, we reply that this
interpretation is quite likely to be correct. And we can easily
trace the conception to its origin beyond the pale of revelation.
It was an idea prevalent among the Jews in the time of the
apostles, and before, that death was an atonement for all sins,
and that the death of the righteous atoned for the sins of
others.10 Now, the apostles might adopt this view and apply it
pre eminently to the case of Christ. This is the very explanation
given by Origen.11 De Wette quotes the following sentence, and
many others of the same purport,

10 Gfrorer, Gesehichte des Urchristenthums, abth. ii. pp. 187
190.

11 Mosheim, Commentaries on Christianity in the First Three
Centuries, Eng. trans., vol. ii. pp. 162-163.

from the Talmud: "The death of the just is the redemption of
sinners."12 The blood of any righteous man was a little atonement;
that of Christ was a vast one. The former all Protestants call a
heathen error. So they should the latter, because it sprung from
the same source and is the same in principle. If, then, there are
any scriptural texts which imply that the mere death of Christ had
a vicarious, expiatory efficacy, they are, so far forth, the
reflection of heathen and Jewish errors yet lingering in the minds
of the writers, and not the inspired revelation of an isolated,
arbitrary after expedient contrived in the secret counsels of God
and wonderfully interpolated into the providential history of the
world. But, if there are any such passages, they are few and
unimportant. The great mass of the scriptural language on this
subject is fairly and fully explained by the historical theory
whose outlines we have sketched. The root of the matter is the
resurrection of Christ out from among the dead and his ascent into
heaven.

It has not been our purpose in this chapter, or in the preceding
chapters, to present the history of the Christian doctrine of the
atonement, either in its intrinsic significance or in its
relations to subjective religious experience. We have only sought
to explain it, according to the original understanding of it, in
its objective relations to the fate of men in the future life. The
importance of the subject, its difficulty, and the profound
prejudices connected with it, are so great as not only to excuse,
but even to require, much explanatory repetition to make the truth
clear and to recommend it, in many lights, with various methods,
and by accumulated authorities. Those who wish to see the whole
subject of the atonement treated with consummate fulness and
ability, leaving nothing to be desired from the historical point
of view, have only to read the masterly work of Baur.13

In leaving this part of our subject here, we would submit the
following considerations to the candid judgment of the reader.
Admitting the truth of the common doctrine of the atonement, why
did Christ die? It does not appear how there could be any
particular efficacy in mere death. The expiation of sin which he
had undertaken required only a certain amount of suffering. It did
not as far as we can see on the theory of satisfaction by an
equivalent substituted suffering require death. It seems as if
local and physical ideas must have been associated with the
thought of his death. And we find the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews thus replying to the question, Why did Christ die? "That
through death he might destroy him that hath the power of death,
that is, the devil, and deliver those who through fear of death
were all their lifetime subject to bondage." Now, plainly, this
end was accomplished by his resurrection bursting asunder the
bonds of Hades and showing that it was no longer the hopeless
prison of the dead. The justice of this explanation appears from
the logical necessity of the series of ideas, the internal
coherence and harmony of thought. It has been ably shown that
substantially this view is the accurate interpretation of the New
Testament doctrine by

12 Comm. de Morte Christi Expiatoria, cap. iii.: Qua Judaorum
Recentiorum Christologia de Passione ac Morte Messia docet.

13 Die Christliche Lehre von der Versohnung in ihrer
Geschichtlichen Entwicklung von der Alteaten Zeit bis auf die
Neueste.

Steinbart,14 Schott,15 Bretschneider,16 Klaiber,17 and others. The
gradual deviations from this early view can be historically
traced, step by step, through the refining speculations of
theologians. First, in ecclesiastical history, after the New
Testament times, it is thought the devil has a right over all
souls in consequence of sin. Christ is a ransom offered to the
devil to offset his claim. Sometimes this is represented as a fair
bargain, sometimes as a deception practised on the devil,
sometimes as a battle waged with him. Next, it is conceived that
the devil has no right over human souls, that it is God who has
doomed them to the infernal prison and holds them there for their
sin. Accordingly, the sacrifice of Christ for their ransom is
offered not to the tyrannical devil but to the offended God.
Finally, in the progress of culture, the satisfaction theory
appears; and now the suffering of Christ is neither to buy souls
from the devil nor to appease God and soften his anger into
forgiveness; but it is to meet the inexorable exigencies of the
abstract law of infinite justice and deliver sinners by bearing
for them the penalty of sin. The whole course of thought, once
commenced, is natural, inevitable; but the starting point is from
an error, and the pausing places are at false goals.

The view which we have asserted to be the scriptural view
prevailed as the orthodox doctrine of the Church throughout the
first three centuries, as Bahr has proved in his valuable treatise
on the subject.18 He shows that during that period Christ's death
was regarded as a revelation of God's love, a victory over the
devil, (through his resurrection,) a means of obtaining salvation
for men, but not as a punitive sacrifice, not as a vindication of
God's justice, not as a vicarious satisfaction of the law.19 If
the leading theologians of Christendom, such as Anselm, Calvin,
and Grotius, have so thoroughly repudiated the original Christian
and patristic doctrine of the atonement, and built another
doctrine upon their own uninspired speculations, why should our
modern sects defer so slavishly to them, and, instead of freely
investigating the subject for themselves from the first sources of
Scripture and spiritual philosophy, timidly cling to the results
reached by these biassed, morbid, and over sharp thinkers? In
proportion as scholarly, unfettered minds engage in such a
criticism, we believe the exposition given in the foregoing pages
will be recognised as scriptural. Without involving this whole
theory, how can any one explain the unquestionable fact that
during the first four centuries the entire orthodox Church
believed that Christ at his resurrection from the under world
delivered Adam from his imprisonment there?20 All acknowledge that
the phrase "redemption by the blood of Christ" is a metaphor. The
only question is, what meaning was it intended to convey? We
maintain its meaning to be that

14 System der Reinen Philosophie, oder Gluckseligkeitslehre des
Christenthums, u.s.f.

15 Epitome Theologia Christiana Dogmatica.

16 Die Lehren von Adam's Fall, der Erbsunde, und dem Opfer
Christi.

17 Studien der Evang. Geietlichkeit Wurtemburgs, viii. 1, 2.
Doederlein, Morus, Knapp, Schwarze, and Reinhard affirm that the
death of Christ was not the price of our pardon, but the
confirming declaration of free pardon from God. Hagenbach,
Dogmengeschichte, sect. 297, note 5.

18 Die Lehre der Kirche vom Tode Jesu in den Ersten Drei
Jahrhunderteu.

19 Die Lehre der Kirche vom Tode Jesu in den Ersten Drei
Jahrhunderten, ss. 176-180.

20 Augustine, Epist. ad Evodium 99. Op. Imp. vi. 22, 30. Epist.
164. Dante makes Adam say he had been 4302 years in Limbo when
Christ, at his descent, rescued him. Paradise, canto xxvi.


through all the events and forces associated with the death of
Christ, including his descent to Hades and his resurrection, men
are delivered from the doom of the under world. The common
theology explains it as teaching that there was an expiatory
efficacy in the unmerited sufferings of Christ. The system known
as Unitarianism says it denotes merely the exertion of a saving
spiritual power on the hearts of men. The first interpretation
charges the figure of speech with a dramatic revelation of the
love of God freely rescuing men from their inherited fate. The
second seems to make it a tank of gore, where Divine vengeance
legally laps to appease its otherwise insatiable appetite. The
third fills it with a regenerative moral influence to be
distributed upon the characters of believers. The two former also
include the last; but it excludes them. Now, as it seems to us,
the first is the form of mistake in which the early Church,
including the apostles, embodied the true significance of the
mission of Christ. Owing to the circle of ideas in which they
lived, this was the only possible form in which the disciples of
Jesus could receive the new doctrine of a blessed immortality
brought to light by Christianity.21 The second is the form of
false theory in which a few scholastic brains elaborated the cruel
results of their diseased metaphysical speculations. The third is
the dry, meager, inadequate statement of the most essential truth
in the case.

There is one more point of view in which the New Testament holds
up the resurrection of Christ. It is regarded as a summons to a
moral and spiritual resurrection within the breast of the
believer. As the great Forerunner had ascended to a spiritual and
immortal life in the heavens, so his followers should be inspired
with such a realizing sense of heavenly things, with such Divine
faith and fellowship, as would lift them above the world, with all
its evanescent cares, and fix their hearts with God. This high
communion with Christ, and intense assurance of a destined speedy
inheritance with him, should render the disciple insensible to the
clamorous distractions of earth, invulnerable to the open and
secret assaults of sin, as if in the body he were already dead,
and only alive in the spirit to the obligations of holiness, the
attractions of piety, and the promises of heaven. "When we were
dead in trespasses and sins, God loved us, and hath quickened us
together with Christ, and hath raised us up together and made us
sit together in heavenly places." "If ye, then, be risen with
Christ, set your affection on things above, not on earthly things;
for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God." This
moral symbolic application of the resurrection is most beautiful
and effective. Christ has risen, immaculate and immortal, into the
pure and holy heaven: then live virtuously and piously, that you
may be found worthy to be received unto him. "He that hath this
hope purifieth himself, even as He is pure." Paul enforces this
thought through the striking figure that, since "we are freed from
the law through the death of Christ, we should be married to his
risen spirit and bring forth fruit unto God." And again, when he
speaks in these words, "Christ in you the hope of glory," we
suppose he refers to the spiritual image of the risen Redeemer
formed in the disciples' imagination and heart, the prefiguring
and witnessing pledge of their ascension also to heaven. The same
practical use is made of the doctrine through the rite and sign of
baptism. "Ye are buried with Christ in

21 Bretschneider forcibly illustrates this in his Handbuch der
Dogmatik der Evang.  Luther. Kirche, sects. 156-158, band ii.


baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through faith in the
working of God, who hath raised him from the dead." "Wherefore, if
ye be dead with Christ, why are ye subject to worldly ordinances?
and if ye be risen with him, seek those things which are above."
When the disciple sunk beneath the baptizing waters, he was
typically dead and buried, as Jesus was in the tomb; when he rose
from the waters into the air again, he figuratively represented
Christ rising from the dead into heaven. Henceforth, therefore, he
was to consider himself as dead to all worldly sins and lusts,
alive to all heavenly virtues and aspirations. "Therefore," the
apostle says, "we are buried with Christ by baptism unto death,
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, even so we should
walk in newness of life." "In that Christ died, he died unto sin
once; but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God. Likewise reckon
ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto
God." "Therefore, if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature:
old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new."
This was strictly true to the immediate disciples of Jesus. When
he died, their hearts died within them; they shrank away in
hopeless confusion and gloom. When he returned to life and
ascended to heaven, in feeling and imagination they went with him.
Every moral power and motive started into new life and energy.

"The day when from the dead Our Lord arose, then everywhere, Out
of their darkness and despair, Triumphant over fears and foes, The
souls of his disciples rose."

An unheard of assurance of the Father's love and of their eternal
inheritance flooded their being with its regenerating, uplifting
power. To their absorbing anticipations the mighty consummation of
all was at hand. In reflective imagination it was already past,
and they, dead to the world, only lived to God. The material world
and the lust thereof had sunk beneath them and vanished. They were
moving in the universe of imperishable realities unseen by the
fleshly eye. To their faith already was unrolled over them that
new firmament in whose spanless welkin no cloudy tempests ever
gather and break, and the serene lights never fade nor go down.
This experience of a spiritual exaltation above the sins and
degrading turmoils of passion, above the perishing baubles of the
earth, into the religious principles which are independent and
assured, peace, and bliss, and eternity, is attainable by all who
with the earnestness of their souls assimilate the moral truths of
Christianity, pressing in pious trust after the steps of the risen
Master. And this, after all, is the vital essence of the doctrine
of the resurrection as it makes practical appeal to us. This will
stand, though gnawing time and hostile criticism should assail and
shake all the rest. It is something not to be mechanically wrought
upon us from without, but to be done within by our own voluntary
effort and prayer, by God's help. To rise from sloth, unbelief,
sin, from moral death, to earnestness, faith, beneficence, to
eternal life in the breast, is a real and most sublime
resurrection, the indispensable preparation for that other and
final one which shall raise us from the sepulchre to the sky.
When, on Easter morning, Christian disciples throughout the world
hear the joyous cry, "Christ is risen," and their own
hearts instinctively respond, with an unquenchable persuasion that
he is now alive somewhere in the heights of the universe, "Christ
is risen indeed," they should endeavor in spirit to rise too, rise
from the deadly bondage and corruption of vice and indifference.
While the earth remains, and men survive, and the evils which
alienate them from God and his blessedness retain any sway over
them, so oft as that hallowed day comes round, this is the
kindling message of Divine authority ever fresh, and of
transcendent import never old, that it bears through all the
borders of Christendom to every responsible soul: "Awake from your
sleep, arise from your death, lift up your eyes to heaven, and the
risen Redeemer will give you the light of immortal life!" Have
this awakening and deathless experience in the soul, and you will
be troubled by no doubts about an everlasting life succeeding the
close of the world. But so long as this spiritual resurrection in
the breast is unknown, you can have no knowledge of eternal life,
no experimental faith in a future entrance from the grave into
heaven, no, not though millions of resurrections had crowded the
interstellar space with ascending shapes. Rise, then, from your
moral graves, and already, by faith and imagination, sit in
heavenly places with Christ Jesus.

Before leaving this subject, it belongs to us to look at it as a
theory; that is, to consider with critical scrutiny the
conclusions which are supposed to flow from its central fact. We
must regard it from three distinct points of view, seeking its
meaning in sound logic, its force in past history, its value in
present experience. First, then, we are to inquire what really is
the logical significance of the resurrection of Christ. The
looseness and confusion of thought prevailing in relation to this
point are amazing. It seems as if mankind were contented with
investigations careless, reasonings incoherent, and inferences
arbitrary, in proportion to the momentousness of the matter in
hand. In regard to little details of sensible fact and daily
business their observation is sharp, their analysis careful, their
reflection patient; but when they approach the great problems of
morality, God, immortality, they shrink from commensurate efforts
to master those mighty questions with stern honesty, and remain
satisfied with fanciful methods and vague results. The
resurrection of Christ is generally regarded as a direct
demonstration of the immortality of man, an argument of
irrefragable validity. But this is an astonishing mistake. The
argument was not so constructed by Paul. He did not seek directly
to prove the immortality of the soul, but the resurrection of the
dead. He took for granted the Pharisaic doctrine that all souls on
leaving their bodies descended to Sheol, where they darkly
survived, waiting to be summoned forth at the arrival of the
Messianic epoch. Assuming the further premise that Christ after
death went down among these imprisoned souls, and then rose thence
again, Paul infers, by a logical process strictly valid and
irresistible to one holding those premises, that the general
doctrine of a resurrection from the dead is true, and that by this
visible pledge we may expect it soon, since the Messiah, who is to
usher in its execution, has already come and finished the
preliminary stages of his work. The apostle's own words plainly
show this to be his meaning. "If there be no resurrection of the
dead, then is Christ not risen. But now is Christ risen from the
dead, become the first fruits of them that slept. For since by man
came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. Every
man shall be made alive in his own order: Christ the first fruits;
then they that are Christ's, at his coming; then the last remnant,
when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God." The notions
of a universal imprisonment of souls in the intermediate state,
and of a universal raising of them thence at an appointed time,
having faded from a deep and vivid belief into a cold traditional
dogma, ridiculed by many, cared for at all by few, realizingly
held by almost none, Paul's argument has been perverted and
misinterpreted, until it is now commonly supposed to mean this:
Christ has risen from the dead: therefore the soul of man is
immortal. Whereas the argument really existed in his mind in the
reverse form, thus: The souls of men are immortal and are
hereafter to be raised up: therefore Christ has risen as an
example and illustration thereof. It is singular to notice that he
has himself clearly stated the argument in this form three times
within the space of four consecutive verses, as follows: "If there
be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen:" "God
raised Christ not up, if so be that the dead rise not." "For if
the dead rise not, then is Christ not raised." The fact of the
resurrection of Christ, taken in connection with the related
notions previously held in the mind of Paul, formed the complement
of an irresistible argument to prove the impending resurrection of
the dead, But if it be now perceived that those other notions were
Pharisaic errors, the argument, as he employed it, falls to the
ground.

Taken by itself and analyzed by a severe logic, the resurrection
of Christ proves nothing conclusively in regard to our
immortality. If it did of itself prove any thing, the direct
logical inference from it would be that henceforth all men, three
days after death, would rise bodily from the dead, appear for a
season on earth as before, and then ascend visibly into the sky.
If at the present time a man who had been put to death and
entombed three days should openly come forth alive, considered as
an isolated fact, what would it prove? It would merely prove that
a wonderful event had occurred. It would show that either by some
mysterious means he had escaped death, or else that by some
apparently preternatural agency he had been restored to life from
the dead. Taken by itself, it could not prove whether the
occurrence was caused by a demoniacal or by a Divine power, or by
some occult force of nature developed by a peculiar combination of
conditions. The strange event would stand clear to our senses; but
all beyond that would be but an hypothesis of our own, and liable
to mistake. Consequently, we say, the resurrection, taken by
itself, proves no doctrine. But we may so suppose the case that
such an event would, from its relation to something else, acquire
logical meaning. For instance, if Christ had taught that he had
supernatural knowledge of truth, a Divine commission to reveal a
future life, and said that, after he should have been dead and
buried three days, God would restore him to life to authenticate
his words, and if, then, so stupendous a miracle occurred in
accordance with his prediction, it would prove that his claims and
doctrine were true, because God is no accomplice in deception.
Such was the case with Jesus as narrated; and thus his
resurrection appears, not as having doctrinal significance and
demonstrative validity in itself, but as a miraculous
authentication of his mission. That is to say, the Christian's
faith in immortality rests not directly on the resurrection of
Christ, but on his teachings, which were confirmed and sealed by
his resurrection. It is true that, even in this modified form,
some persons of dialectical minds will deny all validity to the
argument. What necessary connection is there, they will ask,
between the exhibition of mechanico chemical wonders, physical
feats, however abnormal and inexplicable, and the possession of
infallibility of intellectual insight and moral utterance? If a
man should say, God is falsehood and hatred, and in evidence of
his declaration should make a whole cemetery disembogue its dead
alive, or cause the sun suddenly to sink from its station at noon
and return again, would his wonderful performance prove his
horrible doctrine? Why, or how, then, would a similar feat prove
the opposite doctrine? Plainly, there is not, on rigid logical
principles, any connecting tie or evidencing coherence between a
physical miracle and a moral doctrine.22 We admit the correctness
of this, on philosophical grounds. But the validity of a miracle
as proof of a doctrine rests on the spontaneous assumption that no
man can work a miracle unless God specially delegate him the
power: thereby God becomes the voucher of his envoy. And when a
person claiming to be a messenger from God appears, saying, "The
Father hath commanded me to declare that in the many mansions of
his house there is a blessed life for men after the close of this
life," and when he promises that, in confirmation of his claim,
God will restore him to life after he shall have been three days
dead, and when he returns accordingly triumphant from the
sepulchre, the argument will be unquestioningly received as valid
by the instinctive common sense of all who are convinced of the
facts.

We next pass from the meaning of the resurrection in logic to its
force and working in history. When Jesus hung on the cross, and
the scornful shouts of the multitude murmured in his ears, the
disciples had fled away, disappointed, terror stricken,
despairing. His star seemed set in a hopeless night of shame and
defeat. The new religion appeared a failure. But in three days
affairs had taken a new aspect. He that was crucified had risen,
and the scattered disciples rallied from every quarter, and,
animated by faith and zeal, went forth to convert the world. As an
organic centre of thought and belief, as a fervid and enduring
incitement to action, in the apostolic times and all through the
early centuries, the received fact of the resurrection of Christ
wielded an incomparable influence and produced incalculable
results. Christianity indeed rose upon it, and, to a great extent,
flourished through it. The principal effect which the gospel has
had in bringing life and immortality to light throughout a large
part of the world is to be referred to the proclaimed resurrection
of Christ. For without the latter the former would not have been.
Its historical value has therefore been immense. More than nine
tenths of the dormant common faith of Christendom in a future life
now outwardly reposes on it from tradition and custom. The great
majority of Christians grow up, by education and habit, without
any sharp conscientious investigation of their own, to an
undisturbed belief in immortality, a belief passively resting on
the demonstration of the doctrine supposed to have been furnished
by the resurrection of Christ in Judea two thousand years ago. The
historical power of that fact has therefore been inexpressibly
important; and its vast and happy consequences as food and basis
of faith still remain. But this historic force is no longer what
it once was as a living and present cause. It now operates mostly
through traditional reception as an established doctrine to be
taken

22 J. Blanco White, Letter on Miracles, in appendix to Martineau's
Rationale of Religious Inquiry.


for granted, without fresh individual inquiry. Education and
custom use it as an unexamined but trusted foundation to build on
by common assumptions. And so the historic impetus is not yet
spent. But it certainly has diminished; and it will diminish more.
When faced with dauntless eyes and approached by skeptical
methods, it of course cannot have the silencing, all sufficient
authority, now that it is buried in the dim remoteness of nineteen
centuries and surrounded by obscuring accompaniments, that it had
when its light blazed close at hand. The historical force of the
alleged resurrection of Christ must evidently, other things being
equal, lessen to an unprejudiced inquirer in some proportion to
the lengthening distance of the event from him in time, and the
growing difficulties of ignorance, perplexity, doubt, manifold
uncertainty, deficiency, infidel suggestions, and naturalistic
possibilities, intervening between it and him. The shock of faith
given by the miracle is dissipated in coming through such an abyss
of time. The farther off and the longer ago it was, the more
chances for error and the more circumstances of obscurity there
are, and so much the worth and force of the historical belief in
it will naturally become fainter, till they will finally fade
away. An honest student may bow humbly before the august front of
Christian history and join with the millions around in
acknowledging the fact of the resurrection of Christ. But we
maintain that the essential fact in this historic act is not the
visible resuscitation of the dead body, but the celestial
reception of the deathless spirit. So Paul evidently thought; for
he had never seen Christ in the flesh, yet he places himself, as a
witness to the resurrection of Christ, in the same rank with those
who had seen him on his reappearance in the body: "Last of all he
was seen of me also." Paul had only seen him in vision as a
glorified spirit of heaven.

We know that our belief in the fleshly resurrection of Jesus rests
on education and habit, on cherished associations of reverence and
attachment, rather than on sifted testimony and convincing proof.
It is plain, too, that if a person takes the attitude, not of
piety and receptive trust, but of skeptical antagonism, it is
impossible, as the facts within our reach are to day, to convince
him of the asserted reality in question. An unprejudiced mind
competently taught and trained for the inquiry, but whose attitude
towards the declared fact is that of distrust, a mind which will
admit nothing but what is conclusively proved, cannot be driven
from its position by all the extant material of evidence.
Education, associations, hopes, affections, leaning that way, he
may be convinced; but leaning the other way, or poised in
indifference on a severe logical ground, he will honestly remain
in his unbelief despite of all the arguments that can be
presented. In the first place, he will say, "The only history we
have of the resurrection is in the New Testament; and the
testimony of witnesses in their own cause is always suspicious;
and it is wholly impossible now really to prove who wrote those
documents, or precisely when and how they originated: besides
that, the obvious discrepancies in the accounts, and the utterly
uncritical credulity and unscientific modes of investigation which
satisfied the writers, destroy their value as witnesses in any
severe court of reason." And in reply, although we may claim that
there is sufficient evidence to satisfy an humble Christian,
previously inclined to such a faith, that the New Testament
documents were written by the persons whose names they bear, and
that their accounts are true, yet we cannot pretend that there is
sufficient evidence effectually to convince a critical inquirer
that there is no possibility of ungenuineness and unauthenticity.
In the second place, such a person will say, "Many fabulous
miracles have been eagerly credited by contemporaries of their
professed authors, and handed down to the credulity of after
times; many actual events, honestly, interpreted as miracles,
without fraud in any party concerned, have been so accepted and
testified to.

Roman Catholic Christendom claims to this day the performance of
miracles within the Church; while all Protestant Christendom
scouts them as ridiculous tales: and this may be one of them. How
can we demonstrate that it does not fall within the same class on
the laws of evidence?" And although our own moral beliefs and
sympathies may force upon us the most profound conviction to the
contrary, it is plainly out of our power to disprove the
possibility of this hypothesis being true. In the third place, he
will say, "Of all who testify to the resurrection, there is
nothing in the record admitting its entire reliableness as an
ingenuous statement of the facts as apprehended by the authors to
show that any one of them knew that Jesus was actually dead, or
that any one of them made any real search into that point. He may
have revived from a long insensibility, wandered forth in his
grave clothes, mingled afterwards with his disciples, and at last
have died from his wounds and exhaustion, in solitude, as he was
used to spend seasons in lonely prayer by night. Then, with
perfectly good faith, his disciples, involving no collusion or
deceit anywhere, may have put a miraculous interpretation upon it
all, such additional particulars as his visible ascension into the
sky being a later mythical accretion." This view may well seem
offensive, even shocking, to the pious believer; but it is plainly
possible. It is intrinsically more easily conceivable than the
accredited miracle. It is impossible positively to refute it: the
available data do not exist. Upon the whole, then, we conclude
that the time is coming when the basis of faith in immortality, in
order to stand the tests of independent scrutiny, must be
historically as well as logically shifted from a blind dependence
on the miraculous resurrection of Christ to a wise reliance on
insight into the supernatural capacity and destiny of man, on the
deductions of moral reason and the prophecies of religious trust.

Finally, we pause a moment, in closing this discussion, to weigh
the practical value of the resurrection of Christ as acknowledged
in the experience of the present time. How does that event,
admitted as a fact, rest in the average personal experience of
Christians now? We shall provoke no intelligent contradiction when
we say that it certainly does not often rest on laborious research
and rigorous testing of evidence. We surely risk nothing in saying
that with the multitude of believers it rests on a docile
reception of tradition, an unquestioning conformity to the
established doctrine. And that reception and conformity in the
present instance depend, we shall find by going a step further
back, upon a deep a priori faith in God and immortality. When Paul
reasons that, if the dead are not to rise, Christ is not risen,
but that the dead are to rise, and therefore Christ is risen, his
argument reposes on a spontaneous practical method of moral
assumption, not on a judicial process of logical proof. So is it
with Christians now. The intense moral conviction that God is
good, and that there is another life, and that it would be
supremely worthy of God to send a messenger to teach that doctrine
and to rise from the dead in proof of it, it is this earnest
previous faith that gives plausibility, vitality, and power to the
preserved tradition of the actual event. If we trace the case home
to the last resort, as it really lies in the experience developed
in us by Christianity, we shall find that a deep faith in God is
the basis of our belief, first in general immortality, and
secondly in the special resurrection of Christ as related thereto.
But, by a confusion, or a want, of thought, the former is
mistakenly supposed to rest directly and solely on the latter. The
doctrinal inferences built up around the resurrection of Christ
fall within the province of faith, resting on moral grounds, not
within that of knowledge, resting on logical grounds. For example:
what direct proof is there that Christ, when he vanished from the
disciples, went to the presence of God in heaven, to die no more?
It was only seen that he disappeared: all beyond that except as it
rests on belief in the previous words of Christ himself is an
inference of faith, a faith kindled in the soul by God and not
created by the miracle of the resurrection.

That imagination, tradition, feeling, and faith, have much more to
do with the inferences commonly drawn from the resurrection of
Christ than any strict investigation of its logical contents has,
appears clearly enough from the universal neglect to draw any
inferences from, or to attribute any didactic importance to, the
other resurrections recorded in the New Testament. We refer
especially to the resurrection narrated in the twenty seventh
chapter of Matthew, "the most stupendous miracle ever wrought upon
earth," it has been termed; and yet hardly any one ever deigns to
notice it. Thus the evangelist writes: "And the graves were
opened, and many bodies of the saints which slept arose and came
out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy
city, and appeared unto many." Nothing is inferred from this
alleged event but the power of God. Yet logically what separates
it from the resurrection of Christ? In Greece there was the
accredited account of the resurrection of Er, in Persia that of
Viraf, in Judea that of Lazarus, in other nations those of other
persons. None of these ever produced great results. Yet the
resurrection of one individual from the dead logically contains
all that that of any other individual can. Why, then, has that of
Christ alone made such a change in the faith of the world?
Because, through a combination of causes, it has appealed to the
imagination and heart of the world and stirred their believing
activity, because the thought was here connected with a person, a
history, a moral force, and a providential interposition, fit for
the grandest deductions and equal to the mightiest effects. It is
not accurate philosophical criticism that has done this, but
humble love and faith.

In the experience of earnest Christians, a personal belief in the
resurrection of Christ, vividly conceived in the imagination and
taken home to the heart, is chiefly effective in its spiritual,
not in its argumentative, results. It stirs up the powers and
awakens the yearnings of the soul, opens heaven to the gaze,
locates there, as it were visibly, a glorious ideal, and thus
helps one to enter upon an inward realization of the immortal
world. The one essential thing is not that Jesus appeared alive in
the flesh after his physical death, the revealer of superhuman
power and possessor of infallibility, but that he divinely lives
now, the forerunner and type of our immortality.

