CHAPTER II.

METEMPSYCHOSIS; OR, TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS.

NO other doctrine has exerted so extensive, controlling, and
permanent an influence upon mankind as that of the metempsychosis,
the notion that when the soul leaves the body it is born anew in
another body, its rank, character, circumstances, and experience
in each successive existence depending on its qualities, deeds,
and attainments in its preceding lives. Such a theory, well
matured, bore unresisted sway through the great Eastern world,
long before Moses slept in his little ark of bulrushes on the
shore of the Egyptian river; Alexander the Great gazed with
amazement on the self immolation by fire to which it inspired the
Gymnosophists; Casar found its tenets propagated among the Gauls
beyond the Rubicon; and at this hour it reigns despotic, as the
learned and travelled Professor of Sanscrit at Oxford tells us,
"without any sign of decrepitude or decay, over the Burman,
Chinese, Tartar, Tibetan, and Indian nations, including at least
six hundred and fifty millions of mankind."1 There is abundant
evidence to prove that this scheme of thought prevailed at a very
early period among the Egyptians, all classes and sects of the
Hindus, the Persian disciples of the Magi, and the Druids, and, in
a later age, among the Greeks and Romans as represented by Musaus,
Pythagoras, Plato, Plotinus, Macrobius, Ovid, and many others. It
was generally adopted by the Jews from the time of the Babylonian
captivity. Traces of it have been discovered among the ancient
Scythians, the African tribes, some of the Pacific Islanders, and
various aboriginal nations both of North and of South America.
Charlevoix says some tribes of Canadian Indians believed in a
transmigration of souls; but, with a curious mixture of fancy and
reflection, they limited it to the souls of little children, who,
being balked of this life in its beginning, they thought would try
it again. Their bodies, accordingly, were buried at the sides of
roads, that their spirits might pass into pregnant women
travelling by. A belief in the metempsychosis limited in the same
way to the souls of children also prevailed among the Mexicans.2
The Maricopas, by the Gila, believe when they die they shall
transmigrate into birds, beasts, and reptiles, and shall return to
the banks of the Colorado, whence they were driven by the Yumas.
They will live there in caves and woods, as wolves, rats, and
snakes; so will their enemies the Yumas; and they will fight
together.3 On the western border of the United States, only three
or four years ago, two Indians having been sentenced to be hung
for murder, the chiefs of their tribe came in and begged that they
might be shot or burned instead, as they looked upon hanging with
the utmost horror, believing that the spirit of a person who is
thus strangled to death goes into the next world in a foul manner,
and that it assumes a beastly form. The Sandwich Islanders
sometimes threw their dead into the sea to be devoured by sharks,
supposing their souls would animate these monsters and cause them

1 Wilson, Two Lectures on the Religious Opinions of the Hindus, p.
64.

2 Kingsborough, Antiquities of Mexico, vol. viii. p. 220.

3 Bartlett, Personal Narrative of Explorations in Texas, New
Mexico, &c., ch. xxx.


to spare the living whom accident should throw within their
reach.4 Similar superstitions, but more elaborately developed, are
rife among many tribes of African negroes.5 It was inculcated in
the early Christian centuries by the Gnostics and the Manichaans;
also by Origen and several other influential Fathers. In the
Middle Ages the sect of the Cathari, the Bogomiles, the famous
scholastics Scotus Erigena and Bonaventura, as well as numerous
less distinguished authors, advocated it. And in modern times it
has been earnestly received by Lessing and Fourier, and is not
without its open defenders to day, as we can attest from our own
knowledge, even in the prosaic and enlightened circles of European
and American society.

There have been two methods of explaining the origin of the dogma
of transmigration. First, it has been regarded as a retribution,
the sequel to sin in a pre existent state:

"All that flesh doth cover,
Souls of source sublime,
Are but slaves sold over
To the Master Time
To work out their ransom
For the ancient crime."

With the ancient Egyptians the doctrine was developed in
connection with the conception of a revolt and battle among the
gods in some dim and disastrous epoch of the past eternity, when
the defeated deities were thrust out of heaven and shut up in
fleshly prison bodies. So man is a fallen spirit, heaven his
fatherland, this life a penance, sometimes necessarily repeated in
order to be effectual.6 The pre existence of the soul, whether
taught by Pythagoras, sung by Empedocles, dreamed by Fludd, or
contended for by Beecher, is the principal foundation of the
belief in the metempsychosis. But, secondly, the transmigration of
souls has been considered as the means of their progressive
ascent. The soul begins its conscious course at the bottom of the
scale of being, and, gradually rising through birth after birth,
climbs along a discriminated series of improvements in endless
aspiration. Here the scientific adaptation and moral intent are
thought to lead only upwards, insect travelling to man, man
soaring to God; but by sin the natural order and working of means
are inverted, and the series of births lead downward, until
expiation and merit restore the primal adjustment and direction.

The idea of a metempsychosis, or soul wandering, as the Germans
call it, has been broached in various forms widely differing in
the extent of their application. Among the Jews the writings of
Philo, the Talmud, and other documents, are full of it. They seem,
for the most part, to have confined the mortal residence of souls
to human bodies. They say that God created all souls on the first
day, the only day in which he made aught out of nothing; and they
imply, in their doctrine of the revolution of souls, that these
are born over and over, and will continue wandering thus until the
Messiah comes and the resurrection occurs. The

4 Jarves, Hist. Sandwich Islands, p. 82.

5 Wilson, Western Africa, p. 210.

6 Dr. Roth, Agyptische Glaubenslehre.


Rabbins distinguish two kinds of metempsychosis; namely, "Gilgul,"
which is a series of single transmigrations, each lasting till
death; and "Ibbur," which is where one soul occupies several
bodies, changing its residence at pleasure, or where several souls
occupy one body.7 The latter kind is illustrated by examples of
demoniacal possession in the New Testament. The demons were
supposed to be the souls of deceased wicked men. Sometimes they
are represented as solitary and flitting from one victim to
another; sometimes they swarm together in the same person, as
seven were at once cast out of Mary Magdalene.

More frequently, however, the range of the soul's travels in its
repeated births has been so extended as to include all animal
bodies, beasts, birds, fishes, reptiles, insects. In this extent
the doctrine was held by the Pythagoreans and Platonists, and in
fact by a majority of its believers. Shakspeare's wit is not
without historical warrant when he makes the clown say to
Malvolio, "Thou shalt fear to kill a woodcock, lest thou
dispossess the soul of thy grandam." Many the Manichaans, for
instance taught that human souls transmigrated not only through
the lowest animal bodies but even through all forms of vegetable
life. Souls inhabit ears of corn, figs, shrubs. "Whoso plucks the
fruit or the leaves from trees, or pulls up plants or herbs, is
guilty of homicide," say they; "for in each case he expels a soul
from its body." 8 And some have even gone so far as to believe
that the soul, by a course of ignorance, cruelty, and uncleanness
pursued through many lives, will at length arrive at an inanimate
body, and be doomed to exist for unutterable ages as a stone or as
a particle of dust. The adherents of this hypothesis regard the
whole world as a deposition of materialized souls. At every step
they tread on hosts of degraded souls, destined yet, though now by
sin sunk thus low, to find their way back as redeemed and blessed
spirits to the bosom of the Godhead.

Upon the whole, the metempsychosis may be understood, as to its
inmost meaning and its final issue, to be either a Development, a
Revolution, or a Retribution, a Divine system of development
eternally leading creatures in a graduated ascension from the base
towards the apex of the creation, a perpetual cycle in the order
of nature fixedly recurring by the necessities of a physical fate
unalterable, unavoidable, eternal, a scheme of punishment and
reward exactly fitted to the exigencies of every case, presided
over by a moral Nemesis, and issuing at last in the emancipation
of every purified soul into infinite bliss, when, by the upward
gravitation of spirit, they shall all have been strained through
the successively finer growing filters of the worlds, from the
coarse grained foundation of matter to the lower shore of the
Divine essence.

In seeking to account for the extent and the tenacious grasp of
this antique and stupendous belief, in looking about for the
various suggestions or confirmations of such a dogma, we would
call attention to several considerations, each claiming some
degree of importance. First, among the earliest notions of a
reflecting man is that of the separate existence of the soul after
the dissolution of the body. He instinctively distinguishes the

7 Basnage, Hist. Jews, lib. iv. cap. xxx.: Schroder, Judenthum,
buch ii. kap. iii. Eisenmenger, Entdecktes Judenthum. th. ii. kap.
i.

8 Augustine, De Morlb. Manicha., lib. ii. cap. xvii.: De Hares..
cap. xlvi.: Contra Faustum, lib. xvi. cap. xxviii.


thinking substance he is from the material vestment he wears.
Conscious of an unchanged personal identity beneath the changes
and decays everywhere visible around him, he naturally imagines
that "As billows on the undulating main, That swelling fall and
falling swell again, So on the tide of time inconstant roll The
dying body and the deathless soul."

To one thus meditating, and desiring, as he surely would, to
perceive or devise some explanation of the soul's posthumous
fortunes, the idea could hardly fail to occur that the destiny of
the soul might be to undergo a renewed birth, or a series of
births in new bodies. Such a conception, appearing in a rude state
of culture, before the lines between science, religion, and poetry
had been sharply drawn, recommending itself alike by its
simplicity and by its adaptedness to gratify curiosity and
speculation in the formation of a thousand quaint and engaging
hypotheses, would seem plausible, would be highly attractive,
would very easily secure acceptance as a true doctrine.

Secondly, the strange resemblances and sympathies between men and
animals would often powerfully suggest to a contemplative observer
the doctrine of the transmigration of souls.9 Looking over those
volumes of singular caricatures wherein certain artists have made
all the most distinctive physiognomies of men and beasts mutually
to approximate and mingle, one cannot avoid the fancy that the
bodies of brutes are the masks of degraded men. Notice an ox
reclining in the shade of a tree, patiently ruminating as if sadly
conscious of many things and helplessly bound in some obscure
penance, a mute world of dreamy experiences, a sombre mystery: how
easy to imagine him an enchanted and transformed man! See how
certain animals are allied in their prominent traits to humanity,
the stricken deer, weeping big, piteous tears, the fawning
affection and noble fidelity of the dog, the architectural skill
of the beaver, the wise aspect of the owl, the sweet plaint of the
nightingale, the shrieks of some fierce beasts, and the howls of
others startlingly like the cries of children and the moans of
pain, the sparkling orbs and tortuous stealthiness of the snake;
and the hints at metempsychosis are obvious. Standing face to face
with a tiger, an anaconda, a wild cat, a monkey, a gazelle, a
parrot, a dove, we alternately shudder with horror and yearn with
sympathy, now expecting to see the latent devils throw off their
disguise and start forth in their own demoniac figures, now
waiting for the metamorphosing charm to be reversed, and for the
enchanted children of humanity to stand erect, restored to their
former shapes. Pervading all the grades and forms of distinct
animal life there seems to be a rudimentary unity. The fundamental
elements and primordial germs of consciousness, intellect, will,
passion, appear the same, and the different classes of being seem
capable of passing into one another by improvement or deterioration.

Spontaneously, then, might a primitive observer, unhampered by
prejudices, think that the soul of man on leaving its present body
would find or construct another according to its chief intrinsic
qualities and

9 Scholz, Beweis, dass es eine Seelenwanderung bei den Thieren
giebt.


forces, whether those were a leonine magnanimity of courage, a
vulpine subtlety of cunning, or a pavonine strut of vanity. The
spirit, freed from its fallen cell, "Fills with fresh energy
another form, And towers an elephant, or glides a worm, Swims as
an eagle in the eye of noon, Or wails, a screech owl, to the deaf,
cold moon, Or haunts the brakes where serpents hiss and glare,
Or hums, a glittering insect, in the air."

The hypothesis is equally forced on our thoughts by regarding the
human attributes of some brutes and the brutal attributes of some
men. Thus Gratiano, enraged at the obstinate malignity of Shylock,
cries to the hyena hearted Jew, "Thou almost mak'st me waver in my
faith, To hold opinion, with Pythagoras, That souls of animals
infuse themselves Into the trunks of men: thy currish spirit
Govern'd a wolf, who, hang'd for human slaughter, Even from the
gallows did his fell soul fleet, And, whilst thou lay'st in thine
unhallow'd dam, Infused itself in thee; for thy desires Are
wolfish, bloody, starved, and ravenous."

Thirdly, there is a figurative metempsychosis, which may sometimes
the history of mythology abounds in examples of the same sort of
thing have been turned from an abstract metaphor into a concrete
belief, or from a fanciful supposition have hardened into a
received fact. There is a poetic animation of objects whereby the
imaginative person puts himself into other persons, into trees,
clouds, whirlwinds, or what not, and works them for the time in
ideal realization. The same result is put in speech sometimes as
humorous play: for example, a celebrated English author says,
"Nature meant me for a salamander, and that is the reason I have
always been discontented as a man: I shall be a salamander in the
next world!" Such imagery stated to a mind of a literal order
solidifies into a meaning of prosaic fact. It is a common mode of
speech to say of an enthusiastic disciple that the spirit of his
master possesses him. A receptive student enters into the soul of
Plato, or is full of Goethe. We say that Apelles lived again in
Titian. Augustine reappeared in Calvin, and Pelagius in Arminius,
to fight over the old battle of election and freedom. Luther rose
in Ronge. Take these figures literally, construct what they imply
into a dogma, and the product is the transmigration of souls. The
result thus arrived at finds effective support in the striking
physical resemblance, spiritual likeness, and similarity of
mission frequently seen between persons in one age and those in a
former age. Columbus was the modern Jason sailing after the Golden
Fleece of a New World. Glancing along the portrait gallery of some
ancient family, one is sometimes startled to observe a face,
extinct for several generations, suddenly confronting him again
with all its features in some distant descendant. A peculiarity of
conformation, a remarkable trait of character, suppressed for a
century, all at once starts into vivid prominence in a remote
branch of the lineage, and men say, pointing back to the ancestor,
"He has revived once more." Seeing Elisha do the same things that
his departed master had done before him, the people exclaimed,
"The spirit of Elijah is upon him." Beholding in John the Baptist
one going before him in the spirit of that expected prophet, Jesus
said, "If ye are able to receive it, this is he." Some of the
later Rabbins assert many entertaining things concerning the
repeated births of the most distinguished personages in their
national history. Abel was born again in Seth; Cain, in that
Egyptian whom Moses slew; Abiram, in Ahithophel; and Adam, having
already reappeared once in David, will live again in the Messiah.
The performance by an eminent man of some great labor which had
been done in an earlier age in like manner by a kindred spirit
evokes in the imagination an apparition of the return of the dead
to repeat his old work.

Fourthly, there are certain familiar psychological experiences
which serve to suggest and to support the theory of transmigration,
and which are themselves in return explained by such a surmise.

Thinking upon some unwonted subject, often a dim impression
arises in the mind, fastens upon us, and we cannot help
feeling, that somewhere, long ago, we have had these reflections
before. Learning a fact, meeting a face, for the first time, we
are puzzled with an obscure assurance that it is not the first
time. Travelling in foreign lands, we are ever and anon haunted by
a sense of familiarity with the views, urging us to conclude that
surely we have more than once trodden those fields and gazed on
those scenes; and from hoary mountain, trickling rill, and vesper
bell, meanwhile, mystic tones of strange memorial music seem to
sigh, in remembered accents, through the soul's plaintive echoing
halls, "'Twas auld lang syne, my dear, 'Twas auld lang syne."

Plato's doctrine of reminiscence here finds its basis. We have
lived before, perchance many times, and through the clouds of
sense and imagination now and then float the veiled visions of
things that were. Efforts of thought reveal the half effaced
inscriptions and pictures on the tablets of memory. Snatches of
dialogues once held are recalled, faint recollections of old
friendships return, and fragments of landscapes beheld and deeds
performed long ago pass in weird procession before the mind's half
opened eye. We know a professional gentleman of unimpeachable
veracity, of distinguished talents and attainments, who is a firm
believer in his own existence on the earth previously to his
present life. He testifies that on innumerable occasions he has
experienced remembrances of events and recognitions of places,
accompanied by a flash of irresistible conviction that he had
known them in a former state. Nearly every one has felt instances
of this, more or less numerous and vivid. The doctrine at which
such things hint that "Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in
utter nakedness," but trailing vague traces and enigmas from a
bygone history, "do we come" yields the secret of many a mood and
dream, the spell of inexplicable hours, the key and clew to
baffling labyrinths of mystery. The belief in the doctrine of the
metempsychosis, among a fanciful people and in an unscientific
age, need be no wonder to any cultivated man acquainted with the
marvels of experience and aware that every one may say,

"Full oft my feelings make me start,
Like footprints on some desert shore,
As if the chambers of my heart
Had heard their shadowy step before."

Fifthly, the theory of the transmigration of souls is marvellously
adapted to explain the seeming chaos of moral inequality,
injustice, and manifold evil presented in the world of human life.
No other conceivable view so admirably accounts for the
heterogeneousness of our present existence, refutes the charge of
a groundless favoritism urged against Providence, and completely
justifies the ways of God to man. The loss of remembrance between
the states is no valid objection to the theory; because such a
loss is the necessary condition of a fresh and fair probation.
Besides, there is a parallel fact of deep significance in our
unquestionable experience; "For is not our first year forgot? The
haunts of memory echo not."

Once admit the theory to be true, and all difficulties in regard
to moral justice vanish. If a man be born blind, deaf, a cripple,
a slave, an idiot, it is because in a previous life he abused his
privileges and heaped on his soul a load of guilt which he is now
expiating. If a sudden calamity overwhelm a good man with
unmerited ruin and anguish, it is the penalty of some crime
committed in a state of responsible being beyond the confines of
his present memory. Does a surprising piece of good fortune accrue
to any one, splendid riches, a commanding position, a peerless
friendship? It is the reward of virtuous deeds done in an earlier
life. Every flower blighted or diseased, every shrub gnarled,
awry, and blasted, every brute ugly and maimed, every man
deformed, wretched, or despised, is reaping in these hard
conditions of being, as contrasted with the fate of the favored
and perfect specimens of the kind, the fruit of sin in a foregone
existence. When the Hindu looks on a man beautiful, learned,
noble, fortunate, and happy, he exclaims, "How wise and good must
this man have been in his former lives!" In his philosophy, or
religion, the proof of the necessary consequences of virtue and
vice is deduced from the metempsychosis, every particular of the
outward man being a result of some corresponding quality of his
soul, and every event of his experience depending as effect on his
previous merit as cause.10 Thus the principal physical and moral
phenomena of life are strikingly explained; and, as we gaze around
the world, its material conditions and spiritual elements combine
in one vast scheme of unrivalled order, and the total experience
of humanity forms a magnificent picture of perfect poetic justice.
We may easily account for the rise and spread of a theory whose
sole difficulty is a lack of positive proof, but whose
applications are so consistent and fascinating alike to
imagination and to conscience. Hierocles said, and distinguished
philosophers both before and since have said, "Without the
doctrine of metempsychosis it is not possible to justify the ways
of Providence."

10 Colebrooke, Essays, vol. i. p. 286.


Finally, this doctrine, having been suggested by the various
foregoing considerations, and having been developed into a
practical system of conceptions and motives by certain leading
thinkers, was adopted by the principal philosophers and
priesthoods of antiquity, and taught to the common people with
authority. The popular beliefs of four thousand years ago depended
for their prevalence, not so much on cogent arguments or intrinsic
probability, as upon the sanctions thrown around them by renowned
teachers, priests, and mystagogues. Now, the doctrine of the
transmigration of souls was inculcated by the ancient teachers,
not as a mere hypothesis resting on loose surmises, but as an
unquestionable fact supported by the experimental knowledge of
many individuals and by infallible revelation from God. The sacred
books of the Hindus abound in detailed histories of transmigrations.
Kapila is said to have written out the Vedas from his remembrance
 of them in a former state of being.

The Vishnu Purana gives some very entertaining examples of
the retention of memory through several successive lives.11
Pythagoras pretended to recollect his adventures in previous lives;
and on one occasion, as we read in Ovid, going into the temple of
Juno, he recognised the shield he had worn as Euphorbus at the
siege of Troy.

Diogenes Laertius also relates of him, that one day meeting a man
who was cruelly beating a dog, the Samian sage instantly detected
in the piteous howls of the poor beast the cries of a dear friend
of his long since deceased, and earnestly and successfully
interceded for his rescue.

In the life of Apollonius of Tyana by Philostratus, numerous
extraordinary instances are told of his recognitions of
persons he had known in preceding lives. Such examples as these
exactly met the weakest point in the metempsychosis theory, and
must have had vast influence in fostering the common faith.
Plotinus said, "Body is the true river of Lethe; for souls plunged
in it forget all." Pierre Leroux, an enthusiastic living defender
of the idea of repeated births, attempts to reply to the objection
drawn from the absence of memory; but his reply is an appeal
rather to authority and fancy than to reason, and leaves the
doubts unsolved.12 His supposition is that in each spirit life we
remember all the bygone lives, both spiritual and earthly, but in
each earth life we forget all that has gone before; just as, here,
every night we lose in sleep all memory of the past, but recover
it each day again as we awake. Throughout the East this general
doctrine is no mere superstition of the masses of ignorant people:
it is the main principle of all Hindu metaphysics, the foundation
of all their philosophy, and inwrought with the intellectual
texture of their inspired books. It is upheld by the venerable
authority of ages, by an intense general conviction of it, and by
multitudes of subtle conceits and apparent arguments. It was also
impressed upon the initiates in the old Mysteries, by being there
dramatically shadowed forth through masks, and quaint symbolic
ceremonies enacted at the time of initiation.13

This, then, is what we must say of the ancient and widely spread
doctrine of transmigration. As a suggestion or theory naturally
arising from empirical observation and confirmed by a variety of
phenomena, it is plausible, attractive, and, in some stages of

11 Professor Wilson's translation, p. 343.

12 De l'Humanite, livre v. chap. xlii.

13 Porphyry, De Abstinentis, lib. iv. sect. 16. Davies, Rites of
the Druids.


knowledge, not only easy to be believed, but hard to be resisted.
As an ethical scheme clearing up on principles of poetic justice
the most perplexed and awful problems in the world, it throws
streams of light through the abysses of evil, gives dramatic
solution to many a puzzle, and, abstractly considered, charms the
understanding and the conscience. As a philosophical dogma
answering to some strange, vague passages in human nature and
experience, it echoes with dreamy sweetness through the deep
mystic chambers of our being. As the undisputed creed which has
inspired and spell bound hundreds of millions of our race for
perhaps over a hundred and fifty generations, it commands
deference and deserves study. But, viewing it as a thesis in the
light of to day, challenging intelligent scrutiny and sober
belief, we scarcely need to say that, based on shadows and on
arbitrary interpretations of superficial appearances, built of
reveries and occult experiences, fortified by unreliable
inferences, destitute of any substantial evidence, it is unable to
face the severity of science.

A real investigation of its validity by the modern methods
dissipates it as the sun scatters fog. First, the mutual
correspondences between men and animals are explained by the fact
that they are all living beings are the products of the same God
and the same nature, and built according to one plan. They thus
partake, in different degrees and on different planes, of many of
the same elements and characteristics. Lucretius, with his usual
mixture of acuteness and sophistry, objects to the doctrine that,
if it were true, when the soul of a lion passed into the body of a
stag, or the soul of a man into the body of a horse, we should see
a stag with the courage of a lion, a horse with the intelligence
of a man. But of course the manifestations of soul depend on the
organs of manifestation. Secondly, the singular psychological
experiences referred to are explicable so far as we can expect
with our present limited data and powers to solve the dense
mysteries of the soul by various considerations not involving the
doctrine in question. Herder has shown this with no little acumen
in three "Dialogues on the Metempsychosis," beautifully translated
by the Rev. Dr. Hedge in his "Prose Writers of Germany." The sense
of pre existence the confused idea that these occurrences have
thus happened to us before which is so often and strongly felt, is
explicable partly by the supposition of some sudden and obscure
mixture of associations, some discordant stroke on the keys of
recollection, jumbling together echoes of bygone scenes, snatches
of unremembered dreams, and other hints and colors in a weird and
uncommanded manner. The phenomenon is accounted for still more
decisively by Dr. Wigand's theory of the "Duality of the Mind."
The mental organs are double, one on each side of the brain. They
usually act with perfect simultaneity. When one gets a slight
start of the other, as the thought reaches the slow side a
bewildered sense of a previous apprehension of it arises in the
soul. And then, the fact that the supposition of a great system of
adjusting transmigrations justifies the ways of Providence is no
proof that the supposition is a true one. The difficulty is, that
there is no evidence of the objective truth of the assumption,
however well the theory applies; and the justice and goodness of
God may as well be defended on the ground of a single life here
and a discriminating retribution hereafter, as on the ground of an
unlimited series of earthly births.

The doctrine evidently possesses two points of moral truth and
power, and, if not tenable as strict science, is yet instructive
as symbolic poetry. First, it embodies, in concrete shapes the
most vivid and unmistakable, the fact that beastly and demoniac
qualities of character lead men down towards the brutes and
fiends. Rage makes man a tiger; low cunning, a fox; coarseness and
ferocity, a bear; selfish envy and malice, a devil. On the
contrary, the attainment of better degrees of intellectual and
ethical qualities elevates man towards the angelic and the Divine.
There are three kinds of lives, corresponding to the three kinds
of metempsychosis, ascending, circular, descending: the aspiring
life of progress in wisdom and goodness; the monotonous life of
routine in mechanical habits and indifference; the deteriorating
life of abandonment in ignorance and vice. Timaus the Locrian, and
some other ancient Pythagoreans, gave the whole doctrine a purely
symbolic meaning. Secondly, the theory of transmigrating souls
typifies the truth that, however it may fare with persons now,
however ill their fortunes may seem to accord with their deserts
here, justice reigns irresistibly in the universe, and sooner or
later every soul shall be strictly compensated for every tittle of
its merits in good or evil. There is no escaping the chain of acts
and consequences.

This entire scheme of thought has always allured the Mystics to
adopt it. In every age, from Indian Vyasa to Teutonic Boehme, we
find them contending for it. Boehme held that all material
existence was composed by King Satan out of the physical substance
of his fallen followers.

The conception of the metempsychosis is strikingly fitted for the
purposes of humor, satire, and ethical hortation; and literature
abounds with such applications of it. In Plutarch's account of
what Thespesius saw when his soul was ravished away into hell for
a time, we are told that he saw the soul of Nero dreadfully
tortured, transfixed with iron nails. The workmen forged it into
the form of a viper; when a voice was heard out of an exceeding
light ordering it to be transfigured into a milder being; and they
made it one of those creatures that sing and croak in the sides of
ponds and marshes.14 When Rosalind finds the verses with which her
enamored Orlando had hung the trees, she exclaimed, "I was never
so berhymed since Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat, which
I can hardly remember." One of the earliest popular introductions
of this Oriental figment to the English public was by Addison,
whose Will Honeycomb tells an amusing story of his friend, Jack
Freelove, how that, finding his mistress's pet monkey alone one
day, he wrote an autobiography of his monkeyship's surprising
adventures in the course of his many transmigrations. Leaving this
precious document in the monkey's hands, his mistress found it on
her return, and was vastly bewildered by its pathetic and
laughable contents.15 The fifth number of the "Adventurer" gives a
very entertaining account of the "Transmigrations of a Flea."
There is also a poem on this subject by Dr. Donne, full of
strength and wit. It traces a soul through ten or twelve births,
giving the salient points of its history in each. First, the soul
animates the apple our hapless mother Eve ate, bringing "death
into the world and all our woe." Then it appeared

14 Sera Numinis Vindicta: near the close.

15 Spectator, No. 343.


successively as a mandrake, a cock, a herring, a whale, "Who spouted
rivers up as if he meant o join our seas with seas above
the firmament." Next, as a mouse, it crept up an elephant's sinewy
proboscis to the soul's bedchamber, the brain, and, gnawing the
life cords there, died, crushed in the ruins of the gigantic
beast. Afterwards it became a wolf, a dog, an ape, and finally a
woman, where the quaint tale closes. Fielding is the author of a
racy literary performance called "A Journey from this World to the
Next." The Emperor Julian is depicted in it, recounting in Elysium
the adventures he had passed through, living successively in the
character of a slave, a Jew, a general, an heir, a carpenter, a
beau, a monk, a fiddler, a wise man, a king, a fool, a beggar, a
prince, a statesman, a soldier, a tailor, an alderman, a poet, a
knight, a dancing master, and a bishop. Whoever would see how
vividly, with what an honest and vigorous verisimilitude, the
doctrine can be embodied, should read "The Modern Pythagorean," by
Dr. Macnish. But perhaps the most humorous passage of this sort is
the following description from a remarkable writer of the present
day:

"In the mean while all the shore rang with the trump of bull
frogs, the sturdy spirits of ancient wine bibbers and wassailers,
still unrepentant, trying to sing a catch in their Stygian lake;
who would fain keep up the hilarious rules of their old festal
tables, though their voices have waxed hoarse and solemnly grave,
mocking at mirth, and the wine has lost its flavor. The most
aldermanic, with his chin upon a heart leaf, which serves for a
napkin to his drooling chaps, under this northern shore quaffs a
deep draught of the once scorned water, and passes round the cup
with the ejaculation tr r r oonk, tr r r oonk! and straightway
comes over the water from some distant cove the same password
repeated, where the next in seniority and girth has gulped down to
his mark; and when this observance has made the circuit of the
shores, then ejaculates the master of ceremonies, with
satisfaction, tr r r conk! and each in his turn, down to the
flabbiest paunched, repeats the same, that there be no mistake;
and then the bowl goes round again and again, until the sun
disperses the morning mist, and only the patriarch is not under
the pond, but vainly bellowing troonk from time to time, and
pausing for a reply." 16

The doctrine of the metempsychosis, which was the priest's threat
against sin, was the poet's interpretation of life. The former
gave by it a terrible emphasis to the moral law; the latter
imparted by it an unequalled tenderness of interest to the
contemplation of the world. To the believer in it in its fullest
development, the mountains piled towering to the sky and the
plains stretching into trackless distance were the conscious dust
of souls; the ocean, heaving in tempest or sleeping in moonlight,
was a sea of spirits, every drop once a man. Each animated form
that caught his attention might be the dwelling of some ancestor,
or of some once cherished companion of his own. Hence the Hindu's
so sensitive kindness towards animals:

16 Thoreau, Walden, or Life in the Woods, p. 137.


"Crush not the feeble, inoffensive worm: Thy sister's spirit wears
that humble form. Why should thy cruel arrow smite yon bird? In
him thy brother's plaintive song is beard. Let not thine anger on
thy dog descend: That faithful animal was once thy friend."

There is a strange grandeur, an affecting mystery, in the view of
the creation from the stand point of the metempsychosis. It is an
awful dream palace all aswarm with falling and climbing creatures
clothed in ever shifting disguises. The races and changes of being
constitute a boundless masquerade of souls, whose bodies are
vizards and whose fortunes poetic retribution. The motive
furnished by the doctrine to self denial and toil has a peerless
sublimity. In our Western world, the hope of acquiring large
possessions, or of attaining an exalted office, often stimulates
men to heroic efforts of labor and endurance. What, then, should
we not expect from the application to the imaginative minds of the
Eastern world of a motive which, transcending all set limits,
offers unheard of prizes, to be plucked in life after life, and at
the end unveils, for the occupancy of the patient aspirant, the
Throne of Immensity? No wonder that, under the propulsion of a
motive so exhaustless, a motive not remote nor abstract, but
concrete, and organized in indissoluble connection with the
visible chain of eternal causes and effects, no wonder we see such
tremendous exhibitions of superstition, voluntary sufferings,
superhuman deeds. Here is the secret fountain of that irresistible
force which enables the devotee to measure journeys of a thousand
miles by prostrations of his body, to hold up his arm until it
withers and remains immovably erect as a stick, or to swing
himself by red hot hooks through his flesh. The poorest wretch of
a soul that has wandered down to the lowest grade of animate
existence can turn his resolute and longing gaze up the
resplendent ranks of being, and, conscious of the god head's germ
within, feel that, though now unspeakably sunken, he shall one day
spurn every vile integument and vault into seats of heavenly
dominion. Crawling as an almost invisible bug in a heap of
carrion, he can still think within himself, holding fast to the
law of righteousness and love, "This is the infinite ladder of
redemption, over whose rounds of purity, penance, charity, and
contemplation I may ascend, through births innumerable, till I
reach a height of wisdom, power, and bliss that will cast into
utter contempt the combined glory of countless millions of worlds,
ay, till I sit enthroned above the topmost summit of the universe
as omnipotent Buddha." 17

17 Those who wish to pursue the subject further will find the
following references useful: Hardy, "Manual of Buddhism," ch. v.
Upham, "History of Buddhism," ch. iii. Beausobre, "Histoire du
Manicheisme," livre vi. ch. iv. Helmont, "De Revolution Animarum."
Richter, "Das Christenthum und die Kitesten Religionen des
Orients," sects. 54-65. Sinner, "Essai sur les Dogmes de la
Metempsychose et du Purgatoire." Conz, "Schicksale der
Seelenwanderungshypothese unter verschiedenen Volkern und in
verschiedenen Zeiten." Dubois, "People of India," part iii. ch.
vii. Werner, "Commentatio Psychologica contra Metempsychosin."


