CHAPTER V.

THE FIVE THEORETIC MODES OF SALVATION.

THE conceptions and fore feelings of immortality which men have
entertained have generally been accompanied by a sense of
uncertainty in regard to the nature of that inheritance, by a
perception of contingent conditions, yielding a twofold fate of
bliss and woe, poised on the perilous hinge of circumstance or
freedom. Almost as often and profoundly, indeed, as man has
thought that he should live hereafter, that idea has been followed
by the belief that if, on the one hand, salvation gleamed for him
in the possible sky, on the other hand perdition yawned for him in
the probable abyss. Heaven and Hell are the light side and shade
side of the doctrine of a future life. Few questions are more
interesting, as none can be more important, than that inquiry
which is about the salvation of the soul. The inherent reach of
this inquiry, and the extent of its philosophical and literary
history, are great. But, by arranging under certain heads the
various principal schemes of salvation which Christian teachers
have from time to time presented for popular acceptance, and
passing them before the mind in order and in mutual lights, we can
very much narrow the space required to exhibit and discuss them.
When the word "salvation" occurs in the following investigation,
it means unless something different be shown by the context the
removal of the soul's doom to misery beyond the grave, and the
securing of its future blessedness. Heaven and hell are terms
employed with wide latitude and fluctuating boundaries of literal
and figurative meaning; but their essential force is simply a
future life of wretchedness, a future life of joy; and salvation,
in its prevailing theological sense, is the avoidance of that and
the gaining of this. We shall not attempt to present the different
theories of redemption in their historical order of development,
or to give an exhaustive account of their diversified prevalence,
but shall arrange them with reference to the most perspicuous
exhibition of their logical contents and practical bearings.

The first scheme of Christian salvation to be noticed is the one
by which it is represented that the interference and suffering of
Christ, in itself, unconditionally saved all souls and emptied
hell forever. This theory arose in the minds of those who received
it as the natural and consistent completion of the view they held
concerning the nature and consequences of the fall of Adam, the
cause and extent of the lost state of man. Adam, as the federal
head of humanity, represented and acted for his whole race: the
responsibility of his decision rested, the consequences of his
conduct would legitimately descend, it was thought, upon all
mankind. If he had kept himself obedient through that easy yet
tremendous probation in Eden, he and all his children would have
lived on earth eternally in perfect bliss. But, violating the
commandment of God, the burden of sin, with its terrible penalty,
fell on him and his posterity. Every human being was henceforth to
be alien from the love of goodness and from the favor of God,
hopelessly condemned to death and the pains of hell. The sin of
Adam, it was believed, thoroughly corrupted the nature of man, and
incapacitated him from all successful efforts to save his soul
from its awful doom. The infinite majesty of God's will, the law
of the universe, had been insulted by disobedience. The only just
retribution was the suffering of an endless death. The adamantine
sanctities of God's government made forgiveness impossible. Thus
all men were lost, to be the prey of blackness, and fire, and the
undying worm, through the remediless ages of eternity. Just then
God had pity on the souls he had made, and himself came to the
rescue. In the person of Christ, he came into the world as a man,
and freely took upon himself the infinite debt of man's sins, by
his death on the cross expiated all offences, satisfied the claims
of offended justice, vindicated the inexpressible sacredness of
the law, and, at the same time, opened a way by which a full and
free reconciliation was extended to all. When the blood of Jesus
flowed over the cross, it purchased the ransom of every sinner. As
Jerome says, "it quenched the flaming sword at the entrance of
Paradise." The weary multitude of captives rose from their bed,
shook off the fetters and stains of the pit, and made the cope of
heaven snowy with their white winged ascent. The prison house of
the devil and his angels should be used no more to confine the
guilty souls of men.1 Their guilt was all washed away in the blood
of the Lamb. Their spirits, without exception, should follow to
the right hand of the Father, in the way marked out by the
ascending Redeemer. This is the first form of Universalism, the
form in which it was held by several of the Fathers in the earlier
ages of the Church, and by the pioneers of that doctrine in modern
times. Cyril of Jerusalem says, "Christ went into the under world
alone, but came out with many." 2 Cyril of Alexandria says that
when Christ ascended from the under world he "emptied it, and left
the devil there utterly alone." 3 The opinion that the whole
population of Hades was released, is found in the lists of ancient
heresies.4 It was advanced by Clement, an Irish priest, antagonist
of Boniface the famous Archbishop of Mentz, in the middle of the
eighth century. He was deposed by the Council of Soissons, and
afterwards anathematized by Pope Zachary. Gregory the Great also
refers in one of his letters with extreme severity to two
ecclesiastics, contemporaries of his own, who held the same
belief. Indeed, this conclusion is a necessary result of a
consistent development of the creed of the Orthodox Church, so
called. By the sin of one, even Adam, through the working of
absolute justice, hell became the portion of all, irrespective of
any fault or virtue of theirs; so, by the voluntary sacrifice, the
infinite atonement, of one, even Christ, through the unspeakable
mercy of God, salvation was effected for all, irrespective of any
virtue or fault of theirs. One member of the scheme is the exact
counterpoise of the other; one doctrine cries out for and
necessitates the other. Those who accept the commonly received
dogmas of original sin, total depravity, and universal
condemnation entailed upon all men in lineal descent from Adam,
and the dogmas of the Trinity, the Incarnation, and the Vicarious
Atonement, are bound, by all the constructions of logic, to accept
the scheme of salvation just set forth, namely, that the death of
Christ secured the deliverance of all unconditionally. We do not
believe that doctrine, only because we do not believe the other
associated doctrines out of which it springs and of whose system
it is the complement.

1 Doederlein, De Redemptione a Potestate Diaboli. In Opuse.
Theolog.

2 Catechesis xis. 9.

3 De Festis Paschalibus, homilia vii.

4 Augustine, De Haresibus, lxxix.


The reasons why we do not believe that our race fell into helpless
depravity and ruin in the sin of the first man are, in essence,
briefly these: First, we have never been able to perceive any
proof whatever of the truth of that dogma; and certainly the onus
probandi rests on the side of such an assumption. It arose
partially from a misinterpretation of the language of the Bible;
and so far as it has a basis in Scripture, we are compelled by
force of evidence to regard it as a Jewish adoption of a pagan
error without authority. Secondly, this doctrinal system seems to
us equally irreconcilable with history and with ethics: it seems
to trample on the surest convictions of reason and conscience, and
spurn the clearest principles of nature and religion, to blacken
and load the heart and doom of man with a mountain of gratuitous
horror, and shroud the face and throne of God in a pall of wilful
barbarity. How can men be guilty of a sin committed thousands of
years before they were born, and deserve to be sent to hopeless
hell for it? What justice is there in putting on one sinless head
the demerits of a world of reprobates, and then letting the
criminal go free because the innocent has suffered? A third
objection to this whole view an objection which, if sustained,
will utterly annihilate it is this: It is quite possible that,
momentous as is the part he has played in theology, the Biblical
Adam is not at all a historical personage, but only a significant
figment of poetry. The common belief of the most authoritative men
of science, that the human race has existed on this earth for a
vastly longer period than the Hebrew statement affirms, may yet be
completely established. It may also yet be acknowledged that each
distinct race of men had its own Adam.5 Then the dogmatic
theology, based on the fall of our entire race into perdition in
its primary representative, will, of course, crumble.

The second doctrine of Christian salvation is a modification and
limitation of the previous one. This theory, like the former,
presupposes that a burden of original sin and natural depravity
transmitted from the first man had doomed, and, unless prevented
in some supernatural manner, would forever press, all souls down
to the realms of ruin and woe; also that an infinite graciousness
in the bosom of the Godhead led Christ to offer himself as an
expiation for the sins, an atoning substitute for the condemnation,
of men. But, according to the present view, this interference
of Christ did not by itself save the lost: it only removed
the otherwise insuperable bar to forgiveness, and presented
to a chosen portion of mankind the means of experiencing
a condition upon the realization of which, in each individual
case, the certainty of salvation depends. That condition is a
mysterious conversion, stirring the depths of the soul through an
inspired faith in personal election by the unchanging decree of
God. The difference, then, in a word, between the two methods of
salvation thus far explained, is this: While both assume that
mankind are doomed to death and hell in consequence of the sin of
Adam, the one asserts that the interference of Christ of itself
saved all souls, the other asserts that that interference cannot
save any soul except those whom God, of his sovereign pleasure,
had from eternity arbitrarily elected.6 This scheme grew directly
out of the dogma of fatalism, which sinks human freedom in Divine
predestination. God having solely of his

5 Burdach, Carus, Oken, Bayrhoffer, Agassiz. See Bunsen,
Christianity and Mankind, vol. iv. p. 28; Mott and Gliddon, Types
of Mankind, p. 338.

6 Confession of Faith of Westminster Divines, ch. iii. sect. 3.


own will foreordained that a certain number of mankind should be
saved, Christ died in order to pay the penalty of their sins and
render it possible for them to be forgiven and taken into heaven
without violating the awful bond of justice. The benefits of the
atonement, therefore, are limited to the elect. Nor is this to be
regarded as an act of severity; on the contrary, it is an act of
unspeakable benevolence. For by the sin of Adam the whole race of
men, without exception, were hateful to God, and justly sentenced
to eternal damnation. When, consequently, he devised a plan of
redemption by which he could himself bear the guilt, and suffer
the agony, and pay the debt of a few, and thus ransom them from
their doom, the reprobates who were left had no right to complain,
but the chosen were a monument of disinterested love, because all
alike deserved the endless tortures of hell. According to this
conception, all men being by their ancestral act and inherited
nature irretrievably lost, God's arbitrary pleasure was the cause,
Christ's voluntary death was the means, by which a certain number
were to be saved. What individuals should compose this portion of
the race, was determined from eternity beyond all contingencies.
The effect of faith and conversion, and of the new birth, is not
to save the soul, but simply to convince the soul that it is
saved. That is to say, a regenerating belief and love is not the
efficient cause, it is merely the revealed assurance, of
salvation, proving to the soul that feels it, by the testimony of
the Holy Spirit, that it is of the chosen number. The preaching of
the gospel is to be extended everywhere, not for the purpose of
saving those who would otherwise be lost, but because its
presentation will awaken in the elect, and in them alone, that
responsive experience which will reveal their election to them,
and make them sure of it, already foretasting it; though it is
thought that no one can be saved who is ignorant of the gospel: it
is mysteriously ordered that the terms of the covenant shall be
preached to all the elect. There are correlated complexities,
miracles, absurdities, in wrought with the whole theory,
inseparable from it. The violence it does to nature, to thought,
to love, to morals, its arbitrariness, its mechanical form, the
wrenching exegesis by which alone it can be forced from the
Bible,7 its glaring partiality and eternal cruelty, are its
sufficient refutation and condemnation. If the death of Christ has
such wondrous saving efficacy, and nothing else has, what keeps
him from dying again to convince the unbelieving and to save the
lost? What man is there who, if he knew that, after thirty years
of suffering terminated by a fearful death, he should rise again
into boundless bliss and glory while rapt infinitude rung with the
paans of an applauding universe, and that by means of his
humiliation he could redeem countless millions from eternal
torture, would not with a joyous spring undertake the task? And is
a common man better than Christ?

The third general plan of Christian salvation which we are to
consider differs from the foregoing one in several essential
particulars. It affirms the free will of man in opposition to a
fatal predestination. It declares that the atonement is sufficient
to redeem not only a portion of our race, but all who will put
themselves in right spiritual relations with it. In a word, while
it admits that some will actually be lost forever, it asserts that
no one is doomed

7 Schweizer, Die Lehre des Apostels Paulus vom erlosenden Tode
Christi. Theologische Studien und Kritiken, Jahrg. 1858, heft 3.


to be lost, but that the offer of pardon is made to every soul,
and that every one has power to accept or reject it. The sacrifice
of the incarnate Deity vindicated the majesty of the law, appeased
the wrath of God, and purchased his saving favor towards all who,
by a sound and earnest faith, seize the proffered justification,
throw off all reliance on their own works, and present themselves
before the throne of mercy clothed in the righteousness and
sprinkled with the blood of Christ. Here the appropriation of the
merits of Christ, through an orthodox and vivifying faith, is the
real cause as well as the experimental assurance of salvation.
This is free to all. As the brazen serpent was hoisted in the
wilderness, and the scorpion bitten Israelites invited to look on
it and be healed, so the crucified God is lifted up, and all men,
everywhere, are urged to kneel before him, accept his atonement,
and thus enable his righteousness to be imputed to them, and their
souls to be saved. The vital condition of salvation is an
appropriating faith in the vicarious atonement. Without this no
one can be saved. Thus with one word and a single breath whole
nations and races are whiffed into hell. All that the good hearted
Luther could venture to say of Cicero, whom he deeply admired and
loved, was the kind ejaculation, "I hope God will be merciful to
him!" To those who appreciate it with hostility, and look on all
things in its light, the thought that there can be no salvation
except by belief in the expiatory death of Christ, hopelessly
dooming all the heathen,8 and all infant children, unless baptized
in a proxy faith,9 builds an altar of blood among the stars and
makes the universe reek with horror. Other crimes, though stained
through with midnight dyes and heaped up to the brim of outrageous
guilt, may be freely forgiven to him who comes heartily to credit
the vicarious death of the Savior; but he who does not trust in
that, though virtuous as man can be, must depart into the
unappeasable fires. "Why this unintelligible crime of not seeing
the atonement happens to be the only sin for which there is no
atonement, it is impossible to say." Though this view of the
method, extent, and conditions of redemption is less revolting and
incredible than the other, still, it does not seem to us that any
person whose mental and moral nature is unprejudiced, healthy, and
enlightened, and who will patiently study the subject, can
possibly accept either of them. The leading assumed doctrines
common to them, out of which they severally spring, and on which
they both rest, are not only unsupported by adequate proofs, but
really have no evidence at all, and are absurd in themselves,
confounding the broadest distinctions in morals, and subverting
the best established principles of natural religion.10

The fourth scheme of Christian salvation is that which predicates
the power of insuring souls from hell solely of the Church. This
is the sacramental theory. It is assumed that, in the state of
nature subsequent to the transgression and fall of Adam, all men
are alienated from God, and by the universal original sin
universally exposed to damnation, indeed, the helpless victims of
eternal misery. In the fulness of time, Christ appeared, and
offered himself to suffer in their stead to secure their
deliverance. His death cancelled the whole sum of

8 Bretschneider, Entwickelung der Dogmatik, sect. 112, Nos. 37 50.

9 So affirmed by the Council of Carthage, Canon II.

10 The violence done to moral reason by these views is powerfully
exposed in Bushnell's Discourse on the Atonement: God in Christ,
pp. 193-202.


original sin, and only that, thus taking away the absolute
impossibility of salvation, and leaving every man in the world
free to stand or fall, incur hell or win heaven, by his personal
merits. From that time any person who lived a perfectly holy life
which no man could find practically possible thereby secured
eternal blessedness; but the moment he fell into a single sin,
however trivial, he sealed his condemnation: Christ's sacrifice,
as was just said, merely removed the transmitted burden of
original sin from all mankind, but made no provision for their
personal sins, so that practically, all men being voluntary as
well as hereditary sinners, their condition was as bad as before:
they were surely lost. To meet this state of the case, the Church,
whose priests, it is claimed, are the representatives of Christ,
and whose head is the vicegerent of God on earth, was empowered by
the celebration of the mass to re enact, as often as it pleased,
the tragedy of the crucifixion. In this service Christ is supposed
literally to be put to death afresh, and the merit of his
substitutional sufferings is supposed to be placed to the account
of the Church.11 As Sir Henry Wotton says,  "One rosy drop from
Jesus' heart Was worlds of seas to quench God's ire."

In one of the Decretals of Clement VI., called "Extravagants," it
is asserted that "one drop of Christ's blood [una guttula
sanguinis] being sufficient to redeem the whole human race, the
remaining quantity which was shed in the garden and on the cross
was left as a legacy to the Church, to be a treasure whence
indulgences were to be drawn and administered by the Roman
pontiffs." Furthermore, saints and martyrs, by their constant self
denial, voluntary sufferings, penances, and prayers, like Christ,
do more good works than are necessary for their own salvation; and
the balance of merit the works of supererogation is likewise
accredited to the Church. In this way a great reserved fund of
merits is placed at the disposal of the priests. At their pleasure
they can draw upon this vicarious treasure and substitute it in
place of the deserved penalties of the guilty, and thus absolve
them and effect the salvation of their souls. All this dread
machinery is in the sole power of the Church. Outside of her pale,
heretics, heathen, all alike, are unalterably doomed to hell. But
whoso will acknowledge her authority, confess his sins, receive
the sacrament of baptism, partake of the eucharist, obey the
priests, shall be infallibly saved. The Church declares that those
who neglect to submit to her power and observe her rites are lost,
by excommunicating such every year just before Easter, thereby
typifying that they shall have no part in the resurrection and
ascension. The scheme of salvation just exhibited we reject as
alike unwarranted by the Scriptures, absurd to reason, absurd to
conscience, fraught with evil practices, and traceable in history
through the gradual and corrupt growths of the dogmatic policy of
an interested body. There is not one text in the Bible which
affords real argument, credit, or countenance to the haughty
pretensions of a Church to retain or absolve guilt, to have the
exclusive control of the tangible keys of heaven and hell. It is
incredible to a free and intelligent mind that the opposing fates
forever of hundreds of millions of men should turn on a mere
accident of time

11 Thomas Aquinas, Summa, Suppl. pars iii. qu. 25, art. 1.


and place, or at best on the moral contingence of their
acknowledging or denying the doubtful authority of a tyrannical
hierarchy, a mere matter of form and profession, independent of
their lives and characters, and of no spiritual worth at all. One
is here reminded of a passage in Plutarch's Essay "How a Young Man
ought to hear Poems." The lines in Sophocles which declare that
the initiates in the Mysteries shall be happy in the future life,
but that all others shall be wretched, having been read to
Diogenes, he exclaimed, "What! Shall the condition of Pantacion,
the notorious robber, be better after death than that of
Epaminondas, merely because he was initiated in the Mysteries?" It
is also a shocking violence to common sense, and to all proper
appreciation of spiritual realities, to imagine the gross
mechanical transference of blame and merit mutually between the
bad and the good, as if moral qualities were not personal, but
might be shifted about at will by pecuniary considerations, as the
accounts in the debt and credit columns of a ledger. The theoretic
falsities of such a scheme are as numerous and evident as its
practical abuses have been enormous and notorious. How ridiculous
this ritual fetch to snatch souls from perdition appears as stated
by Julian against Augustine! "God and the devil, then, have
entered into a covenant, that what is born the devil shall have,
and what is baptized God shall have!"12 We hesitate not to stake
the argument on one question. If there be no salvation save by
believing and accepting the sacraments with the authority of the
Romanist or the Episcopalian Church, then less than one in a
hundred thousand of the world's population thus far can be saved.
Death steadily showers into hell, age after age, an overwhelming
proportion of the souls of all mankind, a rain storm of agonized
drops of immortality to feed and freshen the quenchless fires of
damnation. Who can believe it, knowing what it is that he
believes?

We advance next to a system of Christian salvation as remarkable
for its simplicity, boldness, and instinctive benevolence as those
we have previously examined are for complexity, unnaturalness, and
severity. The theory referred to promises the natural and
inevitable salvation of every created soul. It bases itself on two
positions, the denial that men are ever lost, except partially and
temporarily, and the exhibition of the irresistible power, perfect
wisdom, and infinite goodness of God. The advocates of this
doctrine point first to observation and experience, and declare
that no person is totally reprobate, that every one is salvable;
those most corrupt and abandoned to wickedness, unbelief, and
hardness, have yet a spark that may be kindled, a fount that may
be made to gush, unto the illumination and purification of the
whole being. A stray word, an unknown influence, a breath of the
Spirit, is continually effecting such changes, such salvations.
True, there are many fettered by vices, torn by sins, ploughed by
the caustic shares of remorse, lost to peaceful freedom, lost to
spiritual joys, lost to the sweet, calm raptures of religious
belief and love, and, in that sense, plunged in damnation. But
this, they say, is the only hell there is. At the longest, it can
endure but for the night of this life: deliverance and blessedness
come with the morning dawn of a better world. Exact retributions
are awarded to all iniquity here; so

12 Julian, lib. vi. ix.


that at the termination of the present state there is nothing to
prevent the flowing of an equal bliss impartially over all. The
substantive faculties and forces of the soul are always good and
right: only their action is perverted to evil.13 This perversion
will cease with the accidents of the present state; and thus death
is the door to salvation. God's desires and intentions for his
creatures, again they argue, must be purely gracious and blessed;
for Nature, the Bible, and the Soul blend their ultimate teachings
in one affirmation that he is Love. Being omnipotent and of
perfect wisdom, nothing can withstand his decrees or thwart his
plans. His purpose, of course, must be fulfilled. There is every
thing to prove, and nothing, rightly understood, to disprove, that
that purpose is the eternal blessedness of all his intelligent
offspring after death. Therefore, they think they are justified in
concluding, the laws of nature, God's regular habits and course of
government, the normal arrangement and process of things, will of
themselves work out the inevitable salvation of all mankind. After
the uproar and darkness, the peril and fear, of a tempestuous
night, the all embracing smile of daylight gradually spreads over
the world, and the turmoil silently subsides, and the scene
sleeps. So after the sins and miseries, the condemnation and hell,
of this state of existence, shall succeed the redemption, the
holiness and happy peace, of heaven, into which all pass by the
order of nature, the original and undisturbed arrangement of the
creative Father. This view is advanced by some on grounds both of
revelation and reason. It is the doctrine of those Beghards who
taught that "there is neither hell nor purgatory; that no one is
damned, neither Jew nor Saracen, because on the death of the body
the soul returns to God."14 But the proper doctrine of the
Universalist denomination is founded directly on Scripture, and
seems now to be simply the absolute certainty of final salvation
for all. Balfour held that Christ, in obedience to the will of
God, secures eternal life for all men in the most literal manner,
by causing the resurrection of the dead from their otherwise
endless sleep in the grave, a doctrine nearly or quite fossil
now.15

It will be noticed that by this view salvation is an unlimited
necessity, not a contingency,  a boon thrown to all, and which no
one has power to reject:

"The road to heaven is broader than the world,
And deeper than the kingdoms of the dead;
And up its ample paths the nations tread
With all their banners furl'd."

This theory contains elements, it seems to us, both of truth and
falsehood. It casts off gross mistakes, announces some fundamental
realities, overlooks, perverts, exaggerates, some essential facts
in the case. There is so much in it that is grateful and beautiful
that we cannot wonder at its reception where the tender instincts
of the heart are stronger than the stern decisions of the
conscience, where the kindly sentiments usurp the province of the
critical reason and sit in judgment upon evidence for the
construction of a dogmatic creed. We

13 Universalist Quarterly Review, vol. x. art. xvi.: Character and
its Predicates.

14 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 209, note 14.

15 See Ballou, Examination of the Doctrine of Future Punishment,
pp. 152-157. Williamson, Exposition of Universalism, Sermon XL:
Nature of Salvation. Cobb, Compend. of Divinity, ch. ix. sect. 3.


cannot accept it as a whole, cannot admit its great unqualified
conclusion, not only because there is no direct evidence for it,
but because there are many potent presumptions against it. It is
not built upon the facts of our consciousness and present
experience, but is resolutely constructed in defiance of them by
an arbitrary process of assumption and inference; for since God's
perfections are as absolute now as they ever can be, and he now
permits sin and misery, there is no impossibility that they will
be permitted for a season hereafter. If they are necessary now,
they may be necessary hereafter. An experience of salvation by
all, regardless of what they do or what they leave undone, would
also defeat what we have always considered the chief final cause
of man, namely, the self determined resistance of Evil and choice
of Good, the free formation of virtuous character. The plan of a
necessary and indiscriminate redemption likewise breaks the
evident continuity of life, ignores the lineal causative power of
experience, whereby each moment partially produces and moulds the
next, destroys the probationary nature of our lot, and palsies the
strength of moral motive. It is furthermore the height of
injustice, awarding to all men the same condition, remorselessly
swallowing up their infinite differences, making sin and virtue,
sloth and toil, exactly alike in the end. Whose earnestly embraces
the theory, and meditates much upon it, and reasons closely, will
be likely to become an Antinomian. It overlooks the loud,
omnipresent hints which tell us that the present state is
incomplete and dependent, the part of a great whole, the visible
segment of a circle whose complement overarches the invisible
world to come, where future correspondences and fulnesses will
satisfy and complete present claims and deficiencies. We reject
this scheme, as to its distinctive feature, for all those reasons
which lead us to accept that final view to which we now turn.

The theory of Christian redemption which seems to us correct,
represents the good and evil forces of personal character,
harmonious or discordant with the mind of God, as the conditions
of salvation or of reprobation. Swedenborg, who teaches that man
in the future state is the son of his own deeds in the present
state, says he once saw Melancthon in hell, writing, "Faith alone
saves," the words fading out as fast as written, because
expressive of a falsehood! It is not belief, but love, that
dominates the soul, not a mental act, but a spiritual substance.
According as the realities of the soul are what they should be,
just and pure, or what they should not be, perverted and corrupt,
and according as the realities of the soul are in right relations
with truth, beauty, goodness, or in vitiated relations with them,
so, and to that extent, is the soul saved or lost. This is not a
matter of arbitrary determination on one hand; and of helpless
submission on the other: it is a matter of Divine permission on
one hand, and of free, though sometimes unintelligent and
mistaken, choice on the other. The only perdition is to be out of
tune with the right constitution and exercise of things and rules.
That, of itself, makes a man the victim of guilt and wretchedness.
The only salvation is the restoration of the balance and normal
efficiency of the faculties, the restoration of their harmony with
the moral law, the recommencement of their action in unison with
the will of God. When a soul, through its exposure and freedom,
becomes and experiences what God did not intend and is not pleased
with, what his creative and executive arrangements are not
purposely ordered for, it is, for the time, and so far forth,
lost. It is saved, when knowledge of truth illuminates the mind,
love of goodness warms the heart, energy, purity, and aspiration
fill and animate the whole being. Then, having realized in its
experience the purposes of Christ's mission, the original aims of
its existence, it rejoices in the favor of God. In the harmonious
fruition of its internal efficiencies and external relations, all
things work together for good unto it, and it basks in the beams
of the sun of immortality. Perdition and hell are the condemnation
and misery instantaneously deposited in experience whenever and
wherever a perverted and corrupt soul touches its relations with
the universe. The meeting of its consciousness with the alienated
mournful faces of things, with the hostile retributive forces of
things, produces unrest and suffering with the same natural
necessity that the meeting of certain chemical substances deposits
poison and bitterness. Perdition being the degradation and
wretchedness of the soul through ingrained falsehood, vice,
impurity, and hardness, salvation is the casting out of these
evils, and the replacing them with truth, righteousness, a holy
and sensitive life. To ransom from hell and translate to heaven is
not, then, so much to deliver from a local dungeon of gnawing
fires and worms, and bear to a local paradise of luxuries, as it
is to heal diseases and restore health. Hell is a wrong, diseased
condition of the soul, its indwelling wretchedness and
retribution, wherever it may be, as when the light of day tortures
a sick eye. Heaven is a right, healthy condition of the soul, its
indwelling integrity and concord, in whatever realms it may
reside, as when the sunshine bathes the healthy orb of vision with
delight. Salvation is nothing more nor less than the harmonious
blessedness of the soul by the fruition of all its right powers
and relations. Remove a man who is writhing in the agonies of some
physical disease, from his desolate hut on the bleak mountain side
to a gorgeous palace in a delicious tropical clime. He is just as
badly off as before. He is still, so to speak, in hell, wherever
he may be in location. Cure his sickness, and then he is, so to
speak, saved, in heaven. It is so with the soul. The conditions of
salvation and reprobation are not arbitrary, mechanical, fickle,
but are the interior and unalterable laws of the soul and of the
universe. "Every devil," Sir Thomas Browne says, "holds enough of
torture in his own ubi, and needs not the torture of circumference
to afflict him." If there are, as there may be, two entirely
separate regions in space, whose respective boundaries enclose
hell and heaven, banishment into the one, or admission into the
other, evidently is not what constitutes the essence of perdition
or of salvation, is not the all important consideration; but the
characteristic condition of the soul, which produces its
experience and decides its destination, that is the essential
thing. The mild fanning of a zephyr in a summer evening is
intolerable to a person in the convulsions of the ague, but most
welcome and delightful to others. So to a wicked soul all objects,
operations, and influences of the moral creation become hostile
and retributive, making a hell of the whole universe. Purify the
soul, restore it to a correct condition, and every thing is
transfigured: the universal hell becomes universal heaven.

We may gather up in a few propositions the leading principles of
this theory of salvation. First, Perdition is not an experience to
which souls are helplessly born, not a sentence inflicted on them
by an arbitrary decree, but is a result wrought out by free
agency, in conformity to the unalterable laws of the spiritual
world. Secondly, heaven and hell are not essentially particular
localities into which spirits are thrust, nor states of
consciousness produced by outward circumstances, but are an outward
 reflection from, and a reciprocal action upon, internal character.

Thirdly, condemnation, or justification, is not absolute and
complete, equalizing all on each side of a given line, but is a
thing of degrees, not exactly the same in any two individuals,
or in the same person at all times. Fourthly, we have no reason
to suppose that probation closes with the closing of the
present life; but every relevant consideration leads us to
conclude that the same great constitution of laws pervades all
worlds and reigns throughout eternity, so that the fate of souls
is not unchangeably fixed at death. No analogy indicates that
after death all will be thoroughly different from what it is
before death. Rather do all analogies argue that the hell and
heaven of the future will be the aggravation, or mitigation, or
continuation, of the perdition and salvation of the present. It is
altogether a sentence of exact right according to character, a
matter of personal achievement depending upon freedom, an
experience of inward elements and states, a thing of degrees, and
a subject of continued probation.

The condition of the heathen nations in reference to salvation is
satisfactory only in the light of the foregoing theory. If a
person is what God wishes, as shown by his revealed will in the
model of Christ, pure, loving, devout, wise, and earnest, he is
saved, whether he ever heard of Christ or not. Are Plato and
Aristides, Cato and Antoninus, to be damned, while Pope Alexander
VI. and King Philip II are saved, because those glorious
characters merely lived at the then height of attainable
excellence, but these fanatic scoundrels made a technical
profession of Christianity? The "Athanasian" creed asserts that
whoever doth not fully believe its dogmas "shall without doubt
perish everlastingly." And the eighteenth article in the creed of
the Church of England declares "them accursed who presume to say
that any man can be saved by diligently framing his life according
to the law or sect which he professeth, and the light of
nature."16

Another particular in which the present view of salvation is
satisfactory, in opposition to the other theories, is in leaving
the personal nature of sin clear, the realm of personal
responsibility unconfused. Why should a system of thought be set
up and adhered to in religion that would be instantly and
universally scouted at if applied to any other subject? 17 "No one
dreams that the sin of an unexercised intellect, of gross
ignorance, can be pardoned only through faith in the sacrifice of
some incarnation of the Perfect Reason. No one expects to be told
that the violation of the bodily laws can be forgiven by the
Infinite Creator only on the ground that some perfect physician
honors them by obedience and death. It is by opening the mind to
God's published truth, and by conformity to the discovered
philosophical

16 Arnauld, Emes, Goeze, and others, have written volumes to prove
the indiscriminate damnation of the heathen. On the contrary,
Muller, in his "Diss. de Paganorum poet Mortem Conditione," and
Marmontel, in his "Belisaire," take a more favorable view of the
fate of the ethnic world. The best work on the subject a work of
great geniality and ability is Eberhard's "Neue Apologie des
Socrates." Also see Knapp's Christian Theology, sect. lxxxviii.

17 Martineau, Studies of Christianity, pp. 153-176: Mediatorial
Religion. Ibid. pp. 468-477: Sin What it is, What it is not.


order, or the reception of the adopted remedy, that the mind and
the frame experience new life. And our souls are redeemed, not by
any expiation on account of which penalties are lifted, but by
reception of spiritual truth and consecration of will, which push
away penalties by wholesome life." 18

The awful inviolability of justice is shown by the eternal course
of God's laws bringing the exactly deserved penalty upon every
soul that sinneth. Whoever breaks a Divine decree puts all sacred
things in antagonism to him, and the precise punishment of his
offences not the worth of worlds nor the blood of angels can
avert. The boundless mercy of God, his atoning love, is shown by
the absence of all vindictiveness from his judgments, their
restorative aim and tendency. Whenever the sinner repents,
reforms, puts himself in a right attitude, God is waiting to
pardon and bless him, the sun shines and the happy heart is glad
as at first, the cloudy screen of sin and fear and retributive
alienation being removed. This view, when appreciated, affords as
impressive a sanction to law, and as affecting an exhibition of
love, as are theoretically ascribed to the doctrine of vicarious
expiation. The infinite sanctity of justice and the fathomless
love of God are certainly much more plainly and satisfactorily
shown by the righteous nature and beneficent operation of the law,
than by its terrible severity and arbitrary subversion. According
to the present view, the relation of Christ to human redemption is
as simple and rational as it is divinely appointed and perfectly
fulfilled. Accredited with miraculous seals, presenting the most
pathetic and inspiring motives, he reveals the truths and
exemplifies the virtues which, when adopted, regenerate the
springs of faith and character, rectify the lines of conduct, and
change men from sinful and wretched to saintly and blessed. He
stirs the stagnant soul, that man may replunge into his native
self, and rise redeemed.

For the more distinct comprehension and remembrance of the schemes
of Christian salvation we have been considering, it may be well to
recapitulate them.

The first theory is this: When, by the fall of Adam, all men were
utterly lost and doomed to hell forever, the vicarious sufferings
of Christ cancelled sin, and unconditionally purchased and saved
all. This was the original development of Universalism. It sprang
consistently from Augustinian grounds. It was taught by a party in
the Church of the first centuries, was afterwards repeatedly
condemned as a heresy by popes and by councils, and was revived by
Kelly, Murray, and others. We are not aware that it now has any
avowed disciples.

The second conception is, in substance, that God, foreseeing from
eternity the fall of Adam and the consequent damnation of his
posterity, arbitrarily elected a portion of them to salvation,
leaving the rest to their fate; and the vicarious sufferings of
Christ were the only possible means of carrying that decree into
effect. This is the Augustinian and Calvinistic theology, and has
had a very extensive prevalence among Christians. Many church
creeds still embody the doctrine; but in its original,
uncompromising form it is rapidly fading from belief. Even now few
persons can be found to profess it without essential modifications,
so

18 T. S. King, Endless Punishment Unchristian and Unreasonable, p.
65.


qualifying it as to destroy its identity.

The third plan of delivering souls from the doom supposed to rest
on them attributes to the vicarious sufferings of Christ a
conditional efficacy, depending upon personal faith. Every one who
will heartily believe in the substitutional death of Christ, and
trust in his atoning merits, shall thereby be saved. This was the
system of Pelagius, Arminius, Luther. It prevails now in the so
called Evangelical Churches more generally than any other system.

The fourth received method of salvation, assuming the same
premises which the three foregoing schemes assume, namely, that
through the fall all men are eternally sentenced to hell, declares
that, by Christ's vicarious sufferings, power is given to the
Church, a priestly hierarchy, to save such as confess her
authority and observe her rites. All others must continue lost.19
This theory early began to be constructed and broached by the
Fathers. It is held by the Roman Catholic Church, and by all the
consistent portion of the Episcopalian. A part of the Baptist
denomination also through their popular preachers, if not in their
recognised symbols assert the indispensableness of ritual baptism
to salvation.

The fifth view of the problem is that no soul is lost or doomed
except so far as it is personally, voluntarily depraved and
sinful. And even to that extent, and in that sense, it can be
called lost only in the present life. After death every soul is
freed from evil, and ushered at once into heaven. This is the
distinctive doctrine of the ultra Universalists. It is
disappearing from among its recent advocates. As a body they have
already exchanged its arbitrary conceptions of "death and glory"
for the more rational conclusions of the "Restorationists." 20

The sixth and final scheme of Christian salvation teaches that, by
the immutable laws which the Creator has established in and over
his works and creatures, a free soul may choose good or evil,
truth or falsehood, love or hate, beneficence or iniquity. Just so
far and just so long as it partakes of the former it is saved; as
it partakes of the latter it is lost, that is, alienates the favor
of God, forfeits so much of the benefits of creation and of the
blessings of being. The conditions and means of repentance,
reformation, regeneration, are always within its power, the future
state being but the unencumbered, more favorable experience of the
spiritual elements of the present, under the same Divine
constitution and laws. This is the common belief of Unitarians and
Universalists, the latter alone teaching it as a sure doctrine of
Revelation.

Salvation by purchase, by the redeeming blood of Christ; salvation
by election, by the independent decree of God, sealed by the blood
of Christ; salvation by faith, by an appropriating faith in the
blood of Christ; salvation by the Church, by the sacraments made
efficacious to that end by the blood of Christ; salvation by
nature, by the irresistible working of the natural order of
things, declared by the teachings of Christ; salvation by a
resurrection from the dead, miraculously effected by the delegated
power of Christ; salvation by character, by conformity of
character to the spiritual laws of the universe, to the nature and
will of God, revealed, urged, exemplified, by the whole mission of
Christ; these are the different theories

19 Adams, Mercy to Babes. (A plea for the baptism of infants, that
they may not be damned.)

20 Adin Ballou, Universalism and Restorationism Moral Contraries,
1837.


proposed for the acceptance of Christians.

Outside of Christendom we discern, received and operative in
various forms, all the theoretic modes of salvation acknowledged
within it, and some others in addition. The creed and practice of
the Mohammedans afford a more unflinching embodiment of the
conception of salvation by election than is furnished anywhere
else. Islam denotes Fate. All is predestinated and follows on in
inevitable sequence. No modifying influence is possible. Can a
breath move Mount Kaf? The chosen of Allah shall believe; the
rejected of Allah shall deny. Every believer's bower is blooming
for him in Paradise; every unbeliever's bed is burning for him in
hell. And nothing whatever can avail to change the persons or the
total number elected for each.

There is one theory of salvation scarcely heard of in the West,
but extensively held in the East. The Brahmanic as well as the
Buddhist thinker relies on obtaining salvation by knowledge. Life
in a continual succession of different bodies is his perdition.
His salvation is to be freed from the vortex of births and deaths,
the fret and storm of finite existence. Neither goodness nor piety
can ever release him. Knowledge alone can do it: an unsullied
intellectual vision and a free intellectual grasp of truth and
love alone can rescue him from the turbid sea of forms and
struggles. "As a lump of salt is of uniform taste within and
without, so the soul is nothing but intelligence."21 If the soul
be an entire mass of intelligence, a current of ideas, its real
salvation depends on its becoming pure and eternal truth without
mixture of falsehood or of emotional disturbance. He "must free
himself from virtues as well as from sins; for the confinement of
fetters is the same whether the chain be of gold or of iron."22
Accordingly, the Hindu, to secure emancipation, planes down the
mountainous thoughts and passions of his soul to a desert level of
indifferent insight. And when, in direct personal knowledge, free
from joy and sorrow, free from good and ill, he gazes into the
limitless abyss of Divine truth, then he is sure of the bosom of
Brahm, the door of Nirwana. Then the wheel of the Brahmanic Ixion
ceases revolving, and the Buddhist Ahasuerus flings away his
staff; for salvation is attained.

The conception of salvation by ritual works based on faith either
faith in Deity or in some redemptive agency is exhibited all over
the world. Hani, a Hindu devotee, dwelt in a thicket, and repeated
the name of Krishna a hundred thousand times each day, 23 and thus
saved his soul. The saintly Muni Shukadev said, as is written in
the most popular religious authority of India, "Who even
ignorantly sing the praises of Krishna undoubtedly obtain final
beatitude; just as, if one ignorant of the properties of nectar
should drink it, he would still become immortal. Whoever worships
Hari, with whatever disposition of mind, obtains beatitude."24
"The repetition of the names of Vishnu purifies from all sins,
even when invoked by an evil minded person, as fire burns even him
who approaches it unwillingly."25 Nothing is more common in the
sacred writings of the Hindus than the promise that "whoever reads
or hears this narrative with a devout mind shall receive final
beatitude." Millions on millions of these docile and abject
devotees undoubtingly expect salvation by such merely ritual

21 Colebrooke, Essays, vol. i. p. 359.

22 Ibid. p. 363.

23 Asiatic Researches, vol. xvi. p. 115.

24 Eastwick, Prem Sagar, p. 56.

25 Vishnu Parans, p. 210, note 13.


observances. One cries "Lord!" "Lord!" Another thumbs a book, as
if it were an omnipotent amulet. Another meditates on some mystic
theme, as if musing were a resistless spell of silent exorcism and
invocation. Another pierces himself with red hot irons, as if
voluntary pain endured now could accumulate merit for him and buy
off future inflictions.

It is surprising to what an extent men's efforts for salvation
seem underlaid by conceptions of propitiation, the placation of a
hatred, the awakening of a love, in the objects of their worship.
In all these cases salvation is sought indirectly through works,
though not particularly good works. The savage makes an offering,
mutters a prayer, or fiercely wounds his body, before the hideous
idol of his choice. The fakir, swung upon sharp hooks, revolves
slowly round a fire. The monk wears a hair shirt, and flagellates
himself until blood trickles across the floor of his cell. The
Portuguese sailor in a storm takes a leaden saint from his bosom
and kneels before it for safety. The offending Bushman crawls in
the dust and shudders as he seeks to avert the fury of the fetich
which he has carved and set in a tree. The wounded brigand in the
Apennines, with unnumbered robberies and murders on his soul,
finds perfect ease to his conscience as his glazing eye falls on a
carefully treasured picture of the Virgin, and he expires in a
triumph of faith, saying, "Sweet Mother of God, intercede for me."
The Calvinistic convert, about to be executed for his fearful
crimes, kneels at the foot of the gallows, and exclaims, as in a
recent well known instance, "I hold the blood of Christ between my
soul and the flaming face of God, and die happy, assured that I am
going to heaven."

It is all a terrible delusion, arising from perverted sentiment
and degraded thought. Of the five theoretical modes of salvation
taught in the world, Election, Faith, Works, Knowledge, Harmony,
one alone is real and divine, although it contains principles
taken from all the rest and blended with its own. There is no
salvation by foregone election; for that would dethrone the moral
laws and deify caprice. There is no salvation by dogmatic faith;
because faith is not a matter of will, but of evidence, not within
man's own power, and a thousand varieties of faith are
necessitated among men. There is no salvation by determinate
works; for works are measurable quantities, whose rewards and
punishments are meted and finally spent, but salvation is
qualitative and infinite. There is no salvation by intellectual
knowledge; for knowledge is sight, not being, an accident, not an
essence, an attribute of one faculty, not a right state and ruling
force in all. The true salvation is by harmony; for harmony of all
the forces of the soul with themselves and with all related forces
beyond, harmony of the individual will with the Divine will,
harmony of personal action with the universal activity, what other
negation of perdition is possible? what other definition and
affirmation of salvation conceivable? By the Creator's fiat, man
is first elected to be. By the guiding stimulus of faith, he is
next animated to spiritual exertion. By the performance of good
works, he then brings his moral nature into beautiful form and
attitude. By knowledge of truth, he furthermore sees how to
direct, govern, and attune himself. And finally, by the
accomplishment of all this in the organized harmony of a wise and
holy soul, there results that state of being whose passive
conditions constitute salvation, and whose active experience is
eternal life.

