CHAPTER V.

RESUME HOW THE QUESTION OF IMMORTALITY NOW STANDS.

IN THE leading nations of Christendom, the belief in the
immortality of the soul has for some time past obviously been
weakening. The number of those who assail the belief increases,
and their utterances become more frank and dogmatic. A multitude
of instances, clear to every careful observer, prove this.
Especially at the present moment do examples of painful doubt,
profound misgiving, bold and exultant denial, mocking flippancy
and ridicule, abound on all sides, in private conversation, in
public discussion, and in every form of literary activity. The
hearty thoroughness and fervor with which the faith of the Church
was once held have gone from whole classes. Subtle skepticism or
blank negation is a common characteristic. Whether this tendency
towards unbelief be sound or fallacious, temporary or permanent,
it is at least actual. And it is important that we examine the
causes of it, and test their logical validity while tracing their
historic spread. Why, then, we ask, is the faith in a future life
for man suffering such a marked decay in the present generation of
Christendom?

In the first place, the faith pales and dwindles, from the general
neglect of that strenuous and constant cultivation of it formerly
secured by the stern doctrinal drill and by the rigid supervision
of daily thought and habit in the interests of religion. Never
before were men so absorbed as now in material toil and care
during the serious portion of their existence; never before so
beset as now during the leisure portion by innumerable forms of
amusement and dissipation. The habit of lonely meditation and
prayer grows rarer. The exactions of the struggle of ambition grow
fiercer, the burdens of necessity press more heavily; the vices
and temptations of society thicken: and they withdraw the
attention of men from ideal and sacred aims. More and more men
seem to live for labor and pleasure, for time and sense; less and
less for truth and good, for God and eternity. Absorbed in the
materialistic game, or frittered and jaded in frivolous
diversions, all eternal aims go by default. In what precious age
was maddening rivalry so universal, giggling laughter so pestilent
an epidemic, triviality at such a premium and sublimity at such a
discount? But the things to which men really devote themselves
dilate to fill the whole field of their vision. They soon come to
disbelieve that for which they take no thought and make no
sacrifice or investment. The average men of our time, as well
those of the educated classes as those of the laboring classes, do
not live for immortality. Therefore their faith in it diminishes.
Our fathers, to a degree not common now, walked in mental
companionship with God, practiced solitary devotion, shaped their
daily feelings and deeds with reference to the effect on their
future life. Thus that hidden life became real to them. Now the
interests and provocations of the present world, concentrated and
intensified as never before the strife of aspirants, the giddy
enterprises of speculation and commerce and engineering, the chaos
of caucuses and newspapers and telegraphs  monopolize our
faculties and exhaust our energies, leaving us but faint
inclination to attend to the solemn themes of the soul and the
mystic lures of infinity. To those crazed with greed, battling
with rivals or sunk in debauchery, God naturally becomes a verbal
phantom and immortality a foolish dream. There is nothing in
mechanism and mammon worship, nothing in selfish sloth and
laughter, nothing in cruel oppression and drudgery, to inspire
belief in the deathless spirituality of man. Among a people
prevailingly given over to these earthlinesses, faith in the
transcendent verities of religion perforce dies out. In the long
run the supreme devotion of the soul irresistibly moulds its
faith. Christendom does not live in conscious sacrifices and
aspirations for God and eternal life, but it lives chiefly for
selfish power and knowledge, money, praise and luxury. Therefore
in Christendom faith in immortality is decaying. But we believe
this decay to be temporary, the necessary transition to a richer
and more harmonic insight. The passing eclipse of faith in a
future life is destined by concentrating attention on the present
to develop its resources, realize the divine possibilities of this
world, unveil all the elements of hell and heaven really existing
here, and fully attune mankind to the conditions of virtue and
blessedness now. When this shall have been done the tangential and
fractional character of our experience will be so obvious, the
inadequacy of the earthly state for the wants of our transcendent
and prophetic faculties will be so urgent, and the supplementing
adaptations of the entire unseen but clearly divined future to the
craving parts in the present will be so manifest, that a complete
revelation of immortality will break upon the prepared mind of the
race. Then history will take a new departure in breathing
communion with the whole creation.

But infidelity to duty and privilege does not destroy the truth of
duty and privilege. It only blinds the faithless eyes so that they
cannot see the truth. If the immortality of the soul be a truth,
the materialistic absorption of our life would blind us to it and
make us deny it. Exclusive attention to the present would hide the
future from us, although its dazzling prizes, scattered on the
dark back ground of eternity, were burning there in everlasting
invitation and hospitality. Thus, while the eager worldliness of
our age practically vacates the faith in a future life, it does
not logically disprove it; but leaves it for the ultimate test of
the genuine evidence.

The second reason for the apparent rapid crumbling away of the
belief in immortality in Christendom is the recent wide diffusion
of a critical knowledge of the comparative history of the opinions
of all nations on the subject of a future life, revealing the
mythological character common to them, and tracking them back to
their origin in primitive superstitions no longer is their literal
purport credible to any educated intelligence. In many works by
theological writers, and by scientific writers, of free habits of
thought, like Strauss and Spencer, collections have been made of
the fancies and theories of mankind respecting the survival of the
spirit and the conditions of its experience after the death of the
body. These beliefs, it has been agreed, even among the most
enlightened peoples, rest at last on the same basis with the
crudest notions of the barbarians of the prehistoric period,
namely, the spontaneous workings of raw instinct and imagination.
Tracing the views of Christians as to the nature of the soul, and
the life to come in heaven or hell, back to the rude conceptions
of the naked savages who fashioned their idea of the ghost from
the shadow or the reflection of the man, which was a picture or
representative of him, yet without matter, and from the phenomena
of dreams, in which they supposed the spirit of the man left him
and went through the adventures of the dream and returned ere he
awoke it has been asserted that every form of later faith, however
refined and improved in details, yet really resting on such
puerile fancies, such incompetent and absurd beginnings, is
thereby discredited and must be rejected.

Now, it is true that when we find among Christian believers,
connected with the doctrine of a future life, an incongruous
medley of physical imagery and gross imaginative pictures,
conceptions of just the same character as the grotesque dreamings
of the earliest savages and the elaborate mythology of subsequent
priesthoods, we are required to treat the whole suppositious mass
as mere poetry or superstition, and to dismiss it from our faith.
But we are by no means justified in doing so with the essential
fact itself of a future life. The essential fact, the assertion of
immortality, may be true, even if the mythological dress be all
fictitious. It does not follow that man has no surviving soul
because the local heaven or hell, described by savage or priest as
its residence, is unreal. It surely is no correct inference that
the soul perishes with the body, because the barbarian mind
generalized its idea of the soul from the phenomena of shadows,
reflections, echoes and dreams. The critical scholar, who judges
the case fairly, will correct the fallacies of the confused
reasoning instinct, and relegate the mythology to its proper
province, but reserve his judgment on the question itself of
spiritual survival to be settled on the only appropriate evidence.
Although the habit thus formed by the critical scholar, and by
those who follow his authority, of sweeping away as wholly
untenable so many varieties of speculation, and so many groups of
images connected with the belief in a future life, has
unquestionably contributed powerfully to foster complete disbelief
in the doctrine itself, yet it is equally unquestionable that this
process of negation is illogical. Many a true doctrine has been
cradled in superstitions and absurdities. A faith supported by
many classes of independent arguments is not overthrown by the
disproof of one of those classes. It is as wrongful a procedure to
deny the immortality of the soul because barbaric instinct
grounded it on erroneous notions and enveloped it with falsehoods,
as it would be to reject the established laws of gravitation and
light and sound, for the reason that the various provisional
theories, preceding the correct ones, were ridiculous mistakes.
The problem to be solved is, Does the man who is now a soul in a
body remain a soul when the body dissolves? The inadequacy or
folly of a hundred provisional answers does not affect the final
answer. Instead of denying immortality because the childish mind
of the early world feigned impossible things about it, we should
change the question by appeal to a more competent court, and
inquire what Pythagoras, Augustine, Dante, Leibnitz, Fichte,
Schelling, Swedenborg, Goethe, thought about it. It is a question
for the consensus of the most gifted and impartial minds, the very
Areopagus of Humanity, to decide. Furthermore, on a deeper
inquiry, it seems clear that the real belief in immortality did
not originate from the contemplation of the phenomena of dreams
and shadows and echoes, but arose rather from the inexpugnable
self assertion of consciousness, its inability to feel itself non
existent. This persistency of consciousness, following it in all
its imaginative flights of thought beyond the death of the body,
was the cause of the mythological creativeness of the barbaric
mind. And thus the elaboration of the imagery of ghosts and a
ghostly realm was not the precursor, but the result of a belief in
another life. The belief sprang directly out of the feeling of a
continuous being unconquerably connected with human self
consciousness, and is independent of the imagery in which it has
been clothed, may clothe itself in endless forms of imagery, and
survive their removal on the discovery of their incompetence.

Besides, the savage himself was, after all, not so far out of the
way. His mythology was not a mere fiction concreted into fact by
superstition. He was on that track of analogy which, when cleared,
will be, perhaps, the luminous highway to universal truth. The
savage was obscurely conscious that the objects which appeared
around him as solid material realities had their immaterial
correspondences within his spirit. The tree, the stone, the
flower, the star, the beast, the man, had within him correspondent
mental images or ideas just as real as they, but without sensible
qualities, and incapable of hurt. With creative wonder he
recognized a symbol or analogy of this inner world in the shadow
and the reflection. The shadow or the reflection is a representation
of its original, but without material substance.

See, it lies there, wavering, on the rock, or in the water. No
arrow can pierce it, no club bruise it, no pestle pulverize it, no
chemistry disintegrate it. It is an emblem of the immaterial and
indestructible spirit, revealed in the outer world of matter,
where everything changes and passes away except the noumena under
the phenomena. No wonder it stirred the brooding fancy of the
ignorant, but prophetic primitive man, and made it teem with poesy
and personification.

Freely, then, let us brush aside the mythological extravagance and
irrational errors in the entire cosmopolitan doctrine of a future
life, but beware of rejecting the fact itself of immortality until
we have better grounds than have yet been afforded by the
accumulating insight of literary history. As the world moves on,
and the human mind develops with it, the crude must give way to
the mature, and the false be replaced, not with vacancy, but with
the true. The problem of the nature and destiny of the soul will
not be solved by tearing away the fictitious drapery thrown around
it, but by piercing to the roots of the reality within the
drapery.

And now we come to the third reason for the increasing doubt and
decreasing faith in regard to a future life: that reason is that
the form of the belief in it prevalent in Christendom has become
incredible, and the rejection of the form has loosened the hold on
the substance. The philosophic mind, which has attained to the
idea of the infinite God, without body, or parts, or passions,
omnipresent in his total perfection, can reason to the belief in a
kindred immortality for its own finite being. But since our
experience is here limited to the life now known, we are utterly
without data or ability to image forth such a conception of
immortality in any form of picture or mental scenery. There seem
to be only three ways in which we can give imaginative
representation of a future life. The first is the method of the
universal barbarian mind, which paints the life to come as a
shadowy reflex or copy of the present world and life, an
unsubstantial, graspless, yet actual and conscious realm of
ghosts, carrying on a pale and noiseless mimicry of their former
adventures in the body. Holding fast to that clew of analogy which
is the nucleus of philosophy in this view, but rejecting the rest
as fantastic figment, we arrive at the next way in which those who
are unwilling to leave their thoughts of the future life in empty
rational abstraction, portray it in vivid concrete. This they do
by means of the doctrine of a general bodily resurrection of the
dead.

It is a striking fact that four of the great historic and literary
religions have taught the doctrine of immortality under the form
of a physical resurrection, namely: Zoroastrianism, Judaism,
Christianity, and Mohammedanism. It has been attributed, also, to
the ancient religion of Egypt, but erroneously. Its belief there
is a mere inference from facts which do not really imply it. The
Egyptians plainly believed in a series of individual reincarnations,
not in any general resurrection. But it is a sufficiently
interesting and impressive fact that over one third of the human
race have embodied their expectation of a future eternal life
in this concrete and astonishing form. It has not rested on a basis
of reason, but on one of asserted revelation and authority. It
originated in the fact that the only life of which we now have
any experience is a life in the body, and, therefore, this is the
life which we instinctively love and prefer; also in the fact
that this is the only mode of life which we are able to
represent to ourselves in any satisfactory, apprehensible image.
It then bolstered itself up by arbitrary theological theorizings,
and proclaimed itself with sanctions of a pretended supernatural
authority. Slowly the minds of its disciples were drilled to a
familiarity with it, and to a habit of implicitly believing it,
which grew strong enough to make them hold to it in spite of its
difficulty as a sheer and violent miracle having no connection
whatever with the natural order of things. Authority and passive
habit long maintained the belief in unbroken sway. They still so
support it in the Mohammedan world, where there is almost no
science, but little skeptical thought, and a common uniformity of
abject submission to the word of the Koran. But in Christendom it
fares differently. Here, the knowledge of modern science and
habits of free inquiry are almost universally diffused. The
consequence is, since the chief Christian belief in immortality
has been identified with the notion of a general physical
resurrection of the dead at the last day, and since all
philosophical and scientific thinking refutes that notion by
setting its arbitrariness and monstrous abnormality in high and
steep relief against the consensus of demonstrated knowledge and
moral probability, that the popular belief of Christendom in
immortality itself is depolarized and swiftly dropping into decay
with a large class of persons. But this spread of doubt and
denial, while a natural process, is yet an illogical and
unnecessary one. The competent thinker will extricate the question
of the immortality of the soul from its accidental entanglement
with the doctrine of the resurrection, and, rejecting the latter
as incredible, still affirm the former on its own independent
grounds. To prove and illustrate these statements we must here
give a little additional study, fresh and independent study, to
the subject.

The doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh is bound up with the
whole fabric of the Catholic and Orthodox dogmatic theology of
Christendom, and cannot be removed without logically shaking that
system of belief into pieces. And yet the doctrine, as has been
shown in a previous chapter, is unscriptural and of a purely pagan
origin, the New Testament foretelling a resurrection of spirits
from the underworld, not of bodies from the grave. It has no real
analogies in the world, but is a figment of fancy, unsupported by
reason on any authentic physical or moral grounds. It is,
furthermore, a doctrine whose realization is impossible, because
it is a self destroying absurdity.

All that we need for demonstrating its absolute incredibility, is
simply to ultimate its implications, carry it out in thought to
the necessary results which its ignorant originators never
foresaw. The doctrine of a physical resurrection presupposes that
our race was originally intended to be immortal on earth, and that
death was a penalty for sin. Fill out the theory. Adam and Eve,
made male and female, were commanded to multiply and replenish the
earth. Their descendants, doubling every twenty five years, would,
after sixty or seventy generations had accumulated, have covered
the whole earth so thickly that they would be packed in one
immovable mass, the whole planet carpeted with their forms and
paved with their upturned faces. Not an inch of room on the globe
for any harvest to grow or any creature to move; the world,
crowded and imbedded at every point with one continuous multitude
of immortal human beings, would have then rolled around the
zodiac, presenting this chronic and motionless picture, to all
eternity!

If it be maintained that had it not been for sin and its penalty,
the successive generations would neither have died nor have
remained forever on the earth, but would have been translated
bodily to some other world, the absurdity just exposed is escaped
only to introduce another one equally glaring. For in time, the
entire solid contents of the globe would thus be removed, and the
disappearance of our planet unhinge the solar system and produce a
general cataclysm. The solid contents of the earth have been
estimated at about thirty nine trillions of cubic feet. Seventy
five doublings of the primal pair would reach to over seventy
trillions of human beings, each containing more than a solid cubic
foot.

It is perfectly clear, therefore, in any view, that the only way
in which the human race, with their reproductive constitution,
could permanently inhabit the world is by the present system of
successive births and deaths; a system, furthermore, which science
shows to have been in working existence among the preceding races
of creatures for innumerable ages before the mythical sin of Adam
and Eve, with its mythical consequences.

The fabulous scheme of an intended bodily immortality on the earth
is a discordant and disagreeable one in every respect, asthetic,
rational, and moral. It jars incongruously with the great order of
nature and providence, which everywhere interpolates a night
between two days, a sleep between two wakings, to keep the edge of
consciousness fresh and the possibilities of pleasure alive.
Imprisoned in this carcass of flesh with its ignoble necessities
for endless ages, the contemplation of the fearful burden of
monotony would be insufferable to any one who had thought the case
out in all its details with vivid realization. And yet, so
unthinking are most persons in regard to the conventional beliefs
prevalent in society,  Parsees, Jews, Christians and Mohammedans,
professedly base their entire faith in immortality on this dogma
with the resurrection involved in it.

When carried out in its particulars by the imagination, the
doctrine is self evidently untenable, contradictory to the
essential facts of human nature under the given conditions of the
material creation. It had its theologic birth in the speculations
of the dualistic religion of Persia, whence it was first borrowed
by the Jews, then secondarily adopted into Christianity, and
thence finally impacted into the mongrel creed of Mohammed and his
followers. It is philosophically irreconcilable with a pure
monotheism; for, if God be infinite, no enemy could subvert his
original scheme and force Him to an arbitrary miracle to restore
it. It is a creaking and dissonant artifice, every way repugnant
to all whose reason and sentiment have learned to love the smooth
and continuous evolution of the order of the cosmos and the
connected destinies of conscious beings. It is absolutely refuted
by the double reductio ad absurdum shown above to be contained in
it.

Yet, while the grounds on which the common belief in a destined
general resurrection of the dead rests have really lost their
validity to the mind of the nineteenth century, the millions of
Islam and Christendom retain the article unchanged in their
creeds, and to question it is a heresy. No wonder skepticism
flourishes and genuine faith decays. This clinging to an outgrown
scheme is not only from the strong drift of a passive mental
conformity, as the train of cars keeps on for some time after the
dynamic locomotive has been taken off. Another reason is that the
tenet is so centrally imbedded in the dogmatic ecclesiasticism
that it cannot be extricated without involving all the associated
dogmas. Therefore, one portion of this knowing generation repeat
the formula and blink the difficulties, while another portion go
over to open disbelief of any future life. The doctrine of the
literal resurrection of the body from the grave is incredible to
the educated and free intelligence of the age. In continuing to
affirm it ecclesiastical Christendom brands itself with frivolity,
not earnest enough to carry its thought in loyalty to truth as far
as possible, or with hypocrisy, consciously dishonest to its
doubts.

It is a precious boon to be rid of such an unnatural and ominous
belief as that in the final disemboguing of the dead by sea and
land, the tumbling of the rocks, the falling of the stars, and the
everlasting torture of the condemned in a prison of fire. Far
better than any such doctrine is a calm confronting of the mystery
of the future in its confessed secrecy as it is, and a peaceful
resignation to the will of God in conscious ignorance and trust.
And yet the believer in this scheme of colossal and ghastly
necromancy, when confronted with the unanswerable arguments
against it, is sometimes found clinging to it with willful
tenacity, and bitterly complaining of those who refute it, that
they would rob him of his faith and give him nothing in exchange.
Suppose a man to believe that in the year nineteen hundred the
earth will be exploded, and that all men, except himself and the
little clique of his friends, will be strung for eternity on a red
hot iron wire in empty space. Suppose that this horrid notion is
clearly proved to him to be an error. Then, because he is not
taught exactly what will happen in the year nineteen hundred, he,
the unhappy man, assails his enlightener for having robbed him of
his faith and given him nothing in exchange! Is not the truth of
ignorance better than the falsity of superstition? Modest faith in
front of the shrouded unknown can well stand comparison with the
arrogant and incompetent exultation of fanaticism. In regard to
that belated relic of the belief in magic, the doctrine of the
literal resurrection of the dead in their fleshy bodies, let us
gratefully wipe it all out and draw a long breath of relief. Let
us rejoice to know that the will of God will be done in the
fulfilling order of the universe, although we may now be ignorant
of precisely what that will is. Believing the will of God to be
good, whether revealed or concealed, we can afford to wait in
peace, trying in the meantime to carry our individual character
and our social state and experience here steadily toward
perfection. Surely, that is the best way to prepare ourselves for
whatever lies beyond.

And yet we are not wholly shut up to mere blind faith. There is
always some ground of moral truth in every widely extended
dogmatic belief. In casting off the dogma we should carefully
extract its moral purport and try to give it a more authentic
setting. It will not be hard to do this with reference to the
doctrine now under consideration.

Obscure and complicated and baffling as the problem of our future
destiny is, we can already trace many a line of light, many a
prophetic signal and hint suggestive of what is ordained to happen
to the individual and the race.

Unquestionably, the genuine moral reason why the belief in the
fleshly resurrection has been so general and tenacious is the two
fold consideration: first; that we desire our future life to be an
incarnate life because our experience makes that form of being
realizable and precious to our imagination, while a disembodied
ghostliness is, perforce, repulsively vacant and abstract; and,
secondly because our affection and our imagination and our
conscience profoundly crave the complete fulfillment of the scheme
of the historic career of collective humanity in this world in
some such manner, that here, on this dear old earth, the
experience of our whole race may be brought to a clear epical
unity, and may close with an illuminating justification of
providence in the sight of all men, who shall then read the
interpretation of their entire past, and see together eye to eye.
Now we believe that the essence of this natural desire and this
sublime hope is a divine prophecy which shall be fulfilled. We
believe that in the very falsity of the doctrine of a carnal
resurrection and judgment there lurks a truth yet to break out in
overwhelming refulgence and perfectly satisfy every soul of man.
But it will be brought about by the gradual culmination of the
means and processes which God is now visibly carrying forward, and
not by any sudden convulsion of miracle.

The faculties of human consciousness in the individual and the
race are in process of development. Also the transmissible sum of
knowledge, on which those faculties employ themselves, is in
process of rapid increase. The faculties of knowledge possessed by
an accomplished master of literature and science now, contrasted
with those of a cannibal savage of the pre glacial epoch, reveal
an advance which hardly needs to be repeated in order to give us a
comprehension of the whole experience of our kind on earth, quite
ample to explain the facts of the case and solve the problem of
our destiny. The grasp of our intelligence and the richness of our
sensibility increase along the ages. The generalizations of our
philosophy grow wider, the gropings of our sympathetic faith
become vaster, the retrospection and the prevision of our science
keener and longer and more inclusive, every generation. It is very
significant that the further away we get from the prehistoric
times the more we learn about them. Archaology is one of the
latest and most swiftly enlarging branches of knowledge. Let the
processes thus indicated go on, as they have gone on and are with
accelerated pace going on, and the date is not beyond prophecy
when all earthly and human secrets will be solved, and their
mysteries be revealed, and the autobiographic book and volume of
the world be opened, and the universal tribunal be set in the
light of every life, and the irreversible judgment be declared, by
the simple revelation of the truth of history in the web of its
relations. For as every atom of matter is conjoined by all the
laws of nature with all other atoms of matter, and the history of
all their adventures is registered by their own indestructible
vibrations in the elemental spaces of the universe where they run
their career, so every identity of spirit is conjoined by all the
laws of spirit with all other spirits, and all their deeds and
sufferings are ineffaceably self registered in their reactions
upon the authors, in the pictures they shed upon space, and the
influences they set rolling through the eternity of successive
souls and lives. All, then, that is needed for a perfectly
vindicating judgment is the awakening of consciousness to the full
view of the facts. And the tendencies are powerfully moving in
that direction. What was the illumination of Swedenborg but the
taking possession by his consciousness of the unconscious lower
nervous system, with all its impacted ancestral experiences and
wondrous relations with the visible and invisible worlds? And this
may be repeated, by and by, and be perfected, and become common.
What may result is as yet almost inconceivable. Let us trace a
little, in this regard, the connections of the individual and the
face, and follow out some of their implications.

Suppose that in turn every child born begets or bears two
children. Then in the thirtieth generation the transmitted
qualities of spirit, nerve and blood, of the single original pair
of parents will be represented in upwards of one thousand millions
of descendants. It is clear from this law, allowing for all
deviations from its numerical progression on account of inter
marriages and of failures of offspring, how powerfully and swiftly
the ever multiplying streams of consanguinity are spreading in
every direction, affiliating and fraternizing the whole human race
literally into one family, the innumerable rills of separate
descent intermingling as they flow on, and finally diffusing over
the earth in that oceanic unity of humanity, which, when full,
will beat with the tidal pulse of a single sympathy. It is
believed by many that no experience of any living creature is ever
lost, but is by its own spontaneous and exact reflex vibrations
either registered in the conscious memory or deposited in the
unconscious organism in latent perfection of vestige and tendency.
Memory is a faithful treasurer of all the stores of events.
Suppose now that each parent bequeaths in the dynamic germ of his
progeny the possibility of reviving into consciousness, when the
proper conditions shall be furnished, the accumulated sum of all
that has happened throughout the entire line of his ancestry. And
again, imagine that all the souls composing the human race each of
which is a substantial and indestructible entity, living
incarnated over and over, and not a mere phenomenal process that
vanishes into nothing with the dissolution of the body are so
limited in number that they may be embodied on the earth in one
generation, whose members shall be so conjoined in knowledge and
fellowship that the life of the whole is concentrated in every
one, and the life of every one mirrored in the whole. Now,
finally, let it be conceived that this latest generation,
including all who have ever inhabited the world, at last attain a
development which enables them to grasp in distinct consciousness
the collective sum of the organic heritage of the race, each one
reading with perfect clearness in every particular the complete
history of humanity from the beginning to the end, understanding
all its causes, courses and consequences, and beholding with
unspeakable delight the justification of the ways of God, the
whole universe opening into free intercommunication, as if time
and space were either no more or else their measures were of
boundless subjective elasticity, every creature found in peace and
rapture at the goal of his destiny. That, indeed, would be a
realization of the day of judgment and the resurrection of the
dead, but without a shock or a jar in the course of things which
science reveals. The process of development now going on, if
carried far enough, will naturally result in this or in something
equivalent to it; while the notion of the vomiting forth of the
accumulated dead from land and sea, at the blast of a trumpet, is
a wild piece of imagery, borrowed from startling political
phenomena, and applied with absurd incongruity to the chronic
providence of God. The former view contains all the moral
significance of the latter, but without its violation of
probability. Nor is it all necessary that the climax shall be
brought about of a simultaneous universal judgment, or of the
appearance of our whole race on the earth at one time. The giving
of the vision to souls subjectively, one after another, in the
order of their attainment of the conditions, would meet every
requirement of the case. To each one in turn, wherever he was, as
the result broke on him in the ecstatic glory of all it means, the
essence of the so long cherished faith of Christendom would be
justified, and the providential theater and scenery of human
experience would appear under its illumination as a dazzling
vision of poetic justice perfect at every point.

Marvelous and almost incredible as this scheme of thought may
seem, it is not more mysterious in itself, or more staggering in
its demand on our faith, than many things successively were which
are now established beyond a doubt such as the telegraphic
conversation of men through the ocean and around the globe; the
seven hundred and thirty three thousand millions of ethereal
vibrations in a second, which cause the report of the violet ray
in consciousness; the transcendent disclosures of the spectrum
analysis; the conception of gravitation as a force which holds all
matter in unbroken union, and acts throughout the stellar universe
with timeless simultaneity. It is in entire keeping with
everything else in the workings of God, as demonstrated by
science, on every hand, both in nature and history. The atomic
theory and the nebular hypothesis, the chemical crucible and the
mathematical calculus, the microscope and the telescope discover
to our senses and our reason, wherever we look, facts as
mysterious to the understanding, and as baffling to the
imagination as any of the foregoing implications; showing us, in
every department of nature and experience, the bewildering
miracles of the infinitely little and the infinitely great exactly
balanced and perpetually passing into one another.

There is a third way, in addition to the ghost world of the
primitive faith of barbarians, and the resurrection climax of the
Christian and Parsee and Hebrew and Moslem creeds, in which the
imagination of man, moved by his instinct and reason, has
concreted the idea of a future life; namely, by the doctrine of
transmigration. A striking feature and no slight recommendation of
the foregoing view of the true meaning of the dogma of the
resurrection is that it reconciles these two chief forms of the
belief in immortal life. For resurrection and transmigration agree
in the central point of a restoration of the disembodied soul to a
new bodily existence, only the former represents this as a single
collective miracle wrought by an arbitrary stroke of God at the
close of the earthly drama, the latter depicts it as constantly
taking place in the regular fulfillment of the divine plan in the
creation. This difference is certainly, to a scientific and
philosophical thinker, who reasons on the data of nature and
experience and not on the dicta of theologians, strongly in favor
of the Oriental theory. We have no experience whatever of any
general resurrection, but all experience is full of the constant
appearances of souls in freshly created bodies throughout the
scale of sentient being. If our final future life is to be a
bodily one there surely is a world of presumptive evidence,
therefore, in behalf of transmigration as opposed to resurrection.
Besides the various distinctive arguments of its own, every reason
for the resurrection holds with at least equal force for
transmigration. The argument from analogy is especially strong. It
is natural to argue from the universal spectacle of incarnated
life that this is the eternal scheme everywhere, the variety of
souls finding in the variety of worlds an everlasting series of
adventures, in appropriate organisms; there being, as Paul said,
one kind of flesh of birds, another kind of flesh of beasts,
another of men, another of angels, and so on. Our present lack of
recollection of past lives is no disproof of their actuality.
Every night we lose all knowledge of the past, but every day we
reawaken to a memory of the whole series of days and nights. So in
one life we may forget or dream, and in another recover the whole
thread of experience from the beginning.

In every event, it must be confessed that of all the thoughtful
and refined forms of the belief in a future life none has had so
extensive and prolonged a prevalence as this. It has the vote of
the majority, having for ages on ages been held by half of the
human race with an intensity of conviction almost without a
parallel. Indeed the most striking fact, at first sight, about the
doctrine of the repeated existences of the soul incarnated in
different organisms, its form and experience in each successive
embodiment being determined by its merits and demerits in the
preceding ones, is the constant reappearance of the faith in it in
all parts of the world, and its permanent hold on certain great
nations. The ancient civilization of Egypt, whose contrasted
splendors and horrors awaken astonishment more and more with each
step in the progressive decipherment of its mysterious record,
seems largely to have grown out of this faith. The swarming
millions of India also, through the chief periods of their
history, have lain under its spell, suffered their lives, wrought
their great works of government, architecture, philosophy, and
poetry, and in its belief meditated, aspired, and exhaled their
souls. Ruder forms of it are reported among innumerable barbaric
tribes. It played an important part in the speculations of the
early Fathers of the Christian Church, and has often cropped out
in the works of later theologians. Men of the profoundest
metaphysical genius, like Scotus Erigena and Leibnitz, have
affirmed it, and sought to give it a logical or scientific basis.
And even amidst the predominance of skeptical and materialistic
influences in Europe and America, at the present time, we
constantly meet individuals with independent minds who earnestly
believe the alluring dogma. For, to a large and varied class of
minds, the doctrine holds a transcendent attraction as well as a
manifold plausibility.

Another striking fact connected with this doctrine is that it
seems to be a native and ineradicable growth of the Oriental
world; but appears in the Western world only in scattered
instances, and rather as an exotic form of thought. In the growing
freedom and liberality of thought, which no less than its doubt
and denial, now characterize Christendom, it seems as if the full
time had come for a greater mental and asthetic hospitality on the
part of Christians towards Hindus. The advocates of the
resurrection should not confine their attention to the repellent
or the ludicrous aspects of metempsychosis, but do justice to its
claim and its charm. The Pantheistic tendency which possessed and
overwhelmed the Brahminic mind, shaping and tinging its views
opened the whole range of sentient existences to an indiscriminate
sympathy, and made the idea of transmigration natural, and more
pleasing than repugnant. Furthermore, the Brahminic thinkers and
sages were a distinct class of men whose whole lives were absorbed
in introspective reveries and metaphysical broodings calculated to
stimulate the imagination and arouse to the keenest consciousness
all the latent marvels and possibilities of human experience, thus
furnishing the most favorable conditions for exactly such a belief
as that of transmigration, an endless series of ever varying
adventures for the imperishable soul. And the vast swarms of the
common people in the East are the passive followers of this high
caste of thinkers, abjectly accepting what they teach.
Accordingly, the mysterious doctrine of the metempsychosis has
held the entire mind, sentiment and civilization of the East,
through every period of its history, as with an irreversible
spell.

The persistent practice of various modes of profound and
rhythmical breathing by which the Brahmins perfect their
respiration, and the keen and sustained concentration of their
attention on their inner states, tend at the same time to heighten
the richness and intensity of the cerebral nerves, to unify the
connections of the lower nerve centres with them, and to fuse the
unconscious physiological processes with the conscious
psychological processes. Then the persevering disuse and
suppression of the action of their outer senses cause the objects
of the material world around them to seem more vague and dreamy
than the impressions of the ideal world within. And so the earth
with all its affairs seems an illusion, while their own unsought
trains of thought, feeling and imagery the rich mental panorama of
pictures and events, are taken for a series of substantial
revelations of the universe of being. An irresistible belief in
preexistence, immortality and transmigration, results.

On the contrary, in the Western world, the characteristic
tendencies are all different. Pantheistic theories are rarely
held, and the dreams and emotions which those theories are fitted
to feed are foreign and repulsive. An impassible barrier is
imagined separating humanity from every other form of being.
Speculative reason, imagination and affection, are chiefly
employed in scientific studies and social pursuits, or personal
schemes, external rather than internal. This absorption in
material things and evanescent affairs engenders in the spirit an
arid atmosphere of doubt and denial, in which no efflorescence of
poetic and mystic faiths can flourish. Thus, while the outward
utilities abound, hard negations spread abroad; and living,
personal apprehension of God, of an all pervasive Providence, and
of the immortality of the soul in any form, dies out either in
open infidelity or in a mere verbal acceptance of the established
creed of society. Consequently, to the average mind of the modern
Western world, the doctrine of transmigration remains a mere
fancy, although, as we shall immediately see, it has a strange
poetic charm, a deep metaphysical basis, and a high ethical and
religious quality.

The first ground on which the belief rests is the various strong
resemblances, both physical and psychical, connecting human beings
with the whole family of lower creatures. They have all the senses
in common with us, together with the rudiments of intelligence and
will. They all seem created after one plan, as if their varieties
were the gradulations of a single original type. We recognize
kindred forms of experience and modes of expression in ourselves
and in them. Now the man seems a travesty of the hog, the parrot,
the ape, the hawk, or the shark; now they seem travesties of him.
As we gaze at the ruminating ox, couched on the summer grass,
notice the slow rhythm of his jaw, and the wondering dreaminess of
his eyes, it is not difficult to fancy him some ancient Brahmin
transmigrated to this, and patiently awaiting his release. Nor is
it incongruous with our reason or moral feeling to suppose that
the cruel monsters of humanity may in a succeeding birth find the
fit penalty for their degradation and crime, in the horrid life of
a crocodile or a boa constrictor.

The conception of a series of connected lives also furnishes a
plausible explanation for many mysteries in our present
experience. Reference is made to all that class of phenomena
covered by the Platonic doctrine of reminiscence. Faces previously
unseen, and localities unvisited, awaken in us a vivid feeling of
a long familiarity with them. Thoughts and emotions, not hitherto
entertained, come to us as if we had welcomed and dismissed them a
thousand times in periods long gone by. Many an experience,
apparently novel and untried, makes us start as at the shadowy
reminder of something often known before. The supposition of
forgotten lives preceding the present, portions of whose
consciousness reverberate and gleam through the veils of thought
and sense, seems to throw satisfactory light on this strange
department of experience.

Much more weighty and penetrative, however, than the foregoing
considerations is the philosophical argument in behalf of
transmigration, drawn from the nature of the soul. Consciousness
being in its very essence the feeling of itself, the conscious
soul can never feel itself annihilated, even in thought it only
loses the knowledge of its being when it lapses into unconsciousness,
as in sleep or trance. The soul may indeed think of its own
annihilation but cannot realize the thought in feeling,
since the fainter emotional reflex upon the idea of its
destruction is instantly contradicted and over borne by the more
massive and vivid sense of its persistent being in immediate
consciousness. This incessant self assertion of consciousness at
once suggests the idea of its being independent of the changing
and vanishing body in which it is temporarily shrined. Then the
conception naturally follows that the soul, as it has once
appeared in human form, so it may reappear indefinitely in any of
the higher or lower forms of being which compose the hierarchy of
the universe. The eternity of the soul, past and future, once
accepted by the mind, leads directly to the construction of the
whole scheme of metempsychosis an everlasting succession of births
and deaths, disembodiments and reembodiments, with their laws of
personality and fortunes of time and space weaving the boundless
web of destiny and playing the endless drama of providence.

But the strongest support of the theory of transmigration is the
happy moral solution it seems to give to the problem of the dark
and distressing inequality and injustice which otherwise appear so
predominant in the experience of the world. To the superficial
observer of human life the whole scene of struggle, sin and
sorrow, nobleness and joy, triumph and defeat, is a tangled maze
of inconsistencies, a painful combination of violent discords. But
if we believe that every soul, from that of the lowest insect to
that of the greatest archangel, forms an affiliated member of the
infinite family of God, and is eternal in its conscious essence,
perishable only as to its evanescent disguises of unconscious
incarnation; that every act of every creature is followed by its
legitimate reactions; that these actions and reactions constitute
a law of retribution absolutely perfect; that these souls, with
all their doings and sufferings are interconnected with one
another, and with the whole, all whose relationships copenetrate
and cooperate with mutual influences whose reports are infallible
and with lines of sequence that never break, then the bewildering
maze becomes a vindicated plan, the horrible discord a divine
harmony. What an explication it gives of those mysteries of evil,
pain, sorrow and retribution, which often wrap the innocent and
the wicked in one sad fate, if we but see that no individual
stands alone, but trails along with him the unfinished sequels of
all ancestral experience, and, furthermore, is so bound up with
his simultaneous race that each is responsible for all and all for
each, and that no one can be wholly saved or safe until all are
redeemed and perfected! Then every suffering we endure for faults
not our own, the consequence of the deeds of others, assumes a
holy light and a sublime dignity, associating us with that great
sacrament of atoning pain whereof the crucified Christ is not the
exclusive instance but the representative head.

The above translation of the ecclesiastical doctrine of the
resurrection into a form scientifically credible, and reconciled
with the immemorial tenet of transmigration, may seem to some a
very fanciful speculation, a mere intellectual toy. Perhaps it is
so. It is not propounded with the slightest dogmatic animus. It is
advanced solely as an illustration of what may possibly be true,
as suggested by the general evidence of the phenomena of history
and the facts of experience. The thoughts embodied in it are so
wonderful, the method of it is so rational, the region of
contemplation into which it lifts the mind is so grand, the
prospects it opens are of such universal reach and import, that
the study of it brings us into full sympathy with the sublime
scope of the idea of immortality and of a cosmopolitan vindication
of providence uncovered to every eye. It takes us out of the
littleness of petty themes and selfish affairs, and makes it
easier for us to believe in the vastest hopes mankind have ever
known. It causes the most magnificent conceptions of human destiny
to seem simply proportional to the native magnitude and beauty of
the powers of the mind which can conceive such things. After
traversing the grounds here set forth we feel that if the view
based on them be not the truth, it must be because God has in
reserve for us a sequel greater and lovelier, not meaner than our
brightest dream hitherto. The worthiest theory of the fate of man
which the spirit of man can construct must either be a revelatory
divination of the truth, or an inadequate attempt to grasp the
design of the Creator in its true glory. It is impious and absurd
to hold that man can think out a scheme superior to the one God
has decreed. And it seems equally unreasonable to suppose that the
scheme of God for the future stages of our career is one which has
no hints in our present experience. Certainly it appears more
likely that the sequel will be discovered by the logical
completion of the inwrought order which has been slowly unfolding
from the first. And what do history and prophecy show more plainly
than the tendency to a convergence of all humanity in every man?
Spreading consanguinity in descent and growth of sympathetic
knowledge both point to this. Perfect this in each man, and
illuminate his whole organism and its relations with adequate
intelligence, and we have a true resurrection, not indeed of
decayed bodies from the grave, but of historic states of
consciousness from their latent embedment in the nervous system,
and their undulatory record in the dynamic medium of the creation.
Our senses now convert certain sets of undulations of the ethereal
medium into perceptions of light, heat, sound, and so interpret
their contents and extract their tidings. It is not impossible
that in a coming stage of development we may obtain additional
senses; our spirits may command the means of translating into
correspondent states of consciousness all the other modes of
vibration of the ethereal medium, and grasp the keys of unlimited
knowledge deciphering every secret wherever they go. The whole
universe may be a palimpsest preserving the inscriptions of all
deeds, and every soul may be a reagent gifted with the power to
recover and read its own.

As each generation is the inheritor of the preceding ones, all of
which from the first prolong their existence into the last in
unbroken continuity of historic conduct and responsibility,
justice may at the ripened period be naturally summed up without
any miracle. We all are projections of our ancestors. They
properly in us suffer and enjoy in accordance with what has flowed
from their lives. The whole of this, lighted up with consciousness
at last, may be the real meaning of the burden of the spirit given
to the apostle Paul, but misinterpreted by him into the mechanico
scenic scheme of the Judaized Christian Church. For when the
mighty influx struck the brain of the persecuting zealot,
revolutionizing his life, it came into connection with all the
inflamed theories and convictions so deeply drilled therein by his
Pharisaic education. These convictions, partly of a mere local and
transient character, associated with legends of Adam and Abraham
and the under world and Christ and the sky, mixed with the true
and universal import of the higher inspiration now given him,
caused his misconstrual of its message, and stamped the purely
human and providential meaning of the doctrine of the resurrection
with the rabbinical die of a politico mythological dogma. If this
were so, it is not the only instance in which the preexistent
discolorations in the mind of an inspired prophet have refracted
the truth of his burden into distorted error and bequeathed the
task of a future rectification when more light shall have come.

In the next place, we come to the fourth reason for the growing
doubts and disbelief of our day in immortality. It is the
remarkable diffusion of the habits of thought engendered by the
study of materialistic science. The authority of physical science
has been rapidly encroaching on and displacing the authority of
the church theology and sectarian creeds. Belief in invariable
laws has undermined belief in miracle and supernatural revelation.
Those who had been taught that the resurrection of Christ was the
only adequate proof of the immortality of the soul, learning to
deny the former, have naturally proceeded to question the latter.
For in such matters the real implications of logic are little
noticed. The religious skepticism nourished by physical science is
in all respects really as irrational and baseless as it is actual.
For example, the resurrection of Christ, admitting it to be a
fact, did not create the immortality it was considered to
illustrate. If he rose, it was because men are immortal, and men
are not immortal because he rose. If he did not rise, men are
immortal all the same, provided human immortality be a truth; if
it be not a truth, the resurrection of Christ would be an isolated
abnormal event without any logical validity on the question. The
truth or falsity of human immortality, therefore, is a question of
the creative plan of God and the essential nature of man, to be
decided on the intrinsic evidences, and cannot logically be
affected one way or the other by any individual historic
occurrence limited to a certain time and place. Yet it is a
practical necessity that any great popular faith, if it rests on
authority, will be shocked and weakened by everything which shocks
and weakens that authority, no matter how adventitious it is. If
one cannot believe in the preternatural resurrection of Christ,
that surely is no valid reason for denying the natural immortality
of the soul, but only a good reason for seeking to learn if there
be not adequate grounds for this faith quite independent of
scripture text and priestly assertion.

Precisely the same reasoning holds in relation to the doubts about
spiritual realities bred in the minds of those whose studies are
conversant exclusively with material realities. The professors of
physical science, thoroughly familiarized with things which
combine and dissolve, often come to fancy that everything is
phenomenal and evanescent, that there is no immaterial substance,
that spirit is not entity but process, that thought and feeling
and will are mere transient functions of transient matter. Thus
all faith in the individuality of mind is pulverized at the
fountain head. There can be no question but that such is the
common influence of a constant contemplation of the physical
aspects alone of physical things. Mentality, consciousness, is
regarded as the prismatic bow in the cloud, a spectral show that
appears and vanishes, with no permanent substance. At the present
time, in Christendom, the one conquering power in literature, the
one fascinating absorption of thought in society, is that
connected with the cultivation of physical science. Its prestige
is overwhelming. Its prevalent methods and results give a
materialistic turn of interpretation to the popular mind upon all
subjects. The direct consequence, among that class of minds who
put physical science above theology, is the spreading disavowal of
all belief in the immortality of the soul. The fallacy is obvious,
and the remedy is simple, if there be at hand but enough of modest
candor and patience fairly to weigh the facts of the case in the
scales of a sound logic.

In the first place, by the very structure of our being, by the
very necessity of our experience, the universe is divided into two
irreconcilable classes of realities, namely, spiritual subjects
and material objects. Sensations, perceptions, emotions, thoughts,
volitions, all qualities of mind, all states of consciousness, are
absolutely immaterial. They are more real to us, that is to say,
they more inexpugnably assert and maintain themselves, than
material things do: and it is only hopeless vulgarity and
incompetence of thinking which can ever confuse or merge them with
material things. Matter is that which proves itself to spirit by
the effects it produces on spirit. Spirit is that which is its own
evidence. The center of consciousness in us is its own proof of
its own being, and all that occurs within it is its own proof, and
is unsusceptible of any other or foreign demonstration. Hope,
fear, love, imagination, reason, are absolutely unthinkable as
forms of material substance, however exquisitely refined and
exalted. There is no conceivable community of being between a
sentiment and an atom, a gas and an aspiration, an idea of truth
in the soul and any mass of matter in space. Each of these facts,
conscious thought and material extension, has its own incommunicable
and incomparable sphere of being and laws of action, which can be
confused only by ignorance and sophistry.

So clear has this become to all profound reflection, that the ablest
supporters of the theory of evolution, with all their preponderant
bias in favor of physical science, declare, in the words of
Herbert Spencer, that if compelled to choose between thinking of
spirit in the terms of matter and thinking of matter in the terms
of spirit, they should take the latter alternative and give an
idealistic interpretation to nature rather than a materialistic
interpretation to the soul. It is logically clear, then, despite
the fallacious influences of habit to the contrary, that no
progress of the physical sciences, no conceivable amount of
induction and generalization as to the composition or decomposition
of material bodies, can throw any new light or darkness on the
nature and destiny of the immaterial soul.

The incessant flux of phenomena constructing and destroying apparent
things, though studied till the observing eye sees nothing but
mirage anywhere, has nothing to do with the steady persistence of
spiritual identity. To force it to discredit our claim to a divine
descent and an endless inheritance is a glaring sophism. The
question must be snatched back from the assumption of the retort
and crucible, the observational and numerical methods of the
physical realm, and relegated to the legitimate tests of the moral
and metaphysical realm.

Again, there is furnished in the results of the study of physical
science itself, as pursued by its most gifted masters, a glorious
overthrow and neutralization of the moral and religious doubts
called out in its shallower votaries by their absorption in its
more superficial phases. The scientific men of the most profound
intellectual power and the most brilliant original genius, the
supreme heads of chemistry, dynamics and mathematics, have applied
to the phenomena of the material creation modes of observation and
instruments of reasoning before whose compelling efficacy the
whole frowning vastitude of the outer universe melts into ideal
points of force and forms of law. Everything in time and space is
reduced to molecular vibrations, regulated by the mental
conceptions of number, weight and measure. The reasonings of such
men as Oersted and Faraday on electricity and magnetism; of Sir
William Thomson and Clerk Maxwell on thermodynamics; the theories
of the greatest mathematicians, grasping all things in heaven and
earth with their irresistible calculus, literally using infinites
as toys, creating imaginary quantities, and, going through certain
operations with them, actually discovering new truths in the solid
domain of reality yield conceptions of order, beauty and
sublimity, and emotions of wonder, awe and delight, nowhere else
surpassed. They exalt the spectacle of nature into a vision of
poetic intelligence, and show the theorizing mind of man to be
akin to the creating mind of God. Thus, if skepticism as to the
deathless royalty of soul is bred in the physicist who constantly
stoops with the scalpel and the microscope, it is offset in him
who, with as steady a judgment, soars to the contemplation of the
ethereal medium with its lines of force traversing immensity and
vibrating timelessly along their whole length, loaded, for those
who can interpret them, with tidings of all that happens. Instead
of spirit being materialized, matter is spiritualized and nature
transfigured into the ideal home of ideal entities. Dumas, years
ago, asserted that hydrogen gas is but an etherealized metal. Just
now, it is said, Pictet has succeeded, under a pressure of six
hundred and fifty atmospheres, in actually crystallizing oxygen
and hydrogen. One has only to read such papers as those of Stallo
on the fundamental concepts of science to learn that if matter or
mind is ever to be lost, it will not be mind.

But there remains a more direct and more important way of
correcting the dismal or defiant doubts of immortality caused by
the inferior phases of materialistic study; and that is, by
bringing up to a correspondent fullness and intensity the counter
activity of the ideal powers. Let justice be done to the subject
as well as to the object. Over against the watching of clouds and
waves, the sorting of herbs, the weighing of metals, the measuring
of quantities, bring up the exercise of the mind on the treasures
of qualitative substance in its own proper sphere of reason and
love and faith. Admire the beautiful, love the good, obey the
true, worship the right, aspire to the highest, subordinate or
sacrifice everything base or wrong in a generous service of duty,
and thus nourish a consciousness of those ontological relations by
which the soul is rooted in the Godhead, and stimulate that
intuitive efflorescence of faith which grows out of progressive
fulfillment and which prophecies perpetuity of fulfillment. To say
the least, the subject is as real as the object, the contemplating
faculty as valid as the phenomenon it confronts. The teachings of
the soul rightly construed are as authentic as the teachings of
nature. And, some day in the future, a complete system of truth
developed from the central principle of the one by the subjective
method will be found to correspond perfectly with the complete
system of truth developed by the objective method from the central
principle of the other. As the objective scientific principle is
the persistence of force, the subjective scientific principle is
the potential infinity of individual spirit, each one the
equivalent of the all. What else than this can be the ultimate
meaning of the primal, universal, indestructible antithesis or
dual classification of being, the ego and the non ego, self and
not self, the former including each individual in his own
apprehension, the latter including all besides?

There is a philosophical authority which, for those incompetent to
judge for themselves, should properly take the place vacated by
the ecclesiastical authority, which, in our day, is plainly on the
wane. Multitudes no longer believe in the immortality of their
souls on the ground of the resurrection of Christ, or the
assertion of Scripture or creed. Shall they, then, deny it
altogether because the materialistic band clamor that it is a
delusion, and they themselves see no sufficient evidence for it?
There is a more appropriate alternative. Many theories in natural
philosophy have been exploded by the proof of their absurdity, and
the correct explanations are accepted on trust by the multitudes
incompetent to master their logical and mathematical grounds. Very
few understand the proofs of the chief laws of nature, but the
vast majority of men implicitly trust the assertions of those who
do know them. In like manner there is a legitimate sphere for
authority in moral and religious beliefs; only it should be the
authority of the competent and disinterested. Now, it is a fact
that the very greatest philosophers who have ever lived, the
preeminently imperial thinkers, such as Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas,
Anselm, Hegel, and the resplendent group of their peers, have
asserted as a necessary principle the real being and eternal
substantiality of the soul. Besides all the combinations of matter
that dissolve, all the phenomena that pass, they affirm the
existence of enduring entities, individual spirits, thinkers
conscious of their thoughts. In central calm, far within the
struggle and vex of the rolling elements, throned in its own
serene realm of law, lives the free, conscious soul, and will live
eternally, actualizing its potentialities. Nothing can
disintegrate it, because it is not an aggregate but a unity, not a
quantitative mass of matter, but a spaceless monad of power. It is
a closed circuit of thinking activity, impenetrable to everything
else. Spirits are the only solids, matter being endlessly
penetrable and transmutable.

We are all obliged to think of ourselves as entities, and not as
mere phenomenal series of states. There must be a substratum for
the affections of consciousness. All changes are changes of
something. It is true there is a mystery involved here which no
words can make clear; yet the more deeply one thinks and feels the
more intense will be his assurance that there is something in him
which thinks and feels, or rather that he himself is a something
which thinks and feels. The best conception we can get of the soul
is that it is a subject which is its own object and a mirror for
the inner reflection of all other objects. God is not an object,
because He is the actualized infinite Subject. His thoughts are
concrete creations, the objective realities of the universe
phenomenal and substantial. We are actually finite subjects, but
with a potential infinity, patterned in free correspondence with
Him. Our thoughts are subjective reflections of His, modified by
the contents of our facultative constitution and the peculiarities
of our historic experience. What constitutes my soul is the
potentiality of all states of consciousness, actual and latent,
past, present and future. It reveals itself to me, so to speak, in
my actual thoughts and feelings. So far as these are true and
good, they correspond with and represent the will of God, and must
share the fortunes of the Divine Reality with which they are
implicitly joined. Then my soul cannot be annihilated unless the
will of God is so far annihilated. But God is infinite being, and
there is nothing outside of or counter to infinite being to
destroy it. All evil is but defect or negation. I am only in so
far as I am positive reality. Nothing of me, therefore, can ever
perish, except my imperfections; and the thought of the perishing
of imperfections is a thought of joy. Welcome, then, be the
approach of death which shall cleanse and dislimit me into
unimprisonable divineness of being, the crystalline sphere of pure
intelligence and immortality!

The only real proof of immortality in the sight of the intellect,
is the perception of the necessity of self determining entities as
the causes and grounds of the facts of experience. A series of
states implies something of which they are states. There seems to
be no possible explanation or understanding of the phenomena which
confront our experience without the conception of ultimate
individualities, indestructible subject objects, centers of
spiritual activity, monistic selfhoods, conscious egos, each of
which distinguishes itself from every other, and contrasts itself
with the All. Now it is claimed that every thinker who reaches the
maturest stage of thought attains to this insight. It is the
imperial mark of a certain stage of knowledge. Here the supreme
thinkers, sceptered with final perception of the truth of their
own eternity, sit at ease, enthroned in the serene and lucid realm
of law, beyond the reach of the dark tempest of cavils and doubts.
And there is a larger company who on easier terms have attained
the same result. For, without this wearisome metaphysical hewing
of conclusions from the quarries of ontology, the good and pure,
who, in their loving obedience and aspiration, keep the harmonic
quickness and innocence of their intuitions uninjured, also have
an unshaken assurance that they live in God and shall share his
life forevermore. The mystics of every period seem in feeling to
have an immediate grasp of all that the greatest philosophers have
painfully conquered by speculation. These two classes may claim to
possess direct certitude of eternal life. All others must either
attain to the stage of development and mount of vision of these,
or receive the faith on their authority, or else be subject to
doubt and unbelief.

To accept the doctrine of the immortality of the soul on the
authority of the wisest philosophers and the purest saints, is a
legitimate procedure perfectly in keeping with what the human race
does in all other provinces of thought where it is incapable of
proving what its teachers have demonstrated, but can easily
appreciate and make practical application of the truths they have
affirmed. The great laws of science in all its domains are
scientifically mastered by very few, but their empirical rules are
implicitly followed by the common multitude. One form or
receptacle of authority after another may be superseded; but
authority itself always remains. And the true course for those to
pursue who have come to repudiate the authority of scripture, or
church creed, or the resurrection of Christ, as a proof of the
future life of man, is not at once to abandon all belief in a
future state, but to accept the guidance of the most competent
independent thinkers in place of that of the most arbitrary
dogmatists. For unto all who do not arrogate to themselves a
transcendent competency to judge, the general consensus of the
thought and feeling of the world, clarified and interpreted by the
fittest few, will always be a grateful ground of reliance and
trust. And the verdict thus revealed is unequivocally in favor of
the doctrine of immortality.

There can be no changes independently of something which is
changed. Amidst all the changeable in us which passes and is
forgotten, there is something which stays and is inexpugnable. It
is our identity. That which appears in consciousness first, which
recurs oftenest, and which persists longest, is the most valid
object of belief. And what is that but the very consciousness, or
the subject as its own object? Surely, the one invariable
accompaniment of all the shifting states of consciousness is the
bare essential consciousness itself: this is, so to speak, the
unitary vessel containing all their varieties. This unquestionably
exists now. The burden of proof, then, as Bishop Butler long ago
showed, is on those who affirm its destruction in the article of
death. Consciousness is purely immaterial, as every one who has
passed beyond the most ignorant and childish stages of thought
must see. Merely because it is, in our present experience,
associated in time and space with a material organism, therefore
to declare that it is a dependent production of matter, or a
transient concomitant of the transient body, is a gratuitous
assertion with not one scintilla of evidence.

Even, for the moment, admitting it to be true that no argument of
irresistible cogency has yet been advanced to prove the
immortality of the soul, it is certain that no proof has ever
been given of its mortality. The very utmost that can be claimed
by any skeptic who fairly understands the whole case, is that the
different arguments, for and against, offset one another, and
leave the question in a neutral balance of suspense, just where it
was before the debate began. Many persons hold that the counter
reasonings do thus balance and annul one another. For them the
problem remains to be decided on other grounds than those of the
logical disputation which has proved inadequate to its settlement.
These other grounds are considerations of congruity, probability,
the prophetic preparations and demands of present experience. What
sort of a figure would the segments which we now see, compose, if
they were completed? What in the hidden future portions of our
destiny would be harmonic and complementary as related with the
parts here experienced? When the other modes of inquiry are
abandoned this mode remains. Its teachings are rich and impressive
in proportion to the greatness of the faculties and the wealth of
knowledge and love brought to its consideration. And thus we come
face to face with the fifth and last cause of the failing faith in
immortality confessed to characterize the present day.

That cause is the common inability to realize in the thoughts of
the mind, and to hold in the faith of the feelings, a conception
so vast, so mysterious, so remote from the usual routine of the
selfish trifles and petty notions which monopolize the powers and
fritter down the faculties of the average people of the nineteenth
century. The battle of sensualism, the scramble over material
interests, the wearing absorption in the small and evanescent
struggles of social rivalry, the irritated attention given to the
ever thickening claims of external things, the pulverizing
discussions of all sorts of opinions by hostile schools, are fatal
to that concentrated calmness of mood, that unity of passion, that
serene amplitude of intellectual and imaginative scope, that
docile religious receptiveness of soul, requisite for the fit
contemplation of a doctrine so solemn and sublime as that of
immortality. The grade of thought and scale of emotion ordinarily
characteristic of ordinary men are utterly out of keeping with the
inexpressible grandeur of themes like that of the divine kinship
and eternity of the soul. The reason and fancy, before they can be
competent to appreciate such truths, must be trained in the study
and worshipful meditation of subjects of commensurate mystery and
sublimity. It is no wonder that when minds and hearts familiar
only with houses and clothes and food, the trivial gossip and
vanity of the hour, are summoned to grasp the idea of spiritual
survival and an everlasting destiny of conscious adventures, they
are overwhelmed and helplessly fail to represent to themselves the
possibility of any such truth. This cause of doubt is very
prevalent and effective; for ever more and more in our age
conscious attention is turned away from states within and fixed
upon things without. The natural consequence is that the objective
world is arrogating the first place in consciousness, and the
subjective world is sinking into the secondary rank. Whatever
exalts the object at the expense of the subject tends to
materialism, unbelief in the separate being of the spirit. On the
other hand whatever gives the panoramic passage of subjective
states in the soul greater apparent vividness and tenacity than
belong to outer phenomena, tends to produce faith in the
independence and immortality of the spirit. Hence it is quite to
be expected that until our modern concentration on objective toil
and study and amusement reaches its destined climax and begins the
return career to subjective reason and feeling, the skepticism of
the age will increase.

Meanwhile the remedy for the evil is, first, to perceive it, and
then, to cultivate the kinds of experience calculated to
neutralize it. For the logical invalidity and fallaciousness of
the doubts concerning immortality, arising from the immense
disparity of such a belief with the mental habits of ignorant
earthlings and social parasites, appear from the fact that there
are others with whose experience and thought the doctrine has no
such disparity, but for whose spiritual range and haunt it is as
natural to believe it as to breathe. And, in explaining the
destiny of man, it is legitimate to take the most finished and
furnished specimens, not the abortive ones. There are grounds of
knowledge, domains of imagination, heights of nobility, familiar
to the most exalted characters, perfectly cognate and harmonious
with the conception of eternal life, and making the faith in it
fully as credible as the transcendent truths of science and
philosophy which have been actually demonstrated. Those who are
familiar only with the little affairs of sense, in narrow bounds
of time and space, may well gasp in despair and denial when the
bewildering contents of the doctrine of immortality are held
before them; but for all who have mastered what science reveals of
the objective world of nature, and what literature records of the
subjective world of soul, both these spheres furnish ample
illustrative examples and data to make the faith in every way
congruous with what else they know, and as easy as it is pleasing
to receive. Assuredly the belief resulting in this latter class
from their positive perception and correspondent desire and
persuasion, are, on every ground of reason or moral fitness, more
than a counterbalance for the unbelief resulting in the former
class from their negative experience and incompetency. If we
sought to estimate the possibility and destined fulfillment of
human nature when all its conditions shall have been perfected,
should we choose for the basis of our judgment the incapacity of
the lower specimens of man? or the capacity of the higher? After
considering the chief achievements of human genius, the mysterious
powers of the human soul now, the doctrine of immortality does not
seem too great and wonderful for belief; but, on the contrary, it
appears the coherent complement of the facts of the present.

Nothing can be more marvelous or imply greater glory for the
destiny of the individual being than the fact that each
consciousness is to itself the antithetical equivalent or balance
of the totality of being beside; since the whole universe, all
other beings, God himself, are known to the individual
consciousness only as revealed in itself through its personal
faculties. The slightest change in the subject is reported by a
correspondent change in objects. Heighten the internal activities
of the soul to a certain pitch, and the convictions they engender
will be so intense, and the experience so absorbing, as
irresistibly to sweep away all opposing doubts and fill every
craving with the triumphant flood of life. What overwhelming
revelations of the providence of God and eternal life, crowding
the cosmos at every point with the workings of poetic justice, may
thus be made to prepared spirits, only those who receive them
know. Paul said he was caught up into the third heaven and heard
unspeakable words. It is to be believed that such visions, while
often illusory, are sometimes genuine. A test to discriminate the
spurious and the authentic will one day be secured. Meanwhile it
is either a faithless faintheartedness or a vulgar arrogance to
omit from the data of our expected fate those thoughts, which,
though beyond the reaches of our souls, nevertheless irresistibly
allure our attention and enchain our affection; ideas belonging to
our nature, though transcending our experience, and, while
surpassing our faculties, still attracting us to our destiny. What
are presentiments but divine wings of the spirit fluttering toward
our unseen goal?

Again, the great metaphysicians, who have elaborated the
idealistic philosophy in so many forms, exhibit the mind of man to
us as superior to the cosmic spectacle it contemplates projected
in immensity. They portray the material creation as a phantasmal
show of mind, a phenomenal process and aspect of spirit,
indissoluble centers of consciousness alone having solid verity
and stay, while matter and force and times and places whirl and
pass, combine and dissolve.

Likewise the mathematicians, with their mighty calculus, translate
all quantities and qualities, all objects and operations, into
numerical symbols, and with these intellectual toys play the same
miraculous tricks that the Creator himself plays with the
originals. They symbolize purely imaginary quantities, bring them
into relations and pass them through certain operations, and
thereby discover truths which are found to have permanent
objective validity. It demonstrates, as said before, that the
filial mind which thus wanders in thought through the house of the
Father, and, everywhere making itself familiarly at home, disports
among His treasures, is of the same type with the parental Mind.

And now, still farther, that the cultivators of physical science
are pushing their discoveries and their theories to ultimates, we
begin to see the adamantine structure of material nature melting
into a system of ideal equivalents, vaporizing into an undulatory
ether, vanishing before our microscopes in immaterial bases of
thought, reason, law and will. The gases have just been first
liquified and then actually solidified, confirming the speculative
announcement long before made that oxygen and hydrogen are metals
volatilized. Many valuable and strange discoveries have been
reached in physical science by following prophetic declarations
made a priori on grounds of pure reason. The same proofs of
intellectual design and purpose are discerned in the order of
atomic combination, in the beauty of crystals and dewdrops and
snowflakes, in the perfect geometrical symmetry of minerals and
flowers, and in the same spiral adjustment of the leaves on a tree
and of the orbits of the planets in the sky, as in the artistic
works of man. Intellect and will are as much shown in the
production of a palm tree as they are in the production of a poem
And so, before the gaze of the accomplished and devout scientist,
matter is translated into terms of mind, rather than the reverse,
and the whole cosmos is transmuted into a divine laboratory of
ideal powers, a divine gallery of ideal pictures, a divine theater
for the eternal adventures of conscious spirits.

In mental conception man deals with mathematical infinites as
easily as with the pettiest objects, dilates a point to the
universe and shrinks the universe to a point, condenses eternity
into a moment or stretches a moment to eternity. It has been shown
that if correspondent diminution or enlargement in the faculties
of sense and intelligence and in all the forces concerned were
made, the whole stellar system and its contents might be dwarfed
into the bulk of a grain of sand, or so magnified that each grain
would fill the space now occupied by the whole, and no one would
perceive any change whatever in the scale. In reply to the
statement that nothing can act where it is not, it has been proved
that every atom is virtually omnipresent. It takes the entire
universe to constitute an atom, since the forces centered in each
atom are connected with the whole by the insunderable continuity
of all the laws of being. The science of molecular physics as
expounded by its latest masters is not less astounding than the
wildest soarings of transcendental metaphysics. For instance, it
is proved that if there be ultimate atoms their size must be so
small that it would require at least five hundred millions of them
to an inch in length. In a cubic inch of hydrogen gas, then, for
example, there are 125,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 one hundred
and twenty five septillions of atoms, moving with the inconceivable
velocity that is implied by their making thousands of millions
of changes of direction every second. The view of the dynamic s
tructure of the universe opened in this direction is as
appalling as that unveiled in the opposite direction by the
largest extension of the nebular hypothesis. He who can gaze here
with steady reason need not be staggered by the sublimest doctrine
of religion. Amazed at the spectacle of creative power and wisdom,
equally amazed at the discovering faculty of man, we feel it to be
incredible that he should have been made capable of such thoughts
only to be annihilated after a brief tantalization. Confronting
the immeasurable wilderness of divine glory, strewn all through
with prizes before which his soul burns with the unconsumable fire
of a god like ambition, man lifts his eye to worship and reaches
out his hand to receive. Is he merely taunted with the starry sky,
and mocked with an infinite illusion of progress, suddenly barred
with endless night and oblivion? Behold him emerging out of
nothingness, mastering his self conscious identity, climbing over
the rounds of symbolic experience and language through the heights
of knowledge and love. Strange, helpless, sublime prince of the
universe, beggar of God, when he has attained the summit of
illimitable perception, holding immortal joys in full prospect,
shall he be dashed back into nonentity? Is it not fitter that he
be welcomed by triumphant initiation into the family of the
deathless Father?

Think of the advancement man has made since the time when he was a
cannibal cave dweller, shivering out of the glacial epoch, and
contending with wild beasts for a foothold on the earth, till now
that he enjoys the idealism of Berkeley, wields the quaternions of
Hamilton, uses the lightnings for his red sandaled messengers,
holds his spectroscope to a star and tells what elements compose
it, or to an outskirting nebula and declares it a mass of
incandescent hydrogen. From such a background of accomplished fact
he seems really to have a right to peer forth into the unbounded
future and promise himself an unbounded destiny. The repetition of
such a progress, nay much less, it may not unreasonably be
imagined would raise the curtains from unsuspected secrets, bring
the family of intelligences scattered over all worlds into
conscious communication, and accomplish the deliverance of the
whole creation travailing and groaning together unto this day for
the redemption of the creature. What a splendid, almost incredible
task man has already achieved in disentangling the apparent
astronomic motions and converting them into the real ones. How
immensely sublimer and more complex is the position of man on this
planet than it seemed to the primitive savage, who knew only what
his crude senses taught him, although, all the while, the moon was
circling about him twenty five hundred miles an hour, and he was
whirling with the revolving earth a thousand miles an hour, and
spinning around the sun over thirty thousand miles an hour, and
swooping with the whole solar system through the blue void with a
still swifter gyre in a yet vaster cycle! This is demonstrated
physical fact. Its harmonic correlate in the spiritual sphere
would be nothing less than a lease of eternal existence for the
soul which sees endless invitations ahead, and exults at the
prospect of an eternal pursuit of them, its reason and affection
affiliated with those of the whole divine household of immortals.
Two or three generations ago it would have been more inconceivable
that men a hundred miles apart could audibly converse together, as
they now do by means of the telephone, than it is at this day to
believe that communication may at some future time be opened
between the inhabitants of the earth and the inhabitants of Sirius
through the vibrations of the ethereal medium.

Futhermore, the idea of the infinite God, in possession of which
man finds himself, is a warrant for his immortality. There cannot
be more in an effect than was in its cause, though there may be
less. We perceive intelligence, orderly purpose, as well as power,
in nature. We find in ourselves all the explicit attributes and
treasures of consciousness. Reasoning back by indubitable steps we
come to an uncaused, unlimited, infinite Being, the underived and
eternal source of all that is. This idea in our minds of a Being
of absolute perfection, whose boundless consciousness as being
necessarily indivisible must be totally present at every point of
infinitude, is the charter of our own divine nature and heirship.
For we can become, even here, friends and companions of this
omnipresent One, of whose essence and attributes everything below
is but a defective transcript or dimmed revelation. This idea of
Himself is the gift of God to us. To suppose that we are capable
of originating it implies a greater miracle than the one it seeks
to account for, and really puts ourselves in the place of God. Can
we imagine that we are the creators of God? If the absolute
noumenal Power beyond all phenomena be unknowable, it cannot
contain less, but must contain more than all the attributes of the
material and spiritual creation which has proceeded thence. The
noblest and best spirits of all lands and ages have walked in full
fellowship with this Being, seeking supremely to serve and love
Him in the subjection of self will and in the doing of good. Many
a nameless saint, in a pure consecration, has heroically thought
and suffered and aspired, worn out life in slow toils or offered
it up in sharp sacrifice, for the good of fellow creatures, as a
tribute to God, and exhaled the last breath in a prayer of love
and trust. Such faithful servants and comrades must be dear to the
Infinite Spirit, and it is natural to believe that He will keep
them with him forever. When Christ, in self sacrificing love,
submitted to death on the cross, saying, "Father, into Thy hands I
commit my spirit," he who can believe that the magnanimous
sufferer was disappointed, blotted out and extinguished, thus
reveals the grade of his own insight, but does not refute the
greater hope of nobler seers. It seems as if the idea of God, with
loving faith and obedience to its requirements, planted in a soul
which had not inherited immortality would straightway begin to
develop it there. The atmosphere of eternity alone befits a nature
which feels itself living in the companionship of God. Everything
subject to decay cowers into oblivion from before the idea of that
august, incorruptible presence. The fear of death is but the
recoil of the immortal from mortality. When man voluntarily faces
death without fear, even courting martyrdom with a radiant joy, it
is because there is in him, deeper than consciousness, a mystic
knowledge that he is essentially eternal and cannot perish. He who
freely sacrifices anything thereby proves himself superior to that
which he sacrifices. Man freely sacrifices his life. Therefore he
is immortal.

The ancient Semitic philosopher and poet who wrote the book of
Job, brooding on the strange problem of life and death, murmured,
"Man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?" With each successive
generation, for many ages, countless millions have dissolved and
vanished into the vast, dumb mystery. Now, the spectator,
remembering all this, stands beneath the dome of midnight,
imploringly breathes the mystic sigh, "Man giveth up the ghost,
and where is he?" The only responses is the same dread silence
still maintained as of old. And, in a moment more, he who breathed
the wondering inquiry is himself gone. Whither? Into the vacant
dark of nothingness? Into the transparent sphere of perfect
intelligence? The sublimity of the demand seems to ally the finite
questioner with the infinite Creator; and, with a presentiment of
marvelous joy, we look beyond the ignorant veil at the close of
earth, and hold that eternity itself will not exhaust the
possibilities of the soul, whose career shall be kept from
stagnation by constant interspersals of death and birth,
refreshing disembodiments from worn out forms and reincarnations
in new.

If this life on the earth, where man feels himself a stranger, be
his all, how superfluously he is equipped with foresights and
longings that outrun every conceivable limit! Why is he gifted
with powers of reason and demands of love so far beyond his
conditions? If there be no future for him, why is he tortured with
the inspiring idea of the eternal pursuit of the still flying goal
of perfection? Is it possible that the hero and the martyr and the
saint, whose experience is laden with painful sacrifices for
humanity, are mistaken? and that the slattern and the voluptuary
and the sluggard, whose course is one of base self indulgence, are
correct? Is it credible that, with no justifying explanation
hereafter, it should be ordained that the more gifted and
disinterested a man is the more he shall uselessly suffer, from
his sympathetic carriage of the greater share in the sin and
sorrow of all his race? No, far back in the past there has been
some dark mystery which yet flings its dense shadows over our
history here; and in the obscurity we cannot read its solution.
But there is a solution. And when in some blessed age to come
mankind shall outgrow their discords and be reconciled, so that
their divinest living member can become the focalizing center of
their collective inspiration, through him the truth will be
revealed. The most inspired individual can only in a degree
anticipate his age. At a certain distance he is tethered by his
connections with the race. They must be near the goal before he
can deliver the final message. Inspiration and revelation are as
real as the sensuous method of outer knowledge. Spirit or
consciousness, as that which is its own evidence, has a more than
mathematic validity. When men purely love one another, and, with
supreme loyalty, seek truth, ignorance and delusion will melt away
before the encroaching illumination from God, and the dominion of
death will be abolished.

That the human mind shall be the victim of death is incongruous
with its rank. The atheistic scientist who imagines that the
energy of the stellar creation is gradually dissipating, so that
the whole scheme must at last perish; and who sees the soul, then,
like a belated butterfly, fall frozen on the boundary of a dead
universe, refutes his own dismal creed by the grandeur of the
power shown in thinking it. The might of love, the faculty of
thought, the instinct of curiosity, are insatiable; and that which
remains wooing them to grasp it, is infinite. And, after all is
said, it seems certain that we are either discerpted emanations
and avatars of God suffering transient incarnations for a purpose,
and then to be resumed, immortal in his immortality; or else we
are separate and inherent entities, immortal in ourselves. The
former faith ought to satisfy the proudest ambition. The latter
faith yields every motive for contentment and aspiring obedience.
Man, forever feeding on the unknown, is the mysterious guest of
God in the universe. We cannot believe that, the hospitality of
the infinite Housekeeper becoming exhausted, He will ever blow out
the lights and quench the guests.

