CHAPTER I.

DOCTRINE OF A FUTURE LIFE IN THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES.

THE power of the old religions was for centuries concentrated in
the Mysteries. These were recondite institutions, sometimes
wielded by the state, sometimes by a priesthood, sometimes by a
ramifying private society. None could be admitted into them save
with the permission of the hierarchs, by rites of initiation, and
under solemn seals of secrecy. These mysterious institutions,
charged with strange attractions, shrouded in awful wonder, were
numerous, and, agreeing in some of their fundamental features,
were spread nearly all over the world. The writings of the
ancients abound with references to them, mostly eulogistic. The
mighty part played by these veiled bodies in the life of the
periods when they flourished, the pregnant hints and alluring
obscurities amid which they stand in relation to the learning of
modern times, have repeatedly obtained wide attention, elicited
opposite opinions, provoked fierce debates, and led different
inquirers to various conclusions as to their true origin,
character, scope, meaning, and results.

One of the principal points in discussion by scholars concerning
the Mysteries has been whether they inculcated an esoteric
doctrine of philosophy, opposed to the popular religion. Some
writers have maintained that in their symbols and rites was
contained a pure system of monotheistic ethics and religion. Our
own opinion is that in some of these institutions, at one period,
higher theological views and scientific speculations were
unfolded, but in others never. Still, it is extremely difficult to
prove any thing on this part of the general subject: there is much
that is plausible to be said on both sides of the question.
Another query to be noticed in passing is in regard to the degree
of exclusiveness and concealment really attached to the form of
initiation. Lobeck, in his celebrated work, "Aglaophamus," borne
away by a theory, assumes the extravagant position that the
Eleusinian Mysteries were almost freely open to all.1 His error
seems to lie in not distinguishing sufficiently between the Lesser
and the Greater Mysteries, and in not separating the noisy shows
of the public festal days from the initiatory and explanatory
rites of personal admission within the mystic pale. The notorious

1 Lib. i. sects. 4, 5.


facts that strict inquiry was made into the character and fitness
of the applicant before his admission, and that many were openly
rejected, that instant death was inflicted on all who intruded
unprepared within the sacred circuits, and that death was the
penalty of divulging what happened during the celebrations, all
are inconsistent with the notion of Lobeck, and prove that the
Mysteries were hedged about with dread. Aschylus narrowly escaped
being torn in pieces upon the stage by the people on suspicion
that in his play he had given a hint of something in the
Mysteries. He delivered himself by appealing to the Areopagus, and
proving that he had never been initiated. Andocides also, a Greek
orator who lived about four hundred years before Christ, was
somewhat similarly accused, and only escaped by a strenuous
defence of himself in an oration, still extant, entitled
"Concerning the Mysteries."

A third preliminary matter is as to the moral character of the
services performed by these companies. Some held that their
characteristics were divinely pure, intellectual, exalting; others
that in abandoned pleasures they were fouler than the Stygian pit.
The Church Fathers, Clement, Irenaus, Tertullian, and the rest,
influenced by a mixture of prejudice, hatred, and horror, against
every thing connected with paganism, declared, in round terms,
that the Mysteries were unmitigated sinks of iniquity and shame,
lust, murder, and all promiscuous deviltry. Without pausing to
except or qualify, or to be thoroughly informed and just, they
included the ancient stern generations and their own degraded
contemporaries, the vile rites of the Corinthian Aphrodite and the
solemn service of Demeter, the furious revels of the Bacchanalians
and the harmonious mental worship of Apollo, all in one
indiscriminate charge of insane beastliness and idolatry. Their
view of the Mysteries has been most circulated among the moderns
by Leland's learned but bigoted work on the "Use and Necessity of
a Divine Revelation." He would have us regard each one as a vortex
of atheistic sensuality and crime. There should be discrimination.
The facts are undoubtedly these, as we might abundantly
demonstrate were it in the province of the present essay. The
original Mysteries, the authoritative institutions co ordinated
with the state or administered by the poets and philosophers, were
pure: their purpose was to purify the lives and characters of
their disciples. Their means were a complicated apparatus of
sensible and symbolic revelations and instructions admirably
calculated to impress the most salutary moral and religious
lessons. In the first place, is it credible that the state would
fling its auspices over societies whose function was to organize
lawlessness and debauchery, to make a business of vice and filth?
Among the laws of Solon is a regulation decreeing that the Senate
shall convene in the Eleusinian temple, the day after the
festival, to inquire whether every thing had been done with
reverence and propriety. Secondly, if such was the character of
these secrets, why was inquisition always made into the moral
habits of the candidate, that he might be refused admittance if
they were bad? This inquiry was severe, and the decision
unrelenting. Alcibiades was rejected, as we learn from Plutarch's
life of him, on account of his dissoluteness and insubordination
in the city. Nero dared not attend the Eleusinian Mysteries,
"because to the murder of his mother he had joined the slaughter
of his paternal aunt."2 All accepted candidates were scrupulously
purified in thought and body, and clad in white robes, for nine
days previous to their reception. Thirdly, it is intrinsically
absurd to suppose that an institution of gross immorality and
cruelty could have flourished in the most polite and refined Greek
nation, as the Eleusinian Mysteries did for over eighteen hundred
years, ranking among its members a vast majority of both sexes, of
all classes, of all ages, and constantly celebrating its rites
before immense audiences of them all. Finally, a host of men like
Plato, Sophocles, Cimon, Lycurgus, Cicero, were members of these
bodies, partook in their transactions, and have left on record
eulogies of them and of their influence. The concurrent testimony
of antiquity is that in the Great Mysteries the desires were
chastened, the heart purified, the mind calmed, the soul inspired,
all the virtues of morality and hopes of religion taught and
enforced with sublime solemnities. There is no just ground for
suspecting this to be false.

But there remains something more and different to be said also.
While the authorized Mysteries were what we have asserted, there
did afterwards arise spurious Mysteries, in names, forms, and
pretensions partially resembling the genuine ones, under the
control of the most unprincipled persons, and in which
unquestionably the excesses of unbelief, drunkenness, and
prostitution held riot. These depraved societies were foreign
grafts from the sensual pantheism ever nourished in the voluptuous
climes of the remote East. They established themselves late in
Greece, but were developed at Rome in such unbridled enormities as
compelled the Senate to suppress them. Livy gives a detailed and
vivid account of the whole affair in his history.3 But the
gladiators, scoundrels, rakes, bawds, who swarmed in these stews
of rotting Rome, are hardly to be confounded with the noble men
and matrons of the earlier time who openly joined in the pure
Mysteries with the approving example of the holiest bards, the
gravest statesmen, and the profoundest sages, men like Pindar,
Pericles, and Pythagoras. Ample facilities are afforded in the
numerous works to which we shall refer for unmasking the different
organizations that travelled over the earth in the guise of the
Mysteries, and of seeing what deceptive arts were practised in
some, what superhuman terrors paraded in others, what horrible
cruelties perpetrated in others, what leading objects sought in
each.

The Mysteries have many bearings on several distinct subjects; but
in those aspects we have not space here to examine them. We
purpose to consider them solely in their relation to the doctrine
of a future life. We are convinced that the very heart of their
secret, the essence of their meaning in their origin and their
end, was no other than the doctrine of an immortality succeeding a
death. Gessner published a book at Gottingen, so long ago as the
year 1755, maintaining this very assertion. His work, which is
quite scarce now, bears the title "Dogma de perenni Animoruin
Natura per Sacra pracipue Eleusinia Propagata." The consenting
testimony of more than forty of the most authoritative ancient
writers comes down to us in their surviving works to the effect
that those who were admitted into the Mysteries were thereby
purified, led to holy lives, joined in communion with the gods,
and

2 Suetonius, Vita Neronis, cap. xxxiv.

3 Lib. xxxix. cap. viii xvi.


assured of a better fate than otherwise could be expected in the
future state. Two or three specimens from these witnesses will
suffice. Aristophanes, in the second act of the Frogs, describes
an elysium of the initiates after death, where he says they bound
"in sportive dances on rose enamelled meadows; for the light is
cheerful only to those who have been initiated."4 Pausanias
describes the uninitiated as being compelled in Hades to carry
water in buckets bored full of holes.5 Isocrates says, in his
Panegyric, "Demeter, the goddess of the Eleusinian Mysteries,
fortifies those who have been initiated against the fear of death,
and teaches them to have sweet hopes concerning eternity." The old
Orphic verses cited by Thomas Taylor in his Treatise on the
Mysteries run thus: "The soul that uninitiated dies Plunged in the
blackest mire in Hades lies." 6

The same statement is likewise found in Plato, who, in another
place, also explicitly declares that a doctrine of future
retribution was taught in the Mysteries and believed by the
serious.7 Cicero says, "Initiation makes us both live more
honorably and die with better hopes." 8 In seasons of imminent
danger as in a shipwreck it was customary for a man to ask his
companion, Hast thou been initiated? The implication is that
initiation removed fear of death by promising a happy life to
follow.9 A fragment preserved from a very ancient author is plain
on this subject. "The soul is affected in death just as it is in
the initiation into the great Mysteries: thing answers to thing.
At first it passes through darkness, horrors, and toils. Then are
disclosed a wondrous light, pure places, flowery meads, replete
with mystic sounds, dances, and sacred doctrines, and holy
visions. Then, perfectly enlightened, they are free: crowned, they
walk about worshipping the gods and conversing with good men."10
The principal part of the hymn to Ceres, attributed to Homer, is
occupied with a narrative of her labors to endow the young
Demophoon, mortal child of Metaneira, with immortality. Now, Ceres
was the goddess of the Mysteries; and the last part of this very
hymn recounts how Persephone was snatched from the light of life
into Hades and restored again. Thus we see that the implications
of the indirect evidence, the leanings and guidings of all the
incidental clews now left us to the real aim and purport of the
Mysteries, combine to assure us that their chief teaching was a
doctrine of a future life in which there should be rewards and
punishments. All this we shall more fully establish, both by
direct proofs and by collateral supports.

It is a well known fact, intimately connected with the different
religions of Greece and Asia Minor, that during the time of
harvest in the autumn, and again at the season of sowing in the
spring, the shepherds, the vintagers, and the people in general,
were accustomed to observe certain sacred festivals, the autumnal
sad, the vernal joyous. These undoubtedly grew out of the deep
sympathy between man and nature over the decay and disappearance,
the revival and return, of vegetation. When the hot season had
withered the verdure of the

4 Scene iii.

5 Lib. x. cap. xxxi.

6 Phadon, sect. xxxviii.

7 Leg., lib. ix. cap. x.

8 De Leg., lib. ii. cap. xiv.

9 St. John, Hellenes, ch. xi.

10 Sentences of Stobaus, Sermo CXIX.


fields, plaintive songs were sung, their wild melancholy notes and
snatches borne abroad by the breeze and their echoes dying at last
in the distance. In every instance, these mournful strains were
the annual lamentation of the people over the death of some
mythical boy of extraordinary beauty and promise, who, in the
flower of youth, was suddenly drowned, or torn in pieces by wild
beasts, "Some Hyacinthine boy, for whom Morn well might break and April
bloom."

Among the Argives it was Linus. With the Arcadians it was
Scephrus. In Phrygia it was Lityerses. On the shore of the Black
Sea it was Bormus. In the country of the Bithynians it was Hylas.
At Pelusium it was Maneros. And in Syria it was Adonis. The
untimely death of these beautiful boys, carried off in their
morning of life, was yearly bewailed, their names re echoing over
the plains, the fountains, and among the hills. It is obvious that
these cannot have been real persons whose death excited a sympathy
so general, so recurrent. "The real object of lamentation," says
Muller, "was the tender beauty of spring destroyed by the raging
heat, and other similar phenomena, which the imagination of those
early times invested with a personal form."11 All this was woven
into the Mysteries, whose great legend and drama were that every
autumn Persephone was carried down to the dark realm of the King
of Shadows, but that she was to return each spring to her mother's
arms. Thus were described the withdrawal and reappearance of
vegetable life in the alternations of the seasons. But these
changes of nature typified the changes in the human lot; else
Persephone would have been merely a symbol of the buried grain and
would not have become the Queen of the Dead.12 Her return to the
world of light, by natural analogy, denoted a new birth to men.
Accordingly, "all the testimony of antiquity concurs in saying
that these Mysteries inspired the most animating hopes with regard
to the condition of the soul after death."13 That the fate of man
should by imagination and sentiment have been so connected with
the phenomena of nature in myths and symbols embodied in pathetic
religious ceremonies was a spontaneous product. For how "Her fresh
benignant look Nature changes at that lorn season when, With
tresses drooping o'er her sable stole, She yearly mourns the
mortal doom of man, Her noblest work! So Israel's virgins erst
With annual moan upon the mountains wept Their fairest gone!"

And soon again the birds begin to warble, the leaves and blossoms
put forth, and all is new life once more. In every age the gentle
heart and meditative mind have been impressed by the mournful
correspondence and the animating prophecy.

11 History of the Literature of Ancient Greece, ch. iii. sects. 2
3.

12 For the connection of the Eleusinian goddesses with
agriculture, the seasons, the under world, death, resurrection,
etc., see "Demeter and Persephone," von Dr. Ludwig Preller, kap.
i. sects. 9 11.

13 Muller, Hist. Gr. Lit., ch. xvi. sect. 2.


But not only was the changing recurrence of dreary winter and
gladsome summer joined by affecting analogies with the human doom
of death and hope of another life. The phenomena of the skies, the
impressive succession of day and night, also were early seized
upon and made to blend their shadows and lights, by means of
imaginative suggestions, into an image of the decease and
resurrection of man. Among the Mystical Hymns of Orpheus, so
called, there is a hymn to Adonis, in which that personage is
identified with the sun alternately sinking to Tartarus and
soaring to heaven. It was customary with the ancients to speak of
the setting of a constellation as its death, its reascension in
the horizon being its return to life.14 The black abysm under the
earth was the realm of the dead. The bright expanse above the
earth was the realm of the living. While the daily sun rises
royally through the latter, all things rejoice in the warmth and
splendor of his smile. When he sinks nightly, shorn of his
ambrosial beams, into the former, sky and earth wrap themselves in
mourning for their departed monarch, the dead god of light muffled
in his bier and borne along the darkening heavens to his burial.
How naturally the phenomena of human fate would be symbolically
interwoven with all this! Especially alike are the exuberant joy
and activity of full life and of day, the melancholy stillness and
sad repose of midnight and of death.

The sun insists on gladness; but at night, When he is gone, poor
Nature loves to weep."

Through her yearly and her diurnal round alike, therefore, does
mother Nature sympathize with man, and picture forth his fate, in
type of autumnal decay, and wintry darkness, and night buried
seed, in sign of vernal bud, and summer light, and day bursting
fruit.

These facts and phenomena of nature and man, together with
explanatory theories to which they gave rise, were, by the
peculiar imaginative processes so powerfully operative among the
earliest nations, personified in mythic beings and set forth as
literal history. Their doctrine was inculcated as truth once
historically exemplified by some traditional personage. It was
dramatically impersonated and enacted in the process of initiation
into the Mysteries. A striking instance of this kind of theatrical
representation is afforded by the celebration, every eight years,
of the mythus of Apollo's fight with the Pythian dragon, his
flight and expiatory service to Admetus, the subterranean king of
the dead. In mimic order, a boy slew a monster at Delphi, ran
along the road to Tempe, represented on the way the bondage of the
god in Hades, and returned, purified, bringing a branch of laurel
from the sacred valley.15 The doctrine of a future life connected
with the legend of some hero who had died, descended into the
under world, and again risen to life, this doctrine, dramatically
represented in the personal experience of the initiate, was the
heart of every one of the secret religious societies of antiquity.

"Here rests the secret, here the keys, Of the old death bolted
Mysteries."

14 Leitch's Eng. trans. of K. O. Muller's Introduction to a
Scientific System of Mythology, Appendix, pp. 339-342.

15 Muller, Introduction to Mythology, pp. 97 and 241. Also his
Dorian, lib. ii. cap. vii. sect. 8.


Perhaps this great system of esoteric rites and instructions grew
up naturally, little by little. Perhaps it was constructed at
once, either as poetry, by a company of poets, or as a theology,
by a society of priests, or as a fair method of moral and
religious teaching, by a company of philosophers. Or perhaps it
was gradually formed by a mixture of all these means and motives.
Many have regarded it as the bedimmed relic of a brilliant
primeval revelation. This question of the origination, the first
causes and purposes, of the Mysteries is now sunk in hopeless
obscurity, even were it of any importance to be known. One thing
we know, namely, that at an early age these societies formed
organizations of formidable extent and power, and were vitally
connected with the prevailing religions of the principal nations
of the earth.

In Egypt the legend of initiation was this.16 Typhon, a wicked,
destroying personage, once formed a conspiracy against his
brother, the good king Osiris. Having prepared a costly chest,
inlaid with gold, he offered to give it to any one whose body
would fit it. Osiris unsuspiciously lay down in it. Typhon
instantly fastened the cover and threw the fatal chest into the
river. This was called the loss or burial of Osiris, and was
annually celebrated with all sorts of melancholy rites. But the
winds and waves drove the funereal vessel ashore, where Isis, the
inconsolable wife of Osiris, wandering in search of her husband's
remains, at last found it, and restored the corpse to life. This
part of the drama was called the discovery or resurrection of
Osiris, and was also enacted yearly, but with every manifestation
of excessive joy. "In the losing of Osiris, and then in the
finding him again," Augustine writes, "first their lamentation,
then their extravagant delight, are a mere play and fiction; yet
the fond people, though they neither lose nor find any thing, weep
and rejoice truly."17 Plutarch speaks of the death, regeneration,
and resurrection of Osiris represented in the great religious
festivals of Egypt. He explains the rites in commemoration of
Typhon's murder of Osiris as symbols referring to four things, the
subsidence of the Nile into his channel, the cessation of the
delicious Etesian winds before the hot blasts of the South, the
encroachment of the lengthening night on the shortening day, the
disappearance of the bloom of summer before the barrenness of
winter.18 But the real interest and power of the whole subject
probably lay in the direct relation of all these phenomena,
traditions, and ceremonies to the doctrine of death and a future
life for man.

In the Mithraic Mysteries of Persia, the legend, ritual, and
doctrine were virtually the same as the foregoing. They are
credulously said to have been established by Zoroaster himself,
who fitted up a vast grotto in the mountains of Bokhara, where
thousands thronged to be initiated by him.19 This Mithraic cave
was an emblem of the universe, its roof painted with the
constellations of the zodiac, its depths full of the black and
fiery terrors of grisly hell, its summit illuminated with the blue
and starry splendors of heaven, its passages lined with dangers
and instructions, now quaking with infernal shrieks, now breathing
celestial music. In the Persian Mysteries, the initiate, in
dramatic show, died, was laid in a coffin, and

16 Wilkinson, Egyptian Antiquities, series i. vol. i. ch. 3.

17 De Civitate Dei, lib. vi. cap. 10.

18 De Is. et Osir.

19 Porphyry, De Antro Nympharum. Tertullian, Prescript. ad Her.,
cap. xl., where he refers the mimic death and resurrection in the
Mithraic Mysteries to the teaching of Satan.


afterwards rose unto a new life, all of which was a type of the
natural fate of man.20 The descent of the soul from heaven and its
return thither were denoted by a torch borne alternately reversed
and upright, and by the descriptions of the passage of spirits, in
the round of the metempsychosis, through the planetary gates of
the zodiac. The sun and moon and the morning and evening star were
depicted in brilliant gold or blackly muffled, according to their
journeying in the upper or in the lower hemisphere.21

The hero of the Syrian Mysteries was Adonis or Thammuz, the
beautiful favorite of Aphrodite, untimely slain by a wild boar.
His death was sadly, his resurrection joyously, celebrated every
year at Byblus with great pomp and universal interest. The
festival lasted two days. On the first, all things were clad in
mourning, sorrow was depicted in every face, and wails and weeping
resounded. Coffins were exposed at every door and borne in
numerous processions. Frail stalks of young corn and flowers were
thrown into the river to perish, as types of the premature death
of blooming Adonis, cut off like a plant in the bud of his age.22
The second day the whole aspect of things was changed, and the
greatest exultation prevailed, because it was said Adonis had
returned from the dead.23 Venus, having found him dead, deposited
his body on a bed of lettuce and mourned bitterly over him. From
his blood sprang the adonium, from her tears the anemone.24 The
Jews were captivated by the religious rites connected with this
touching myth, and even enacted them in the gates of their holy
temple. Ezekiel says, "Behold, at the gate of the Lord's house
which was towards the north [the direction of night and winter]
there sat women weeping for Tammuz." It was said that Aphrodite
prevailed on Persephone to let Adonis dwell one half the year with
her on earth, and only the rest among the shades, a plain
reference to vegetable life in summer and winter.25 Lucian, in his
little treatise on the Syrian Goddess, says that "the river
Adonis, rising out of Mount Libanus, at certain seasons flows red
in its channel: some say it is miraculously stained by the blood
of the fresh wounded youth; others say that the spring rains,
washing in a red ore from the soil of the country, discolor the
stream." Dupuis remarks that this redness was probably an artifice
of the priests.26 Milton's beautiful allusion to this fable is
familiar to most persons. Next came he "Whose annual wound in
Lebanon allured The Syrian damsels to lament his fate In amorous
ditties all a summer's day, While smooth Adonis from his native
rock Ran purple to the sea with Thammuz' blood."

20 Julius Firmicus, De Errore Prof. Relig.

21 Mithraica, Memoire Academique sur le Culte Solaire de Mithra,
par Joseph de Hammer, pp: 66-68, 125-127. Tertullian, Prescript.
ad Her., cap. xl. Porphyry, De Abstinentia, lib. iv. sect. 16.
Hyde. Hist. Vet. Pers. Relig., p. 254.

22 Hist. du Culte d'Adonis, Mem. Acad. des Inscript., vol. iv. p.
136.

23 Theocritus, Idyl XV.

24 Bion, Epitaph Adon., l. 66.

25 See references in Anthon's Class. Dict., art. Adonis.

26 Dupuis, Orig. de Cultes, vol. iv. p. 121, ed. 1822.


There is no end to the discussions concerning the secret purport
of this fascinating story. But, after all is said, it seems to us
that there are in it essentially two significations, one relating
to the phenomena of the sun and the earth, the other to the mutual
changes of nature and the fate of humanity. Aphrodite bewailing
Adonis is surviving Nature mourning for departed Man.

In India the story was told of Mahadeva searching for his lost
consort Sita, and, after discovering her lifeless form, bearing it
around the world with dismal lamentations. Sometimes it was the
death of Camadeva, the Hindu Cupid, that was mourned with solemn
dirges.27 He, like Osiris, was slain, enclosed in a chest, and
committed to the waves. He was afterwards recovered and
resuscitated. Each initiate passed through the emblematic
ceremonies corresponding to the points of this pretended history.
The Phrygians associated the same great doctrine with the persons
of Atys and Cybele. Atys was a lovely shepherd youth passionately
loved by the mother of the gods.28 He suddenly died; and she, in
frantic grief, wandered over the earth in search of him, teaching
the people where she went the arts of agriculture. He was at
length restored to her. Annually the whole drama was performed by
the assembled nation with sobs of woe succeeded by ecstasies of
joy.29 Similar to this, in the essential features, was the
Eleusinian myth. Aidoneus snatched the maiden Kore down to his
gloomy empire. Her mother, Demeter, set off in search of her,
scattering the blessings of agriculture, and finally discovered
her, and obtained the promise of her society for half of every
year. These adventures were dramatized and explained in the
mysteries which she, according to tradition, instituted at
Eleusis.

The form of the legend was somewhat differently incorporated with
the Bacchic Mysteries. It was elaborately wrought up by the Orphic
poets. The distinctive name they gave to Bacchus or Dionysus was
Zagreus. He was the son of Zeus, and was chosen by him to sit on
the throne of heaven. Zeus gave him Apollo and the Curetes as
guards; but the brutal Titans, instigated by jealous Hera,
disguised themselves and fell on the unfortunate youth while his
attention was fixed on a splendid mirror, and, after a fearful
conflict, overcame him and tore him into seven pieces. Pallas,
however, saved his palpitating heart, and Zeus swallowed it.
Zagreus was then begotten again.30 He was destined to restore the
golden age. His devotees looked to him for the liberation of their
souls through the purifying rites of his Mysteries. The initiation
shadowed out an esoteric doctrine of death and a future life, in
the mock murder and new birth of the aspirant, who impersonated
Zagreus.31

The Northmen constructed the same drama of death around the young
Balder, their god of gentleness and beauty. This legend, as Dr.
Oliver has shown, constituted the secret of the Gothic
Mysteries.32 Obscure and dread prophecies having crept among the
gods that the death of the beloved Balder was at hand, portending
universal ruin, a consultation was held to devise means for
averting the calamity. At the suggestion of Balder's mother,
Freya, the Scandinavian Venus, an oath that they would not be
instrumental in causing his death was

27 Asiatic Researches, vol. iii. p. 187.

28 See article Atys in Smith's Class. Dict. with references.

29 Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, lib. ii. 11. 605-655.

30 Muller, Hist. Greek Lit., ch. xvi.

31 Lobeck, Aglaophamus, lib. iii. cap. 5, sect. 13.

32 History of Initiation, Lect. X.


exacted from all things in nature except the mistletoe, which, on
account of its frailty and insignificance, was scornfully
neglected. Asa Loke, the evil principle of the Norse faith, taking
advantage of this fatal exception, had a spear made of mistletoe,
and with it armed Hodur, a strong but blind god. Freya, rejoicing
in fancied security, to convince Balder of his charmed exemption
from wounds, persuaded him to be the mark for the weapons of the
gods. But, alas! when Hodur tilted at him, the devoted victim was
transpierced and fell lifeless to the ground. Darkness settled
over the world, and bitter was the grief of men and gods over the
innocent and lovely Balder. A deputation imploring his release was
sent to the queen of the dead. Hela so far relented as to promise
his liberation to the upper world on condition that every thing on
earth wept for him. Straightway there was a universal mourning.
Men, beasts, trees, metals, stones, wept. But an old withered
giantess Asa Loke in disguise shed no tears; and so Hela kept her
beauteous and lamented prey. But he is to rise again to eternal
life and joy when the twilight of the gods has passed.33 This
entire fable has been explained by the commentators, in all its
details, as a poetic embodiment of the natural phenomena of the
seasons. But it is not improbable that, in addition, it bore a
profound doctrinal reference to the fate of man which was
interpreted to the initiates.

A great deal has been written concerning the ceremonies and
meaning of the celebrated Celtic Mysteries established so long at
Samothrace, and under the administration of the Druids throughout
ancient Gaul and Britain. The aspirant was led through a series of
scenic representations, "without the aid of words," mystically
shadowing forth in symbolic forms the doctrine of the transmigration
of souls. He assumed successively the shapes of a rabbit, a hen,
a grain of wheat, a horse, a tree, and so on through a wide range
of metamorphoses enacted by the aid of secret dramatic machinery.

He died, was buried, was born anew, rising from his dark confinement
to life again. The hierophant enclosed him in a little boat and
set him adrift, pointing him to a distant rock, which he calls
"the harbor of life." Across the black and stormy waters he strives
to gain the beaconing refuge.

In these scenes and rites a recondite doctrine of the physical
and moral relations and destiny of man was shrouded, to be unveiled
by degrees to their docile disciples by the Druidic mystagogues.34

It may appear strange that there should be in connection with so
many of the old religions of the earth these arcana only to be
approached by secret initiation at the hands of hierophants. But
it will seem natural when we remember that those religions were in
the exclusive keeping of priesthoods, which, organized with
wondrous cunning and perpetuated through ages, absorbed the
science, art, and philosophy of the world, and, concealing their
wisdom in the mystic signs of an esoteric language, wielded the
mighty enginery of superstition over the people at will. The
scenes and instructions through which the priests led the
unenlightened candidate were the hiding of their power. Thus,
wherever was a priesthood we should expect to find mysteries and
initiations. Historic fact justifies the

33 Pigott, Manual of Scandinavian Mythology, pp. 288-300.

34 Davies, Mythology and Rites of the British Druids, pp. 207-257;
390-392; 420, 555, 572. The accuracy of many of Davies's
translations has been called in question. His statements, even on
the matters affirmed above, must be received with some reservation
of faith.


supposition; learning unveils the obscure places of antiquity, and
shows us the templed or cavernous rites of the religious world,
from Hindostan to Gaul, from Egypt to Norway, from Athens to
Mexico. And this brings us to the Mysteries of Vitzliputzli,
established in South America. Dr. Oliver, in the twelfth lecture
of his History of Initiation, gathering his materials from various
sources, gives a terrific account of the dramatic ritual here
employed. The walls, floor, images, were smeared and caked with
human blood. Fresh slaughters of victims were perpetrated at
frequent intervals. The candidate descended to the grim caverns
excavated under the foundations of the temple. This course was
denominated "the path of the dead." Phantoms flitted before him,
shrieks appalled him, pitfalls and sacrificial knives threatened
him. At last, after many frightful adventures, the aspirant
arrived at a narrow stone fissure terminating the range of
caverns, through which he was thrust, and was received in the open
air, as a person born again, and welcomed with frantic shouts by
the multitudes who had been waiting for him without during the
process of his initiation.

Even among the savage tribes of North America striking traces have
been found of an initiation into a secret society by a mystic
death and resurrection. Captain Jonathan Carver, who spent the
winter of 1776 with the Naudowessie Indians, was an eye witness of
the admission of a young brave into a body which they entitled
Wakou Kitchewah, or Friendly Society of the Spirit. "This singular
initiation," he says, "took place within a railed enclosure in the
centre of the camp at the time of the new moon." First came the
chiefs, clad in trailing furs. Then came the members of the
society, dressed and painted in the gayest manner. When all were
seated, one of the principal chiefs arose, and, leading the young
man forward, informed the meeting of his desire to be admitted
into their circle. No objection being offered, the various
preliminary arrangements were made; after which the director began
to speak to the kneeling candidate, telling him that he was about
to receive a communication of the spirit. This spirit would
instantly strike him dead; but he was told not to be terrified,
because he should immediately be restored to life again, and this
experience was a necessary introduction to the advantages of the
community he was on the point of entering. Then violent agitation
distorted the face and convulsed the frame of the old chief. He
threw something looking like a small bean at the young man. It
entered his mouth, and he fell lifeless as suddenly as if he had
been shot. Several assistants received him, rubbed his limbs, beat
his back, stripped him of his garments and put a new dress on him,
and finally presented him to the society in full consciousness as
a member.36

All the Mysteries were funereal. This is the most striking single
phenomenon connected with them. They invariably began in darkness
with groans and tears, but as invariably ended in festive triumph
with shouts and smiles. In them all were a symbolic death, a
mournful entombment, and a glad resurrection. We know this from
the abundant direct testimony of unimpeachable ancient writers,
and also from their indirect descriptions of the ceremonies and
allusions to them. For example, Apuleius says, "The delivery of
the Mysteries is celebrated as a thing resembling a voluntary
death: the initiate, being, after a manner, born

36 Travels in the Interior of North America, ch. vii.


again, is restored to a new life." 36 Indeed, all who describe the
course of initiation agree in declaring that the aspirant was
buried for a time within some narrow space, a typical coffin or
grave. This testimony is confirmed by the evidence of the ruins of
the chief temples and sacred places of the pagan world. These
abound with spacious caverns, labyrinthine passages, and curious
recesses; and in connection with them is always found some
excavation evidently fitted to enclose a human form. Such hollow
beds, covered with flat stones easily removed, are still to be
seen amidst the Druidic remains of Britain and Gaul, as well as in
nearly every spot where tradition has located the celebration of
the Mysteries, in Greece, India, Persia, Egypt.37

It becomes a most interesting question whence these symbols and
rites had their origin, and what they were really meant to shadow
forth. Bryant, Davies, Faber, Oliver, and several other well known
mythologists, have labored, with no slight learning and ingenuity,
to show that all these ceremonies sprang from traditions of the
Deluge and of Noah's adventures at that time. The mystic death,
burial, and resurrection of the initiate, they say, are a
representation of the entrance of the patriarch into the ark, his
dark and lonesome sojourn in it, and his final departure out of
it. The melancholy wailings with which the Mysteries invariably
began, typified the mourning of the patriarchal family over their
confinement within the gloomy and sepulchral ark; the triumphant
rejoicings with which the initiations always ended, referred to
the glad exit of the patriarchal family from their floating prison
into the blooming world. The advocates of this theory have
laboriously collected all the materials that favor it, and
skilfully striven by their means to elucidate the whole subject of
ancient paganism, especially of the Mysteries. But, after reading
all that they have written, and considering it in the light of
impartial researches, one is constrained to say that they have by
no means made out their case. It is somewhat doubtful if there be
any ground whatever for believing that traditions concerning
Noah's deluge and the ark, and his doings in connection with them,
in any way entered into the public doctrines and forms, or into
the secret initiations, of the heathen religions. At all events,
there can be no doubt that the Arkite theorists have exaggerated
the importance and extent of these views beyond all tolerable
bounds, and even to absurdity. But our business with them now is
only so far as they relate to the Mysteries. Our own conviction is
that the real meaning of the rites in the Mysteries was based upon
the affecting phenomena of human life and death and the hope of
another life. We hold the Arkite theory to be arbitrary in
general, unsupported by proofs, and inconsistent in detail, unable
to meet the points presented.

In the first place, a fundamental part of the ancient belief was
that below the surface of the earth was a vast, sombre under
world, the destination of the ghosts of men, the Greek Hades, the
Roman Orcus, the Gothic Hell. A part of the service of initiation
was a symbolic descent into this realm. Apuleius, describing his
initiation, says, "I approached to the confines

36 Golden Ass, Eng. trans., by Thomas Taylor, p. 280.

37 Copious instances are given in Oliver's History of Initiation,
in Faber's Origin of Pagan Idolatry, and in Maurice's Indian
Antiquities.


of death and trod on the threshold of Proserpine." 38 Orpheus, to
whom the introduction of the Mysteries into Greece from the East
was ascribed, wrote a poem, now lost, called the "Descent into
Hades." Such a descent was attributed to Hercules, Theseus,
Rhampsinitus, and many others.39 It is painted in detail by Homer
in the adventure of his hero Ulysses, also by Virgil much more
minutely through the journey of Aneas. Warburton labors with great
learning and plausibility, and, as it seems to us, with
irresistible cogency, to show that these descents are no more nor
less than exoteric accounts of what was dramatically enacted in
the esoteric recesses of the Mysteries.40 Any person must be
invincibly prejudiced who can doubt that the Greek Hades meant a
capacious subterranean world of shades. Now, to assert, as Bryant
and his disciples do,41 that "Hades means the interior of Noah's
ark," or "the abyss of waters on which the ark floated, as a
coffin bearing the relics of dead Nature," is a purely arbitrary
step taken from undue attachment to a mere theory. Hades means the
under world of the dead, and not the interior of Noah's ark.
Indeed, in the second place, Faber admits that in the Mysteries
"the ark itself was supposed to be in Hades, the vast central
abyss of the earth." But such was not the location of Noah's
vessel and voyage. They were on the face of the flood, above the
tops of the mountains. It is beyond comparison the most reasonable
supposition in itself, and the one best supported by historic
facts, that the representations of a mystic burial and voyage in a
ship or boat shown in the ancient religions were symbolic rites
drawn from imagination and theory as applied to the impressive
phenomena of nature and the lot of man. The Egyptians and some
other early nations, we know, figured the starry worlds in the sky
as ships sailing over a celestial sea. The earth itself was
sometimes emblematized in the same way. Then, too, there was the
sepulchral barge in which the Egyptian corpses were borne over the
Acherusian lake to be entombed. Also the "dark blue punt" in which
Charon ferried souls across the river of death. In these surely
there was no reference to Noah's ark. It seems altogether likely
that what Bryant and his coadjutors have constructed into the
Arkite system of interpretation was really but an emblematic
showing forth of a natural doctrine of human life and death and
future fate. A wavering boat floating on the deep might, with
striking fitness, typify the frail condition of humanity in life,
as when Hercules is depicted sailing over the ocean in a golden
cup; and that boat, safely riding the flood, might also represent
the cheerful faith of the initiate in a future life, bearing him
fearlessly through all dangers and through death to the welcoming
society of Elysium, as when Danae and her babe, tossed over the
tempestuous sea in a fragile chest, were securely wafted to the
sheltering shore of Seriphus. No emblem of our human state and
lot, with their mysteries, perils, threats, and promises, could be
either more natural or more impressive than that of a vessel
launched on the deep. The dying Socrates said "that he should
trust his soul on the hope of a future life as upon a raft, and
launch away into the unknown." Thus the imagination broods over
and explores the shows and secrets, presageful warnings and
alluring

38 Golden Ass, Taylor's trans., p. 283.

39 Herodotus, lib. il. cap. cxxii.

40 Divine Legation of Moses, book ii. sect. iv.

41 Faber, Mysteries of the Cabiri, ch. v.: On the Connection of
the Fabulous Hades with the Mysteries.


invitations, storms and calms, island homes and unknown havens, of
the dim seas of nature and of man, of time and of eternity.42

Thirdly, the defenders of the Arkite theory are driven into gross
inconsistencies with themselves by the falsity of their views. The
dilaceration of Zagreus into fragments, the mangling of Osiris and
scattering of his limbs abroad, they say, refer to the throwing
open of the ark and the going forth of the inmates to populate the
earth. They usually make Osiris, Zagreus, Adonis, and the other
heroes of the legends enacted in the Mysteries, representatives of
the diluvian patriarch himself; but here, with no reason whatever
save the exigencies of their theory, they make these mythic
personages representatives of the ark, a view which is utterly
unfounded and glaringly wanting in analogy. When Zagreus is torn
in pieces, his heart is preserved alive by Zeus and born again
into the world within a human form. After the body of Osiris had
been strewn piecemeal, the fragments were fondly gathered by Isis,
and he was restored to life. There is no plausible correspondence
between these cases and the sending out from the ark of the
patriarchal family to repeople the world. Their real purpose would
seem plainly to be to symbolize the thought that, however the body
of man crumbles in pieces, there is life for him still, he does
not hopelessly die. They likewise say that the egg which was
consecrated in the Mysteries, at the beginning of the rites, was
intended as an emblem of the ark resting on the abyss of waters,
and that its latent hatching was meant to suggest the opening of
the ark to let the imprisoned patriarch forth. This hypothesis has
no proof, and is needless. It is much more plausible to suppose
that the egg was meant as a symbol of a new life about to burst
upon the candidate, a symbol of his resurrection from the mystic
tomb wherein he was buried during one stage of initiation; for we
know that the initiation was often regarded as the commencement of
a fresh life, as a new birth. Apuleius says, "I celebrated the
most joyful day of my initiation as my natal day."

Faber argues, from the very close similarity of all the
differently named Mysteries, that they were all Arkite, all
derived from one mass of traditions reaching from Noah and
embodying his history.43 The asserted fact of general resemblance
among the instituted Mysteries is unquestionable; but the
inference above drawn from it is unwarrantable, even if no better
explanation could be offered. But there is another explanation
ready, more natural in conception, more consistent in detail, and
better sustained by evidence. The various Mysteries celebrated in
the ancient nations were so much alike not because they were all
founded on one world wide tradition about the Noachian deluge, but
because they all grew out of the great common facts of human
destiny in connection with natural phenomena. The Mysteries were
funereal and festive, began in sorrow and ended in joy, not
because they represented first Noah's sad entrance into the ark
and then his glad exit from it, but because they began with
showing the initiate that he must die, and ended with showing him
that he should live again in a happier state. Even the most
prejudiced advocates of the Arkite theory

42 Procopius, in his History of the Gothic War, mentions a curious
popular British superstition concerning the ferriage of souls among
the neighboring islands at midnight. See Grimm's Deutsche Mythologie,
kap. xxvi. zweite ausgabe.

43 Mysteries of the Cabiri, ch. 10: Comparison of the Various
Mysteries.


are forced to admit, on the explicit testimony of the ancients,
that the initiates passed from the darkness and horrors of
Tartarus to the bliss and splendors of Elysium by a dramatic
resurrection from burial in the black caverns of probation to
admission within the illuminated hall or dome of perfection.44
That the idea of death and of another life runs through all the
Mysteries as their cardinal tenet is well shown in connection with
the rites of the celebrated Cave of Trophonius at Lebadea in
Boeotia. Whoso sought this oracle must descend head foremost over
an inclined plane, bearing a honey cake in his hand. Aristophanes
speaks of this descent with a shudder of fear.45 The adventurer
was suddenly bereft of his senses, and after a while returned to
the upper air. What he could then remember composed the Divine
revelation which had been communicated to him in his unnatural
state below. Plutarch has given a full account of this experience
from one Timarchus, who had himself passed through it.46 The
substance of it is this. When Timarchus reached the bottom of the
cave, his soul passed from his body, visited the under world of
the departed, saw the sphere of generation where souls were reborn
into the upper world, received some explanation of all these
things: then, returning into the body, he was taken up out of the
cave. Here is no allusion to any traditions of the Deluge or the
ark; but the great purpose is evidently a doctrine of the destiny
of man after death.

Before the eyes and upon the heart of all mankind in every age has
passed in common vision the revolution of the seasons, with its
beautiful and sombre changes, phenomena having a power of
suggestion irresistible to stir some of the most profound
sentiments of the human breast. The day rolls overhead full of
light and life and activity; then the night settles upon the scene
with silent gloom and repose. So man runs his busy round of toil
and pleasure through the day of existence; then, fading, following
the sinking sun, he goes down in death's night to the pallid
populations of shade. Again: the fruitful bloom of summer is
succeeded by the bleak nakedness of winter. So the streams of
enterprise and joy that flowed full and free along their banks in
maturity, overhung by blossoming trees, are shrivelled and frozen
in the channels of age, and above their sepulchral beds the
leafless branches creak in answer to the shrieks of the funereal
blast. The flush of childish gayety, the bloom of youthful
promise, when a new comer is growing up sporting about the hearth
of home, are like the approach of the maiden and starry Spring,
"Who comes sublime, as when, from Pluto free, Came, through the
flash of Zeus, Persephone." And then draw hastily on the long,
lamenting autumnal days, when "Above man's grave the sad winds
wail and rain drops fall, And Nature sheds her leaves in yearly
funeral."

44 Faber, Mysteries of the Cabiri, ch. 10, pp. 331-356. Dion
Chrysostom describes this scene: Oration XII.

45 The Clouds, 1. 507.

46 Essay on the Demon of Socrates. See also Pansanias, lib. ix.
cap. xxxix.


The flowers are gone, the birds are gone, the gentle breezes are
gone; and man too must go, go mingle with the pale people of
dreams. But not wholly and forever shall he die. The sun soars
into new day from the embrace of night; summer restored hastens on
the heels of retreating winter; vegetation but retires and surely
returns, and the familiar song of the birds shall sweeten the
renewing woods afresh for a million springs. Apollo weeping over
the beauteous and darling boy, his slain and drooped Hyacinthus,
is the sun shorn of his fierce beams and mourning over the annual
wintry desolation: it is also Nature bewailing the remediless loss
of man, her favorite companion. It was these general analogies and
suggestions, striking the imagination, affecting the heart,
enlisting the reason, wrought out, personified, and dramatized by
poets, taken up with a mass of other associated matter by priestly
societies and organized in a scheme of legendary doctrine and an
imposing ritual, that constituted the basis and the central
meaning of the old Mysteries; and not a vapid tradition about Noah
and his ark.

The aim of these institutions as they were wielded was threefold;
and in each particular they exerted tremendous power. The first
object was to stretch over the wicked the restraining influence of
a doctrine of future punishment, to fill them with a fearful
looking for judgment in the invisible world. And a considerable
proportion of this kind of fear among the ancients is to be traced
to the secret influence of the Mysteries, the revelations and
terrors there applied. The second desire was to encourage the good
and obedient with inspiring hopes of a happy fate and glorious
rewards beyond the grave. Plutarch writes to his wife, (near the
close of his letter of consolation to her,) "Some say the soul
will be entirely insensible after death; but you are too well
acquainted with the doctrines delivered in the Mysteries of
Bacchus, and with the symbols of our fraternity, to harbor such an
error." The third purpose was, by the wonders and splendors, the
secret awe, the mysterious authority and venerable sanctions,
thrown around the society and its ceremonies, to establish its
doctrines in the reverential acceptance of the people, and thus to
increase the power of the priesthood and the state. To compass
these ends, the hidden science, the public force, the vague
superstition, the treasured wealth, and all the varied resources
available by the ancient world, were marshalled and brought to
bear in the Mysteries. By chemical and mechanical secrets then in
their exclusive possession, the mystagogues worked miracles before
the astonished novices.47 They had the powers of electricity,
gunpowder, hydrostatic pressure, at their command.48 Their rites
were carried out on the most magnificent scale. The temple at
Eleusis could hold thirty thousand persons. Imagine what effect
might be produced, under such imposing and prepared circumstances,
on an ignorant multitude, by a set of men holding all the
scientific secrets and mechanical inventions till then discovered,
illumination flashing after darkness successively before their
smitten eyes, the floors seeming to heave and the walls to crack,
thunders bellowing through the mighty dome; now yawning revealed
beneath them the ghostly chimera of Tartarus, with all the
shrieking and horrid scenery gathered there; now

47 Anthon's Class. Dict., art. "Elicius."

48 Salverte, Des Sciences Occultes, ou Essai sur la Magie. See
also editor's introduction to Thomson's Eng. trans. of Salverte's
work.


the mild beauties of Elysium dawning on their ravished vision,
amid strains of celestial music, through fading clouds of glory,
while nymphs, heroes, and gods walked apparent. Clement of
Alexandria tells us that one feature of the initiation was a
display of the grisly secrets of Hades.49 Apuleius, in his account
of his own initiation, says, "At midnight I saw the sun shining
with a resplendent light; and I manifestly drew near to the lower
and to the upper gods and adored them in immediate presence." 50
Lobeck says that, on the lifting of the veil exposing the adytum
to the gaze of the initiates, apparitions of the gods appeared to
them.51 Christie, in his little work on the Greek Mysteries, says
that the doctrines of the Eleusinian shows were explained by means
of transparent scenes, many of which were faithfully copied upon
the painted Greek vases; and these vase accordingly, were
deposited in tombs to evidence the faith of the deceased in a
future life. The foregoing conceptions may be illustrated by the
dramatic representations, scenic shadows behind transparent
curtains, in Java, alluded to by Sir Stamford Raffles.52

It is remarkable how far the Mysteries spread over the earth, and
what popularity they attained. They penetrated into almost every
nation under the sun. They admitted, in some degree, nearly the
whole people. Herodotus informs us that there were collected in
Egypt, at one celebration, seven hundred thousand men and women,
besides children.53 The greatest warriors and kings Philip,
Alexander, Sulla, Antony esteemed it an honor to be welcomed
within the mystic pale. "Men," says Cicero, "came from the most
distant shores to be initiated at Eleusis." Sophocles declares, as
quoted by Warburton, "True life is to be found only among the
initiates: all other places are full of evil." At the rise of the
Christian religion, all the life and power left in the national
religion of Greece and Rome were in the Mysteries. Accordingly,
here was the most formidable foe of the new faith. Standing in its
old entrenchments, with all its popular prestige around it, it
fought with desperate determination for every inch it was
successively forced to yield. The brilliant effort of Julian to
roll back the tide of Christianity and restore the pagan religion
to more than its pristine splendor an effort beneath which the
scales of the world's fortunes poised, tremulous, for a while was
chiefly an endeavor to revive and enlarge the Mysteries. Such was
the attachment of the people to these old rites even in the middle
of the fourth century of the Christian era, that a murderous riot
broke out at Alexandria, in which Bishop George and others were
slain, on occasion of the profanation by Christians of a secret
adytum in which the Mysteries of Mithra were celebrated.54 And
when, a little later, the Emperor Valentinian had determined to
suppress all nocturnal rites, he was induced to withdraw his
resolution by Pretextatus, proconsul in Greece, "a man endowed
with every virtue, who represented to him that the

49 Stromata, lib. iii., cited by a writer on the Mysteries in
Blackwood, Feb. 1853, pp. 201-203.

50 Taylor's trans. of Golden Ass, p. 283. In a note to p. 275 of
this work, the translator describes (with a citation of his
authorities) "the breathing resemblances of the gods used in the
Mysteries, statues fabricated by the telesta, so as to be
illuminated and to appear animated."

51 Aglaophamus, lib. i. sect. 7.

52 Discourse to the Lit. and Sci. Soc. of Java, 1815, pub. in
Valpy's Pamphleteer, No. 15.

53 Lib. ii. cap. ix.

54 Socrates, Ecc. Inst., lib. iii. cap. 2.


Greeks would consider life insupportable if they were forbidden to
celebrate those most sacred Mysteries which bind together the
human race."55 Upon the whole, we cannot fail to see that the
Mysteries must have exerted a most extensive and profound
influence alike in fostering the good hopes of human nature
touching a life to come, and in giving credit and diffusion to the
popular fables of the poets concerning the details of the future
state. Much of that belief which seems to us so absurd we can
easily suppose they sincerely embraced, when we recollect what
they thought they had seen under supernatural auspices in their
initiations.

In the Greek and Roman faith there was gradually developed in
connection chiefly with the Mysteries, as we believe an
aristocratic doctrine which allotted to a select class of souls an
abode in the sky as their distinguished destination after death,
while the common multitude were still sentenced to the shadow
region below the grave. As Virgil writes, "The descent to Avernus
is easy. The gate of dark Dis is open day and night. But to rise
into the upper world is most arduous. Only the few heroes whom
favoring Jove loves or shining virtue exalts thither can effect
it." 56 Numerous scattered, significant traces of a belief in this
change of the destination of some souls from the pit of Hades to
the hall of heaven are to be found in the classic authors. Virgil,
celebrating the death of some person under the fictitious name of
Daphnis, exclaims, "Robed in white, he admires the strange court
of heaven, and sees the clouds and the stars beneath his feet. He
is a god now." 57 Porphyry ascribes to Pythagoras the declaration
that the souls of departed men are gathered in the zodiac.58 Plato
earnestly describes a region of brightness and unfading realities
above this lower world, among the stars, where the gods live, and
whither, he says, the virtuous and wise may ascend, while the
corrupt and ignorant must sink into the Tartarean realm.59 A
similar conception of the attainableness of heaven seems to be
suggested in the old popular myths, first, of Hercules coming back
in triumph from his visit to Pluto's seat, and, on dying, rising
to the assembly of immortals and taking his equal place among
them; secondly, of Dionysus going into the under world, rescuing
his mother, the hapless Semele, and soaring with her to heaven,
where she henceforth resides, a peeress of the eldest goddesses.
Cicero expresses the same thought when he affirms that "a life of
justice and piety is the path to heaven, where patriots, exemplary
souls, released from their bodies, enjoy endless happiness amidst
the brilliant orbs of the galaxy." 60 The same author also speaks
of certain philosophers who flourished before his time, "whose
opinions encouraged the belief that souls departing from bodies
would arrive at heaven as their proper dwelling place." 61 He
afterwards stigmatizes the notion that the life succeeding death
is subterranean as an error,62 and in his own name addresses his
auditor thus: "I see you gazing upward and wishing to migrate into
heaven." 63 It was the common belief of the Romans for ages that
Romulus was taken up into heaven, where he would remain forever,
claiming Divine honors.64 The Emperor Julian says, in his Letter
on the

55 Essay on Mysteries, by M. Ouvaroff, Eng. trans. by J. D. Price,
p. 55.

56 Aneid, lib. vi. 11. 125-130.

57 Ecl. v. 11. 57, 58, 64.

58 De Antro Nympharum.

59 Phado sects. 136-138.

60 Soma. Scipionis.

61 Tusc. Quast., lib. i. cap. xi.

62 Ibid. cap. xvi.

63 Ibid. cap. xxxiv.

64 Ennius, e. g., sings, "Romulus in coelo cum diis agit avum"


Duties of a Priest, "God will raise from darkness and Tartarus the
souls of all of us who worship him sincerely: to the pious,
instead of Tartarus he promises Olympus." "It is lawful," writes
Plato, "only for the true lover of wisdom to pass into the rank of
gods." 65 The privilege here confined to philosophers we believe
was promised to the initiates in the Mysteries, as the special
prerogative secured to them by their initiation. "To pass into the
rank of the gods" is a phrase which, as here employed, means to
ascend into heaven and have a seat with the immortals, instead of
being banished, with the souls of common mortals, to the under
world.

In early times the Greek worship was most earnestly directed to
that set of deities who resided at the gloomy centre of the earth,
and who were called the chthonian gods.66 The hope of immortality
first sprung up and was nourished in connection with this worship.
But in the progress of time and culture the supernal circle of
divinities who kept state on bright Olympus acquired a greater
share of attention, and at last received a degree of worship far
surpassing that paid to their swarthy compeers below. The
adoration of these bright beings, with a growing trust in their
benignity, the fables of the poets telling how they had sometimes
elevated human favorites to their presence, for instance,
receiving a Ganymede to the joys of their sublime society, the
encouraging thoughts of the more religious and cheerful of the
philosophers, these facts, together with a natural shrinking from
the dismal gloom of the life of shades around the Styx, and a
native longing for admission to the serene pleasures of the
unfading life led by the radiant lords of heaven, in conjunction,
perhaps, with still other causes, effected an improvement of the
old faith, altering and brightening it, little by little, until
the hope came in many quarters to be entertained that the faithful
soul would after death rise into the assemblage and splendor of
the celestial gods. The Emperor Julian, at the close of his
seventh Oration, represents the gods of Olympus addressing him in
this strain:  "Remember that your soul is immortal, and that if
you follow us you will be a god and with us will behold our
Father." Several learned writers have strenuously labored to prove
that the ground secret of the Mysteries, the grand thing revealed
in them, was the doctrine of apotheosis, shaking the established
theology by unmasking the historic fact that all the gods were
merely deified men. We believe the real significance of the
various collective testimony, hints, and inferences by which these
writers have been brought to such a conclusion is this; the
genuine point of the Mysteries lay not in teaching that the gods
were once men, but in the idea that men may become gods. To teach
that Zeus, the universal Father, causing the creation to tremble
at the motion of his brow, was formerly an obscure king of Crete,
whose tomb was yet visible in that island, would have been utterly
absurd. But to assert that the soul of man, the free, intelligent
image of the gods, on leaving the body, would ascend to live
eternally in the kingdom of its Divine prototypes, would have been
a brilliant step of progress in harmony both with reason and the
heart. Such was probably the fact. Observe the following citation
from Plutarch: "There is no occasion against nature to send the
bodies of good men to heaven; but we are to conclude that virtuous
souls, by nature and the Divine justice, rise from men to heroes,
from heroes to genii; and if, as in the Mysteries, they are

65 Phado, sect. lxxi.

66 Muller, Mist. Greek Lit., cap. ii. sect. 5; cap. xvi. sect. 2.


purified, shaking off the remains of mortality and the power of
the passions, they then attain the highest happiness, and ascend
from genii to gods, not by the vote of the people, but by the just
and established order of nature." 67

The reference in the last clause is to the decrees of the Senate
whereby apotheosis was conferred on various persons, placing them
among the gods. This ceremony has often been made to appear
unnecessarily ridiculous, through a perversion of its actual
meaning. When the ancients applied the term "god" to a human soul
departed from the body, it was not used as the moderns
prevailingly employ that word. It expressed a great deal less with
them than with us. It merely meant to affirm similarity of
essence, qualities, and residence, but by no means equal dignity
and power of attributes between the one and the others. It meant
that the soul had gone to the heavenly habitation of the gods and
was thenceforth a participant in the heavenly life.68 Heraclitus
was accustomed to say, "Men are mortal gods; gods are immortal
men." Macrobius says, "The soul is not only immortal, but a god."
69 And Cicero declares, "The soul of man is a Divine thing, as
Euripides dares to say, a god." 70 Milton uses language precisely
parallel, speaking of those who are "unmindful of the crown true
Virtue gives her servants, after their mortal change, among the
enthroned gods on sainted seats." Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch in
the second century, says that "to become a god means to ascend
into heaven." 71 The Roman Catholic ceremony of beatification and
canonization of saints, offering them incense and prayers
thereafter, means exactly what was meant by the ancient
apotheosis, namely, that while the multitudes of the dead abide
below, in the intermediate state, these favored souls have been
advanced into heaven. The papal functionaries borrowed this rite,
with most of its details, from their immediate pagan predecessors,
who themselves probably adopted it from the East, whence the
Mysteries came. It is well known that the Brahmans and Buddhists
believed, centuries before the Christian era, in the contrasted
fate of good men after death to enjoy the successive heavens above
the clouds, and of bad men to suffer the successive hells beneath
the earth. A knowledge of this attractive Oriental doctrine may
have united with the advance of their own speculations to win the
partial acceptance obtained among the Greeks and Romans for the
faith which broke the universal doom to Hades and opened heaven to
their hopeful aspirations. In a tragedy of Euripides the following
passage occurs, addressed to the bereaved Admetus: "Let not the
tomb of thy wife be looked on as the mound of the ordinary dead.
Some wayfarer, as he treads the sloping road, shall say, 'This
woman once died for her husband; but now she is a saint in
heaven.'" 72

When the meaning of the cheerful promises given to the initiates
of a more favored fate in the future life than awaited others
namely, as we think, that their spirits on leaving the body should
scale Olympus instead of plunging to Tartarus had been concealed
within the

67 Lives, Romulus, sect. xxviii.

68 See a valuable discussion of the ancient use of the terms theos
and deus in note D vol. iii. of Norton's Genuineness of the
Gospels.

69 Somn. Scip., lib. ii. cap. 12.

70 Tusc. Quest., lib. i. cap. 26.

71 We omit several other authorities, as the reader would probably
deem any further evidence superfluous.

72 Alcestis, ll. 1015-1025, ed. Glasg.


Mysteries for a long time, it at length broke into public view in
the national apotheosis of ancient heroes, kings, and renowned
worthies, the instances of which became so numerous that Cicero
cries, "Is not nearly all heaven peopled with the human race?" 73
Over the heads of the devout heathen, as they gazed up through the
clear night air, twinkled the beams of innumerable stars, each
chosen to designate the cerulean seat where some soul was
rejoicing with the gods in heaven over the glorious issue of the
toils and sufferings in which he once painfully trod this earthly
scene.

Herodian, a Greek historian of some of the Roman emperors, has
left a detailed account of the rite of apotheosis.74 An image of
the person to be deified was made in wax, looking all sick and
pale, laid in state on a lofty bed of ivory covered with cloth of
gold, surrounded on one side by choirs of noble lords, on the
other side by their ladies stripped of their jewels and clad in
mourning, visited often for several days by a physician, who still
reports his patient worse, and finally announces his decease. Then
the Senators and haughtiest patricians bear the couch through the
via sacra to the Forum. Bands of noble boys and of proud women
ranged opposite each other chant hymns and lauds over the dead in
solemn melody. The bier is next borne to the Campus Martius, where
it is placed upon a high wooden altar, a large, thin structure
with a tower like a lighthouse. Heaps of fragrant gums, herbs,
fruits, and spices are poured out and piled upon it. Then the
Roman knights, mounted on horseback, prance before it in beautiful
bravery, wheeling to and fro in the dizzy measures of the Pyrrhic
dance. Also, in a stately manner, purple clothed charioteers,
wearing masks which picture forth the features of the most famous
worthies of other days to the reverential recognition of the
silent hosts assembled, ride around the form of their descendant.
Suddenly a torch is set to the pile, and it is wrapped in flames.
From the turret, amidst the aromatic fumes, an eagle is let loose.
Phoenix like symbol of the departed soul, he soars into the sky,
and the seven hilled city throbs with pride, reverberating the
shouts of her people. Thus into the residence of the gods "Sic
itur ad astra" was borne the divinely favored mortal; "And thus we
see how man's prophetic creeds Made gods of men when godlike were
their deeds."

For it was only in times of degradation and by a violent
perversion that the honor was allowed to the unworthy; and even in
such cases it was usually nullified as soon as the people
recovered their senses and their freedom. There is extant among
the works of Seneca a little treatise called Apocolocuntosis, that
is, pumpkinification, or the metamorphosis into a gourd, a sharp
satire levelled against the apotheosis of the Emperor Claudius.
The deification of mortals among the ancients has long been
laughed at. When the great Macedonian monarch applied for a decree
for his apotheosis while he was yet alive, the Lacedemonian
Senate, with bitter sarcasm, voted, "If Alexander desires to be a
god, let him be a god." The doctrine is often referred to among us
in terms of mockery. But this is principally because it is not
understood. It simply signifies the ascent of the soul after death
into the Olympian halls instead of descending into the Acheronian
gulfs. And whether we

73 Tusc. Quast., lib. i. cap. 12.

74 Lib. iv.


consider the symbolic justice and beauty of the conception as a
poetic image applied to the deathless heroes of humanity ensphered
above us forever in historic fame and natural worship, or regard
its comparative probability as the literal location of the
residence of departed spirits, it must recommend itself to us as a
decided improvement on the ideas previously prevalent, and as a
sort of anticipation, in part, of that bright faith in a heavenly
home for faithfuls souls, afterwards established in the world by
Him of whom it was written, "No man hath ascended up to heaven but
he that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man, who is now in
heaven." Indeed, so forcible and close is the correspondence
between the course of the aspirant in his initiation dramatically
dying, descending into Hades, rising again to life, and ascending
into heaven with the apostolic presentation of the redemptive
career of Christ, our great Forerunner, that some writers Nork,
for instance have suggested that the latter was but the exoteric
publication to all the world of what in the former was
esoterically taught to the initiates alone.

There was a striking naturalness, a profound propriety, in the
obscurities of secrecy and awe with which the ancient Mysteries
shrouded from a rash curiosity their instructions concerning the
future life and only unfolded them by careful degrees to the
prepared candidate. It is so with the reality itself in the nature
of things. It is the great mystery of mysteries, darkly hinted in
types, faintly gleaming in analogies, softly whispered in hopes,
passionately asked in desires, patiently confirmed in arguments,
suddenly blazed and thundered in revelation. Man from the very
beginning of his race on earth has been thickly encompassed by
mysteries, hung around by the muffling curtains of ignorance and
superstition. Through one after another of these he has forced his
way and gazed on their successive secrets laid bare. Once the
Ocean was an alluring and terrible mystery, weltering before him
with its endless wash of waves, into which the weary sun, in the
west, plunged at evening, and out of which, in the east, it
bounded refreshed in the morning. But the daring prows of his
ships, guided by pioneering thought and skill, passed its islands
and touched its ultimate shores. Once the Polar Circle was a
frightful and frozen mystery, enthroned on mountains of eternal
ice and wearing upon its snowy brow the flaming crown of the
aurora borealis. But his hardy navigators, inspired by enterprise
and philanthropy, armed with science, and supplied by art, have
driven the awful phantom back, league by league, until but a small
expanse of its wonders remains untracked by his steps. Once the
crowded Sky was a boundless mystery, a maze of motions, a field
where ghastly comets played their antics and shook down terrors on
the nations. But the theories of his reason, based on the gigantic
grasp of his calculus and aided by the instruments of his
invention, have solved perplexity after perplexity, blended
discords into harmony, and shown to his delighted vision the calm
perfection of the stellar system. So, too, in the moral world he
has lifted the shrouds from many a dark problem, and extended the
empire of light and love far out over the ancient realm of
darkness and terror. But the secret of Death, the mystery of the
Future, remains yet, as of old, unfathomed and inscrutable to his
inquiries. Still, as of old, he kneels before that unlifted veil
and beseeches the oracles for a response to faith.

The ancient Mysteries in their principal ceremony but copied the
ordination and followed the overawing spirit of Nature herself.
The religious reserve and awe about the entrance into the adytum
of their traditions were like those about the entrance into the
invisible scenes beyond the veils of time and mortality. Their
initiation was but a miniature symbol of the great initiation
through which, and that upon impartial terms, every mortal, from
King Solomon to the idiot pauper, must sooner or later pass to
immortality. When a fit applicant, after the preliminary
probation, kneels with fainting sense and pallid brow before the
veil of the unutterable Unknown, and the last pulsations of his
heart tap at the door of eternity, and he reverentially asks
admission to partake in the secrets shrouded from profane vision,
the infinite Hierophant directs the call to be answered by Death,
the speechless and solemn steward of the celestial Mysteries. He
comes, pushes the curtain aside, leads the awe struck initiate in,
takes the blinding bandage of the body from his soul; and
straightway the trembling neophyte receives light in the midst of
that innumerable Fraternity of Immortals over whom the Supreme
Author of the Universe presides.

