CHAPTER VI.

CHRIST'S TEACHINGS CONCERNING THE FUTURE LIFE.

IN approaching the teachings of the Savior himself concerning the
future fate of man, we should throw off the weight of creeds and
prejudices, and, by the aid of all the appliances in our power,
endeavor to reach beneath the imagery and unessential particulars
of his instructions to learn their bare significance in truth.
This is made difficult by the singular perversions his religion
has undergone; by the loss of a complete knowledge of the
peculiarities of the Messianic age in the lapse of the ages since;
by the almost universal change in our associations, modes of
feeling and thought, and styles of speech; and by the gradual
accretion and hardening of false doctrines and sectarian biases
and wilfulness. As we examine the words of Christ to find their
real meaning, there are four prominent considerations to be
especially weighed and borne in mind.

First, we must not forget the poetic Eastern style common to the
Jewish prophets; their symbolic enunciations in bold figures of
speech: "I am the door;" "I am the bread of life;" "I am the
vine;" "My sheep hear my voice;" "If these should hold their
peace, the stones would immediately cry out." This daring
emblematic language was natural to the Oriental nations; and the
Bible is full of it. Is the overthrow of a country foretold? It is
not said, "Babylon shall be destroyed," but "The sun shall be
darkened at his going forth, the moon shall be as blood, the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the earth shall stagger to and fro as
a drunken man." If we would truly understand Christ's
declarations, we must not overlook the characteristics of
figurative language. For "he spake to the multitude in parables,
and without a parable spake he not unto them;" and a parable, of
course, is not to be taken literally, but holds a latent sense and
purpose which are to be sought out. The greatest injustice is done
to the teachings of Christ when his words are studied as those of
a dry scholastic, a metaphysical moralist, not as those of a
profound poet, a master in the spiritual realm.

Secondly, we must remember that we have but fragmentary reports of
a small part of the teachings of Christ. He was engaged in the
active prosecution of his mission probably about three years, at
the shortest over one year; while all the different words of his
recorded in the New Testament would not occupy more than five
hours. Only a little fraction of what he said has been transmitted
to us; and though this part may contain the essence of the whole,
yet it must naturally in some instances be obscure and difficult
of apprehension. We must therefore compare different passages with
each other, carefully probe them all, and explain, so far as
possible, those whose meaning is recondite by those whose meaning
is obvious. Some persons may be surprised to think that we have
but a small portion of the sayings of Jesus. The fact, however, is
unquestionable. And perhaps there is no more reason that we should
have a full report of his words than there is that we should have
a complete account of his doings; and the evangelist declares,
"There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if
they should every one be written, I suppose that even the world
itself could not contain the books."

Thirdly, when examining the instructions of Jesus, we should
recollect that he adopted, and applied to himself and to his
kingdom, the common Jewish phraseology concerning the Messiah and
the events that were expected to attend his advent and reign. But
he did not take up these phrases in the perverted sense held in
the corrupt opinions and earthly hopes of the Jews: he used them
spiritually, in the sense which accorded with the true Messianic
dispensation as it was arranged in the forecasting providence of
God. No investigation of the New Testament should be unaccompanied
by an observance of the fundamental rule of interpretation,
namely, that the strident of a book, especially of an ancient,
obscure, and fragmentary book, should imbue himself as thoroughly
as he can with the knowledge and spirit of the opinions, events,
influences, circumstances, of the time when the document was
written, and of the persons who wrote it. The inquirer must be
equipped for his task by a mastery of the Rabbinism of Gamaliel,
at whose feet Paul was brought up; for the Jewish mind of that age
was filled, and its religious language directed, by this
Rabbinism. Guided by this principle, furnished with the necessary
information, in the helpful light of the best results of modern
critical scholarship, we shall be able to explain many dark texts,
and to satisfy ourselves, at least in a degree, as to the genuine
substance of Christ's declarations touching the future destinies
of men.

Finally, he who studies the New Testament with patient
thoroughness and with honest sharpness will arrive at a
distinction most important to be made and to be kept in view,
namely, a distinction between the real meaning of Christ's words
in his own mind and the actual meaning understood in them by his
auditors and reporters.1 Here we approach a most delicate and
vital point, hitherto too little noticed, but destined yet to
become prominent and fruitful. A large number of religious phrases
were in common use among the Jews at the time of Jesus. He adopted
them, but infused into them a deeper, a correct meaning, as
Copernicus did into the old astronomic formulas. But the
bystanders who listened to his discourses, hearing the familiar
terms, seized the familiar meaning, and erroneously attributed it
to him. It is certain that the Savior was often misunderstood and
often not understood at all. When he declared himself the Messiah,
the people would have made him a king by force! Even the apostles
frequently grossly failed to appreciate his spirit and aims,
wrenched unwarrantable inferences from his words, and quarrelled
for the precedency in his coming kingdom and for seats at his
right hand. In numerous cases it is glaringly plain that his ideas
were far from their conceptions of them. We have no doubt the same
was true in many other instances where it is not so clear. He
repeatedly reproves them for folly and slowness because they did
not perceive the sense of his instructions. Perhaps there was a
slight impatience in his tones when he said, "How is it that ye do
not understand that I spake it not to you concerning bread, that
ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the
Sadducees?" Jesus uttered in established phrases new and
profoundly spiritual thoughts. The apostles educated in, and full
of, as they evidently were, the dogmas, prejudices, and

1 See this distinction affirmed by De Wette, in the preface to his
Commentatio de Morte Jesus Christi Expiatoria. See also Thurn,
Jesus und seine Apostel in Widerspruch in Ansehung der Lehre von
der Ewigcn Verdamnniss. In Scherer's Schriftforsch. sect. i. nr.
4.


hopes of their age and land would naturally, to some extent,
misapprehend his meaning. Then, after a tumultuous interval,
writing out his instructions from memory, how perfectly natural
that their own convictions and sentiments would have a powerful
influence in modifying and shaping the animus and the verbal
expressions in their reports! Under the circumstances, that we
should now possess the very equivalents of his words with strict
literalness, and conveying his very intentions perfectly
translated from the Aramaan into the Greek tongue, would imply the
most sustained and amazing of all miracles. There is nothing
whatever that indicates any such miraculous intervention. There is
nothing to discredit the fair presumption that the writers were
left to their own abilities, under the inspiration of an earnest
consecrating love and truthfulness. And we must, with due
limitations, distinguish between the original words and conscious
meaning of the sublime Master, illustrated by the emphasis and
discrimination of his looks, tones, and gestures, and the
apprehended meaning recorded long afterwards, shaped and colored
by passing through the minds and pens of the sometimes dissentient
and always imperfect disciples. He once declared to them, "I have
many things to say unto you, but ye are not able to bear them."
Admitting his infallibility, as we may, yet asserting their
fallibility, as we must, and accompanied, too, as his words now
are by many very obscuring circumstances, it is extremely
difficult to lay the hand on discriminated texts and say,
"[non ASCII characters]"

The Messianic doctrine prevalent among the Jews in the time of
Jesus appears to have been built up little by little, by religious
faith, national pride, and priestly desire, out of literal
interpretations of figurative prophecy, and Cabalistic
interpretations of plain language, and Rabbinical traditions and
speculations, additionally corrupted in some particulars by
intercourse with the Persians. Under all this was a central
spiritual germ of a Divine promise and plan. A Messiah was really
to come. It was in answering the questions, what kind of a king he
was to be, and over what sort of a kingdom he was to reign, that
the errors crept in. The Messianic conceptions which have come
down to us through the Prophets, the Targums, incidental allusions
in the New Testament, the Talmud, and the few other traditions and
records yet in existence, are very diverse and sometimes
contradictory. They agreed in ardently looking for an earthly
sovereign in the Messiah, one who would rise up in the line of
David and by the power of Jehovah deliver his people, punish their
enemies, subdue the world to his sceptre, and reign with Divine
auspices of beneficence and splendor. They also expected that then
a portion of the dead would rise from the under world and assume
their bodies again, to participate in the triumphs and blessings
of his earthly kingdom. His personal reign in Judea was what they
usually meant by the phrases "the kingdom of heaven," "the kingdom
of God." The apostles cherished these ideas, and expressed them in
the terms common to their countrymen. But we cannot doubt that
Jesus employed this and kindred language in a purer and deeper
sense, which we must take pains to distinguish from the early and
lingering errors associated with it.

Upon the threshold of our subject we meet with predictions of a
second coming of Christ from heaven, with power and glory, to sit
on his throne and judge the world. The portentous imagery in which
these prophecies are clothed is taken from the old prophets; and
to them

we must turn to learn its usage and force. The Hebrews called any
signal manifestation of power especially any dreadful calamity a
coming of the Lord. It was a coming of Jehovah when his vengeance
strewed the ground with the corpses of Sennacherib's host; when
its storm swept Jerusalem as with fire, and bore Israel into
bondage; when its sword came down upon Idumea and was bathed in
blood upon Edom. "The day of the Lord" is another term of
precisely similar import. It occurs in the Old Testament about
fifteen times. In every instance it means some mighty
manifestation of God's power in calamity. These occasions are
pictured forth with the most astounding figures of speech. Isaiah
describes the approaching destruction of Babylon in these terms:
"The stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall give no
light; the sun shall be darkened, the moon shall not shine, the
heavens shall shake, and the earth shall remove out of her place
and be as a frightened sheep that no man taketh up." The Jews
expected that the coming of the Messiah would be preceded by many
fearful woes, in the midst of which he would appear with peerless
pomp and might. The day of his coming they named emphatically the
day of the Lord. Jesus actually appeared, not, as they expected, a
warrior travelling in the greatness of his strength, with dyed
garments from Bozrah, staining his raiment with blood as he
trampled in the wine vat of vengeance, but the true Messiah, God's
foreordained and anointed Son, despised and rejected of men,
bringing good tidings, publishing peace. It must have been
impossible for the Jews to receive such a Messiah without
explanations. Those few who became converts apprehended his
Messianic language, at least to some extent, in the sense which
previously occupied their minds. He knew that often he was not
understood; and he frequently said to his followers, "Who hath
ears to hear, let him hear." His disciples once asked him, "What
shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?" He
replied, substantially, "There shall be wars, famines, and
unheard of trials; and immediately after the sun shall be
darkened, the moon shall not give her light, the stars shall fall
from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. Then
shall they see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with
great power. And he shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and
all nations shall be gathered before him, and he shall separate
them one from another." That this language was understood by the
evangelists and the early Christians, in accordance with their
Pharisaic notions, as teaching literally a physical reappearance
of Christ on the earth, a resurrection, and a general judgment, we
fully believe. Those ideas were prevalent at the time, are
expressed in scores of places in the New Testament, and are the
direct strong assertion of the words themselves. But that such was
the meaning of Christ himself we much more than doubt.

In the first place, in his own language in regard to his second
coming there is not the least hint of a resurrection of the dead:
the scene is confined to the living, and to the earth. Secondly,
the figures which he employs in this connection are the same as
those used by the Jewish prophets to denote great and signal
events on the earth, and may be so taken here without violence to
the idiom. Thirdly, he expressly fixed the date of the events he
referred to within that generation; and if, therefore, he spoke
literally, he was grossly in error, and his prophecies failed of
fulfilment, a conclusion which we cannot adopt. To suppose that he
partook in the false, mechanical dogmas of the carnal Jews would
be equally irreconcilable with the common idea of his Divine
inspiration, and with the profound penetration and spirituality
of his own mind.

He certainly used much of the phraseology of his contemporary
countrymen, metaphorically, to convey his own purer thoughts. We
have no doubt he did so in regard to the descriptions of his
second coming. Let us state in a form of paraphrase what his real
instructions on this point seem to us to have been: "You cannot
believe that I am the Messiah, because I do not deliver you from
your oppressors and trample on the Gentiles. Your minds are
clouded with errors. The Father hath sent me to found the kingdom
of peace and righteousness, and hath given me all power to reward
and punish. By my word shall the nations of the earth be honored
and blessed, or be overwhelmed with fire; and every man must stand
before my judgment seat. The end of the world is at the doors. The
Mosaic dispensation is about to be closed in the fearful
tribulations of the day of the Lord, and my dispensation to be set
up. When you see Jerusalem encompassed with armies, know that the
day is at hand, and flee to the mountains; for not one stone shall
be left upon another. Then the power of God will be shown on my
behalf, and the sign of the Son of Man be seen in heaven. My
truths shall prevail, and shall be owned as the criteria of Divine
judgment. According to them, all the righteous shall be
distinguished as my subjects, and all the iniquitous shall be
separated from my kingdom. Some of those standing here shall not
taste death till all these things be fulfilled. Then it will be
seen that I am the Messiah, and that through the eternal
principles of truth which I have proclaimed I shall sit upon a
throne of glory, not literally, in person, as you thought,
blessing the Jews and cursing the Gentiles, but spiritually, in
the truth, dispensing joy to good men and woe to bad men,
according to their deserts." Such we believe to be the meaning of
Christ's own predictions of his second coming. He figuratively
identifies himself with his religion according to that idiom by
which it is written, "Moses hath in every city them that read him,
being read in the synagogues every Sabbath day." His figure of
himself as the universal judge is a bold personification; for he
elsewhere says, "He that believeth in me believeth not in me, but
in Him that sent me." And again, "He that rejecteth me, I judge
him not: the word that I have spoken, that shall judge him." His
coming in the clouds of heaven with great power and glory was
when, at the destruction of Jerusalem, the old age closed and the
new began, the obstacles to his religion were removed and his
throne established on the earth.2 The apostles undoubtedly
understood the doctrine differently; but that such was his own
thought we conclude, because he did sometimes undeniably use
figurative language in that way, and because the other meaning is
an error, not in harmony either with his character, his mind, or
his mission.

This interpretation is so important that it may need to be
illustrated and confirmed by further instances: "When the Son of
Man sits on the throne of his glory, and all nations are gathered
before him, his angels shall sever the wicked from among the just,
and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth." A few such picturesque phrases have led to
the general belief in a great world judgment at the end of the

2 Norton, Statement of Reasons, Appendix.


appointed time, after which the condemned are to be thrown into
the tortures of an unquenchable world of flame. How arbitrary and
violent a conclusion this is, how unwarranted and gross a
perversion of the language of Christ it is, we may easily see. The
fact that the old prophets often described fearful misfortunes and
woes in images of clouds and flame and falling stars, and other
portentous symbols, and that this style was therefore familiar to
the Jews, would make it very natural for Jesus, in foretelling
such an event as the coming destruction of Jerusalem, in
conflagration and massacre, with the irretrievable subversion of
the old dispensation, to picture it forth in a similar way. Fire
was to the Jews a common emblem of calamity and devastation; and
judgments incomparably less momentous than those gathered about
the fall of Jerusalem and the dispersion of the self boasted
favorites of Jehovah were often described by the prophets in
appalling images of darkened planets, shaking heavens, clouds,
fire, and blackness. Joel, speaking of a "day of the Lord," when
there should be famine and drought, and a horrid army of
destroying insects, "before whom a fire devoureth, and behind them
a flame burneth," draws the scene in these terrific colors: "The
earth shall quake before them; the sun and moon shall be dark, and
the stars shall withdraw their shining; and the Lord shall utter
his voice before his terrible army of locusts, caterpillars, and
destroying worms:" Ezekiel represents God as saying, "The house of
Israel is to me become dross: therefore I will gather you into the
midst of Jerusalem: as they gather silver, brass, iron, tin, and
lead into the midst of the furnace to blow the fire upon it, so
will I gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and
ye shall be melted in the midst thereof." We read in Isaiah, "The
Assyrian shall flee, and his princes shall be afraid, saith the
Lord, whose fire is in Zion and his furnace in Jerusalem." Malachi
also says, "The day cometh that shall burn as a furnace, and all
that do wickedly shall be stubble, and shall be burned up root and
branch. They shall be trodden as ashes beneath the feet of the
righteous." The meaning of these passages, and of many other
similar ones, is, in every instance, some severe temporal
calamity, some dire example of Jehovah's retributions among the
nations of the earth. Their authors never dreamed of teaching that
there is a place of fire beyond the grave in which the wicked dead
shall be tormented, or that the natural creation is finally to be
devoured by flame. It is perfectly certain that not a single text
in the Old Testament was meant to teach any such doctrine as that.
The judgments shadowed forth in kindred metaphors by Christ are to
be understood in the light of this fact. Their meaning is, that
all unjust, cruel, false, impure men shall endure severe
punishments. This general thought is fearfully distinct; but every
thing beyond all details are left in utter obscurity.

In the august scene of the King in judgment, when the sentence has
been pronounced on those at the left hand, "Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels," it is written, "and they shall go away into everlasting
punishment." It is obvious to remark that the imagery of a fiery
prison built for Satan and the fallen angels, and into which the
bad shall be finally doomed, is poetical language, or language of
accommodation to the current notions of the time. These startling
Oriental figures are used to wrap and convey the assertion that
the wicked shall be severely punished according to their deserts.
No literal reference seems to be made either to the particular
time, to the

special place, or to the distinctive character, of the punishment;
but the mere fact is stated in a manner to fill the conscience
with awe and to stamp the practical lesson vividly on the memory.
But admitting the clauses apparently descriptive of the nature of
this retribution to be metaphorical, yet what shall we think of
its duration? Is it absolutely unending? There is nothing in the
record to enable a candid inquirer to answer that question
decisively. So far as the letter of Scripture is concerned, there
are no data to give an indubitable solution to the problem. It is
true the word "everlasting" is repeated; but, when impartially
weighed, it seems a sudden rhetorical expression, of indefinite
force, used to heighten the impressiveness of a sublime dramatic
representation, rather than a cautious philosophical term employed
to convey an abstract conception. There is no reason whatever for
supposing that Christ's mind was particularly directed to the
metaphysical idea of endlessness, or to the much more metaphysical
idea of timelessness. The presumptive evidence is that he spoke
popularly. Had he been charged to reveal a doctrine so tremendous,
so awful, so unutterably momentous in its practical relations, as
that of the endless close of all probation at death, is it
conceivable that he would merely have couched it in a few
figurative expressions and left it as a matter of obscure
inference and uncertainty? No: in that case, he would have
iterated and reiterated it, defined, guarded, illustrated it, and
have left no possibility of honest mistake or doubt of it.

The Greek word [non-ASCII characters], and the same is true of the
corresponding Hebrew word, translated "everlasting" in the English
Bible, has not in its popular usage the rigid force of eternal
duration, but varies, is now applied to objects as evanescent as
man's earthly life, now to objects as lasting as eternity.3
Its power in any given case is to be sought from the context and
the reason of the thing.

Isaiah, having threatened the unrighteous nations that they
"should conceive chaff and bring forth stubble, that their own
breath should be fire to devour them, and that they should be
burnt like lime, like thorns cut up in the fire," makes the
terror smitten sinners and hypocrites cry, "Who among us can dwell
in devouring fire? Who among us can dwell in everlasting
burnings?" Yet his reference is solely to an outward, temporal
judgment in this world. The Greek adjective rendered "everlasting"
is etymologically, and by universal usage, a term of duration, but
indefinite, its extent of meaning depending on the subjects of
which it is predicated. Therefore, when Christ connects this word
with the punishment of the wicked, it is impossible to say with
any certainty, judging from the language itself, whether he
implies that those who die in their sins are hopelessly lost,
perfectly irredeemable forever, or not, though the probabilities
are very strongly in the latter direction. "Everlasting
punishment" may mean, in philosophical strictness, a punishment
absolutely eternal, or may be a popular expression denoting, with
general indefiniteness, a very long duration. Since in all Greek
literature, sacred and profane, [non-ASCII characters] is applied
to things that end, ten times as often as it is to things immortal,
no fair critic can assert positively that when it is connected
with future punishment it has the stringent meaning of
metaphysical endlessness. On the other hand, no one has any
critical

3 See Christian Examiner for March, 1854, pp. 280-297.


right to say positively that in such cases it has not that
meaning. The Master has not explained his words on this point, but
has left them veiled. We can settle the question itself concerning
the limitedness or the unlimitedness of future punishment only on
other grounds than those of textual criticism, even on grounds of
enlightened reason postulating the cardinal principles of
Christianity and of ethics. Will not the unimpeded Spirit of
Christ lead all free minds and loving hearts to one conclusion?
But that conclusion is to be held modestly as a trusted inference,
not dogmatically as a received revelation.

Another point in the Savior's teachings which it is of the utmost
importance to understand is the sense in which he used the Jewish
phrases "Resurrection of the Dead" and "Resurrection at the Last
Day." The Pharisees looked for a restoration of the righteous from
their graves to a bodily life. This event they supposed would take
place at the appearance of the Messiah; and the time of his coming
they called "the last day." So the Apostle John says, "Already are
there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time."
Now, Jesus claimed to be the Messiah, clothed in his functions,
though he interpreted those functions as carrying an interior and
moral, not an outward and physical, force. "This is the will of
Him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son and believeth
on him should have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at
the last day." Again, when Martha told Jesus that "she knew her
brother Lazarus would rise again in the resurrection at the last
day," he replied, "I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and
whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." This
utterance is surely metaphorical; for belief in Jesus does not
prevent physical dissolution. The thoughts contained in the
various passages belonging to this subject, when drawn out,
compared, and stated in general terms, seem to us to be as
follows: "You suppose that in the last day your Messiah will
restore the dead to live again upon the earth. I am the Messiah,
and the last days have therefore arrived. I am commissioned by the
Father to bestow eternal life upon all who believe on me; but not
in the manner you have anticipated. The true resurrection is not
calling the body from the tomb, but opening the fountains of
eternal life in the soul. I am come to open the spiritual world to
your faith. He that believeth in me and keepeth my commandments
has passed from death unto life, become conscious that though
seemingly he passes into the grave, yet really he shall live with
God forever. The true resurrection is, to come into the experience
of the truth that 'God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living; for all live unto him.' Over the soul that is filled with
such an experience, death has no power. Verily, I say unto, you,
the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead, the ignorant and
guilty, buried in trespasses and sins, shall hear these truths
declared, and they that believe shall lay hold of the life thus
offered and be blessed. The Father hath given me authority to
execute judgment, that is, to lay down the principles by which men
shall be judged according to their deserts. All mankind shall be
judged in the spiritual state by the spirit and precepts of my
religion as veritably as if in their graves the generations of the
dead heard my voice and came forth, the good to blessedness, the
evil to misery. The judgment which is, as it were, committed unto
me, is not really committed unto me, but unto the truth which I
declare; for of mine own self I can do nothing." We believe this
paraphrase expresses the essential meaning of Christ's own
declarations concerning a resurrection and an associated judgment.
Coming to bring from the Father authenticated tidings of
immortality, and to reveal the laws of the Divine judgment,
he declared that those who believed and kept his words were
delivered from the terror of death, and, knowing that an endless
life of blessedness was awaiting them, immediately entered upon
its experience. He did not teach the doctrine of a bodily
restoration, but said, "In the resurrection," that is, in the
spiritual state succeeding death, "they neither marry nor are
given in marriage, but are as the angels of heaven."

He did not teach the doctrine of a temporary sleep in the grave,
but said to the penitent thief on the cross, "This day shalt thou
be with me in Paradise:" instantly upon leaving the body their
souls would be together in the state of the blessed.

It is often said that the words of Jesus in relation to the dead
hearing his voice and coming forth must be taken literally; for
the metaphor is of too extreme violence. But it is in keeping with
his usage. He says, "Let the dead bury their dead." It is far less
bold than "This is my body; this is my blood." It is not nearly so
strong as Paul's adjuration, "Awake, thou that sleepest, and rise
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light." It is not more
daringly imaginative than the assertion that "the heroes sleeping
in Marathon's gory bed stirred in their graves when Leonidas
fought at Thermopyla; or than Christ's own words, "If thou hadst
faith like a grain of mustard seed, thou couldst say to this
mountain, Be thou cast into yonder sea, and it should obey you."
So one might say,

"Where'er the gospel comes,
It spreads diviner light;
It calls dead sinners from their tombs
And gives the blind their sight."

And in the latter days, when it has done its work, and the
glorious measure of human redemption is full, liberty,
intelligence, and love shall stand hand in hand on the mountain
summits and raise up the long generations of the dead to behold
the completed fruits of their toils. In this figurative moral
sense Jesus probably spoke when he said, "Thou shalt be
recompensed at the resurrection of the just." He referred simply
to the rewards of the virtuous in the state beyond the grave. The
phraseology in which he clothed the thought he accommodatingly
adopted from the current speech of the Pharisees. They
unquestionably meant by it the group of notions contained in their
dogma of the destined physical restoration of the dead from their
sepulchres at the advent of the Messiah. And it seems perfectly
plain to us, on an impartial study of the record, that the
evangelist, in reporting his words, took the Pharisaic dogma, and
not merely the Christian truth, with them. But that Jesus himself
modified and spiritualized the meaning of the phrase when he
employed it, even as he did the other contemporaneous language
descriptive of the Messianic offices and times, we conclude for
two reasons. First, he certainly did often use language in that
spiritual way, dressing in bold metaphors moral thoughts of
inspired insight and truth. Secondly, the moral doctrine is the
only one that is true, or that is in keeping with his penetrative
thought. The notion of a physical resurrection is an error
borrowed most likely from the Persians by the Pharisees, and not
belonging to the essential elements of Christianity. The notion
being prevalent at the time in Judea, and being usually expressed
in certain appropriated phrases, when Christ used those phrases in
a true spiritual sense the apostles would naturally apprehend from
them the carnal meaning which already filled their minds in common
with the minds of their countrymen.

The word Hades, translated in the English New Testament by the
word "hell," a word of nearly the same etymological force, but now
conveying a quite different meaning, occurs in the discourses of
Jesus only three several times. The other instances of its use are
repetitions or parallels. First, "And thou, Capernaum, which art
exalted to heaven, shalt be brought down to the under world;" that
is, the great and proud city shall become powerless, a heap of
ruins. Second, "Upon this rock I will found my Church, and the
gates of the under world shall not prevail against it;" that is,
the powers of darkness, the opposition of the wicked, the strength
of evil, shall not destroy my religion; in spite of them it shall
assert its organization and overcome all obstacles.

The remaining example of the Savior's use of this word is in the
parable of Dives and Lazarus. The rich man is described, after
death, as suffering in the under world. Seeing the beggar afar off
in Abraham's bosom, he cries, "Father Abraham, pity me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool
my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame." Well known fancies
and opinions are here wrought up in scenic form to convey certain
moral impressions. It will be noticed that the implied division of
the under world into two parts, with a gulf between them,
corresponds to the common Gentile notion of an Elysian region of
delightful meadows for the good and a Tartarean region of
blackness and fire for the bad, both included in one subterranean
kingdom, but divided by an interval. 4

The dramatic details of the account Lazarus being borne into bliss
by angels, Dives asking to have a messenger sent from bale to warn
his surviving brothers rest on opinions afloat among the Jews of
that age, derived from the Persian theology. Zoroaster prays,
"When I shall die, let Aban and Bahman carry me to the bosom of
joy."5 And it was a common belief among the Persians that souls
were at seasons permitted to leave purgatory and visit their
relatives on earth.6 It is evident that the narrative before us is
not a history to be literally construed, but a parable to be
carefully analyzed. The imagery and the particulars are to be laid
aside, and the central thoughts to be drawn forth. Take the words
literally, that the rich man's immaterial soul, writhing in
flames, wished the tip of a finger dipped in water to cool his
tongue, and they are ridiculous. Take them figuratively, as a type
of unknown spiritual anguish, and they are awful. Besides, had
Christ intended to teach the doctrine of a local burning hell, he
surely would have enunciated it in plain words, with solemn
iteration and explanatory amplifications, instead of merely
insinuating it incidentally, in metaphorical

4 See copious illustrations by Rosenmuller, in Luc. cap. xvi. 22,
23.
"Hic locus est partes ubi se via findit in ambas:
Dextera, qua Ditis magni sub moenia tendit;
Hac iter Elysium nobis: at lava malorum
Exercet poenas, et ad impia Tartara mittit."

5 Rhode, Heilige Sage des Zendvolks, s. 408.

6 Ibid. s. 410.


terms, in a professed parable. The sense of the parable is, that
the formal distinctions of this world will have no influence in
the allotments of the future state, but will often be reversed
there; that a righteous Providence, knowing every thing here,
rules hereafter, and will dispense compensating justice to all;
that men should not wait for a herald to rise from the dead to
warn them, but should heed the instructions they already have, and
so live in the life that now is, as to avoid a miserable
condemnation, and secure a blessed acceptance, in the life that is
to come. By inculcating these truths in a striking manner, through
the aid of a parable based on the familiar poetical conceptions of
the future world and its scenery, Christ no more endorses those
conceptions than by using the Messianic phrases of the Jews he
approves the false carnal views which they joined with that
language. To interpret the parable literally, then, and suppose it
meant to teach the actual existence of a located hell of fire for
sinners after death, is to disregard the proprieties of criticism.

"Gehenna," or the equivalent phrase, "Gehenna of fire,"
unfortunately translated into our tongue by the word "hell," is to
be found in the teachings of Christ in only five independent
instances, each of which, after tracing the original Jewish usage
of the term, we will briefly examine. Gehenna, or the Vale of
Hinnom, is derived from two Hebrew words, the first meaning a
vale, the second being the name of its owner. The place thus
called was the eastern part of the beautiful valley that forms the
southern boundary of Jerusalem. Here Moloch, the horrid idol god
worshipped by the Ammonites, and by the Israelites during their
idolatrous lapses, was set up. This monstrous idol had the head of
an ox and the body of a man. It was hollow; and, being filled with
fire, children were laid in its arms and devoured alive by the
heat. This explains the terrific denunciations uttered by the
prophets against those who made their children pass through the
fire to Moloch. The spot was sometimes entitled Tophet, a place of
abhorrence; its name being derived, as some think, from a word
meaning to vomit with loathing, or, as others suppose, from a word
signifying drum, because drums were beaten to drown the shrieks of
the burning children. After these horrible rites were abolished by
Josiah, the place became an utter abomination. All filth, the
offal of the city, the carcasses of beasts, the bodies of executed
criminals, were cast indiscriminately into Gehenna. Fires were
kept constantly burning to prevent the infection of the atmosphere
from the putrifying mass. Worms were to be seen preying on the
relics. The primary meaning, then, of Gehenna, is a valley outside
of Jerusalem, a place of corruption and fire, only to be thought
of with execration and shuddering.

Now, it was not only in keeping with Oriental rhetoric, but also
natural in itself, that figures of speech should be taken from
these obvious and dreadful facts to symbolize any dire evil. For
example, how naturally might a Jew, speaking of some foul wretch,
and standing, perhaps, within sight of the place, exclaim, "He
deserves to be hurled into the fires of Gehenna!" So the term
would gradually become an accepted emblem of abominable
punishment. Such was the fact; and this gives a perspicuous
meaning to the word without supposing it to imply a fiery prison
house of anguish in the future world. Isaiah threatens the King of
Assyria with ruin in these terms: "Tophet is ordained of old, and
prepared for the king: it is made deep and large; the pile thereof
is fire and much wood; the breath of Jehovah, like a stream of
brimstone, doth kindle it." The prophet thus portrays, with the
dread imagery of Gehenna, approaching disaster and overthrow. A
thorough study of the Old Testament shows that the Jews, during
the period which it covers, did not believe in future rewards and
punishments, but expected that all souls without discrimination
would pass their shadowy dream lives in the silence of Sheol.

Between the termination of the Old Testament history and the
commencement of the New, various forms of the doctrine of future
retribution had been introduced or developed among the Jews. But
during this period few, if any, decisive instances can be found in
which the image of penal fire is connected with the future state.
On the contrary, "darkness," "gloom," "blackness," "profound and
perpetual night," are the terms employed to characterize the abode
and fate of the wicked.

Josephus says that, in the faith of the Pharisees, "the worst
criminals were banished to the darkest part of the under world."
Philo represents the depraved and condemned as "groping in the
lowest and darkest part of the creation. The word Gehenna is
rarely found in the literature of this time, and when it is it
commonly seems to be used either simply to denote the detestable
Vale of Hinnom, or else plainly as a general symbol of calamity
and horror, as in the elder prophets.

But in some of the Targums, or Chaldee paraphrases of the Hebrew
Scriptures,  especially in the Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel, we
meet repeated applications of the word Gehenna to signify a
punishment by fire in the future state.7 This is a fact about
which there can be no question. And to the documents showing such
a usage of the word, the best scholars are pretty well agreed in
assigning a date as early as the days of Christ. The evidence
afforded by these Targums, together with the marked application of
the term by Jesus himself, and the similar general use of it
immediately after both by Christians and Jews, render it not
improbable that Gehenna was known to the contemporaries of the
Savior as the metaphorical name of hell, a region of fire, in the
under world, where the reprobate were supposed to be punished
after death. But admitting that, before Christ began to teach, the
Jews had modified their early conception of the under world as the
silent and sombre abode of all the dead in common, and had divided
it into two parts, one where the wicked suffer, called Gehenna,
one where the righteous rest, called Paradise, still, that
modification having been borrowed, as is historically evident,
from the Gentiles, or, if developed among themselves, at all
events unconnected with revelation, of course Christianity is not
involved with the truth or falsity of it, is not responsible for
it. It does not necessarily follow that Jesus gave precisely the
same meaning to the word Gehenna that his contemporaries or
successors did. He may have used it in a modified emblematic
sense, as he did many other current terms. In studying his
language, we should especially free our minds both from the
tyranny of pre Christian notions and dogmas and from the
associations and influences of modern creeds, and seek to
interpret it in the light of his own instructions and in the
spirit of his own mind.

We will now examine the cases in which Christ uses the term
Gehenna, and ask what it means.

First: "Whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou vile wretch!
shall be in danger of the fiery Gehenna." Interpret this
literally, and it teaches that whosoever calls his brother a

7 Gesenius, Hebrew Thesaurus, Ge Hinnom.


wicked apostate is in danger of being thrown into the filthy
flames in the Vale of Hinnom. But no one supposes that such was
its meaning. Jesus would say, as we understand him, "I am not come
to destroy, but to fulfil, the law; to show how at the culmination
of the old dispensation a higher and stricter one opens. I say
unto you, that, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the
Pharisees, you cannot enter the kingdom of heaven. The conditions
of acceptance under the new order are far more profound and
difficult than under the old. That said, Whosoever commits murder
shall be exposed to legal punishment from the public tribunal.
This says, An invisible inward punishment, as much to be dreaded
as the judgments of the Sanhedrim, shall be inflicted upon those
who harbor the secret passions that lead to crime; whosoever, out
of an angry heart, insults his brother, shall be exposed to
spiritual retributions typified by the horrors of yon flaming
valley. They of old time took cognizance of outward crimes by
outward penalties. I take cognizance of inward sins by inward
returns more sure and more fearful."

Second: "If thy right eye be a source of temptation to thee, pluck
it out and fling it away; for it is better for thee that one of
thy members perish than that thy whole body should be cast into
Gehenna." Give these words a literal interpretation, and they
mean, "If your eyes or your hands are the occasions of crime, if
they tempt you to commit offences which will expose you to public
execution, to the ignominy and torture heaped upon felons put to a
shameful death and then flung among the burning filth of Gehenna,
pluck them out, cut them off betimes, and save yourself from such
a frightful end; for it is better to live even thus maimed than,
having a whole body, to be put to a violent death." No one can
suppose that Jesus meant to convey such an idea as that when he
uttered these words. We must, then, attribute a deeper, an
exclusively moral, significance to the passage. It means, "If you
have some bosom sin, to deny and root out which is like tearing
out an eye or cutting off a hand, pause not, but overcome and
destroy it immediately, at whatever cost of effort and suffering;
for it is better to endure the pain of fighting and smothering a
bad passion than to submit to it and allow it to rule until it
acquires complete control over you, pervades your whole nature
with its miserable unrest, and brings you at last into a state of
woe of which Gehenna and its dreadful associations are a fit
emblem." A verse spoken, according to Mark, in immediate
connection with the present passage, confirms the figurative sense
we have attributed to it: "Whosoever shall cause one of these
little ones that believe in me to fall, it were better for him
that a millstone were hanged around his neck and he were plunged
into the midst of the sea;" that is, in literal terms, a man had
better meet a great calamity, even the loss of life, than commit a
foul crime and thus bring the woe of guilt upon his soul.

The phrase, "their worm dieth not, and their fire is not
quenched," is a part of the imagery naturally suggested by the
scene in the Valley of Hinnom, and was used to give greater
vividness and force to the moral impression of the discourse. By
an interpretation resulting either from prejudice or ignorance, it
is generally held to teach the doctrine of literal fire torments
enduring forever. It is a direct quotation from a passage in
Isaiah which signifies that, in a glorious age to come, Jehovah
will cause his worshippers to go forth from new moon to new moon
and look upon the carcasses of the wicked, and see them devoured
by fire which shall not be quenched and gnawed by worms which
shall not die, until the last relics of them are destroyed.

Third: "Fear not them that kill the body but are not able to kill
the soul; but rather fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and
body in Gehenna." A similar use of figurative language, in a still
bolder manner, is found in Isaiah. Intending to say nothing more
than that Assyria should be overthrown and crushed, the prophet
bursts out, "Under the glory of the King of Assyria Jehovah shall
kindle a burning like the burning of a fire; and it shall burn and
devour his thorns and his briers in one day, and shall consume the
glory of his forest and of his fruitful field, both soul and
body." Reading the whole passage in Matthew with a single eye, its
meaning will be apparent. We may paraphrase it thus. Jesus says to
his disciples, "You are now going forth to preach the gospel. My
religion and its destinies are intrusted to your hands. As you go
from place to place, be on your guard; for they will persecute
you, and scourge you, and deliver you up to death. But fear them
not. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master; and
if they have done so unto me, how much more shall they unto you!
Do not, through fear of hostile men, who can only kill your bodies
and are not able in any wise to injure your souls, shrink from
danger and prove recreant to the momentous duties imposed upon
you; but be inspired to proclaim the principles of the heavenly
kingdom with earnestness and courage, in the face of all perils,
by fearing God, him who is able to plunge both your souls and your
bodies in abomination and agony, him who, if you prove unfaithful
and become slothful servants or wicked traitors, will leave your
bodies to a violent death and after that your souls to bitter
shame and anguish. Fear not the temporal, physical power of your
enemies, to be turned from your work by it; but rather fear the
eternal, spiritual power of your God, to be made faithful by it."

Fourth: "Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye
compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and, when he is made,
ye make him twofold more a child of Gehenna than yourselves." That
is, "Ye make him twice as bad as yourselves in hypocrisy, bigotry,
extortion, impurity, and malice, a subject of double guilt and of
double retribution."

Finally, Jesus exclaims to the children of those who killed the
prophets, "Serpents, brood of vipers! how can ye escape the
condemnation of Gehenna?" That is to say, "Venomous creatures, bad
men! you deserve the fate of the worst criminals; you are worthy
of the polluted fires of Gehenna; your vices will surely be
followed by condign punishment: how can such depravity escape the
severest retributions?"

These five are all the distinct instances in which Jesus uses the
word Gehenna. It is plain that he always uses the word
metaphorically. We therefore conclude that Christianity, correctly
understood, never implies that eternal fire awaits sinners in the
future world, but that moral retributions, according to their
deeds, are the portion of all men here and hereafter. There is no
more reason to suppose that essential Christianity contains the
doctrine of a fiery infernal world than there is to suppose that
it really means to declare that God is a glowing mass of flame,
when it says, "Our God is a consuming fire." We must remember the
metaphorical character of much scriptural language. Wickedness is
a fire, in that it preys upon men and draws down the displeasure
of the Almighty, and consumes them.

As Isaiah writes, "Wickedness burneth as the fire, the anger of
Jehovah darkens the land, and the people shall be the food of the
fire." And James declares to proud extortioners, "The rust of your
cankered gold and silver shall eat your flesh as it were fire."

When Jesus says, "It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city" which will not
listen to the preaching of my kingdom, but drives my disciples
away, he uses a familiar figure to signify that Sodom and Gomorrah
would at such a call have repented in sackcloth and ashes. The
guilt of Chorazin and Bethsaida was, therefore, more hardened than
theirs, and should receive a severer punishment; or, making
allowance for the natural exaggeration of this kind of language,
he means, That city whose iniquities and scornful unbelief lead it
to reject my kingdom when it is proffered shall be brought to
judgment and be overwhelmed with avenging calamities. Two parallel
illustrations of this image are given us by the old prophets.
Isaiah says, "Babylon shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah." And Jeremiah complains, "The punishment of Jerusalem is
greater than the punishment of Sodom." It is certainly remarkable
that such passages should ever have been thought to teach the
doctrine of a final, universal judgment day breaking on the world
in fire.

The subject of our Lord's teachings in regard to the punishment of
the wicked is included in two classes of texts, and may be summed
up in a few words. One class of texts relate to the visible
establishment of Christianity as the true religion, the Divine
law, at the destruction of the Jewish power, and to the frightful
woes which should then fall upon the murderers of Christ, the
bitter enemies of his cause. All these things were to come upon
that generation,  were to happen before some of them then standing
there tasted death. The other class of texts and they are by far
the more numerous signify that the kingdom of Truth is now
revealed and set up; that all men are bound to accept and obey it
with reverence and love, and thus become its blessed subjects, the
happy and immortal children of God; that those who spurn its
offers, break its laws, and violate its pure spirit shall be
punished, inevitably and fearfully, by moral retributions
proportioned to the degrees of their guilt. Christ does not teach
that the good are immortal and that the bad shall be annihilated,
but that all alike, both the just and the unjust, enter the
spiritual world. He does not teach that the bad shall be eternally
miserable, cut off from all possibility of amendment, but simply
that they shall be justly judged. He makes no definitive reference
to duration, but leaves us at liberty, peering into the gloom as
best we can, to suppose, if we think it most reasonable, that the
conditions of our spiritual nature are the same in the future as
now, and therefore that the wicked may go on in evil hereafter,
or, if they will, all turn to righteousness, and the universe
finally become as one sea of holiness and as one flood of praise.

Another portion of Christ's doctrine of the future life hinges on
the phrase "the kingdom of heaven." Much is implied in this term
and its accompaniments, and may be drawn out by answering the
questions, What is heaven? Who are citizens of, and who are aliens
from, the kingdom of God? Let us first examine the subordinate
meanings and shades of meaning with which the Savior sometimes
uses these phrases.

"Ye shall see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of Man." No confirmation of the literal
sense of this that is afforded by any incident found in the
Gospels. There is every reason for supposing that he meant by it,
"There shall be open manifestations of supernatural power and
favor bestowed upon me by God, evident signs of direct
communications between us." His Divine works and instructions
justified the statement. The word "heaven" as here used, then,
does not mean any particular place, but means the approving
presence of God. The instincts and natural language of man prompt
us to consider objects of reverence as above us. We kneel below
them. The splendor, mystery, infinity, of the starry regions help
on the delusion. But surely no one possessing clear spiritual
perceptions will think the literal facts in the case must
correspond to this, that God must dwell in a place overhead called
heaven. He is an Omnipresence.

"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you for my
sake: rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven." This passage
probably means, "In the midst of tribulation be exceeding glad;
because you shall be abundantly rewarded in a future state for all
your present sufferings in my cause." In that case, heaven
signifies the spiritual world, and does not involve reference to
any precisely located spot. Or it may mean, "Be not disheartened
by insults and persecutions met in the cause of God; for you shall
be greatly blessed in your inward life: the approval of
conscience, the immortal love and pity of God, shall be yours: the
more you are hated and abused by men unjustly, the closer and
sweeter shall be your communion with God." In that case, heaven
signifies fellowship with the Father, and is independent of any
particular time or place.

"Our Father, who art in heaven." Jesus was not the author of this
sentence. It was a part of the Rabbinical synagogue service, and
was based upon the Hebrew conception of God as having his abode in
an especial sense over the firmament. The Savior uses it as the
language of accommodation, as is evident from his conversation
with the woman of Samaria; for he told her that no exclusive spot
was an acceptable place of worship, since "God is a Spirit; and
they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth." No
one who comprehends the meaning of the words can suppose that the
Infinite Spirit occupies a confined local habitation, and that men
must literally journey there to be with him after death. Wherever
they may be now, they are away from him or with him, according to
their characters. After death they are more banished from him or
more immediately with him, instantly, wherever they are, according
to the spirit they are of.

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, but in heaven." In
other words, Be not absorbed in efforts to accumulate hoards of
gold and silver, and to get houses and lands, which will soon pass
away; but rather labor to acquire heavenly treasures, wisdom,
love, purity, and faith, which will never pass from your
possession nor cease from your enjoyment.

"I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place
for you, I will come again and receive you unto myself, that where
I am there ye may be also." To understand this text, we must
carefully study the whole four chapters of the connection in which
it stands. They abound in bold symbols. An instance of this is
seen where Jesus, having washed his disciples' feet, says to them,
"Ye are clean, but not all. For he knew who should betray him.
Therefore said he, Ye are not all clean." The actual meaning of
the passage before us may be illustrated by a short paraphrase of
it with the context: "Let not your hearts be troubled by the
thought that I must die and be removed from you; for there are
other states of being besides this earthly life. When they crucify
me, as I have said to you before, I shall not perish, but shall
pass into a higher state of existence with my Father. Whither I go
ye know, and the way ye know: my Father is the end, and the truths
that I have declared point out the way. If ye loved me, ye would
rejoice because I say that I go to the Father. And if I go to him,
if, when they have put me to death, I pass into an unseen state of
blessedness and glory (as I prophesy unto you that I shall,) I
will reveal myself unto you again, and tell you. I go before you
as a pioneer, and will surely come back and confirm, with
irresistible evidence, the reality of what I have already told
you. Therefore, trouble not your hearts, but be of good cheer."

"There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner
that repenteth." The sentiment of this Divine declaration simply
implies that all good beings sympathize with every triumph of
goodness; that the living chain of mutual interest runs through
the spiritual universe, making one family of those on earth and
those in the invisible state.

"Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father." "Cling not
to me, detain me not, for I have not yet left the world forever,
to be in the spiritual state with my Father; and ere I do this I
must seek my disciples, to convince them of my resurrection and to
give them my parting commission and blessing." He used the common
language, for it was the only language which she whom he addressed
would understand; and although, literally interpreted, it conveyed
the idea of a local heaven on high, yet at the same time it
conveyed, and in the only way intelligible to her, all the truth
that was important, namely, that when he disappeared he would
still be living, and be, furthermore, with God.

When Christ finally went from his disciples, he seemed to them to
rise and vanish towards the clouds. This would confirm their
previous material conceptions, and the old forms of speech would
be handed down, strengthened by these phenomena, misunderstood in
themselves and exaggerated in their importance. We generally speak
now of God's "throne," of "heaven," as situated far away in the
blue ether; we point upward to the world of bliss, and say, There
the celestial hosannas roll; there the happy ones, the unforgotten
ones of our love, wait to welcome us. These forms of speech are
entirely natural; they are harmless; they aid in giving
definiteness to our thoughts and feelings, and it is well to
continue their use; it would be difficult to express our thoughts
without them. However, we must understand that they are not
strictly and exclusively true. God is everywhere; and wherever he
is there is heaven to the spirits that are like him and,
consequently, see him and enjoy his ineffable blessedness.

Jesus sometimes uses the phrase "kingdom of heaven" as synonymous
with the Divine will, the spiritual principles or laws which he
was inspired to proclaim. Many of his parables were spoken to
illustrate the diffusive power and the incomparable value of the
truth he taught, as when he said, "The kingdom of heaven is like a
grain of mustard seed, which becomes a great tree;" it is "like
unto leaven, which a woman put in two measures of meal until the
whole was leavened;" it is "like a treasure hid in a field," or
"like a goodly pearl of great price, which, a man finding, he goes
and sells all that he has and buys it." In these examples "the
kingdom of heaven" is plainly a personification of the revealed
will of God, the true law of salvation and eternal life. In answer
to the question why he spoke so many things to the people in
parables, Jesus said to his disciples, "Because it is given unto
you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; but unto them
it is not given;" that is, You are prepared to understand the
hitherto concealed truths of God's government, if set forth
plainly; but they are not prepared.

Here as also in the parables of the vineyard let out to
husbandmen, and of the man who sowed good seed in his field, and
in a few other cases "the kingdom of heaven" means God's
government, his mode of dealing with men, his method of
establishing his truths in the hearts of men. "The kingdom of
heaven" sometimes signifies personal purity and peace, freedom
from sensual solicitations. "There be eunuchs which have made
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it."

Christ frequently uses the term "kingdom of heaven" in a somewhat
restricted, traditional sense, based in form but not in spirit
upon the Jewish expectations of the Messiah's kingdom. "Be ye sure
of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you;" "I must
preach the kingdom of God to other cities also;" "Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand." Christ was charged to bear to men a
new revelation from God of his government and laws, that he might
reign over them as a monarch over conscious and loyal subjects.
"Many shall come from the East and the West, and shall sit down
with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven; but the
children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness."
The sense of these texts is as follows. "God is now offering unto
you, through me, a spiritual dispensation, a new kingdom; but,
unless you faithfully heed it and fulfil its conditions, you shall
be rejected from it and lose the Divine favor. Although, by your
position as the chosen people, and in the line of revelation, you
are its natural heirs, yet, unless you rule your spirits and lives
by its commands, you shall see the despised Gentiles enjoying all
the privileges your faith allows to the revered patriarchs of your
nation, while yourselves are shut out from them and overwhelmed
with shame and anguish. Your pride of descent, haughtiness of
spirit, and reliance upon dead rites unfit you for the true
kingdom of God, the inward reign of humility and righteousness;
and the very publicans and harlots, repenting and humbling
themselves, shall go into it before you."

To be welcomed under this Messianic dispensation, to become a
citizen of this spiritual kingdom of God, the Savior declares that
there are certain indispensable conditions. A man must repent and
forsake his sins. This was the burden of John's preaching, that
the candidate for the kingdom of heaven must first be baptized
with water unto repentance, as a sign that he abjures and is
cleansed from all his old errors and iniquities. Then he must be
baptized with the Holy Spirit and with fire, that is, must learn
the positive principles of the coming kingdom, and apply them to
his own character, to purge away every corrupt thing. He must be
born again, born of water and of the Spirit: in other words, he
must be brought out from his impurity and wickedness into a new
and Divine life of holiness, awakened to a conscious experience of
purity, truth, and love, the great prime elements in the reign of
God. He must be guileless and lowly. "Whosoever will not receive
the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter
therein."

The kingdom of heaven, the better dispensation which Christ came
to establish, is the humility of contrite hearts, the innocence of
little children, the purity of undefiled consciences, the fruit of
good works, the truth of universal laws, the love of God, and the
conscious experience of an indestructible, blessed being. Those
who enter into these qualities in faith, in feeling, and in action
are full citizens of that eternal kingdom; all others are aliens
from it.

Heaven, then, according to Christ's use of the word, is not
distinctively a world situated somewhere in immensity, but a
purely spiritual experience, having nothing to do with any special
time or place. It is a state of the soul, or a state of society,
under the rule of truth, governed by God's will, either in this
life or in a future. He said to the young ruler who had walked
faithfully in the law, and whose good traits drew forth his love,
"Thou art not far from the kingdom of God." It is evident that
this does not mean a bounded place of abode, but a true state of
character, a virtuous mode of life "My kingdom is not of this
world." "Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice." That
is, "My kingdom is the realm of truth, the dominion of God's will,
and all true men are my subjects." Evidently this is not a
material but a moral reign and therefore unlimited by seasons or
places. Wherever purity, truth, love, obedience, prevail, there is
God, and that is heaven. It is not necessary to depart into some
distant sphere to meet the Infinite Holy One and dwell with him.
He is on the very dust we tread, he is the very centre of our
souls and breath of our lives, if we are only in a state that is
fitted to recognise and enjoy him. "He that hath sent me is with
me: the Father hath not left me alone, for I always do those
things which please him." It is a fair inference from such
statements as this that to do with conscious adoration and love
those things that please God is to be with him, without regard to
time or place; and that is heaven. "I speak that which I have seen
with my Father," God, "and ye do that which ye have seen with your
father, the devil." No one will suppose that Jesus meant to tell
the wicked men whom he was addressing that they committed their
iniquities in consequence of lessons learned in a previous state
of existence with an arch fiend, the parent of all evil. His
meaning, then, was, I bring forth in words and deeds the things
which I have learned in my secret soul from inspired communion
with infinite goodness and perfection; you bring forth the things
which you have learned from communion with the source of sin and
woe, that is, foul propensities, cruel passions, and evil
thoughts.

"I come forth from the Father and am come into the world; again I
leave the world and go unto the Father." "I go unto Him that sent
me." Since it is declared that God is an Omnipresent Spirit, and
that those who obey and love him see him and are with him
everywhere, these striking words must bear one of the two
following interpretations. First, they may imply in general that
man is created and sent into this state of being by the Father,
and that after the termination of the present life the soul is
admitted to a closer union with the Parent Spirit. This gives a
natural meaning to the language which represents dying as going to
the Father. Not that it is necessary to travel to reach God, but
that the spiritual verity is most adequately expressed under such
a metaphor. But, secondly, and more probably, the phraseology
under consideration may be meant as an assertion of the Divine
origin and authority of the special mission of Christ. "Neither
came I of myself, but He sent me;" "The words that I speak unto
you I speak not of myself;" "As the Father hath taught me, I speak
these things." These passages do not necessarily teach the pre
existence of Christ and his descent from heaven in the flesh. That
is a carnal interpretation which does great violence to the
genuine nature of the claims put forth by our Savior. They may
merely declare the supernatural commission of the Son of God, his
direct inspiration and authority. He did not voluntarily assume
his great work, but was Divinely ordered on that service. Compare
the following text: "The baptism of John, whence was it, from
Heaven, or of men?" That is to say, was it of human or of Divine
origin and authority? So when it is said that the Son of Man
descended from heaven, or was sent by the Father, the meaning in
Christ's mind probably was that he was raised up, did his works,
spoke his words, by the inspiration and with the sanction of God.
The accuracy of this interpretation is seen by the following
citation from the Savior's own words, when he is speaking in his
prayer at the last supper of sending his disciples out to preach
the gospel: "As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I
also sent them into the world." The reference, evidently, is to a
Divine choice and sealing, not to a descent upon the earth from
another sphere.

That the author of the Fourth Gospel believed that Christ
descended from heaven literally we have not the shadow of a doubt.
He repeatedly speaks of him as the great super angelic Logos, the
first born Son and perfect image of God, the instrumental cause of
the creation. His mind was filled with the same views, the same
lofty Logos theory that is so abundantly set forth in the writings
of Philo Judaus. He reports and describes the Savior in conformity
with such a theological postulate. Possessed with the foregone
conclusion that Jesus was the Divine Logos, descended from the
celestial abode, and born into the world as a man, in endeavoring
to write out from memory, years after they were uttered, the
Savior's words, it is probable that he unconsciously
misapprehended and tinged them according to his theory. The
Delphic apothegm, "Know thyself," was said to have descended from
heaven:

"E coelo descendit [non ASCII characters]."

By a familiar Jewish idiom, "to ascend into heaven" meant to learn
the will of God.8 And whatever bore the direct sancion of God was
said to descend from heaven. When in these figurative terms Jesus
asserted his Divine commission, it seems that some understood him
literally, and concluded perhaps in consequence of his miracles,
joined with their own speculations that he was the Logos
incarnated. That such a conclusion was an unwarranted inference
from metaphorical language and from a foregone pagan dogma appears
from his own explanatory and justifying words spoken to the Jews.
For when they accused him of making himself God, he replies, "If
in your law they are called gods to whom the word of God came,
charge ye him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the
world with blasphemy, because he says he is the Son of God?"
Christ's language in the Fourth Gospel

8 Schoettgen, in John iii. 13.


may be fairly explained without implying his actual pre existence
or superhuman nature. But it does not seem to us that John's
possibly can be. His miracles, according to the common idea of
them, did not prove him to be the coequal fac simile, but merely
proved him to be the delegated envoy, of God.

We may sum up the consideration of this point in a few words.
Christ did not essentially mean by the term "heaven" the world of
light and glory located by the Hebrews, and by some other nations,
just above the visible firmament. His meaning, when he spoke of
the kingdom of God or heaven, was always, in some form, either the
reign of justice, purity, and love, or the invisible world of
spirits. If that world, heaven, be in fact, and were in his
conception, a sphere located in space, he never alluded to its
position, but left it perfectly in the dark, keeping his
instructions scrupulously free from any such commitment. He said,
"I go to Him that sent me;" "I will come again and receive you
unto myself, that where I am there ye may be also." The references
to locality are vague and mysterious. The nature of his words, and
their scantiness, are as if he had said, We shall live hereafter;
we shall be with the Father; we shall be together. All the rest is
mystery, even to me: it is not important to be known, and the
Father hath concealed it. Such, almost, are his very words. "A
little while, and ye shall not see me; again, a little while, and
ye shall see me, because I go to the Father." "Father, I will that
they also whom thou hast given me be with me where I am." Whether
heaven be technically a material abode or a spiritual state it is
of little importance to us to know; and the teachings of Jesus
seem to have nothing to do with it. The important things for us to
know are that there is a heaven, and how we may prepare for it;
and on these points the revelation is explicit. To suppose the
Savior ignorant of some things is not inconsistent with his
endowments; for he himself avowed his ignorance, saying, "Of that
day knoweth no man; no, not even the angels which are in heaven,
neither the Son, but the Father." And it adds an awful solemnity,
an indescribably exciting interest, to his departure from the
world, to conceive him hovering on the verge of the same mystery
which has enveloped every passing mortal,  hovering there with
chastened wonder and curiosity, inspired with an absolute trust
that in that fathomless obscurity the Father would be with him,
and would unveil new realms of life, and would enable him to come
back and assure his disciples. He certainly did not reveal the
details of the future state: whether he was acquainted with them
himself or not we cannot tell.

We next advance to the most important portion of the words of
Christ regarding the life and destiny of the soul, those parts of
his doctrine which are most of a personal, experimental character,
sounding the fountains of consciousness, piercing to the dividing
asunder of our being. It is often said that Jesus everywhere takes
for granted the fact of immortality, that it underlies and
permeates all he does and says. We should know at once that such a
being must be immortal; such a life could never be lived by an
ephemeral creature; of all possible proofs of immortality he is
himself the sublimest. This is true, but not the whole truth. The
resistless assurance, the Divine inspiration, the sublime repose,
with which he enunciates the various thoughts connected with the
theme of endless existence, are indeed marvellous. But he not only
authoritatively assumes the truth of a future life: he speaks
directly of it in many ways, often returns to it, continually
hovers about it, reasons for it, exhorts upon it, makes most of
his instructions hinge upon it, shows that it is a favorite
subject of his communion. We may put the justice of these
statements in a clear light by bringing together and explaining
some of his scattered utterances.

His express language teaches that man in this world is a twofold
being, leading a twofold life, physical and spiritual, the one
temporal, the other eternal, the one apt unduly to absorb his
affections, the other really deserving his profoundest care. This
separation of the body and the soul, and survival of the latter,
is brought to light in various striking forms and with various
piercing applications. In view of the dangers that beset his
disciples on their mission, he exhorted and warned them thus:
"Fear not them which have power to kill the body and afterwards
have no more that they can do; but rather fear Him who can kill
both soul and body;" "Whosoever will save his life shall lose it;
and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it;" that
is, whosoever, for the sake of saving the life of his body,
shrinks from the duties of this dangerous time, shall lose the
highest welfare of the soul; but whosoever loveth his lower life
in the body less than he loves the virtues of a consecrated spirit
shall win the true blessedness of his soul. Both of these passages
show that the soul has a life and interest separate from the
material tabernacle. With what pathos and convincing power was the
same faith expressed in his ejaculation from the cross, "Father,
into thy hands I commend my spirit!" an expression of trust which,
under such circumstances of desertion, horror, and agony, could
only have been prompted by that inspiration of God which he always
claimed to have.

Christ once reasoned with the Sadducees "as touching the dead,
that they rise;" in other words, that the souls of men upon the
decease of the body pass into another and an unending state of
existence: "Neither can they die any more; for they are equal with
the angels, and are children of God, being children of the
resurrection." His argument was, that "God is the God of the
living, not of the dead;" that is, the spiritual nature of man
involves such a relationship with God as pledges his attributes to
its perpetuity. The thought which supports this reasoning
penetrates far into the soul and grasps the moral relations
between man and God. It is most interesting viewed as the
unqualified affirmation by Jesus of the doctrine of a future life
which shall be deathless.

But the Savior usually stood in a more imposing attitude and spoke
in a more commanding tone than are indicated in the foregoing
sentences. The prevailing stand point from which he spoke was that
of an oracle giving responses from the inner shrine of the
Divinity. The words and sentiments he uttered were not his, but
the Father's; and he uttered them in the clear tones of knowledge
and authority, not in the whispering accents of speculation or
surmise. How these entrancing tidings came to him he knew not:
they were no creations of his; they rose spontaneously within him,
bearing the miraculous sign and seal of God, a recommendation he
could no more question or resist than he could deny his own
existence. He was set apart as a messenger to men. The tide of
inspiration welled up till it filled every nerve and crevice of
his being with conscious life and with an overmastering
recognition of its living relations with the Omnipresent and
Everlasting Life. Straightway he knew that the Father was in
him and he in the Father, and that he was commissioned to
reveal the mind of the Father to the world.

He knew, by the direct knowledge of inspiration and consciousness,
that he should live forever. Before his keen, full, spiritual
vitality the thought of death fled away, the thought of
annihilation could not come. So far removed was his soul from the
perception of interior sleep and decay, so broad and powerful was
his consciousness of indestructible life, that he saw quite
through the crumbling husks of time and sense to the crystal sea
of spirit and thought. So absorbing was his sense of eternal life
in himself that he even constructed an argument from his personal
feeling to prove the immortality of others, saying to his
disciples, "Because I live, ye shall live also;" "Ye believe in
God, believe also in me." Ye believe what God declares, for he
cannot be mistaken; believe what I declare for his inspiration
makes me infallible when I say there are many spheres of life for
us when this is ended.

It was from the fulness of this experience that Jesus addressed
his hearers. He spoke not so much as one who had faith that
immortal life would hereafter be revealed and certified, but
rather as one already in the insight and possession of it, as one
whose foot already trod the eternal floor and whose vision pierced
the immense horizon. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
heareth my word and believeth on Him that sent me hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death unto life." Being himself brought to this immovable
assurance of immortal life by the special inspiration of God, it
was his aim to bring others to the same blessed knowledge. His
efforts to effect this form a most constant feature in his
teachings. His own definition of his mission was, "I am come that
they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly." We see by the persistent drift of his words that he
strove to lead others to the same spiritual point he stood at,
that they might see the same prospect he saw, feel the same
certitude he felt, enjoy the same communion with God and sense of
immortality he enjoyed. "As the Father raiseth up the dead and
quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom he will;" "For as
the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given the Son to have
life in himself;" "Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may
glorify thee; as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he
might give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him: and
this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." In other words, the
mission of Christ was to awaken in men the experience of immortal
life; and that would be produced by imparting to them reproducing
in them the experience of his own soul. Let us notice what steps
he took to secure this end.

He begins by demanding the unreserved credence of men to what he
says, claiming to say it with express authority from God, and
giving miraculous credentials. "Whatsoever I speak, therefore, as
the Father said to me, so I speak." This claim to inspired
knowledge he advances so emphatically that it cannot be
overlooked. He then announces, as an unquestionable truth, the
supreme claim of man's spiritual interests upon his attention and
labor, alike from their inherent superiority and their enduring
subsistence. "For what shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul?" "Thou fool, this night thy soul
shall be required of thee: then whose shall be those things thou
hast gathered?" "Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for
that meat which endureth unto everlasting life."

The inspiration which dictated these instructions evidently
based them upon the profoundest spiritual philosophy,  upon the
truth that man lives at once in a sphere of material objects which
is comparatively unimportant because he will soon leave it, and in
a sphere of moral realities which is all important because he will
live in it forever. "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." The body,
existing in the sphere of material relations, is supported by
material bread; but the soul, existing in the sphere of spiritual
relations, is supported by truth, the nourishing breath of God's
love. We are in the eternal world, then, at present. Its laws and
influences penetrate and rule us; its ethereal tides lave and bear
us on; our experience and destiny in it are decided every moment
by our characters. If we are pure in heart, have vital faith and
force, we shall see God and have new revelations made to us. Such
are among the fundamental principles of Christianity.

There is another class of texts, based upon a highly figurative
style of speech, striking Oriental idioms, the explanation of
which will cast further light upon the branch of the subject
immediately before us. "As the living Father hath sent me, and I
live by the Father, so he that eateth me, even he shall live by
me;" that is, As the blessed Father hath inspired me with the
knowledge of him, and I am blessed with the consciousness of his
immortal love, so he that believes and assimilates these truths as
I proclaim them, he shall experience the same blessedness through
my instruction. The words. "I am the bread of life" are explained
by the words "I am the truth." The declaration "Whoso eateth my
flesh hath eternal life" is illustrated by the declaration
"Whosoever heareth my word and believeth on Him that sent me hath
everlasting life." There is no difficulty in understanding what
Jesus meant when he said, "I have meat to eat ye know not of: my
meat is to do the will of Him that sent me." Why should we not
with the same ease, upon the same principles, interpret his
kindred expression, "This is the bread which cometh down from
heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die"? The idea to be
conveyed by all this phraseology is, that whosoever understands,
accepts, assimilates, and brings out in earnest experience, the
truths Christ taught, would realize the life of Christ, feel the
same assurance of Divine favor and eternal blessedness. "He that
eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood dwelleth in me and I in
him;" that is, we have the same character, are fed by the same
nutriment, rest in the same experience. Fortunately, we are not
left to guess at the accuracy of this exegesis: it is demonstrated
from the lips of the Master himself. When he knew that the
disciples murmured at what he had said about eating his flesh, and
called it a hard saying, he said to them, "It is the spirit that
quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I speak
unto you, they are spirit and they are life. But there are some of
you that believe not." Any man who heartily believed what Christ
said that he was Divinely authorized to declare, and did declare,
the pervading goodness of the Father and the immortal blessedness
of the souls of his children, by the very terms was delivered from
the bondage of fear and commenced the consciousness of eternal
life. Of course, we are not to suppose that faith in Christ
obtains immortality itself for the believer: it only rectifies and
lights up the conditions of it, and awakens the consciousness of
it. "I am the resurrection and the life: whosoever liveth and
believeth in me shall never die." We suppose this means, he shall
know that he is never to perish: it cannot refer to physical
dissolution, for the believer dies equally with the unbeliever; it
cannot refer to immortal existence in itself, for the unbeliever
is as immortal as the believer: it must refer to the blessed
nature of that immortality and to the personal assurance of it,
because these Christ does impart to the disciple, while the
unregenerate unbeliever in his doctrine, of course, has them not.
Coming from God to reveal his infinite love, exemplifying the
Divine elements of an immortal nature in his whole career, coming
back from the grave to show its sceptre broken and to point the
way to heaven, well may Christ proclaim, "Whosoever believes in
me" knows he "shall never perish."

Among the Savior's parables is an impressive one, which we cannot
help thinking  perhaps fancifully was intended to illustrate the
dealings of Providence in ordering the earthly destiny of
humanity. "So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed
into the ground and the seed should grow up; but when the fruit is
ripe he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come." Men
are seed sown in this world to ripen and be harvested in another.
The figure, taken on the scale of the human race and the whole
earth, is sublime. Whether such an image were originally suggested
by the parable or not, the conception is consistent with Christian
doctrine. The pious Sterling prays,

"Give thou the life which we require, That, rooted fast in thee,
From thee to thee we may aspire, And earth thy garden be."

The symbol shockingly perverted from its original beautiful
meaning by the mistaken belief that we sleep in our graves until a
distant resurrection day is often applied to burial grounds. Let
its appropriate significance be restored. Life is the field, death
the reaper, another sphere of being the immediate garner. An
enlightened Christian, instead of entitling a graveyard the garden
of the dead, and looking for its long buried forms to spring from
its cold embrace, will hear the angel saying again, "They are not
here: they are risen." The line which written on Klopstock's tomb
is a melancholy error, engraved on his cradle would have been an
inspiring truth:  "Seed sown by God to ripen for the harvest."

Several fragmentary speeches, which we have not yet noticed, of
the most tremendous and even exhaustive import, are reported as
having fallen from the lips of Christ at different times. These
sentences, rapid and incomplete as they are in the form in which
they have reached us, do yet give us glimpses of the most
momentous character into the profoundest thoughts of his mind.
They are sufficient to enable us to generalize their fundamental
principles, and construct the outlines, if we may so speak, of his
theology, his inspired conception of God, the universe, and man,
and the resulting duties and destiny of man. We will briefly bring
together and interpret these passages, and deduce the system which
they seem to presuppose and rest upon.

Jesus told the woman of Samaria that God was to be worshipped
acceptably neither in that mountain nor at Jerusalem exclusively,
but anywhere, if it were worthily done. "God is a Spirit; and they
that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth." This
passage, with others, teaches the spirituality and omnipresence of
God. Christ conceived of God as an infinite Spirit. Again,
comforting his friends in view of his approaching departure, he
said, "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so I
would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you." Here he
plainly figures the universe as a house containing many
apartments, all pervaded and ruled by the Father's presence. He
was about taking leave of this earth to proceed to another part of
the creation, and he promised to come back to his followers and
assure them there was another abode prepared for them. Christ
conceived of the universe, with its innumerable divisions, as the
house of God. Furthermore, he regarded truth or the essential laws
and right tendencies of things and the will of God as identical.
He said he came into the world to do the will of Him that sent
him; that is, as he at another time expressed it, he came into the
world to bear witness unto the truth. Thus he prayed, "Father,
sanctify them through the truth: thy word is truth." Christ
conceived of pure truth as the will of God. Finally, he taught
that all who obey the truth, or do the will of God, thereby
constitute one family of brethren, one family of the accepted
children of God, in all worlds forever. "He that doeth the truth
cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they
are wrought in God;" "Whosoever shall do the will of God, the same
is my brother, and my sister, and mother;" "Ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. Whosoever committeth sin
is the servant of sin. And the servant abideth not in the house
forever; but the son abideth forever. If the Son, therefore, make
you free, ye shall be free indeed." That is to say, truth gives a
good man the freedom of the universe, makes him know himself an
heir, immortally and everywhere at home; sin gives the wicked man
over to bondage, makes him feel afraid of being an outcast, loads
him with hardships as a servant. Whoever will believe the
revelations of Christ, and assimilate his experience, shall lose
the wretched burdens of unbelief and fear and be no longer a
servant, but be made free indeed, being adopted as a son.

The whole conception, then, is this: The universe is one vast
house, comprising many subordinate mansions. All the moral beings
that dwell in it compose one immortal family. God is the universal
Father. His will the truth is the law of the household. Whoever
obeys it is a worthy son and has the Father's approbation; whoever
disobeys it is alienated and degraded into the condition of a
servant. We may roam from room to room, but can never get lost
outside the walls beyond the reach of the Paternal arms. Death is
variety of scenery and progress of life:

"We bow our heads At going out, we think, and enter straight
Another golden chamber of the King's, Larger than this we leave,
and lovelier."

Who can comprehend the idea, in its overwhelming magnificence and
in its touching beauty, its sweeping amplitude embracing all
mysteries, its delicate fitness meeting all wants, without being
impressed and stirred by it, even to the regeneration of his soul?
If there is any thing calculated to make man feel and live like a
child of God, it would surely seem to be this conception. Its
unrivalled simplicity and verisimilitude compel the assent of the
mind to its reality. It is the most adequate and sublime view of
things that ever entered the reason of man. It is worthy the
inspiration of God, worthy the preaching of the Son of God. All
the artificial and arbitrary schemes of fanciful theologians are
as ridiculous and impertinent before it as the offensive flaring
of torches in the face of one who sees the steady and solemn
splendors of the sun. To live in the harmony of the truth of
things, in the conscious love of God and enjoyment of immortality,
blessed children, everywhere at home in the hospitable mansions of
the everlasting Father, this is the experience to which Christ
calls his followers; and any eschatology inconsistent with such a
conception is not his.

There are two general methods of interpretation respectively
applied to the words of Christ, the literal, or mechanical, and
the spiritual, or vital. The former leads to a belief in his
second visible advent with an army of angels from heaven, a bodily
resurrection of the dead, a universal judgment, the burning up of
the world, eternal tortures of the wicked in an abyss of infernal
fire, a heaven located on the arch of the Hebrew firmament. The
latter gives us a group of the profoundest moral truths clustered
about the illuminating and emphasizing mission of Christ, sealed
with Divine sanctions, truths of universal obligation and of all
redeeming power. The former method is still adopted by the great
body of Christendom, who are landed by it in a system of doctrines
well nigh identical with those of the Pharisees, against which
Christ so emphatically warned his followers, a system of
traditional dogmas not having the slightest support in philosophy,
nor the least contact with the realities of experience, nor the
faintest color of inherent or historical probability. In this age
they are absolutely incredible to unhampered and studious minds.
On the other hand, the latter method is pursued by the growing
body of rational Christians, and it guides them to a consistent
array of indestructible moral truths, simple, fundamental, and
exhaustive, an array of spiritual principles commanding universal
and implicit homage, robed in their own brightness, accredited by
their own fitness, armed with the loveliness and terror of their
own rewarding and avenging divinity, flashing in mutual lights and
sounding in consonant echoes alike from the law of nature and from
the soul of man, as the Son of God, with miraculous voice, speaks
between.

