CHAPTER VI.

RECOGNITION OF FRIENDS IN A FUTURE LIFE.

OF all the sorrows incident to human life, none is so penetrating
to gentle hearts as that which fills them with aching regrets,
and, for a time, writes hollowness and vanity on their dearest
treasures, when death robs them of those they love. And so, of all
the questions that haunt the soul, wringing its faculties for a
solution, beseeching the oracles of the universe for a response,
none can have a more intense interest than gathers about the
irrepressible inquiry, "Shall we ever meet again, and know, the
friends we have lost? somewhere in the ample creation and in the
boundless ages, join, with the old familiar love, our long parted,
fondly cherished, never forgotten dead?" The grief of bereavement
and the desire of reunion are experienced in an endless diversity
of degrees by different persons, according as they are careless,
hard, and sense bound, or thoughtful, sympathizing, and
imaginative; undisciplined by the mysteries and afflictions of our
mortal destiny, or profoundly tried by the disappointments and
prophecies of time and fate; and as they are shadowed by the gloom
of despair, or cheered by the radiance of belief. But to all who
feel, even the least, the uncertain but deep monitions of the
silent pall, the sad procession, and the burial mound, the
impressive problem must occur, with frequency and power, Does the
grave sunder us and the objects of our affection forever? or,
across that dark gulf, shall we be united again in purer bonds?
Outside of the atheistic dissolution and the pantheistic
absorption, it is supposable that, surviving the blow of death,
our spirits may return to God and run their endless course in
divine solitude. On the other hand, it is supposable that,
possessed with all the memories of this probationary state,
blessed by the companionship of our earthly friends, we may aspire
together along the interminable gradations of the world to come.
If the former supposition be true, and the farewell of the dying
is the announcement of an irrevocable separation, then the tears
we shed over the shrouded clay, once so prized, should be
distillations from Lethe's flood, to make us forget all. But if
the latter be true, then our deadly seeming losses are as the
partings of travellers at night to meet in the morning; and, as
friend after friend retires, we should sigh to each departing
spirit a kind adieu till we meet again, and let pleasing memories
of them linger to mingle in the sacred day dreams of remaining
life.

Evidently it is of much importance to a man which of these views
he shall take; for each exerts a distinctive influence in regard
to his peace of mind, his moral strength, and his religious
character. On one who believes that hereafter, beyond all the
partings in this land of tombs, he shall never meet the dear
companions who now bless his lot, the death of friends must fall,
if he be a person of strong sensibilities, as a staggering blow,
awakening an agony of sorrow, taking from the sky and the earth a
glory nothing can ever replace, and leaving in his heart a
wretched void nothing can ever fill. Henceforth he will be
deprived mostly for all felt connection between them is hopelessly
sundered of the good influences they exerted on him when present:
he must try, by all expedients, to forget them; think no more of
their virtues, their welcome voices and kindly deeds; wipe from
the tablets of his soul all fond records of their united happy
days; look not to the future, let the past be as though it had
never been, and absorb his thoughts and feelings in the turmoil of
the present. This is his only course; and even then, if true to
the holiest instincts of his soul, he will find the fatal
separation has lessened his being and impoverished his life,

"For this losing is true dying; This is lordly man's down lying,
This his slow but sure reclining, Star by star his world
resigning."

But to him who earnestly expects soon to be restored under fairer
auspices and in a deathless world to those from whom he parted as
he laid their crumbling bodies in the earth, the death of friends
will come as a message from the Great Father, a message solemn yet
kind, laden indeed with natural sadness yet brightened by sure
promise and followed by heavenly compensations. If his tears flow,
they flow not in scalding bitterness from the Marah fountain of
despair, but in chastened joy from the smitten rock of faith. So
far from endeavoring to forget the departed, he will cling to
their memories with redoubled tenderness, as a sacred trust and a
redeeming power. They will be more precious to him than ever,
stronger to purify and animate. Their saintly examples will
attract him as never before, and their celestial voices plead from
on high to win him to virtue and to heaven. The constant thought
of seeing them once more, and wafting in their arms through the
enchanted spaces of Paradise, will wield a sanctifying force over
his spirit. They will make the invisible sphere a peopled reality
to him, and draw him to God by the diffused bonds of a spiritual
acquaintance and an eternal love.

Since the result in which a man rests on this subject, believing
or disbelieving that he shall recognise his beloved ones the other
side of the grave, exerts a deep influence on him, in one case
disheartening, in the other uplifting, it is incumbent on us to
investigate the subject, try to get at the truth, clear it up, and
appreciate it as well as we can. It is a theme to interest us all.
Who has not endeared relatives, choice friends, freshly or long
ago removed from this earth into the unknown clime? In a little
while, as the ravaging reaper sweeps on his way, who will not have
still more there, or be there himself? Whether old acquaintance
shall be all forgot or be well remembered there, is an inquiry
which must profoundly interest all who have hearts to love their
companions, and minds to perceive the creeping shadows of mystery
drawing over us as we approach the sure destiny of age and the dim
confines of the world. It is a theme, far removed from noisy
strifes and vain shows, penetrating that mysterious essence of
affection and thought which we are. The thing of first importance
is not the conclusion we reach, but the spirit in which we seek
and hold it. The Christian says to his friend, "Our souls will be
united in yonder heaven." Danton, with a horrible travesty, said
to his comrades on the scaffold, "Our heads will meet in that
sack."

Before engaging directly in the discussion, it will be interesting
to notice, for an instant, the verdict which history, in the
spontaneous suppositions and rude speculations of ancient peoples,
pronounces on this subject.1 Among their various opinions about
the state after death, it is a prominent circumstance that they
generally agree in conceiving it as a social state in which
personal likenesses and memories are retained, fellow countrymen
are grouped together, and friends united. This is minutely true of
those nations with the details of whose faith we are acquainted,
and is implied in the general belief of all others, except those
who expected the individual spirit to be absorbed in the soul of
the universe. Homer shows Ulysses and Virgil in like manner shows
Aneas upon his entrance into the other world mutually recognising
his old comrades and recognised by them. The two heroes whose
inseparable friendship on earth was proverbial are still together
in Elysium:

"Then, side by side, along the dreary coast Advanced Achilles' and
Patroclus' ghost, A friendly pair."

In this representation that there was a full recognition of
acquaintances, all the accounts of the other world given in Greek
and Roman literature harmonize. The same is true of the accounts
contained in the literature of the ancient Hebrews. In the Book of
Genesis, when Jacob hears of the death of his favorite child, he
exclaims, "I shall go down to my son Joseph in the under world,
mourning." When the witch of Endor raised the ghost of Samuel,
Saul knew him by the description she gave of him as he rose. The
monarch shades in the under world are pictured by Isaiah as
recognising the shade of the king of Babylon and rising from their
sombre thrones to greet him with mockery. Ezekiel shows us each
people of the heathen nations in the under world in a company by
themselves. When David's child died, the king sorrowfully
exclaimed, "He will not return to me; but I shall go to him." All
these passages are based on the conception of a gloomy
subterranean abode where the ghosts of the dead are reunited after
their separation at death on earth. An old commentator on the
Koran says a Mohammedan priest was once asked how the blessed in
paradise could be happy when missing some near relative or dear
friend whom they were thus forced to suppose in hell. He replied,
God will either cause believers to forget such persons or else to
rest in expectation of their coming. The anecdote shows
affectingly that the same yearning heart and curiosity are
possessed by Moslem and Christian. A still more impressive case in
point is furnished by a picture in a Buddhist temple in China. The
painting represents the story of the priest Lo Puh, who, on
passing into paradise at death, saw his mother, Yin Te, in hell.
He instantly descended into the infernal court, Tsin Kwang Wang,
where she was suffering, and, by his valor, virtues, and
intercessions, rescued her. The picture vividly portraying the
whole story may be seen and studied at the present time by
Christian missionaries who enter that temple of the benevolent
Buddha.2 From the faith of many other nations illustrations might
be brought of the same fact, that the great common instinct which
has led men to believe in a future life has at the same time
caused them to believe that in that life there would be a union
and recognition of friends. Let this far reaching historical fact
be taken at its just value,

1 Alexius, Tod and Wiedersehen. Eine Gedankenfolge der besten
Schriftsteller aller Zeiten und Volker.

2 Asiatic Journal, 1840, p. 211.


while we proceed to the labor in hand. The fact referred to is of
some value, because, being an expression of the heart of man as
God made it, it is an indication of his will, a prophecy.

There are three ways of trying the problem of future recognition.
The cool, skeptical class of persons will examine the present
related facts of the case; argue from what they now know; test the
question by induction and inference. Let us see to what results
they will thus be led. In the first place, we learn upon
reflection that we now distinguish each other by the outward form,
physical proportion, and combination of looks, tones of voice, and
other the like particulars. Every one has his individuality in
these respects, by which he is separable from others. It may be
hastily inferred, then, that if we are to know our friends
hereafter it will be through the retention or the recovery of
their sensible peculiarities. Accordingly, many believe the soul
to be a perfect reflection or immaterial fac simile of the body,
the exact correspondence in shadowy outline of its gross
tabernacle, and consequently at once recognizable in the
disembodied state. The literature of Christendom we may almost say
of the world teems with exemplifications of this idea. Others,
arguing from the same acknowledged premises, conclude that future
recognition will be secured by the resurrection of the material
body as it was in all its perfection, in renovated and unfading
prime. But, leaving out of view the inherent absurdity of the
doctrine of a physical resurrection, there is a fatal difficulty
in the way of both these supposititious modes of mutual knowledge
in another world. It is this. The outward form, features, and
expression sometimes alter so thoroughly that it is impossible for
us to recognise our once most intimate companions. Cases are not
rare of this kind. Let one pass in absence from childhood to
maturity, and who that had not seen him in the mean time could
tell that it was he? The trouble arising thence is finely
illustrated by Shakspeare in the motherly solicitude of Constance,
who, on learning that her young son has been imprisoned by his
uncle, King John, and will probably be kept until he pines to
death, cries in anguish to her confessor,

"Father cardinal, I have  heard you say
That we shall see and know our friends in heaven:
If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
For, since the birth of Cain, the first male child,
To him that did but yesterday suspire,
There was not such a gracious creature born.
But now will canker sorrow eat my bud
And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
And he will look as hollow as a ghost,
As dim and meagre as an ague's fit;
And so he'll die; and, rising so again,
When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
I shall not know him: therefore never, never
Must I behold my pretty Arthur more."

Owing to the changes of all sorts which take place in the body,
future recognition cannot safely depend upon that or upon any
resemblance of the spirit to it. Besides, not the faintest proof
can be adduced of any such perceptible correspondence subsisting
between them.

Turning again to the facts of experience, we find that it is not
alone, nor indeed chiefly, by their visible forms and features
that we know our chosen ones. We also, and far more truly, know
them by the traits of their characters, the elements of their
lives, the effluence of their spirits, the magic atmosphere which
surrounds them, the electric thrill and communication which vivify
and conjoin our souls. And even in the exterior, that which most
reveals and distinguishes each is not the shape, but the
expression, the lights and shades, reflected out from the immortal
spirit shrined within. We know each other really by the mysterious
motions of our souls. And all these things endure and act
uninterrupted though the fleshly frame alter a thousand times or
dissolve in its native dust. The knowledge of a friend, then,
being independent of the body, spirits may be recognised in the
future state by the associations mutually surrounding them, the
feelings connecting them. Amidst all the innumerable thronging
multitudes, through all the immeasurable intervening heights and
depths, of the immaterial world, remembered and desired companions
may be selected and united by inward laws that act with the ease
and precision of chemical affinities. We may therefore recognise
each other by the feelings which now connect us, and which shall
spontaneously kindle and interchange when we meet in heaven, as
the signs of our former communion.

It needs but little thought to perceive that by this view future
recognition is conditional, being made to depend on the permanence
of our sympathies: there must be the same mutual relations,
affinities, fitness to awaken the same emotions upon approaching
each other's sphere, or we shall neither know nor be known. But in
fact our sympathies and aversions change as much as our outward
appearance does. The vices and virtues, loves and hatreds, of our
hearts alter, the peculiar characteristics of our souls undergo as
great a transformation, sometimes, as thorough a revolution, as
the body does in the interval between childhood and manhood. These
changes going on in our associates frequently change our feelings
towards them, heightening or diminishing our affection, creating a
new interest, destroying an old one, now making enemies lovers,
and now thoroughly alienating very friends. Such fundamental
alterations of character may occur in us, or in our friend, before
we meet in the unseen state, that we shall no more recognise each
other's spirits than we should know each other on earth after a
separation in which our bodily appearances and voices had been
entirely changed. These considerations would induce us to think
that recognition hereafter is not sure, but turns on the condition
that we preserve a remembrance, desire, and adaptedness for one
another.

If now the critical inquirer shall say there is no evidence, and
it is incredible, that the body will be restored to a future life,
or that the soul has any resemblance to the body by which it may
be identified, furthermore, if he shall maintain that the doctrine
of the revelation and recognition of the souls of friends in
another life by an instinctive feeling, a mysterious attraction
and response, is fanciful, an overdrawn conclusion of the
imagination, not warranted by a stern induction of the average
realities of the subject, and if he shall then ask, how are we to
distinguish our former acquaintances among the hosts of heaven?
there is one more fact of experience which meets the case and
answers his demand. When long absence and great exposures have
wiped off all the marks by which old companions knew each other,
it has frequently happened that they have met and conversed with
indifference, each being ignorant of whom the other was; and so it
has continued until, by some indirect means, some accidental
allusion, or the agency of a third person, they have been suddenly
revealed. Then, with throbbing hearts, in tears and rapture, they
have rushed into each other's arms, with an instantaneous
recurrence of their early friendship in all its original warmth,
fulness, and flooding associations. Many such instances are
related in books of romance with strict truth to the actual
occurrences of life. Several instances of it are authenticated in
the early history of America, when children, torn from their homes
by the Indians, were recovered by their parents after twenty or
thirty years had elapsed and they were identified by circumstantial
evidence. Let any parent ask his heart, any true friend ask his heart,
if, discovering by some foreign means the object of his love,
he would not embrace him with just as ardent a gratitude and
devotion as though there were no outward change and they had
known one another at sight. So, in the life beyond the
grave, if we are not able to recognise our earthly companions
directly, either by spiritual sight or by intuitive feeling, we
may obtain knowledge of each other indirectly by comparison of
common recollections, or by the mediation of angels, or by some
other Divine arrangement especially prepared for that purpose. And
therefore, whether in heaven we look or feel as we do here or not,
whether there be any provision in our present constitution for
future recognition or not, is of no consequence. In a thousand
ways the defect can be remedied, if such be the will of God. And
that such is his will every relevant fact and consideration would
seem to prove. It is a consistent and seemingly requisite
continuation and completion of that great scheme of which this
life is a part. It is an apparently essential element and
fulfilment of the wonderful apparatus of retribution, reward, and
discipline, intended to educate us as members of God's eternal
family. Because from the little which we now understand we cannot
infer with plainness and certainty the precise means and method by
which we can discriminate our friends in heaven need be no
obstacle to believing the fact itself; for there are millions of
undoubted truths whose conditions and ways of operation we can
nowise fathom. Upon the whole, then, we conclude that we cannot by
our mere understandings decide with certainty the question
concerning future recognition; but we are justified in trusting to
the accuracy of that doctrine, since it rests safely with the free
pleasure of God, who is both infinitely able and disposed to do
what is best, and we cannot help believing that it is best for us
to be with and love hereafter those whom we are with and love
here.3

There is a way of dealing with the general subject before us
wholly different from the course thus far pursued. Ceasing to act
the philosopher, laying aside all arguments and theories, all dry
speculations, we may come as simple believers to the Christian
Scriptures and investigate their teachings to accept whatever they
pronounce as the word of God's truth. Let us see to what results
we shall thus be led. Searching the New Testament to learn its
doctrine

3 Munch, Werden wir uns wiedersehen nach dem Tode. This work,
based on the Kantian philosophy, denies future recognition. There
is an able reply to it by Vogel, Ueber die Hoffnung des
Wiedersehens.


in regard to reunion in a future state, we are very soon struck
with surprise at the mysterious reserve, so characteristic of its
pages, on this entire theme. Instead of a full and minute
revelation blazing along the track of the gospel pens, a few
fragmentary intimations, incidental hints, scattered here and
there, are the substance of all that it expressly says. But though
little is directly declared, yet much is plainly implied:
especially the one great inference with which we are now concerned
may be unequivocally and repeatedly drawn. In the parable of the
Rich Man and the Beggar the Savior pictures forth the recognition
of their souls in the disembodied state. Dives also is described
as recollecting with intense interest, with the most anxious
sympathy, his endangered brethren on earth. Although this occurs
in a parable, yet it is likely that so prominent and vital a
feature of it would be moulded, as to its essential significance,
in accordance with what the author intended should be received as
truth. Jesus also speaks of many who should come from the east and
the west and sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the
kingdom of heaven; from which it would appear that the patriarchs
are together in fellowship and that the righteous of after times
were to be received with them in mutual acquaintance. On the Mount
of Transfiguration the witnessing disciples saw Moses and Elias
together with Jesus, and recognised them, probably from their
resemblance to traditional descriptions of them. Jesus always
represented the future state as a society. He said to his
followers, "I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am there
ye may be also;" and he prayed to his Father that his disciples
might be with him where he was going. At another time he declared
of little children, "Their angels always behold the face of my
Father in heaven:" he also taught that "there is joy in heaven
over every sinner that repenteth;" passages that presuppose such a
community of faculties, sympathies, in heaven and earth, in angels
and men, as certainly implies the doctrine of continued knowledge
and fellowship. When heaven was opened before the dying Stephen,
he saw and instantly knew his Divine Master, the Lord Jesus, and
called to him to welcome his ascending spirit. Paul writes to the
Thessalonians that he would not have them sorrow concerning the
dead as those who have no hope, assuring them that when Christ
reappears they shall all be united again. In the Apocalypse, John
saw, in a vision, the souls of the martyrs, who had died for the
faith of the gospel, together, under the altar. From community of
suffering and a common abode together in heaven we may safely
infer their recognition of each other. The Gospels declare that
Christ after his death remembered his disciples and came back to
them to assure them that they should rejoin him on high; and the
apostles assert that we are to be with Christ and to be like him
in the future state. It follows from the admission of these
declarations that we shall remember our friends and be united with
them in conscious knowledge. Few, and brief, and vague as the
utterances of the Scriptures are in relation to this theme, they
necessarily involve all the results of an avowed doctrine. They
undeniably involve the supposition that in the other life we shall
be conscious personalities as here, retaining our memories and
constituting a society. From these implications the fact of the
future recognition of friends irresistibly results, unless there
be some special interference to prevent it; and such an
interposition there is no hint of and can be no reason for
fearing.

Such is really all that we can learn from the Scriptures on the
subject of our inquiry.4 Its indirectness and brevity would
convince us that God did not intend to betray to us in clear light
the secrets of the shrouded future, that for some reason it is
best that his teaching should be so reserved, and leave us to the
haunting wonder, the anxious surmise, the appalling mystery, the
alluring possibilities, that now meet our gaze on the unmoving
veil of death. God intends we shall trust in him without
knowledge, and by faith, not by sight, pursue his guidance into
the silent and unknown land.

Therefore, after analyzing the relevant facts of present
experience and inferring what we can from them, and after studying
the Scriptures and finding what they say, there is yet another
method of considering the problem of recognition in the future
state. That is without caring for critical discussion, without
deferring to extraneous authority, we may follow the gravitating
force of instinct, imagination, and moral reason. We are made to
love and depend on each other. The longer, the more profoundly, we
know and admire the good, the more our being becomes intertwined
with theirs, so much the more intensely we desire to be with them
always, and so much the more awful is the agony of separation.
This, what is it but great Nature's testimony, God's silent
avowal, that we are to meet in eternity? Can the fearful anguish
of bereavement be gratuitous? can the yearning prophecies of the
smitten heart be all false? Belief in reunion hereafter is
spontaneously adopted by humanity. We therefore esteem it divinely
ordered or true. Without that soothing and sustaining trust, the
unrelieved, intolerable wretchedness in many cases would burst
through the fortress of the mind, hurl reason from its throne, and
tear the royal affections and their attendants in the trampled
dust of madness. Many a rarely gifted soul, unknown in his
nameless privacy of life, has been so conjoined with a worthy
peer, through precious bonds of unutterable sympathy, that, rather
than be left behind, "the divided half of such a friendship as had
mastered time," he has prayed that they, dying at once, might,
involved together, hover across the dolorous strait to the other
shore, and

"Arrive at last the blessed goal
Where He that died in Holy Land
Might reach them out the shining hand
And take them as a single soul."

Denied that inmost wish, the rest of his widowed life below has
been one melancholy strain of "In Memoriam." Many a faithful and
noble mourner, whose garnered love and hope have been blighted for
this world, would tell you that, without meeting his lost ones
there, heaven itself would be no heaven to him. In such a state of
soul we must expect to know again in an unfading clime the
cherished dead. That belief is of Divine inspiration, an
arrangement to heal the deadly wounds of sorrow. It is madness not
to think it a verity. Who believes, as he shall float through the
ambrosial airs of heaven, he could touch, in passing, the radiant
robes of his chosen friends without a thrill of recognition, the
prelude to a blissful and immortal communion? Is there not truth
in the poet's picture of the meeting of child and parent in heaven?

4 Harbaugh, The Heavenly Recognition. Gisborne, Recollections of
Friends in the World to Come. Muston, Perpetuation of Christian
Friendship.


"It was not, mother, that I knew thy face: The luminous eclipse
that is on it now, Though it was fair on earth, would have made it
strange Even to one who knew as well as he loved thee; But my
heart cried out in me, Mother!"

Think of the unfathomable yearnings, the infinite ecstasies of
desire and faith from age to age swelling in the very heart of the
world, all set on the one hope of future union, and who then can
believe that God will coldly blast them all? They are innocent,
they are holy, they are meritorious, they are unspeakably dear. We
would not destroy them; and God will not.

Man's life is the true fable of that beautiful youth, Narcissus,
who had a twin sister of remarkable loveliness, strongly
resembling himself, and to whom he was most tenderly attached. She
dies young. He frequents fountains to gaze upon his own image
reflected in the waters, it seeming to him the likeness of her he
has lost. He is in pity transformed into a flower on the border of
a stream, where, bending on his fragile stem, he seeks his image
in the waters murmuring by, until he fades and dies. Has not God,
the all loving Author who composed the sweet poem of Man and
Nature, written at the close a reconciling Elysium wherein these
pure lovers, the fond Narcissus and his echo mate, shall wander in
perennial bliss, their embracing forms mirrored in unruffled
fountains?

Looking now for the conclusion of the whole matter, we find that
it lies in three different aspects, both of inquiring thought and
of practical morality, according to the lights and modes in which
three different classes of minds approach it. To the consistent
metaphysician, reasoning rigidly on grounds of science and
philosophy, every thing pertaining to the methods and circumstances
of the future life is an affair of entire uncertainty and hypothesis.5
If in the future state the soul retains its individuality as an
identical force, form, life, and memory, and if associates in the
present state are brought together, it is probable that old friends
will recognise each other. But if they are oblivious of the past,
if they are incommunicably separated in space or state, if one
progresses so much farther that the other can never overtake him,
if the personal soul blends its individual consciousness with the
unitary consciousness of the Over Soul, if it commences a new career
from a fresh psychical germ, then, by the terms, there will be no
mutual recognition. In that case his comfort and his duty are to
know that the anguish and longing he now feels will cease then; to
trust in the benignity of the Infinite Wisdom, who knows best what
to appoint for his creatures; and to submit with harmonizing
resignation to the unalterable decree, offering his private wish a
voluntary sacrifice on the altar of natural piety. That he shall
know his friends hereafter is not impossible, not improbable;
neither is it certain. He may desire it, expect it, but not with
speculative pride dogmatically affirm it, nor with insisting
egotism presumptuously demand it.

5 Gravell, Das Wiedersehen nach dem Tode. Wie es nur sein konne.

To the uncritical Christian the recognising reunion of friends in
heaven is an unshaken assurance.6 There is nothing to disturb his
implicit reception of the plain teaching of Scripture. The
legitimate exhortations of his faith are these. Mourn not too
bitterly nor too long over your absent dead; for you shall meet
them in an immortal clime. As the last hour comes for your dearest
ones or for yourself, be of good cheer; for an imperishable joy is
yours. You:

"Cannot lose the hope that many a year
Hath shone on a gleaming way,
When the walls of life are closing round
And the sky grows sombre gray."

Put not away the intruding thoughts of the departed, but let them
often recur. The dead are constant. You know not how much they may
think of you, how near they may be to you. Will you pass to meet
them not having thought of them for years, having perhaps
forgotten them? Let your mind have its nightly firmament of
religious communion, beneath which white and sable memories shall
walk, and the sphered spirits of your risen friends, like stars,
shed down their holy rays to soothe your feverish cares and hush
every murmuring doubt to rest. From the dumb heavings of your
loving and trustful heart, sometimes exclaim, Parents who nurtured
and watched over me with unwearied affection, I would remember you
oft, and love you well, and so live that one day I may meet you at
the right hand of God. Early friends, so close and dear once, who
in the light of young romance trod with me life's morning hills,
neither your familiar faces nor your sweet communion are forgotten
by me: I fondly think of you, and aspire towards you, and pray for
a purer soul, that I may mount to your celestial circle at last;

"For many a tear these eyes must weep,
And many a sin must be forgiven,
Ere these pale lids shall sink to sleep,
Ere you and I shall meet in heaven."

Blessed Jesus, elder Brother of our race, who sittest now by thy
Father's throne, or pacest along the crystal coast as a leader,
chief among ten thousand, whose condescending brow the bloody
thorns no longer press, but the dazzling crown of thy Divinity
encircles, oh, remember us, poor erring pilgrims after thine
earthly steps; pity us, help us, and after death bring us to thy
home.

To the sympathetic poet, the man of sentiment and meditation, who
views the question from the position of the heart, in the glory
and vistas of the imagination, but with all the known facts and
relations of the subject lying bare under his sight, the uniting
restoration, in another sphere, of earth's broken ties and parted
friends, is an unappeasable craving of the soul, in harmony with
the moral law, powerfully prophesied to his experience from all
quarters, and seemingly confirmed to his hopes by every promise of
God and nature.7

6 Grafe, Biblische Beitrage zu der Frage, Werden wir uns
wiedersehen nach dem Tode.

7 Engel, Wir werden uns wiedersehen. Halst, Beleuchtung der
Hauptgrunde fur den Glauben an Erinnerung und Wiedersehen nach dem
Tode. Streicher, Neue Beitrage zur Kritik des Glaubens an
Ruckerinnerung nach dem Tode.


Received as a truth, it is a well of inexhaustible comfort, making
experience a green oasis where it overflows. The denial of it as a
proven falsehood is a withering blast of dust blowing on the
friendly caravan of sojourners in the desert of life. If existence
is the enjoyment of a largess of social love, and death is to have
a solitary hand snatch it all away forever, how dismal is the
prospect to the poor heart that loves and clings, loses and
despairs, and can only falter hopelessly on! It cannot be so. Love
is the true prophet. Heaven will restore the treasures earth has
lost.

The mourner by the grave! Eve convulsed over the form of Abel!
Jesus weeping where Lazarus lay! America embracing the urn of
Washington! The Genius of Humanity at the Tomb of the Past! It is
the most pathetic spectacle of the world. As in the old myth the
pelican, hovering over her dead broodlets, pierced her own breast
in agony and fluttered there until by the fanning of her wings
above them and the dropping of her warm blood on them they were
brought to life again, so the great Mother of men seems in history
to brood over the ashes of departed ages, dropping the tears of
her grief and faith into the future to restore her deceased
children to life and draw them together within her embrace. And
that sublime Rachel will not easily be comforted except when her
thoughts, migrating whither her offspring have gone, seem to find
them happy in some happy heaven.

The poet, lover of his race, who cannot trust his happier
instinct, but perforce believes that beyond the sepulchral line of
mortality he shall know no more of his friends, may find, as helps
to a willing acquiescence in what is fated, either one of two
possible contemplations.8 He may sadly lay upon his heart the
stifling solace, There will be no baffled wants nor unhappiness,
but all will be over when hic jacet is sculptured on the headstone
of my grave. Or, with measureless rebound of faith, he may crowd
the capacity of his soul with the mysterious presentiment, In the
unchangeable fulness of an infinite bliss, all specialties will be
merged and forgotten, and I shall be one of those to whom "the
wearisome disease" of remembered sorrow and anticipated joy "is an
alien thing."

8 Wieland's Euthanasia expresses disbelief in the preservation of
personality and consciousness after death. The same ground had
been taken in the work published anonymously at Halle in 1775,
Plato and Leibnitz jenseits des Styx. See, on the other side of
the question, Wohlfahrt, Tempel der Unsterblichkeit, oder neue
Anthologie der wichtigsten Ausspruche, besonders neuerer Weisen
uber Wiedersehen u. s. w.

