CHAPTER I.

PATRISTIC DOCTRINE OF A FUTURE LIFE.

WITH reference to the present subject, we shall consider the
period of the Church Fathers as including the nine centuries
succeeding the close of the apostolic age. It extends from
Clement, Barnabas, and Hermas to OEcumenius and Gerbert.

The principal components of the doctrine of the future life held
during this period, though showing some diversities and changes,
are in their prevailing features of one consistent type,
constituting the belief which would in any of those centuries have
been generally recognised by the Church as orthodox.

For reasons previously given, we believe that Jesus himself taught
a purely moral doctrine concerning the future life, a doctrine
free from arbitrary, mechanical, or sacerdotal peculiarities. With
experimental knowledge, with inspired insight, with fullest
authority, he set forth conclusions agreeing with the wisest
philosophy and confirmatory of our noblest hopes, namely, that a
conscious immortality awaits the soul in the many mansions of the
Father's house, which it enters on leaving the body, and where its
experience will depend upon ethical and spiritual conditions. To
this simple and sublime doctrine announced by Jesus, so rational
and satisfactory, we believe for reasons already explained that
the apostles joined various additional and modifying notions,
Judaic and Gentile, such as the local descent of Christ into the
prison world of the dead, his mission there, his visible second
coming, a bodily resurrection, a universal scenic judgment, and
other kindred views. The sum of results thus reached the Fathers
developed in greater detail, distinguishing and emphasizing them,
and also still further corrupting them with some additional
conceptions and fancies, Greek and Oriental, speculative and
imaginative. The peculiar theological work of the apostles in
regard to this subject was the organizing of the Persian Jewish
doctrine of the Pharisees, with a Christian complement and
modifications, around the person of Christ, and fixing so near in
the immediate future the period when it was to be consummated that
it might be looked for at any time. The peculiar theological work
of the Fathers in regard to the doctrine thus formed by the
apostles was twofold. First, being disappointed of the expected
speedy second coming of Christ, they developed the intermediate
state of the dead more fully, and made it more prominent.
Secondly, in the course of the long and vehement controversies
which sprang up, they were led to complete and systematize their
theology, to define their terms, to explain and defend their
doctrines, comparing them together and attempting to harmonize
them with history, reason, and ethics, as well as with Scripture
and tradition. In this way the patristic mind became familiar with
many processes of thought, with many special details, and with
some general principles, quite foreign to the apostolic mind.
Meanwhile, defining and systematizing went on, loose notions
hardened into rigid dogmas, free thought was hampered by
authority, the scheme generally received assumed the title of
orthodox, anathematizing all who dared to dissent, and the
fundamental outlines of the patristic eschatology were firmly
established.1

In seeking to understand and to give an exposition of this scheme
of faith, we have, besides various collateral aids, three chief
guidances. First, we possess the symbols or confessions of faith
put forth by several of the leading theologians of those times, or
by general councils, and openly adopted as authority in many of
the churches, the creed falsely called the Apostles', extant as
early as the close of the third century, the creed of Arius, that
of Cyril, the Nicene creed, the creed falsely named the
Athanasian, and others. Secondly, we have the valuable assistance
afforded by the treatises of Irenaus, Tertullian, Epiphanius,
Augustine, and others still later, on the heresies that had arisen
in the Church, treatises which make it easy to infer, by contrast
and construction, what was considered orthodox from the statement
of what was acknowledged heretical. And, thirdly, abundant
resources are afforded us in the extant theological dissertations,
and historical documents of the principal ecclesiastical authors
of the time in review, a cycle of well known names, sweeping from
Theophilus of Antioch to Photius of Byzantium, from Cyprian of
Carthage to Maurus of Mentz. We think that any candid person,
mastering these sources of information in the illustrating and
discriminating light of a sufficient knowledge of the previous and
the succeeding related opinions, will recognise in the following
abstract a fair representation of the doctrine of a future life as
it was held by the orthodox Fathers of the Christian Church in the
period extending from the first to the tenth century.

Before proceeding to set forth the common patristic scheme, a few
preliminary remarks are necessary in relation to some of the
peculiar, prominent features of Origen's theology, and in relation
to the rival systems of Augustine and Pelagius. Origen was a man
of vast learning, passionately fond of philosophy; and he
modifyingly mingled a great many Oriental and Platonic notions
with his theology. He imagined that innumerable worlds like this
had existed and perished before it, and that innumerable others
will do so after it in endless succession.2 He held that all souls
whether devils, men, angels, or of whatever rank were of the same
nature; that all who exist in material bodies are imprisoned in
them as a punishment for sins committed in a previous state; the
fig leaves in which Adam and Eve were dressed after their sin were
the fleshly bodies they were compelled to assume on being expelled
from the Paradise of their previous existence; that in proportion
to their sins they are confined in subtile or gross bodies of
adjusted grades until by penance and wisdom they slowly win their

1 Bretschneider, Was lehren die altesten Kirchenvater uber die
Entstehung der Sude und des Todes, Adam's Vergehen und die
Versohnung durch Christum. Oppositionsschrift, band viii. hft. 3,
ss. 380-407.

2 De Principiis, lib. lit. cap. 5.


deliverance, this gradual descent and ascent of souls being
figuratively represented by Jacob's ladder; that all punishments
and rewards are exactly fitted to the degree of sin or merit,
without possibility of failure; that all suffering even that in
the lowest hell is benevolent and remedial, so that even the worst
spirits, including Satan himself, shall after a time be restored
to heaven; that this alternation of fall and restoration shall be
continued so often as the cloy and satiety of heavenly bliss, or
the preponderant power of temptation, pervert free will into sin.3
He declared that it was impossible to explain the phenomena and
experience of human life, or to justify the ways of God, except by
admitting that souls sinned in a pre existent state. He was
ignorant of the modern doctrine of vicarious atonement, considered
as placation or satisfaction, and regarded Christ's suffering not
as a substitute for ours, but as having merely the same efficacy
in kind as the death of any innocent person, only more eminent in
degree. He represents the mission of Christ to be to show men that
God can forgive and recall them from sin, banishment, and hell,
and to furnish them, in various ways, helps and incitements to win
salvation. The foregoing assertions, and other kindred points, are
well established by Mosheim, in his exposition of the characteristic
views of Origen.4

The famous controversy between Augustine and Pelagius shook
Christendom for a century and a half, and has rolled its echoing
results even to the theological shores of to day. Augustine was
more Calvinistic in his doctrines than the Fathers before him, and
even than most of those after him. In a few particulars perhaps a
majority of the Fathers really agreed more nearly with Pelagius
than with him. But his system prevailed, and was publicly adopted
for all Christendom by the third general council at Ephesus in the
year 431. Yet some of its principles, in their full force, were
actually not accepted. For instance, his dogma of unconditional
election that some were absolutely predestinated to eternal
salvation, others to eternal damnation has never been taught by
the Roman Catholic Church. When Gottschalk urged it in the ninth
century, it was condemned as a heresy;5 and among the Protestants
in the sixteenth century Calvin was obliged to fight for it
against odds. Augustine's belief must therefore be taken as a
representation of the general patristic belief only with caution
and with qualifications. The distinctive views of Augustine as
contrasted with those of Pelagius were as follow.6 Augustine held
that, by Adam's fault, a burden of sin was entailed on all souls,
dooming them, without exception, to an eternal banishment in the
infernal world. Pelagius denied the doctrine of "original sin,"
and made each one responsible only for his own personal sins.
Augustine taught that baptism was necessary to free its subject
from the power which the devil had over the soul on account of
original sin, and that all would infallibly be doomed to hell who
were not baptized, except, first, the ancient saints, who foreknew
the evangelic doctrines and believed, and, secondly, the martyrs,
whose blood was their baptism. Pelagius claimed that Christian
baptism was only necessary to secure an

3 Ibid. lib. ii. cap. 9, 10.

4 Commentaries on the Affairs of the Christians in the First Three
Centuries: Third Century sects. 27-29.

5 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 183.

6 Wiggers, Augustinism and Pelagianism, trans. from the German by
R. Emerson, ch. xix.; also pp. 62, 68, 75, 79.


entrance into heaven: infants and good men, if unbaptized; would
enjoy a happy immortality in Paradise, but they never could enter
the kingdom of heaven. Augustine affirmed that Adam's sin
destroyed the freedom of the will in the whole human race.
Pelagius asserted the freedom of the individual will. Augustine
declared that a few were arbitrarily elected to salvation from
eternity, and that Christ died only for them. Pelagius taught that
salvation or reprobation depended on personal deserts, and that
the Divine election was merely through prescience of merits.
Augustine said that saving grace was supernatural, irresistible,
unattainable by human effort. Pelagius said it might be won or
resisted by conformity to certain conditions in each person's
power. Augustine believed that bodily death was inflicted as a
punishment for sin;7 Pelagius, that it was the result of a natural
law. The extensive, various learning, massive, penetrating mind,
and remorseless logical consistency, of Augustine, enabled him to
gather up the loose, floating theological elements and notions of
the time, and generalize them into a complete system, in striking
harmony, indeed, with the general character and drift of patristic
thought, but carried out more fully in its details and applied
more unflinchingly in its principles than had been done before,
and therefore in some of its dogmas outstripping the current
convictions of his contemporaries. His dogma of election was too
revolting and immoral ever to win universal assent; and few could
have the heart to unite with him in stigmatizing the whole human
race in their natural state as "one damned batch and mass of
perdition!" (conspersio damnata, massa perditionis.) With these
hints, we are ready to advance to the general patristic scheme of
eschatology. The exceptional variations and heresies will be
referred to afterwards.

First, in regard to the natural state of men under the law, from
the time of Adam's sin to the time of Christ's suffering, their
moral condition and destination, no one can deny that the Fathers
commonly supposed that the dissolution of the body and the descent
of the soul to the under world were a penalty brought on all men
through the sin of the first man. Wherever the lengthening line of
human generations wandered, the trail of the serpent, stamp of
depravity, was on them, sealing them as Death's and marking them
for the Hadean prison. This was the indiscriminate and the
inevitable doom. There is no need of citing proofs of this
statement, as it is well known that the writings of the Fathers
are thronged both with indirect implications and with explicit
avowals of it.

Secondly, they thought that Christ came from heaven to redeem men
from their lost state and subterranean bondage and to guide them
to heaven. Augustine, and perhaps some others, maintained that he
came merely to effectuate the salvation of a foreordained few; but
undoubtedly the common belief was that he came to redeem all who
would conform to certain conditions which he proposed and made
feasible. The important question here is, What did the Fathers
suppose the essence of Christ's redemptive work to be? and how, in
their estimation, did he achieve that work? Was it the renewal and
sanctification of human character by the melting power of a
proclamation of mercy and love from God, by the regenerating
influences and motives of the truths and appeals spoken by his
lips, illustrated

7 In Gen. lib. ix. cap. 10, 11: "Parents would have yielded to
children not by death, but by translation, and would have become
as the angels."

in his life, and brought to a focus in his martyr death? Certainly
this was too plainly and prominently a part of the mission of
Christ ever to be wholly overlooked. And yet one acquainted with
the writings of the Fathers can hardly mistake so widely as to
think that they esteemed this the principal element in Christ's
redemptive work. Was the essence of that work, then, the making of
a vicarious atonement, according to the Calvinistic interpretation
of that phrase, the offering of a substitutional anguish
sufficient to satisfy the claims of inexorable justice, so that
the guilty might be pardoned? No. The modern doctrine of the
atonement the satisfaction theory, as it is called was unknown to
the Fathers. It was developed, step by step, after many
centuries.8 It did not receive its acknowledged form until it came
from the mind of the great Archbishop of Canterbury, Anselm, as
late as the twelfth century. No scholar will question this
confessed fact. What, then, were the essence and method of
Christ's redemptive mission according to the Fathers? In brief,
they were these. He was, as they believed, a superangelic being,
the only begotten Son of God, possessing a nature, powers, and
credentials transcending those delegated to any other being below
God himself. He became flesh, to seek and to save the lost. This
saving work was done not by his mortal sufferings alone, but by
the totality of labors extending through the whole period of his
incarnation. The subjective or moral part of his redemptive
mission was to regenerate the characters of men and fit them for
heaven by his teachings and example; the objective or physical
part was to deliver their souls from the fatal confinement of the
under world and secure for them the gracious freedom of the sky,
by descending himself as the suppressing conqueror of death and
then ascending as the beckoning pioneer of his followers. The
Fathers did not select the one point or act of Christ's death as
the pivot of human redemption; but they regarded that redemption
as wrought out by the whole of his humiliation, instruction,
example, suffering, and triumph, as the resultant of all the
combined acts of his incarnate drama. Run over the relevant
writings of Justin Martyr, Clement of Alexandria, Lactantius,
Cyril, Ambrose, Augustine himself, Jerome, Chrysostom, and the
rest of the prominent authors of the first ten centuries, and you
cannot fail to be struck with the fact that they invariably speak
of redemption, not in connection with Christ's death alone, but
emphatically in connection with the group of ideas, his
incarnation, death, descent, resurrection, and ascension! For the
most part, they received it by tradition as a fact, without much
philosophizing, that, in consequence of the sin of Adam, all men
were doomed to die, that is, to leave their bodies and descend
into the shadowy realm of death. They also accepted it as a fact,
without much attempt at theoretical explanation, that when Christ,
the sinless and resistless Son of God, died and went thither,
before his immaculate Divinity the walls fell, the devils fled,
the prisoners' chains snapped, and the power of Satan was broken.
They received it as a fact that through the mediation of Christ
the original boon forfeited by Adam was to be restored, and that
men, instead of undergoing death and banishment to Hades, should
be translated to heaven. So far as they had a theory about the
cause, it turned on two simple points: first, the free grace and
love of God; second, the self sacrifice and sufficient power of

8 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 68.


Christ. In the progressive course of dogmatic controversy,
metaphysical speculation, and desire for system, explanations have
been devised in a hundred different forms, from that of Aquinas to
that of Calvin; from that of Anselm to that of Grotius; from that
of Socinus to that of Bushnell. Tertullian describes the profound
abyss beneath the grave, in the bowels of the earth, where, he
says, all the dead are detained unto the day of judgment, and
where Christ in his descent made the patriarchs and prophets his
companions.9 Augustine says that nearly the whole Church agreed in
believing that Christ delivered Adam from the under world when he
rose thence himself.10 One must be very ignorant on the subject to
doubt that the Fathers attributed unrivalled importance to the
literal descent of Christ into the abode of the departed.11

Thirdly, after the advent of Christ, what were the conditions
proposed for the actual attainment of personal salvation? It was
the orthodox belief that Christ led up into Paradise with him the
ancient saints who were awaiting his appearance in the under
world:12 but with this exception it was not supposed that he saved
any outright: he only put it in their power to save themselves,
removing the previously insuperable obstacles. In the faith of
those who accepted the dogma of predestination, of course, the
presupposed condition of actual personal salvation was that the
given individual should become one of the elect number. But it
seems to have been usually believed that baptism was indispensable
to give final efficacy to the decree of election in each
individual case.13 Augustine says, "All are born under the power
of the devil, held in chains by him as a jailer: baptism alone,
through the force of Christ's redemptive work, breaks these chains
and secures heaven." In regard to this necessity of baptism
Pelagius agreed with his great adversary, saving an unessential
modification, as we have seen before. The same may be said of
Cyprian, Tertullian, and many other leading Fathers. Again, the so
called Athanasian Creed, which shows the prevalent opinion of the
Church in the fifth and sixth centuries, asserts that whoso
believes not in the Trinity and kindred dogmas as therein laid
down "without doubt shall perish everlastingly." In other words,
assent of mind to the established creed of the Church is a vital
condition of salvation. Finally, in the writings of nearly all of
the Fathers we find frequent declarations of the necessity of
moral virtue, righteous conduct, and piety, as a condition of
admission into the kingdom of heaven. For example, Augustine says,
"Such as have been baptized, partaken of the sacraments, and
remained always in the catholic faith, but have led wicked lives,
can have no hope of escaping eternal damnation." 14 These points
were not sharply defined, authoritatively established, and
consistently adhered to; and yet there was a pretty general
agreement among the body of the Fathers that for actual salvation
there were three practical necessary conditions, baptism, a sound
faith, a good life.

9 De Anima, sects. 7 et 55.

10 Epist. CLXIV.

11 Huidekoper, Belief of the First Three Centuries concerning
Christ's Mission to the Under World.

12 Augustine, De Civ. Del. lib. xx. cap. xv. Wiedenfeld, De
Exorcismi Origine, Mutatione, deque hujus Actus peragendi Ratione
Neander, Church History, vol. i. p. 3

13 Torrey's trans.

14 De Civ. Dei., lib. xxi. cap. xxv.


Fourthly, the Fathers believed that none of the righteous dead
could be admitted into heaven itself, the abode of God and his
angels, until after the second coming of Christ and the holding of
the general judgment; neither were any of the reprobate dead,
according to their view, to be thrust into hell itself until after
those events; but meanwhile all were detained in an intermediate
state, the justified in a peaceful region of the under world
enjoying some foretaste of their future blessedness, the condemned
in a dismal region of the same under world suffering some
foretaste of their future torment.15 After the numerous evidences
given in previous chapters of the prevalence of this view among
the Fathers, it would be superfluous to cite further authorities
here. We will only reply to an objection which may be urged. It
may be said, the Fathers believed that Enoch and Elijah were
translated to heaven, also that the patriarchs, whom Christ
rescued on his descent to Hades, were admitted thither, and,
furthermore, that the martyrs by special privilege were granted
entrance there. The point is an important one. The reply turns on
the broad distinction made by the Fathers between heaven and
Paradise. Some of the Fathers regarded Paradise as one division of
the under world; some located it in a remote and blessed region of
the earth; others thought it was high in the air, but below the
dwelling place of God.16 Now, it was to "Paradise," not to heaven,
that the dying thief, penitent on the cross, was promised
admission. It was of "Paradise," not of heaven, that Tertullian
said "the blood of the martyrs is the perfect key." So, too, when
Jerome, Chrysostom, and others speak of a few favored ones
delivered from the common fate before the day of judgment, it is
"Paradise," and not heaven, that is represented as being thrown
open to them. Irenaus says, "Those who were translated were
translated to the Paradise whence disobedient Adam was driven into
the world."17

A notable attempt has been repeatedly made for example, by the
famous Dr. Coward, by Dodwell, and by some other more obscure
writers to prove that the Fathers of the Greek Church, in
opposition to the Latin Fathers, denied the consciousness of the
soul during the interval from death to the resurrection, and
maintained that the soul died with the body and would be restored
with it at the last day. But this is an error arising from the
misinterpretation of the figurative terms in which the Greek
Fathers express themselves. Tatian, Justin, Theophilus, and
Irenaus do not differ from the others in reality, but only in
words. The opinion that the soul is literally mortal is
erroneously attributed to those Greek Fathers, who in truth no
more held it than Tertullian did. "The death" they mean is, to
borrow their own language, "deprived of the rays of Divine light,
to bear a deathly immortality," (in immortalitate mortem
tolerantes,) an eternal existence in the ghostly under world.18
The con

15 They feel, as Novatian says, (De Trinitate, 1,) a prajudicium
futuri judicii. See also Ernesti, Excurs. de Veter. Patrum
Opinione de Statu Medio Animor. a Corpore sejunctorum. In his
Lect. Acad. in Ep. ad Hebr.

16 E. g., see Ambrose, De Paradiso.

17 Adv. Hares., lib. v. cap. v.

18 See this point ably argued in an academic dissertation
published at Konigsberg, 1827, bearing the title "Antiquissimorum
Ecclesia Grsecte Patrum de Immortalitate Anima Sententia
Recensentur."


They held that the inner man was originally a spirit [non-ASCII
characters omitted] and a soul [non-ASCII characters omitted]
blended and immortal, that is, indestructibly united and blessed.
But by sin the soul loses the spirit and becomes subject to death.
that is, to ignorance of its Divine origin, alienation from God,
darkness, and an abode in Hades. By the influences flowing from the
mission of Christ, man is elevated again to conscious communion with
God, and the spirit is restored to the soul. "Si restituitur, manet
[non-ASCII characters omitted] fit autem [non-ASCII characters
omitted]; si non restituitur, manet [non-ASCII characters omitted],
fit autem [non-ASCII characters omitted], quod haud differt a morte."
cordant doctrine of the Fathers as to the intermediate state of the
dead was that, with the exception of a few admitted to Paradise,
they were in the under world waiting the fulness of time, when the
world should be judged and their final destination be assigned to them.
As Tertullian says, "constituimus omnem animam apud inferos
seguestrari in diem Domini."

Finally, the Fathers expected that Christ would return from
heaven, hold a general day of judgment, and consummate all things.
The earliest disciples seem to have looked anxiously, almost from
hour to hour, for that awful crisis. But, as years rolled on and
the last apostle died, and it came not, the date was fixed more
remotely; and, as other years passed away, and still no clear
signs of its arrival appeared, the date grew more and more
indefinite. Some still looked for the solemn dawn speedily to
break; others assigned it to the year 1000; others left the time
utterly vague; but none gave up the doctrine. All agreed that
sooner or later a time would come when the deep sky would open,
and Christ, clothed in terrors and surrounded by pomp of angels,
would alight on the globe, when:

"The angel of the trumpet Shall split the charnel earth With his
blast so clear and brave, And quicken the charnel birth At the
roots of the grave, Till the dead all stand erect."

Augustine, representing the catholic faith, says, "The coming of
Elias, the conversion of the Jews, Antichrist's persecution, the
setting up of Christ's tribunal, the raising of the dead, the
severing of the good and the bad, the burning of the world, and
its renovation, this is the destined order of events."19 The saved
were to be transported bodily to the eternal bliss of heaven; the
damned, in like manner, were to be banished forever to a fiery
hell in the centre of the earth, there to endure uncomprehended
agonies, both physical and spiritual, without any respite, without
any end. There were important, and for a considerable period quite
extensive, exceptions, to the belief in this last dogma:
nevertheless, such was undeniably the prevailing view, the
orthodox doctrine, of the patristic Church. The strict literality
with which these doctrines were held is strikingly shown in
Jerome's artless question: "If the dead be not raised with flesh
and bones, how can the damned, after the judgment, gnash their
teeth in hell?"

During the period now under consideration there were great
fluctuations, growths, changes, of opinion on three subjects in
regard to which the public creeds did not prevent all freedom of
thought by laying down definite propositions. We refer to baptism,
the millennium, and purgatory. Christian baptism was first simply
a rite of initiation into the Christian religion. Then it became
more distinctly a symbol of faith in Christ and in his gospel, and
an emblem of a new birth. Next it was imagined to be literally
efficacious to

19 De Civ. Del, lib. xx. cap. 30, sect. 5.


personal salvation, solving the chains of the devil, washing off
original sin, and opening the door of heaven.20 To trace the
doctrine through its historical variations and its logical
windings would require a large volume, and is not requisite for
our present purpose.

Almost all the early Fathers believingly looked for a millennium,
a reign of Christ on earth with his saints for a thousand years.
Daille has shown that this belief was generally held, though with
great diversities of conception as to the form and features of the
doctrine.21 It was a Jewish notion which crept among the
Christians of the first century and has been transmitted even to
the present day. Some supposed the millennium would precede the
destruction of the world, others that it would follow that
terrible event, after a general renovation. None but the faithful
would have part in it; and at its close they would pass up to
heaven. Irenaus quotes a tradition, delivered by Papias, that "in
the millennium each vine will bear ten thousand branches, each
branch ten thousand twigs, each twig ten thousand clusters, each
cluster ten thousand grapes, each grape yielding a hogshead of
wine; and if any one plucks a grape its neighbors will cry, Take
me: I am better!" This, of course, was a metaphor to show what the
plenty and the joy of those times would be. According to the
heretics Cerinthus and Marcion, the millennium was to consist in
an abundance of all sorts of sensual riches and delights. Many of
the orthodox Fathers held the same view, but less grossly; while
others made its splendors and its pleasures mental and moral.22
Origen attacked the whole doctrine with vehemence and cogency. His
admirers continued the warfare after him, and the belief in this
celestial Cocaigne suffered much damage and sank into comparative
neglect. The subject rose into importance again at the approaching
close of the first chiliad of Christianity, but soon died away as
the excitement of that ominous epoch passed with equal
disappointment to the hopes and the fears of the believers. A
galvanized controversy has been carried on about it again in the
present century, chiefly excited by the modern sect of Second
Adventists. Large volumes have recently appeared, principally
aiming to decide whether the millennium is to precede or to follow
the second coming of Christ! 23 The doctrine itself is a Jewish
Christian figment supported only by a shadowy basis of fancy. The
truth contained in it, though mutilated and disguised, is that
when the religion of Christ is truly enthroned over the earth,
when his real teachings and life are followed, the kingdom of God
will indeed cover the world, and not for a thousand years only,
but unimaginable glory and happiness shall fill the dwellings of
the successive generations of men forever.24

The doctrine of a purgatory a place intermediate between Paradise
and hell, where souls not too sinful were temporarily punished,
and where their condition and stay were in the power of the Church
on earth, a doctrine which in the Middle Age became practically

20 Neander, Planting and Training, Eng. trans. p. 102.

21 De Usu Patrum, lib. ii. cap. 4.

22 Munscher, Entwickelung der Lehre vom Tausendjahrigen Reiche in
den Drei Ersten Jahrhunderten. In Henke's Magaz. b. vi. ss. 233
254.

23 See e. g. The End, by Dr. Cumming. The Second Advent, by D.
Brown.

24 Bush, On the Millennium. Bishop Russell, Discourses on the
Millennium. Carroll, Geschichte des Chiliasmus.


the foremost instrument of ecclesiastical influence and income was
through the age of the Fathers gradually assuming shape and
firmness. It seems to have been first openly avowed as a Church
dogma and effectively organized as a working power by Pope Gregory
the Great, in the latter part of the sixth century.25 No more
needs to be said here, as the subject more properly belongs to the
next chapter.

It but remains in close to notice those opinions relating to the
future life which were generally condemned as heresies by the
Fathers. One of the earliest of these was the destruction of the
intermediate state and the denial of the general judgment by the
assertion, which Paul charges so early as in his day upon Hymeneus
and Philetus, "that the resurrection has passed already;" that is,
that the soul, when it leaves the body, passes immediately to its
final destination. This opinion reappeared faintly at intervals,
but obtained very little prevalence in the early ages of the
Church. Hierax, an author who lived at Leontopolis in Egypt early
in the fourth century, denied the resurrection of the body, and
excluded from the kingdom of heaven all who were married and all
who died before becoming moral agents.

Another heretical notion which attracted some attention was the
opposite extreme from the foregoing, namely, that the soul totally
dies with the body, and will be restored to life with it in the
general resurrection at the end of the world; an opinion held by
an Arabian sect of Christians, who were vanquished in debate upon
it by Origen, and renounced it.26

Still another doctrine known among the Fathers was the belief that
Christ, when he descended into the under world, saved and led away
in triumph all who were there, Jews, pagans, good, bad, all,
indiscriminately. This is number seventy nine in Augustine's list
of the heresies. And there is now extant among the writings of
Pope Boniface VI, of the ninth century, a letter furiously
assailing a man who had recently maintained this "damnable
doctrine."

The numerous Gnostic sects represented by Valentinus, Cerinthus,
Marcion, Basilides, and other less prominent names, held a system
of speculation copious, complex, and of intensely Oriental
character. That portion of it directly connected with our subject
may be stated in few words. They taught that all souls pre existed
in a world of pure light, but, sinning through the instigation and
craft of demons, they fell, were mixed with darkness and matter,
and bound in bodies. Through sensual lusts and ignorance, they
were doomed to suffer after death in hell for various periods, and
then to be born again. Jehovah was the enemy of the true God, and
was the builder of this world and of hell, wherein he contrives to
keep his victims imprisoned by deceiving them to worship him and
to live in errors and indulgences. Christ came, they said, to
reveal the true God, unmask the infernal character and wiles of
Jehovah, rescue those whom he had cruelly shut up in hell, and
teach men the real way of salvation. Accordingly, Marcion declared
that when Christ descended into the under world he released and
took into his own kingdom Cain, and the Sodomites, and all the

25 Flugge, Geschichte der Lehre vom Zustande des Menschen nach dem
Tode in der Christlichen Kirche, absch. v. ss. 320-352.

26 Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. lib. vi. cap. 37.

Gentiles who had refused to obey the demon worshipped by the Jews,
but left there, unsaved, Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and the other
patriarchs, together with all the prophets.27 The Gnostics agreed
in attributing evil to matter, and made the means of redemption to
consist in fastings and scourgings of the flesh, with denial of
all its cravings, and in lofty spiritual contemplations. Of
course, with one accord they vehemently assailed the dogma of the
resurrection of the flesh. Their views, too, were inconsistent
with the strict eternity of future hell punishments. The
fundamental basis of their system was the same as that of nearly
all the Oriental philosophies and religions, requiring an ascetic
war against the world of sense. The notion that the body is evil,
and the cause of evil, was rife even among the orthodox Fathers;
but they stopped guardedly far short of the extreme to which the
Gnostics carried it, and indignantly rejected all the strange
imaginations which those heretics had devised to explain the
subject of evil in a systematic manner.28 Augustine said, "If we
say all sin comes from the flesh, we make the fleshless devil
sinless!" Hermogenes, some of whose views at least were tinged
with Gnosticism, believed the abyss of hell was formed by the
confluence of matter, and that the devil and all his demons would
at last be utterly resolved into matter.29

The theological system of the Manichaan sect was in some of its
cardinal principles almost identical with those of the Gnostics,
but it was still more imaginative and elaborate.30 It started with
the Persian doctrine of two antagonist deities, one dwelling with
good spirits in a world of light and love, the other with demons
in a realm of darkness and horror. Upon a time the latter,
sallying forth, discovered, far away in the vastness of space, the
world of light. They immediately assailed it. They were conquered
after a terrible struggle and driven back; but they bore with them
captive a multitude of the celestial souls, whom they instantly
mixed with darkness and gross matter. The good God built this
world of mingled light and darkness to afford these imprisoned
souls an opportunity to purge themselves and be restored to him.
In arranging the material substances to form the earth, a mass of
evil fire, with no particle of good in it, was found. It had been
left in their flight by the vanquished princes of darkness. This
was cast out of the world and shut up somewhere in the dark air,
and is the Manichaan hell, presided over by the king of the
demons. If a soul, while in the body, mortify the flesh, observe a
severe ascetic moral discipline, fix its thoughts, affections, and
prayers on God and its native home, it will on leaving the body
return to the celestial light. But if it neglect these duties and
become more deeply entangled in the toils of depraved matter, it
is cast into the awful fire of hell, where the cleansing flames of
torture partially purify it; and then it is born again and put on
a new trial. If after ten successive births twice in each of five
different forms the soul be still unreclaimed, then it is
permanently remanded to the furnace of hell. At last, when all the
celestial souls seized by the princes of darkness have returned to
God, save those just mentioned, this world will be burned. Then
the children

27 Irenaus, Adv. Herres., lib. i. cap. 22.

28 Account of the Gnostic Sects, in Moshelm's Comm., II. Century,
sect. 65.

29 Lardner, Hist. of Heretics, ch. xviii. sect. 9.

30 Baur, Das Manichaische Religionssystem.


of God will lead a life of everlasting blessedness with him in
their native land of light; the prince of evil, with his fiends,
will exist wretchedly in their original realm of darkness. Then
all those souls whose salvation is hopeless shall be drawn out of
hell and be placed as a cordon of watchmen and a phalanx of
soldiers entirely around the world of darkness, to guard its
frontiers forever and to see that its miserable inhabitants never
again come forth to invade the kingdom of light.31

The Christian after Christ's own pattern, trusting that when the
soul left the body it would find a home in some other realm of
God's universe where its experience would be according to its
deserts, capacity, and fittedness, sought to do the Father's will
in the present, and for the future committed himself in faith and
love to the Father's disposal. The apostolic Christian, conceiving
that Christ would soon return to raise the dead and reward his
own, eagerly looked for the arrival of that day, and strove that
he might be among the saints who, delivered or exempt from the
Hadean imprisonment, should reign with the triumphant Messiah on
earth and accompany him back to heaven. The patristic Christian,
looking forward to the divided under world where all the dead must
spend the interval from their decease to the general resurrection,
shuddered at the thought of Gehenna, and wrestled and prayed that
his tarrying might be in Paradise until Christ should summon his
chosen ones, justified from the great tribunal, to the Father's
presence. The Manichaan Christian, believing the soul to be
imprisoned in matter by demons who fought against God in a
previous life, struggled, by fasting, thought, prayer, and
penance, to rescue the spirit from its fleshly entanglements, from
all worldly snares and illusions, that it might be freed from the
necessity of any further abode in a material body, and, on the
dissolution of its present tabernacle, might soar to its native
light in the blissful pleroma of eternal being.

31 Mosheim, Comm., III. Century, sects. 44-52.


