CHAPTER IV.

DOCTRINE OF FUTURE PUNISHMENT; OR, CRITICAL HISTORY OF THE IDEA OF
A HELL.

A HELL of fire and brimstone has been, perhaps still is, the most
terrible of the superstitions of the world. We propose to give a
historic sketch of the popular representations on this subject,
trace them to their origin, and discuss the merits of the question
itself. To follow the doctrine through all its variations,
illustrating the practical and controversial writings upon it,
would require a large volume; but, by a judicious arrangement, all
that is necessary to a fair understanding of the subject, or
really interesting, may be presented within the compass of an
essay. Any one who should read the literature of this subject
would be astonished at the almost universal prevalence of the
doctrine and at the immense diversity of appalling descriptions of
it, and would ask, Whence arises all this? How have these horrors
obtained such a seated hold in the world?

In the first place, it is to be replied, as soon as reason is in
fair possession of the idea of a continued individual existence
beyond the grave, the moral sense, discriminating the deeds,
tempers, and characters of men, would teach that there must be
different allotments and experiences for them after death. It is
not right, say reason and conscience, for the coward, the idler,
fool, knave, sot, murderer, to enter into the same realm and have
the same bliss with heroes, sages, and saints; neither are they
able to do it. The spontaneous thought and sentiment of humanity
would declare, if the soul survives the body, passing into the
invisible world, its fortunes there must depend somewhat upon its
fitness and deserts, its contained treasures and acquired habits.
Reason, judging the facts of observation according to the
principles of ethics and the working of experienced spiritual
laws, at once decides that there is a difference hereafter between
the fate of the good heart and the bad one, the great soul and the
mean one: in a word, there is, in some sense or other, a heaven
and a hell.

Again: the same belief would be necessitated by the conception, so
deeply entertained by the primitive people of the earth, of
overruling and inspecting gods. They supposed these gods to be in
a great degree like themselves, partial, fickle, jealous,
revengeful. Such beings, of course, would caress their favorites
and torture their offenders. The calamities and blessings of this
life were regarded as tokens, revengeful or loving, of the ruling
deities, now pleased, now enraged. And when their votaries or
victims had passed into the eternal state, how natural to suppose
them still favored or cursed by the passionate wills of these
irresponsible gods! Plainly enough, they who believe in gods that
launch thunderbolts and upheave the sea in their rage and take
vengeance for an insult by sending forth a pestilence, must also
believe in a hell where Ixion may be affixed to the wheel and
Tantalus be tortured with maddening mockeries. These two
conceptions of discriminating justice and of vengeful gods both
lead to the theoretic construction of a hell, and to the growth of
doctrines and parables about it, though in a different sort, the
former illustrating a pervasive law which distributes men
according to their deserts, the latter speaking of beings with
human passions, who inflict outward arbitrary penalties according
to their pleasure.

Thirdly, when the general idea of a hell has once obtained
lodgment, it is rapidly nourished, developed, and ornamented,
carried out into particulars by poets, rhetoricians, and popular
teachers, whose fancies are stimulated and whose figurative views
and pictures act and react both upon the sources and the products
of faith. Representations based only on moral facts, emblems
addressing the imagination, after a while are received in a
literal sense, become physically located and clothed with the
power of horror. A Hindu poet says, "The ungrateful shall remain
in hell as long as the sun hangs in heaven." An old Jewish Rabbi
says that after the general judgment "God shall lead all the
blessed through hell and all the damned through paradise, and show
to each one the place that was prepared for him in each region, so
that they shall not be able to say, 'We are not to be blamed or
praised; for our doom was unalterably fixed beforehand.' Such
utterances are originally moral symbols, not dogmatic assertions;
and yet in a rude age they very easily pass into the popular mind
as declaring facts literally to be believed. A Talmudic writer
says, "There are in hell seven abodes, in each abode seven
thousand caverns, in each cavern seven thousand clefts, in each
cleft seven thousand scorpions; each scorpion has seven limbs, and
on each limb are seven thousand barrels of gall. There are also in
hell seven rivers of rankest poison, so deadly that if one touches
it he bursts." Hesiod, Homer, Virgil, have given minute
descriptions of hell and its agonies, descriptions which have
unquestionably had a tremendous influence in cherishing and
fashioning the world's faith in that awful empire. The poems of
Dante, Milton, and Pollok revel in the most vivid and terrific
pictures of the infernal kingdom and its imagined horrors; and the
popular doctrine of future punishment in Christendom is far more
closely conformed to their revelations than to the declarations of
the New Testament. The English poet's "Paradise Lost" has
undoubtedly exerted an influence on the popular faith comparable
with that of the Genevan theologian's "Institutes of the Christian
Religion." There is a horrid fiction, widely believed once by the
Jewish Rabbins and by the Mohammedans, that two gigantic fiends
called the Searchers, as soon as a deceased person is buried, make
him sit up in the grave, examine the moral condition of his soul,
and, if he is very guilty, beat in his temples with heavy iron
maces. It is obvious to observe that such conceptions are purely
arbitrary, the work of fancy, not based on any intrinsic fitness
or probability; but they are received because unthinking ignorance
and hungry superstition will greedily believe any thing they hear.
Joseph Trapp, an English clergyman, in a long poem thus sets forth
the scene of damnation: "Doom'd to live death and never to expire,
In floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire The damn'd shall
groan, fire of all kinds and forms, In rain and hail, in
hurricanes and storms, Liquid and solid, livid, red, and pale, A
flaming mountain here, and there a flaming vale; The liquid fire
makes seas, the solid, shores; Arch'd o'er with flames, the horrid
concave roars. In bubbling eddies rolls the fiery tide, And
sulphurous surges on each other ride. The hollow winding vaults,
and dens, and caves, Bellow like furnaces with flaming waves.
Pillars of flame in spiral volumes rise, Like fiery snakes, and
lick the infernal skies. Sulphur, the eternal fuel, unconsumed,
Vomits redounding smoke, thick, unillumed."

But all other paintings of the fear and anguish of hell are vapid
and pale before the preternatural frightfulness of those given at
unmerciful length and in sickening specialty in some of the Hindu
and Persian sacred books.1 Here worlds of nauseating disgusts, of
loathsome agonies, of intolerable terrors, pass before us. Some
are hung up by their tongues, or by their eyes, and slowly
devoured by fiery vermin; some scourged with whips of serpents
whose poisonous fangs lacerate their flesh at every blow; some
forced to swallow bowls of gore, hair, and corruption, freshly
filled as fast as drained; some packed immovably in red hot iron
chests and laid in raging furnaces for unutterable millions of
ages. One who is familiar with the imagery of the Buddhist hells
will think the pencils of Dante and Pollok, of Jeremy Taylor and
Jonathan Edwards, were dipped in water. There is just as much
ground for believing the accounts of the former to be true as
there is for crediting those of the latter: the two are
fundamentally the same, and the pagan had earlier possession of
the field.

Furthermore, in the early ages, and among people where castes were
prominent, when the learning, culture, and power were confined to
one class at the expense of others, it is unquestionable that
copious and fearful descriptions of the future state were spread
abroad by those who were interested in establishing such a dogma.
The haughtiness and selfishness of the hierarchic spirit, the
exclusiveness, cruelty, and cunning tyranny of many of the ancient
priesthoods, are well known. Despising, hating, and fearing the
people, whom they held in abject spiritual bondage, they sought to
devise, diffuse, and organize such opinions as would concentrate
power in their own hands and rivet their authority. Accordingly,
in the lower immensity they painted and shadowed forth the lurid
and dusky image of hell, gathering around it all that was most
abominated and awful. Then they set up certain fanciful
conditions, without the strict observance of which no one could
avoid damnation. The animus of a priesthood in the structure of
this doctrine is shown by the glaring fact that in the old
religions the woes of hell were denounced not so much upon bad men
who committed crimes out of a wicked heart, as upon careless men
who neglected priestly guidance and violated the ritual. The
omission of a prayer or an ablution, the neglect of baptism or
confession, a slight thrown upon a priest, a mental conception
differing from the decree of the "Church," would condemn a man far
more surely and deeply into the Egyptian, Hindu, Persian,
Pharisaic, Papal, or Calvinistic hell than any amount of moral
culpability according to the standard of natural ethics.

1 See Pope's translation of the Viraf Nameh. Also the Dabistan,
vol. i. pp. 295-304, of the translation by Shea and Troyer; and
Coleman's Mythology of the Hindus, chapter on the hells.


The popular hells have ever been built on hierarchic selfishness,
dogmatic pride, and personal cruelty, and have been walled around
with arbitrary and traditional rituals. Through the breaches made
in these rituals by neglect, souls have been plunged in. The
Parsee priest describes a woman in hell "beaten with stone clubs
by two demons twelve miles in size, and compelled to continue
eating a basin of putridity, because once some of her hair, as she
combed it, fell into the sacred fire." The Brahmanic priest tells
of a man who, for "neglecting to meditate on the mystic
monosyllable Om before praying, was thrown down in hell on an iron
floor and cleaved with an axe, then stirred in a caldron of molten
lead till covered all over with the sweated foam of torture like a
grain of rice in an oven, and then fastened, with head downwards
and feet upwards, to a chariot of fire and urged onwards with a
red hot goad." The Papal priest declares that the schismatic,
though the kindest and justest man, at death drops hopelessly into
hell, while the devotee, though scandalously corrupt in heart and
life, who confesses and receives extreme unction, treads the
primrose path to paradise. The Episcopalian priest dooms the
dissenter to everlasting woe in spite of every virtue, because he
has not known sacramental baptism in the apostolic line. The
Arminian priest turns the rationalist over to the penal fires of
eternity, because he is in mental error as to the explanation of
the Trinity and the Atonement. In every age it has been the
priestly spirit, acting on ritual considerations, that has
deepened the foundations, enlarged the borders, and apportioned
the victims, of hell. The perversions and excesses of the doctrine
have grown out of cruel ambition and cunning on one side, and been
received by docile ignorance and superstition on the other, and
been mutually fed by traditions and fables between. The excessive
vanity and theocratic pride of the Jews led them to exclude all
the Gentiles, whom they stigmatized as "uncircumcised dogs," from
the Jewish salvation. The same spirit, aggravated if possible,
passed lineally into Christendom, causing the Orthodox Church to
exclude all the heathen, all heretics, and the unbaptized, from
the Christian salvation.

A fifth explanation of the wholesale severity and multiplied
details of horror, which came to be incorporated with the doctrine
of hell, is to be found in the gloomy theories of certain
philosophers whose relentless speculations were tinged and moulded
by their own recluse misanthropy and the prevailing superstitions
of their time. Out of the old asceticism of the East the false
spiritualism which regarded matter as the source of evil and this
life as a penance arose the dogma of metempsychosis. The
consequence of this theory, rigidly carried out, created a
descending congeries of hells, reaching from centre to nadir, in
correspondence to an ascending congeries of heavens, reaching from
centre to zenith. Out of the myth of the Fall sprang the dogma of
total depravity, dooming our whole race to hell forever, except
those saved by the subsequent artifice of the atonement. Theories
conjured up and elaborated by fanciful and bloodless metaphysicians,
in an age when the milk of public human kindness was thinned,
soured, poisoned, by narrow and tyrannical prejudices, might
easily legitimate and establish any conclusions, however
unreasonable and monstrous. The history of philosophy is
the broad demonstration of this. The Church philosophers, (with
exceptions, of course,) receiving the traditions of the common
faith, partaking in the superstitions of their age, banished from
the bosoms of men by their monastic position, and inflamed with
hierarchic pride, with but a faint connection or intercourse
between conscience and intellect or between heart and fancy,
strove to spin out theories which would explain and justify the
orthodox dogmas.

Working with metaphysical tools of abstract reason, not with the
practical faculties of life, dealing with the fanciful materials
of priestly tradition, not with the solid facts of ethical
observation, they would naturally be troubled with but few qualms
and make but few reservations, however overwhelming the results of
horror at which they might arrive. Habituated for years to hair
drawn analyses and superstitious broodings upon the subject,
overshadowed by the supernatural hierarchy in which they lived,
surrounded by a thick night of ignorance, persecution, and
slaughter, it was no wonder they could believe the system they
preached, although in reality it was only a traditional
abstraction metaphysically wrought up and vivified by themselves.
Being thus wrought out and animated by them, who were the sole
depositaries of learning and the undisputed lords of thought, the
mass of the people, lying abjectly in the fetters of authority,
could not help accepting it. Ample illustrations of these
assertions will occur to all who are familiar with the theological
schemes and the dialectic subtleties of the early Church Fathers
and of the later Church Scholastics.

Finally, by the combined power, first, of natural conscience
affirming a future distinction between the good and the bad;
secondly, of imperfect conceptions of God as a passionate avenger;
thirdly, of the licentious fancies of poets drawing awful
imaginative pictures of future woe; fourthly, of the cruel spirit
and the ambitious plans of selfish priesthoods; and fifthly, of
the harsh and relentless theories of conforming metaphysicians,
the doctrine of hell, as a located place of manifold terrific
physical tortures drawing in vast majorities of the human race,
became established in the ruling creeds and enthroned as an
orthodox dogma. In some heathen nations the descriptions of the
poets, in others the accounts of the priestly books, were held to
be inspired revelations. To call them in question was blasphemous.
In Christendom the scriptural representations of the subject,
which were general moral adaptations, incidentally made, of
representations already existing, obtained a literal interpretation,
had the stamp of infallibility put on them and immense perverted
additions joined to them. Thus everywhere the dogma became
associated with the established authority. To deny it was heresy.
Heretics were excommunicated, loaded with pains and penalties,
and, for many centuries, often put to death with excruciating
tortures. From that moment the doctrine was taken out of
the province of natural reason, out of the realm of ethical
truth. The absurdities, wrongs, and barbarities deducible from it
were a part and parcel of it, and not to be considered as any
objection to it. No free thought and honest criticism were
allowed. Because taught by authority, it must be submissively
taken for granted. Henceforth we are not to wonder at the
revolting inhumanity of spirit and horribleness of gloating hatred
shown in connection with the doctrine; for it was not the
independent thought and proper moral spirit of individuals, but
the petrified dogma and irresponsible corporate spirit of that
towering hierarchy, the Church.

The Church set forth certain conditional offers of salvation. When
those offers were spurned or neglected, the Church felt personally
insulted and aggrieved. Her servants hurled on the hated heretics
and heathen the denunciations of bigotry and the threats of rage.
Rugged old Tertullian, in whose torrid veins the fire of his
African deserts seems infused, revels with infernal glee over the
contemplation of the sure damnation of the heathen. "At that
greatest of all spectacles, the last and eternal judgment," he
says, "how shall I admire, how laugh, how rejoice, how exult, when
I behold so many proud monarchs groaning in the lowest abyss of
darkness; so many magistrates liquefying in fiercer flames than
they ever kindled against the Christians; so many sage
philosophers blushing in red hot fires with their deluded pupils;
so many tragedians more tuneful in the expression of their own
sufferings; so many dancers tripping more nimbly from anguish than
ever before from applause."2 Hundreds of the most accredited
Christian writers have shown the same fiendish spirit. Drexel the
Jesuit, preaching of Dives, exclaims, "Instead of a lofty bed of
down on which he was wont to repose himself, he now lies frying in
the flames; his sparkling wine and delicious dainties are taken
from him; he is burnt up with thirst, and has nothing for his food
but smoke and sulphur." Jeremy Taylor3 says, in that discourse on
the "Pains of Hell" where he has lavished all the stores of his
matchless learning and all the wealth of his gorgeous imagination
in multiplying and adorning the paraphernalia of torture with
infinite accompaniments of unendurable pangs and insufferable
abominations, "We are amazed at the inhumanity of Phalaris, who
roasted men in his brazen bull: this was joy in respect of that
fire of hell which penetrates the very entrails without consuming
them;" "husbands shall see their wives, parents shall see their
children, tormented before their eyes;" "the bodies of the damned
shall be crowded together in hell like grapes in a wine press,
which press one another till they burst;" "every distinct sense
and organ shall be assailed with its own appropriate and most
exquisite sufferings." Christopher Love belying his name says of
the damned, "Their cursings are their hymns, howlings their tunes,
and blasphemies their ditties." Calvin writes, "Forever harassed
with a dreadful tempest, they shall feel themselves torn asunder
by an angry God, and transfixed and penetrated by mortal stings,
terrified by the thunderbolts of God, and broken by the weight of
his hand, so that to sink into any gulfs would be more tolerable
than to stand for a moment in these terrors." A living divine, Dr.
Gardiner Spring, declares, "When the omnipotent and angry God, who
has access to all the avenues of distress in the corporeal frame
and all the inlets to agony in the intellectual constitution,
undertakes to punish, he will convince the universe that he does
not gird himself for the work of retribution in vain;" "it will be
a glorious deed when He who hung on Calvary shall cast those who
have trodden his blood under their feet, into the furnace of fire,
where there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth."
Thousands of passages like these, and even worse, might easily be
collected from Christian authors, dating their utterance from the
days of St. Irenaus, Bishop of Lyons, who flamed against the
heretics, to the days of Nehemiah Adams, Congregational preacher
of Boston, who says, "It is to be feared the forty two children
that mocked Elisha are now in hell." 4 There is an unmerciful
animus in them, a vindictiveness of thought and feeling, far oh,
how far! removed from the meek and loving

2 De Spectaculis, cap. xxx., Gibbon's trans.

3 Contemplations of the State of Man, ch. 6 8.

4 Friends of Christ, p. 149.


soul of Jesus, who wept over Jerusalem, and loved the
"unevangelical" young lawyer who was "not far from the kingdom of
heaven," and yearned towards the penitent Peter, and from the
tenderness of his immaculate purity said to the adulteress,
"Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." There are some
sectarians in whom the arbitrary narrowness, fierceness, and
rigidity of their received creeds have so demoralized and hardened
conscience and sensibility in their native healthy directions, and
artificially inflamed them in diseased channels, that we verily
believe, if the decision of the eternal destiny of the human race
were placed in their hands, they would with scarcely a twinge of
pain perhaps some of them even with a horrid satisfaction and
triumph doom all except their own dogmatic coterie to hell. They
are bound to do so. They profess to know infallibly that God will
do so: if, therefore, the case being in their arbitration, they
would decide differently, they thereby impeach the action of God,
confess his decrees irreconcilable with reason and justice, and
set up their own goodness as superior to his. Burnet has preserved
the plea of Bloody Mary, which was in these words: "As the souls
of heretics are hereafter to be eternally burning in hell, there
can be nothing more proper than for me to imitate the Divine
vengeance by burning them on earth." Thanks be to the infinite
Father that our fate is in his hands, and not in the hands of men
who are bigots,

"Those pseudo Privy Councillors of God,
Who write down judgments with a pen hard nibb'd:
Ushers of Beelzebub's black rod,
Commending sinners, not to ice thick ribb'd,
But endless flames to scorch them up like flax,
Yet sure of heaven themselves, as if they'd cribb'd
The impression of St. Peter's keys in wax!"

It may be thought that this doctrine and its awful concomitants,
though once promulgated, are now nearly obsolete. It is true that,
in thinking minds and generous hearts, they are getting to be
repudiated. But by no means is it so in the recognised formularies
of the established Churches and in the teachings of the popular
clergy. All through the Gentile world, wherever there is a
prevailing religion, the threats and horrors of a fearful doctrine
of hell are still brandished over the trembling or careless
multitudes. In Christendom, the authoritative announcement of the
Roman and Greek Churches, and the public creeds confessed by every
communicant of all the denominations, save two or three which are
comparatively insignificant in numbers, show that the doctrine is
yet held without mitigation. The Bishop of Toronto, only a year or
two ago, published the authoritative declaration that "every child
of humanity, except the Virgin Mary, is from the first moment of
conception a child of wrath, hated by the blessed Trinity,
belonging to Satan, and doomed to hell!" Indeed, the doctrine, in
its whole naked and frightful extent, is necessarily, in strict
logic, an integral part of the great system of the popular
Christianity, that is, Christianity as falsely interpreted,
paganized, and scholasticized. For if by the sin of Adam the
entire race were totally depraved and condemned to a hopeless
hell, and only those can be saved who personally appropriate by a
realizing faith the benefits of the subsequent artifice carried
out in the atoning blood of the incarnate God, certainly the
extremist advocate of the doctrine concerning hell has not
exceeded the truth, and cannot exceed it. All the necessities of
logic rebuke the tame hearted theologians, and great Augustine's,
great Calvin's, ghost walks unapproached among them, crying out
that they are slow and inefficient in describing the enormous
sweep of the inherited penalty! Many persons who have not taken
pains to examine the subject suppose that the horrifying
descriptions given by Christian authors of the state and
sufferings of the lost were not intended to be literally received,
but were meant as figures of speech, highly wrought metaphors
calculated to alarm and impress with physical emblems corresponding
only to moral and spiritual realities. The progress of
thought and refinement has made it natural that recourse should
often be had to such an explanation; but unquestionably it is a
mistake. The annals of theology, both dogmatic and homiletic, from
the time of the earliest Fathers till now, abound in detailed
accounts of the future punishment of the wicked, whereof the
context, the train of thought, and all the intrinsic characteristics
of style and coherence, do not leave a shadow of doubt that they
were written as faithful, though inadequate, accounts of facts.
The Church, the immense bulk of Christendom, has in theory always
regarded hell and its dire concomitants as material facts,
and not as merely spiritual experiences.

Tertullian says, "The damned burn eternally without consuming, as
the volcanoes, which are vents from the stored subterranean fire
of hell, burn forever without wasting." 5 Cyprian declares that
"the wretched bodies of the condemned shall simmer and blaze in
those living fires." Augustine argues at great length and with
ingenious varieties of reasoning to show how the material bodies
of the damned may withstand annihilation in everlasting fire.6
Similar assertions, which cannot be figuratively explained, are
made by Irenaus, Jerome, Athanasius, Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventura,
Gerson, Bernard, and indeed by almost all the Christian writers.
Origen, who was a Platonist, and a heretic on many points, was
severely condemned for saying that the fire of hell was inward and
of the conscience, rather than outward and of the body. For the
strict materiality of the fire of hell we might adduce volumes of
authorities from nearly every province of the Church. Dr. Barrow
asserts that "our bodies will be afflicted continually by a
sulphurous flame, piercing the inmost sinews." John Whitaker
thinks "the bodies of the damned will be all salted with fire, so
tempered and prepared as to burn the more fiercely and yet never
consume." Jeremy Taylor teaches that "this temporal fire is but a
painted fire in respect of that penetrating and real fire in
hell." Jonathan Edwards soberly and believingly writes thus: "The
world will probably be converted into a great lake or liquid globe
of fire, a vast ocean of fire, in which the wicked shall be
overwhelmed, which will always be in tempest, in which they shall
be tost to and fro, having no rest day or night, vast waves or
billows of fire continually rolling over their heads, of which
they shall forever be full of a quick sense within and without:
their heads, their eyes, their tongues, their hands, their feet,
their loins, and their vitals shall forever be full of a glowing,
melting fire, fierce enough to melt the very rocks and elements;
and also they shall eternally be full of the most quick and lively
sense

5 Apol. cap. 47-48.

6 De Civ. Dei, lib. xxi. cap. 2 4.


to feel the torments; not for one minute, nor for one day, nor for
one age, nor for two ages, nor for a hundred ages, nor for ten
thousands of millions of ages one after another, but for ever and
ever, without any end at all, and never, never be delivered." 7
Calvin says, "Iterum quaro, unde factum est, ut tot gentes una cum
liberis eorum infantibus aterna morti involveret lapsus Ada absque
remedio, nisi quia Deo ita visum est? Decretum horribile fateor."
8 Outraged humanity before the contemplation cries, "O God, horror
hath overwhelmed me, for thou art represented as an omnipotent
Fiend." It is not the Father of Christ, but his Antagonist, whose
face glares down over such a scene as that! The above diabolical
passage at the recital of which from the pulpit, Edwards's
biographers tell us, "whole congregations shuddered and
simultaneously rose to their feet, smiting their breasts, weeping
and groaning" is not the arbitrary exaggeration of an individual,
but a fair representation of the actual tenets and vividly held
faith of the Puritans. It is also, in all its uncompromising
literality, a direct and inevitable part of the system of doctrine
which, with insignificant exceptions, professedly prevails
throughout Christendom at this hour. We know most persons will
hesitate at this statement; but let them look at the logic of the
case in the light of its history, and they must admit the
correctness of the assertion. Weigh the following propositions,
the accuracy of which no one, we suppose, will question, and it
will appear at once that there is no possibility of avoiding the
conclusion.

First, it is the established doctrine of Christendom that no one
can be saved without a supernatural regeneration, or sincere faith
in the vicarious atonement, or valid reception of sacramental
grace at the hands of a priest, conditions which it is not
possible that one in a hundred thousand of the whole human race
has fulfilled. Secondly, it is the established doctrine of
Christendom that there will be a general day of judgment, when all
men will be raised in the same bodies which they originally
occupied on earth, when Christ and his angels will visibly descend
from heaven, separate the elect from the reprobate, summon the
sheep to the blissful pastures on the right hand, but "Proclaim
The flocks of goats to folds of flame."

The world is to be burnt up, and the damned, restored to their
bodies, are to be driven into the everlasting fire prepared for
them. The resurrection of the body, still held in all Christendom,
taken in connection with the rest of the associated scheme,
necessitates the belief in the materiality of the torments of
hell. That eminent living divine, Dr. Gardiner Spring, says, "The
souls of all who have died in their sins are in hell; and there
their bodies too will be after the resurrection." 9 Mr. Spurgeon
also, in his graphic and fearful sermon on the "Resurrection of
the Dead," uses the following language: "When thou diest, thy soul
will be tormented alone; that will be a hell for it: but at the
day of judgment thy body will join thy soul, and then thou wilt
have twin hells, thy soul sweating drops of blood, and thy body
suffused with agony. In fire exactly like that which we have on
earth thy body will lie,

7 Edwards's Works, vol. viii. p. 166.

8 Instit., lib. iii. cap. xxiii. sect. 7.

9 The Glory of Christ, vol. ii. p. 258.


asbestos like, forever unconsumed, all thy veins roads for the
feet of pain to travel on, every nerve a string on which the devil
shall forever play his diabolical tune of Hell's Unutterable
Lament!" And, if this doctrine be true, no ingenuity, however
fertile in expedients and however fiendish in cruelty, can
possibly devise emblems and paint pictures half terrific enough to
present in imagination and equal in moral impression what the
reality will be to the sufferers. It is easy to speak or hear the
word "hell;" but to analyze its significance and realize it in a
sensitive fancy is difficult; and whenever it is done the fruit is
madness, as the bedlams of the world are shrieking in testimony at
this instant. The Revivalist preachers, so far from exaggerating
the frightful contents latent in the prevalent dogma concerning
hell, have never been able and no man is able to do any thing like
justice to its legitimate deductions. Edwards is right in
declaring, "After we have said our utmost and thought our utmost,
all that we have said and thought is but a faint shadow of the
reality." Think of yourselves, seized, just as you are now, and
flung into the roaring, glowing furnace of eternity; think of such
torture for an instant, multiply it by infinity, and then say if
any words can convey the proper force of impression. It is true
these intolerable details are merely latent and unappreciated by
the multitude of believers; and when one, roused to fanaticism by
earnest contemplation of his creed, dares to proclaim its logical
consequences and to exhort men accordingly, they shrink, and
charge him with excess. But they should beware ere they repudiate
the literal horrors of the historic orthodox doctrine for any
figurative and moral views accommodated to the advanced reason and
refinement of the times, beware how such an abandonment of a part
of their system affects the rest.

Give up the material fire, and you lose the bodily resurrection.
Renounce the bodily resurrection, and away goes the visible coming
of Christ to a general judgment. Abandon the general judgment, and
the climacteric completion of the Church scheme of redemption is
wanting. Mar the wholeness of the redemption plan, and farewell to
the incarnation and vicarious atonement. Neglect the vicarious
atonement, and down crumbles the hollow and broken shell of the
popular theology helplessly into its grave. The old literal
doctrine of a material hell, however awful its idea, as it has
been set forth in flaming views and threats by all the accredited
representatives of the Church, must be uncompromisingly clung to,
else the whole popular system of theology will be mutilated,
shattered, and lost from sight. The theological leaders understand
this perfectly well, and for the most part they act accordingly.
We have now under our hand numerous extracts, from writings
published within the last five years by highly influential
dignitaries in the different denominations, which for frightfulness
of outline and coloring, and for unshrinking assertions of
literality, will compare with those already quoted.

Especially read the following description of this kind from John
Henry Newman: "Oh, terrible moment for the soul, when it suddenly
finds itself at the judgment seat of Christ, when the Judge speaks
and consigns it to the jailers till it shall pay the endless debt
which lies against it! 'Impossible! I a lost soul? I separated
from hope and from peace forever? It is not I of whom the Judge so
spake! There is a mistake somewhere; Christ, Savior, hold thy
hand: one minute to explain it! My name is Demas: I am but Demas,
not Judas, or Nicholas, or Alexander, or Philetus, or Diotrephes.
What! eternal pain for me? Impossible! it shall not be!' And the
poor soul struggles and wrestles in the grasp of the mighty demon
which has hold of it, and whose every touch is torment. 'Oh,
atrocious!' it shrieks, in agony, and in anger too, as if the
very keenness of the infliction were a proof of its injustice.
'A second! and a third! I can bear no more! Stop, horrible fiend!
give over: I am a man, and not such as thou! I am not food for
thee, or sport for thee! I have been taught religion; I have had
a conscience; I have a cultivated mind; I am well versed in science
and art; I am a philosopher, or a poet, or a shrewd observer of men,
or a hero, or a statesman, or an orator, or a man of wit and humor.
Nay, I have received the grace of the Redeemer; I have attended the
sacraments for years; I have been a Catholic from a child; I died
in communion with the Church: nothing, nothing which I have ever
been, which I have ever seen, bears any resemblance to thee, and
to the flame and stench which exhale from thee: so I defy thee,
and abjure thee, O enemy of man!'

"Alas! poor soul! and, whilst it thus fights with that destiny
which it has brought upon itself and those companions whom it has
chosen, the man's name perhaps is solemnly chanted forth, and his
memory decently cherished, among his friends on earth. Men talk of
him from time to time; they appeal to his authority; they quote
his words; perhaps they even raise a monument to his name, or
write his history. 'So comprehensive a mind! such a power of
throwing light on a perplexed subject and bringing conflicting
ideas or facts into harmony!' 'Such a speech it was that he made
on such and such an occasion: I happened to be present, and never
shall forget it;' or, 'A great personage, whom some of us knew;'
or, 'It was a rule with a very worthy and excellent friend of
mine, now no more;' or, 'Never was his equal in society, so just
in his remarks, so lively, so versatile, so unobtrusive;' or, 'So
great a benefactor to his country and to his kind;' or, 'His
philosophy so profound.' 'Oh, vanity! vanity of vanities! all is
vanity! What profiteth it? What profiteth it? His soul is in hell,
O ye children of men! While thus ye speak, his soul is in the
beginning of those torments in which his body will soon have part,
and which will never die!" 10

Some theologians do not hesitate, even now, to say that "in hell
the bodies of the damned shall be nealed, as we speak of glass, so
as to endure the fire without being annihilated thereby." "Made of
the nature of salamanders," they shall be "immortal kept to feel
immortal fire." Well may we take up the words of the Psalmist and
cry out of the bottomless depths of disgust and anguish, "I am
overwhelmed with horror!"

Holding this abhorrent mass of representations, so grossly carnal
and fearful, up in the free light of to day, it cannot stand the
test of honest and resolute inquiry. It exists only by timid,
unthinking sufferance. It is kept alive, among the superstitious
vestiges of the outworn and out grown past, only by the power of
tradition, authority, and custom. In refutation of it we shall not
present here a prolonged detail of learned researches and logical
processes; for that would be useless to those who are enslaved to
the foregone conclusions of a creed and possessed by invulnerable
prejudices, while those who are thoughtful and candid can make

10 Sermon on "Neglect of Divine Calls and warnings."


such investigations themselves. We shall merely state, in a few
clear and brief propositions, the results in which we suppose all
free and enlightened minds who have adequately studied the subject
now agree, leaving the reader to weigh these propositions for
himself, with such further examination as inclination and
opportunity may cause him to bestow upon the matter.

We reject the common belief of Christians in a hell which is a
local prison of fire where the wicked are to be tortured by
material instruments, on the following grounds, appealing to God
for the reverential sincerity of our convictions, and appealing to
reason for their truth. First, the supposition that hell is an
enormous region in the hollow of the earth is a remnant of ancient
ignorance, a fancy of poets who magnified the grave into Hades, a
thought of geographers who supposed the earth to be flat and
surrounded by a brazen expanse bright above and black beneath.
Secondly, the soul, on leaving the body, is a spiritual substance,
if it be any substance at all, eluding our senses and all the
instruments of science. Therefore, in the nature of things, it
cannot be chained in a dungeon, nor be cognizant of suffering from
material fire or other physical infliction, but its woes must be
moral and inward; and the figment that its former fleshly body is
to be restored to it is utterly incredible, being an absurdity in
science, and not affirmed, as we believe, in Scripture. Thirdly,
the imagery of a subterranean hell of fire, brimstone, and undying
worms, as used in the Scriptures of the New Testament, is the same
as that drawn from heathen sources with modifications and employed
by the Pharisees before the time of Christ and his disciples; and
we must therefore, since neither Persians nor Pharisees were
inspired, either suppose that this imagery was adopted by the
apostles figuratively to convey moral truths, or else that they
were left, in common with their countrymen, at least partially
under the dominion of the errors of their time. Thus in every
alternative we deny that the interior of the earth is, or ever
will be, an abode of souls, full of fire, a hell in which the
damned are to be confined and physically tormented.

The elements of the popular doctrine of future punishment which we
thus reject are the falsities contributed by superstition and the
priestly spirit. The truths remaining in the doctrine, furnished
by conscience, reason, and Scripture, we will next exhibit, in
order not to dismiss this head, on the nature of future
punishment, with negations. What is the real character of the
retributions in the future state? We do not think they are
necessarily connected with any peculiar locality or essentially
dependent on any external circumstances. As Milton says, when
speaking of the best theologians, "To banish forever into a local
hell, whether in the air, or in the centre, or in that uttermost
and bottomless gulf of chaos deeper from holy bliss than the
world's diameter multiplied, they thought not a punishment so
proper and proportionate for God to inflict as to punish sin with
sin."

God does not arbitrarily stretch forth his arm, like an enraged
and vindictive man, and take direct vengeance on offenders; but by
his immutable laws, permeating all beings and governing all
worlds, evil is, and brings, its own punishment. The intrinsic
substances and forces of character and their organized
correlations with the realities of eternity, the ruling
principles, habits, and love of the soul, as they stand affected
towards the world to which they go, these are the conditions on
which experience depends, herein is the hiding of retribution.
"Each one," as Origen says, "kindles the flame of his own
appropriate fire." Superior spirits must look on a corrupted human
soul with a sorrow similar, though infinitely profounder, to that
with which the lapidary contemplates a splendid pearl with a dark
flaw in its centre. The Koran says, "Men sleep while they live,
and when they die they wake." The sudden infliction of pain in the
future state comes from the sudden unveiling of secrets,
quickening of the moral consciousness, and exposure of the naked
soul's fitnesses to the spiritual correspondences of its deserts.
It is said,  "Death does Away disguise: souls see each other
clear, At one glance, as two drops of rain in air Might look into
each other had they life."

The quality of the soul's character decides the elements of the
soul's life; and, as this becomes known on crossing the death
drawn line of futurity, conscious retribution then arises in the
guilty. This is a retribution which is reasonable, moral,
unavoidable, before which we may well pause and tremble. The great
moral of it is that we should not so much dread being thrust into
an eternal hell as we should fear carrying a hell with us when we
go into eternity. It is not so bad to be in hell as to be forced
truly to say, "Which way I fly is hell; myself am hell."

If these general ideas are correct, it follows even as all common
sense and reflection affirm that every real preparation for death
and for what is to succeed must be an ingrained characteristic,
and cannot consist in a mere opinion, mood, or act. Here we strike
at one of the shallowest errors, one of the most extensive and
rooted superstitions, of the world. Throughout the immense
kingdoms of the East, where the Brahmanic and Buddhist religions
hold sway over six hundred millions of men, the notion of
yadasanna that is, the merit instantaneously obtained when at the
point of death fully prevails. They suppose that in that moment,
regardless of their former lives and of their present characters,
by bringing the mind and the heart into certain momentary states
of thought and feeling, and meditating on certain objects or
repeating certain sacred words, they can suddenly obtain exemption
from punishment in their next life.11 The notion likewise obtains
almost universally among Christians, incredible as it may seem.
With the Romanists, who are three fourths of the Christian world,
it is a most prominent doctrine, everywhere vehemently proclaimed
and acted on: that is the meaning of the sacrament of extreme
unction, whereby, on submission to the Church and confession to a
priest, the venal sins of the dying man are forgiven, purgatory
avoided or lessened, and heaven made sure. The ghost of the King
of Denmark complains most of the unwarned suddenness of his
murder, not of the murder itself, but of its suddenness, which
left him no opportunity to save his soul: "Sleeping, was I by a
brother's hand Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,

11 Hardy, Manual of Buddhism, p. 489.


Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd; No reckoning made, but sent to
my account With all my imperfections on my head."

Hamlet, urged by supernatural solicitings to vengeance, finds his
murderous uncle on his knees at prayer. Stealing behind him with
drawn sword, he is about to strike the fatal blow, when the
thought occurs to him that the guilty man, if killed when at his
devotions, would surely go to heaven; and so he refrains until a
different opportunity. For to send to heaven the villain who had
slain his father,

"That would be hire and salary, not revenge. He took my father
grossly full of bread, With all his crimes broad blown, as flush
as May; And how his audit stands who knows save Heaven? But, in
our circumstance and course of thought, 'Tie heavy with him. And
am I then revenged To take him in the purging of his soul, When he
is fit and season'd for his passage? No; but when he is drunk,
asleep, enraged, Or in the incestuous pleasures of his bed, At
gaming, swearing, or about some act That has no relish of
salvation in't: Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damn'd and black As hell, whereto it
goes."

This, though poetry, is a fair representation of the mediaval
faith held by all Christendom in sober prose. The same train of
thought latently underlies the feelings of most Protestants too,
though it is true any one would now shrink from expressing it with
such frankness and horrible gusto. But what else means the minute
morbid anatomy of death beds, the prurient curiosity to know how
the dying one bore himself in the solemn passage? How commonly, if
one dies without physical anguish, and with the artificial
exultations of a fanatic, rejoiceful auguries are drawn! if he
dies in physical suffering, and with apparent regret, a gloomy
verdict is rendered! It is superstition, absurdity, and injustice,
all. Not the accidental physical conditions, not the transient
emotions, with which one passes from the earth, can decide his
fate, but the real good or evil of his soul, the genuine fitness
or unfitness of his soul, his soul's inherent merits of bliss or
bale. There is no time nor power in the instant of death, by any
magical legerdemain, to turn away the impending retributions of
wickedness and guilt. What is right, within the conditions of
Infinite wisdom and goodness, will be done in spite of all
traditional juggles and spasmodic spiritual attitudinizations.
What can it avail that a most vile and hardened wretch, when
dying, convulsed with fright and possessed with superstition,
compels, or strives to compel, a certain sentiment into his soul,
conjures, or tries to conjure, his mind into the relation of
belief towards a certain ancient and abstract dogma?

"Yet I've seen men who meant not ill, Compelling doctrine out of
death, With hell and heaven acutely poised Upon the turning of a
breath."

Cruelly racking the soul with useless probes of theological
questions and statements, they stand by the dying to catch the
words of his last breath, and, in perfect consistence with their
faith, they pronounce sentence accordingly. If, as the pallid lips
faintly close, they hear the magic words, "I put my trust in the
atoning blood of Christ," up goes the soul to heaven. If they hear
the less stereotyped words, "I have tried to do as well as I
could: I hope God will be merciful towards me and receive me,"
down goes the soul to hell. Strange and cruel superstition, that
imagines God to act towards men only according to the evanescent
temper and technical phrase with which they leave the world! The
most popular English preacher of the present day, the Rev. Mr.
Spurgeon, after referring to the fable that those before whom
Perseus held the head of Medusa were turned into stone in the very
act and posture of the moment when they saw it, says, "Death is
such a power. What I am when death is held before me, that I must
be forever. When my spirit goes, if God finds me hymning his
praise, I shall hymn it in heaven: doth he find me breathing out
oaths, I shall follow up those oaths in hell. As I die, so shall I
live eternally!" 12

No: the true preparation for death and the invisible realm of
souls is not the eager adoption of an opinion, the hurried
assumption of a mood, or the frightened performance of an outward
act: it is the patient culture of the mind with truth, the pious
purification of the heart with disinterested love, the consecrated
training of the life in holiness, the growth of the soul in habits
of righteousness, faith, and charity, the organization of divine
principles into character. Every real preparation of the soul for
death must be a characteristic rightly related to the immortal
realities to which death is the introduction of the soul. An evil
soul is not thrust into a physical and fiery hell, fenced in and
roofed over from the universal common; but it is revealed to
itself, and consciously enters on retributive relations. In the
spiritual world, whither all go at death, we suppose that like
perceives like, and thus are they saved or damned, having, by the
natural attraction and elective seeing of their virtues or vices,
the beatific vision of God, or the horrid vision of iniquity and
terror.

It cannot be supposed that God is a bounded shape so vast as to
fill the entire circuits of the creation. Spirit transcends the
categories of body, and it is absurd to apply the language of
finite things to the illimitable One, except symbolically. When we
die, we do not sink or soar to the realm of spirits, but are in
it, at once, everywhere; and the resulting experience will depend
on the prevailing elements of our moral being. If we are bad, our
badness is our banishment from God; if we are good, our goodness
is our union with God. In every world the true nature and law of
retribution lie in the recoil of conduct on character, and the
assimilated results ensuing. Take a soul that is saturated with
the rottenness of depravity into the core of heaven, and it is in
the heart of hell still. Take a soul that is compacted of divine

12 Sermons, 3d Series. Sermon XIV., Thoughts on the Last Battle.


realities to the very bottom of hell, and heaven is with it there.

We are treading on eternity, and infinitude is all around us. Now,
as well as hereafter, to us, the universe is action, the soul is
reaction, experience is the resultant. Death but unveils the
facts. Pass that great crisis, in the passage becoming conscious
of universal realities and of individual relations to them, and
the Father will say to the discordant soul, "Alienated one,
incapable of my embrace, change and come to me;" to the harmonious
soul, "Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine."

Having thus considered the question as to the nature of future
punishments, it now remains to discuss the question concerning
their duration. The fact of a just and varied punishment for souls
we firmly believe in. The particulars of it in the future, or the
degrees of its continuance, we think, are concealed from the
present knowledge of man. These details we do not profess to be
able to settle much about. We have but three general convictions
on the subject. First, that these punishments will be experienced
in accordance with those righteous and inmost laws which
indestructibly express the mind of God and rule the universe, and
will not be vindictively inflicted through arbitrary external
penalties. Secondly, that they will be accurately tempered to the
just deserts and qualifications of the individual sufferers. And
thirdly, that they will be alleviated, remedial, and limited, not
unmitigated, hopeless, and endless.

Upon the first of these thoughts perhaps enough has already been
said, and the second and third may be discussed together. Our
business, therefore, in the remainder of this dissertation, is to
disprove, if truth in the hands of reason and conscience will
enable us to disprove, the popular dogma which asserts that the
state of the condemned departed is a state of complete damnation
absolutely eternal. Against that form of representing future
punishment which makes it unlimited by conceiving the destiny of
the soul to be an eternal progress, in which their initiative
steps of good or evil in this life place different souls under
advantages or disadvantages never relatively to be lost, we have
nothing to object. It is reasonable, in unison with natural law,
and not frightful.13 But we are to deal, if we fairly can, a
refutation against the doctrine of an intense endless misery for
the wicked, as that doctrine is prevailingly taught and received.

The advocates of eternal damnation primarily plant themselves upon
the Christian Scriptures, and say that there the voice of an
infallible inspiration from heaven asserts it. First of all, let
us examine this ground, and see if they do not stand there only
upon erroneous premises sustained by prejudices. In the beginning,
then, we submit to candid minds that, if the literal eternity of
future torment be proclaimed in the New Testament, it is not a
part of the revelation contained in that volume; it is not a truth
revealed by inspiration; and that we maintain for this reason. The
same representations of the everlasting duration of future
punishment in hell, the same expressions for an unlimited
duration, which occur in the New Testament, were previously
employed by the Hindus, Greeks, and Pharisees, who were not
inspired, but must have drawn the doctrine from fallible sources.
Now, to say the least, it is as reasonable to suppose that these
expressions, when found in the New Testament, were

13 Lessing, Ueber Leibnitz von den Ewigen Strafen.


employed by the Saviour and the evangelists in conformity with the
prevailing thought and customary phraseology of their time, as to
conclude that they were derived from an unerring inspiration. The
former is a natural and reasonable inference; the latter is a
gratuitous hypothesis for which we have never heard of any
evidence. If its advocates will honestly attempt really to prove
it, we are convinced they will be forced to renounce it. The only
way they continue to hold it is by taking it for granted. If,
therefore, the strict eternity of future woe be declared in the
New Testament, we regard it not as a part of the inspired
utterance of Jesus, but as an error which crept in among others
from the surrounding notions of a benighted pagan age.

But, in the next place, we do not admit by any means that the
literal eternity of future damnation is taught in the Scriptures.
On the contrary, we deny such an assertion, for several reasons.
First, we argue from the usage of language before the New
Testament was written. The Egyptians, Hindus, Greeks, often make
most emphatic use of phrases declaring the eternal sufferings of
the wicked in hell; but they must have meant by "eternal" only a
very long time, because a fundamental portion of the great system
of thought on which their religions rested was the idea of
recurring epochs, sundered by immense periods statedly arriving,
when all things were restored, the hells and heavens vanished
away, and God was all in all. If the representations of the
eternal punishment of the wicked, made before the New Testament
was written, were not significant, with metaphysical severity, of
an eternity of duration, but only, with popular looseness, of an
extremely long period, the same may be true of the similar
expressions found in that record.

Secondly, we argue from the usage of language in and after the New
Testament age. The critics have collected, as any one desirous may
easily find, and as every theological scholar well knows, scores
of instances from the writings of authors contemporary with Christ
and his apostles, and succeeding them, where the Greek word for
"eternal" is used popularly, not strictly, in a rhetorical, not in
a philosophical, sense, not denoting a duration literally endless,
but one very prolonged. In all Greek literature the word is
undoubtedly used in a careless and qualified sense at least a
hundred times where it is used once with its close etymological
force. And the same is true of the corresponding Hebrew term. The
writer of the "Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs," at the close
of every chapter, describing the respective patriarch's death,
says, "he slept the eternal sleep," though by "eternal" he can
only mean a duration reaching to the time of the resurrection, as
plainly appears from the context. Iamblichus speaks of "an eternal
eternity of eternities."14 Origen, and Gregory of Nyssa, and
others, the fact of whose belief in final universal salvation no
one pretends to deny, do not hesitate with earnestness and
frequency to affirm the "eternal" punishment of the wicked in
hell. Now, if the contemporaries of the evangelists, and their
successors, often used the word "eternal" popularly, in a
figurative, limited sense, then it may be so employed when it
occurs in the New Testament in connection with the future pains of
the bad.

Thirdly, we argue from the phraseology and other peculiarities of
the representation of the future woe of the condemned, given in
the New Testament itself, that its authors

14 De Mysteriis Egyptiorum, cap. viii. sect. 10.


did not consciously intend to proclaim the rigid endlessness of
that woe.15 "These shall go away into everlasting punishment."
Since the word "everlasting" was often used simply to denote a
long period, what right has any one to declare that here it must
mean an absolutely unending duration? How does any one know that
the mind of Jesus dialectically grasped the metaphysical notion of
eternity and deliberately intended to express it? Certainly the
intrinsic probabilities are all the other way. Such a conclusion
is hardly compatible with the highly tropical style of speech
employed throughout the discourse. Besides, had he wished to
convey the overwhelming idea that the doom of the guilty would be
strictly irremediable, their anguish literally infinite, would he
not have taken pains to say so in definite, guarded, explained,
unmistakable terms? He might easily, by a precise prosaic
utterance, by explanatory circumlocutions, have placed that
thought beyond possibility of mistake.

Fourthly, we have an intense conviction not only that the leaving
of such a doctrine by the Savior in impenetrable obscurity and
uncertainty is irreconcilable with the supposition of his
deliberately holding it in his belief, but also that a belief in
the doctrine itself is utterly irreconcilable with the very
essentials of his teachings and spirit, his inmost convictions and
life. He taught the infinite and unchangeable goodness of God:
confront the doctrine of endless misery with the parable of the
prodigal son. He taught the doctrine of unconquerable forgiveness,
without apparent qualification: bring together the doctrine of
never relenting punishment and his petition on the cross, "Father,
forgive them." He taught that at the great judgment heaven or hell
would be allotted to men according to their lives; and the notion
of endless torment does not rest on the demerit of sinful deeds,
which is the standard of judgment that he holds up, but on
conceptions concerning a totally depraved nature, a God inflamed
with wrath, a vicarious atonement rejected, or some other ethnic
tradition or ritual consideration equally foreign to his mind and
hostile to his heart.

Fifthly, if we reason on the popular belief that the letter of
Scripture teaches only unerring truth, we have the strongest
argument of all against the eternal hopelessness of future
punishment. The doctrine of Christ's descent to hell underlies the
New Testament. We are told that after his death "he went and
preached to the spirits in prison." And again we read that "the
gospel was preached also to them that are dead." This New
Testament idea was unquestionably a vital and important feature in
the apostolic and in the early Christian belief. It necessarily
implies that there is probation, and that there may be salvation,
after death. It is fatal to the horrid dogma which commands all
who enter hell to abandon every gleam of hope, utterly and
forever. The symbolic force of the doctrine of Christ's descent
and preaching in hell is this, as Guder says in his "Appearance of
Christ among the Dead,"  that the deepest and most horrible depth
of damnation is not too deep and horrible for the pitying love
which wishes to save the lost: even into the veriest depth of hell
reaches down the love of God, and his beatific call sounds to the
most distant distances. There is no outermost darkness to which
his heavenly and all conquering light cannot shine. The book which
teaches that Christ went even into hell itself, to seek and to
save that which was lost,

15 Corrodi, Ueber die Ewigkeit der Hollenetrafen. In den Beitragen
zur Beforderung des Vernunft. Denk. n. s. w. heft vii. ss. 41-72.


does not teach that from the instant of death the fate of the
wicked is irredeemably fixed.

Upon the whole, then, we reach the clear conclusion that the
Christian Scriptures do not really declare the hopeless eternity
of future punishment.16 They speak popularly, not scientifically,
speak in metaphors which cannot be analyzed and reduced to
metaphysical precision. The subject is left with fearful warnings
in an impressive obscurity. There we must either leave it, in awe
and faith, undecided; or, if not content to do that, we must
examine and decide it on other grounds than those of traditional
authority, and with other instruments than those of textual
interpretation.

Let us next sift and weigh the arguments from reason by which the
dogma of the eternity of future misery is respectively defended
and assailed. The advocates of it have sought to support it by
four positions, which are such entire assumptions that only a word
will be requisite to expose each of them to logical rejection.
First, it is said that sin is infinite and deserves an infinite
penalty because it is an outrage against an infinite being.17 A
more absurd perversion of logic than this, a more glaring
violation of common sense, was never perpetrated. It directly
reverses the facts and subverts the legitimate inference. Is the
sin measured by the dignity of the lawgiver, or by the
responsibility of the law breaker? Does justice heed the wrath of
the offended, or the guilt of the offender? As well say that the
eye of man is infinite because it looks out into infinite space,
as affirm that his sin is infinite because committed against an
infinite God. That man is finite, and all his acts finite, and
consequently not in justice to be punished infinitely, is a plain
statement of fact which compels assent. All else is empty
quibbling, scholastic jugglery. The ridiculousness of the argument
is amusingly apparent as presented thus in an old Miracle Play,
wherein Justice is made to tell Mercy "That man, havinge offended
God who is endlesse, His endlesse punchement therefore may nevyr
seese."

The second device brought forward to sustain the doctrine in
question is more ingenious, but equally arbitrary. It is based on
the foreknowledge of God. He foresaw that the wicked, if allowed
to live on earth immortally in freedom, would go on forever in a
course of constant sin. They were therefore constructively guilty
of all the sin which they would have committed; but he saved the
world the ravages of their actual crimes by hurling them into hell
beneath the endless penalty of their latent infinite guilt. In
reply to those who argue thus, it is obvious to ask, whence did
they learn all this? There is no such scheme drawn up or hinted in
Scripture; and surely it is not within the possible discoveries of
reason. Plainly, it is not a known premise legitimating a result,
not a sound argument proving a conclusion: it is merely a conceit,
devised to explain and fortify a theory already embraced from
other considerations. It is an imaginative hypothesis without
confirmation.

16 Bretschneider, in his Systematische Entwickelung aller in der
Dogmatik vorkommenden Begriffe, gives the literature of this
subject in a list of thirty six distinct works. Sect. 139, Ewig
keit der Hollenstrafen.

17 Thomas Aquinas, Summa, pars iii. suppl. qu. 99, art. 1.


Thirdly, it has been said that future punishment will be endless
because sin will be so. The evil soul, growing ever more evil,
getting its habits of vice and passions of iniquity more deeply
infixed, and surrounded in the infernal realm with all the
incentives to wickedness, will become confirmed in depravity
beyond all power of cure, and, sinning forever, be necessarily
damned and tortured forever. The same objection holds to this
argument as to the former. Its premises are daring assumptions
beyond the province of our knowledge. They are assumptions, too,
contrary to analogy, probability, the highest laws of humanity,
and the goodness of God. Without freedom of will there cannot be
sin; and those who retain moral freedom may reform, cease to do
evil and learn to do good. There are invitations and opportunities
to change from evil to good here: why not hereafter? The will is
free now: what shall suddenly paralyze or annihilate that freedom
when the soul leaves the body? Why may not such amazing
revelations be made, such regenerating motives be brought to bear,
in the spiritual world, as will soften the hardest, convince the
stubbornest, and, sooner or later, transform and redeem the worst?
It is true the law of sinful habit is dark and fearful; but it is
frequently neutralized. The argument as the support of a positive
dogma is void because itself only hypothetical.

Some have tried to prove eternal condemnation by an assumed
necessity of moral gravitation. There is a great deal of loose and
hasty talk afloat about the law of affinities distributing souls
hereafter in fitted companies. Similar characters will
spontaneously come together. The same qualities and grades of
sympathy will coalesce, the unlike will fly apart. And so all
future existence will be arranged in circles of dead equality on
stagnant levels of everlasting hopelessness of change. The law of
spiritual attraction is no such force as that, produces no such
results. It is broken up by contrasts, changes, multiplicity of
other interacting forces. We are not only drawn by affinity to
those like ourselves, but often still more powerfully, with
rebuking and redeeming effect, to those above us that we may
become like them, to those beneath us that we may pity and help
them. The law of affinity is not in moral beings a simple force
necessitating an endless uniformity of state, but a complex of
forces, sometimes mingling the unlike by stimulants of wedded
similarity and contrast to bless and advance all, now punishing,
now rewarding, but ever finally intended to redeem. Reasoning by
sound analogy, the heavens and hells of the future state are not
monotonous circles each filled with mutually reflecting
personalities, but one fenceless spiritual world of distinctive,
ever varying degrees, sympathetic and contrasted life, circulating
freshness, variety of attractions and repulsions, divine
advancement.

Finally, it is maintained by many that endless misery is the fate
of the reprobate because such is the sovereign pleasure of God.
This is no argument, but a desperate assertion. It virtually
confesses that the doctrine cannot be defended by reason, but is
to be thrown into the province of wilful faith. A host of gloomy
theologians have taken this ground as the forlorn hope of their
belief. The damned are eternally lost because that is the
arbitrary decree of God. Those who thus abandon reason for
dogmatic authority and trample on logic with mere reiterated
assertion can only be met with the flat denial, such is not the
arbitrary pleasure of God. Then, as far as argument is concerned,
the controversy ends where it began.

These four hypotheses include all the attempted justifications of
the doctrine of eternal misery that we have ever seen offered from
the stand point of independent thought. We submit that, considered
as proofs, they are utterly sophistical.

There are three great arguments in refutation of the endlessness
of future punishment, as that doctrine is commonly held. The first
argument is ethical, drawn from the laws of right; the second is
theological, drawn from the attributes of God; the third is
experimental, drawn from the principles of human nature. We shall
subdivide these and consider them successively.

In the first place, we maintain that the popular doctrine of
eternal punishment is unjust, because it overlooks the differences
in the sins of men, launching on all whom it embraces one infinite
penalty of undiscriminating damnation. The consistent advocates of
the doctrine, the boldest creeds, unflinchingly avow this, and
defend it by the plea that every sin, however trivial, is equally
an offence against the law of the infinite God with the most
terrible crime, and equally merits an infinite punishment. Thus,
by a metaphysical quibble, the very basis of morals is overturned,
and the child guilty of an equivocation through fear is put on a
level with the pirate guilty of robbery and murder through cold
blooded avarice and hate. In a hell where all are plunged in
physical fire for eternity there are no degrees of retribution,
though the degrees of evil and demerit are as numerous and various
as the individuals. The Scriptures say, "Every man shall receive
according to the deeds done in the body:" some "shall be beaten
with many stripes," others "with few stripes."

The first principle of justice exact discrimination of judgment
according to deeds and character is monstrously violated and all
differences blotted out by the common dogma of hell. A better
thought is shown in the old Persian legend which tells that God
once permitted Zoroaster to accompany him on a visit to hell. The
prophet saw many in grievous torments. Among the rest, he saw one
who was deprived of his right foot. Asking the meaning of this,
God replied, "Yonder sufferer was a king who in his whole life did
but one kind action. Passing once near a dromedary which, tied up
in a state of starvation, was vainly striving to reach some
provender placed just beyond its utmost effort, the king with his
right foot compassionately kicked the fodder within the poor
beast's reach. That foot I placed in heaven: the rest of him is
here." 18

Again: there is the grossest injustice in the first assumption or
fundamental ground on which the theory we are opposing rests. That
theory does not teach that men are actually damned eternally on
account of their own personal sins, but on account of original
sin: the eternal tortures of hell are the transmitted penalty
hurled on all the descendants of Adam, save those who in some way
avoid it, in consequence of his primal transgression. Language
cannot characterize with too much severity, as it seems to us, the
injustice, the immorality, involved in this scheme. The belief in
a sin, called "original," entailed by one act of one person upon a
whole immortal race of countless millions, dooming vast majorities
of them helplessly to a hopeless torture prison, can rest only on
a sleep of reason and a delirium of

18 Wilson's ed. of Mill's Hist. of British India, vol. i. p. 429,
note.


conscience. Such a "sin" is no sin at all; and any penalty
inflicted on it would not be the necessary severity of a holy God,
but a species of gratuitous vengeance. For sin, by the very
essence of ethics, is the free, intelligent, wilful violation of a
law known to be right; and every punishment, in order to be just,
must be the suffering deserved by the intentional fault, the
personal evil, of the culprit himself. The doctrine before us
reverses all this, and sends untold myriads to hell forever for no
other sin than that of simply having been born children of
humanity. Born totally depraved, hateful to God, helpless through
an irresistible proclivity to sin and an ineradicable aversion to
evangelical truth, and asked to save themselves, asked by a
mockery like that of fettering men hand and foot, clothing them in
leaden straitjackets, and then flinging them overboard, telling
them not to drown! What justice, what justice, is here in this?

Thirdly, the profound injustice of this doctrine is seen in its
making the alternative of so unutterably awful a doom hinge upon
such trivial particulars and upon merely fortuitous circumstances.
One is born of pious, orthodox parents, another of heretics or
infidels: with no difference of merit due to them, one goes to
heaven, the other goes to hell. One happens to form a friendship
with an evangelical believer, another is influenced by a
rationalist companion: the same fearful diversity of fate ensues.
One is converted by a single sermon: if he had been ill that day,
or had been detained from church by any other cause, his fated bed
would have been made in hell, heaven closed against him forever.
One says, "I believe in the Trinity of God, in the Deity of
Christ;" and, dying, he goes to heaven. Another says, "I believe
in the Unity of God and in the humanity of Christ:" he, dying,
goes to hell. Of two children snatched away by disease when twenty
four hours old, one has been baptized, the other not: the angels
of heaven welcome that, the demons of hell clutch this. The
doctrine of infant damnation, intolerably painful as it is, has
been proclaimed thousands of times by authoritative teachers and
by large parties in the Church, and is a logical sequence from the
popular theology. It is not a great many years since people heard,
it is said, the celebrated statement that "hell is paved with the
skulls of infants not a span long!" Think of the everlasting bliss
or misery of a helpless infant depending on the petty accident of
whether it was baptized or not! There are hypothetical cases like
the following: If one man had died a year earlier, when he was a
saint, he would not have fallen from grace, and renounced his
faith, and rolled in crimes, and sunk to hell. If another had
lived a year later, he would have been smitten with conviction,
and would have repented, and made his peace, and gone to heaven.
To the everlasting loss of each, an eternity of bliss against an
eternity of woe hung fatally poised on the time appointed for him
to die. Oh how the bigoted pride, the exclusive dogmatism of self
styled saints, self flatterers equally satisfied of their own
election and of the rejection of almost everybody else, ought to
sink and fade when they reflect on the slight chances, mere
chances of time and place, by which the infinite contingency has
been, or is to be, decided! They should heed the impregnable good
sense and logic conveyed in the humane hearted poet's satirical
humor when he advises such persons to

"Consider well, before, like Hurlothrumbo,
They aim their clubs at any creed on earth,
That by the simple accident of birth
They might have been high priests to Mumbo Jumbo."

It is evidently but the rankest mockery of justice to suspend an
infinite woe upon an accident out of the power of the party
concerned.

Still further: there is a tremendous injustice even in that form
of the doctrine of endless punishment, the most favorable of all,
which says that no one is absolutely foreordained to hell, but
that all are free, and that life is a fixed season of probation
wherein the means of salvation are offered to all, and if they
neglect or spurn them the fault is their own, and eternal pain
their merited portion. The perfectly apparent inconsistency of
this theory with known facts is fatal to it, since out of every
generation there are millions on millions of infants, idiots,
maniacs, heathen, within whose hearing or power the means of
salvation by a personal appropriation of the atoning merit of
Christ's blood were never brought; so that life to them is no
scene of Christian probation. But, waiving that, the probation is
not a fair one to anybody. If the indescribable horror of an
eternal damnation be the consequence that follows a certain course
while we are on trial in this life, then a knowledge of that fact
in all its bearings ought to be given us, clear, explicit, beyond
any possibility of mistake or doubt. Otherwise the probation is
not fair. To place men in the world, as millions are constantly
placed, beset by allurements of every sort within and without, led
astray by false teachings and evil examples, exposed in ignorance,
bewildered with uncertainties of conflicting doubts and surmises,
either never hearing of the way of salvation at all, or hearing of
it only in terms that seem absurd in themselves and unaccompanied
by sufficient, if by any, proof, and then, if under these fearful
hazards they waver from strict purity of heart, rectitude of
conduct, or orthodoxy of belief, to condemn them to a world of
everlasting agony, would be the very climax of cruelty, with no
touch of mercy or color of right.

Beneath such a rule the universe should be shrouded in the
blackness of despair, and God be thought of with a convulsive
shudder. Such a "probation" would be only like that on which the
Inquisitors put their victims who were studiously kept ignorant in
their dungeons, waiting for the rack and the flame to be made
ready. Few persons will deny that, as the facts now are, a good,
intelligent, candid man may doubt the reality of an endless
punishment awaiting men in hell. But if the doctrine be true, and
he is on probation under it, is it fair that he should be left
honestly in ignorance or doubt about it? No: if it be true, it
ought to be burned into his brain and crushed into his soul with
such terrific vividness and abiding constancy of impression as
would deter him ever from the wrong path, keep him in the right. A
distinguished writer has represented a condemned delinquent,
suffering on, and still interminably on, in hell, thus complaining
of the unfairness of his probation: "Oh, had it been possible for
me to conceive even the most diminutive part of the weight and
horror of this doom, I should have shrunk from every temptation to
sin, with the most violent recoil."19

19 John Foster, Letter on the Eternity of Future Punishments.

If an endless hell is to be the lot of the sinner, he ought to
have an infallible certainty of it, with all possible helps and
incentives to avoid it. Such is not the case; and therefore, since
God is just and generous, the doctrine is not true.

Finally, the injustice of the dogma of everlasting punishment is
most emphatically shown by the fact that there is no sort of
correspondence or possible proportion between the offence and the
penalty, between the moment of sinning life and the eternity of
suffering death. If a child were told to hold its breath thirty
seconds, and, failing to do it, should be confined in a dark
solitary dungeon for seventy years amidst loathsome horrors and
speechless afflictions, and be frightfully scourged six times a
day for that entire period, there would be just proportion nay, an
inexpressibly merciful proportion between the offence and the
punishment, in comparison with that which, being an absolutely
infinite disproportion, does not really admit of any comparison,
the sentence to an eternal abode in hell as a penalty for the
worst kind and the greatest amount of crime a man could possibly
crowd into a life of a thousand years. Think, then, of passing
such a sentence on one who has struggled hard against temptation,
and yielded but rarely, and suffered much, and striven to do as
well as he could, and borne up courageously, with generous
resolves and affections, and died commending his soul to God in
hope.

"Fearfully fleet is this life," says one, "and yet in it eternal
life is lost or won: profoundly wretched is this life, yet in it
eternal bliss is lost or won." Weigh the words adequately, and say
how improbable is the thought, and how terribly unjust. Perhaps
there have already lived upon this earth, and died, and passed
into the invisible world, two hundred thousand millions of men,
the everlasting doom of every one of whom, it is imagined, was
fixed unalterably during the momentary period of his mortal
transit from cradle to grave. In respect of eternity, six thousand
years and this duration must be reduced to threescore years and
ten, since that is all that each generation enjoyed is the same as
one hour. Suppose, now, that all these two hundred thousand
millions of men were called into being at once; that they were
placed on probation for one hour; that the result of their choice
and action in that hour was to decide their irrevocable fate,
actually forever, to ecstatic bliss or to ecstatic woe; that
during that hour they were left, as far as clear and stable
conviction goes, in utter ignorance and uncertainty as to the
great realities of their condition, courted by opposing theories
and modes of action; and that, when the clock of time knelled the
close of that awful, that most evanescent hour, the roaring gulf
of torture yawned, and its jaws of flame and blackness closed over
ninety nine hundredths of them for eternity! That is a fair
picture of the popular doctrine of temporal probation and eternal
punishment, when examined in the light of the facts of human life.
Of course, no man at this day, who is in his senses and thinks
honestly upon the subject, can credit such a doctrine, unless
indeed he believes that a lawless fiend sits on the throne of the
universe and guides the helm of destiny. And lives there a man of
unperverted soul who would not decidedly prefer to have no God
rather than to have such a one? Ay, "Rather than so, come FATE
into the list And champion us to the utterance."

Let us be atheists, and bow to mortal Chance, believe there is no
pilot at all at the rudder of Creation's vessel, no channel before
the prow, but the roaring breakers of despair to right and left,
and the granite bluff of annihilation full in front!

In the next place, then, we argue against the doctrine of eternal
damnation that it is incompatible with any worthy idea of the
character of God. God is love; and love cannot consent to the
useless torture of millions of helpless souls for eternity. The
gross contradiction of the common doctrine of hell to the spirit
of love is so obvious that its advocates, unable to deny or
conceal it, have often positively proclaimed it, avowing that, in
respect to the wicked, God is changed into a consuming fire full
of hatred and vengeance. But that is unmitigated blasphemy. God is
unchangeable, his very nature being disinterested, immutable
goodness. The sufferings of the wicked are of their own
preparation. If a pestilential exhalation is drawn from some
decaying substance, it is not the fault of any alteration in the
sunlight. But a Christian writer assures us that when "the damned
are packed like brick in a kiln, so bound that they cannot move a
limb nor even an eyelid, God shall blow the fires of hell through
them for ever and ever."

And another writer says, "All in God is turned into fury: in hell
he draws out into the field all his forces, all his attributes,
whereof wrath is the leader and general."20 Such representations
may be left without a comment. Every enlightened mind will
instantly reject with horror the doctrine which necessitates a
conception of God like that here pictured forth. God is a being of
infinite forgiveness and magnanimity. To the wandering sinner,
even while a great way off, his arms are open, and his inviting
voice, penetrating the farthest abysses, says, "Return." His sun
shines and his rain falls on the fields of the unjust and
unthankful. What is it, the instant mortals pass the line of
death, that shall transform this Divinity of yearning pity and
beneficence into a devil of relentless hate and cruelty? It cannot
be. We shall find him dealing towards us in eternity as he does
here. An eminent theologian says, "If mortal men kill the body
temporally in their anger, it is like the immortal God to damn the
soul eternally in his." "God holds sinners in his hands over the
mouth of hell as so many spiders; and he is dreadfully provoked,
and he not only hates them, but holds them in utmost contempt, and
he will trample them beneath his feet with inexpressible
fierceness, he will crush their blood out, and will make it fly so
that it will sprinkle his garments and stain all his raiment."21
Oh, ravings and blasphemies of theological bigotry, blinded with
old creeds, inflamed with sectarian hate, soaked in the gall of
bitterness, encompassed by absurd delusions, you know not what you
say!

A daring writer of modern times observes that God can never say
from the last tribunal, in any other than a limited and
metaphorical sense, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire," because that would not be doing as he would be done by.
Saving the appearance of irreverence, we maintain his assertion to
be just, based on impregnable morality. A recent religious poet
describes Jesus, on descending into hell after his crucifixion,

20 For these and several other quotations we are indebted to the
Rev. T. J. Sawyer's work, entitled "Endless Punishment: its Origin
and Grounds Examined."

21 Edwards's works, vol. vii. p. 499.


meeting Judas, and when he saw his pangs and heard his stifled
sobs, "Pitying, Messiah gazed, and had forgiven, But Justice her
eternal bar opposed." 22

The instinctive sentiment is worthy of Jesus, but the deliberate
thought is worthy of Calvin. Why is it so calmly assumed that God
cannot pardon, and that therefore sinners must be given over to
endless pains? By what proofs is so tremendous a conclusion
supported? Is it not a gratuitous fiction of theologians? The
exemplification of God's character and conduct given in the
spirit, teachings, and deeds of Christ is full of a free mercy, an
eager charity that rushes forward to forgive and embrace the
sinful and wretched wanderers. He is a very different being whom
the evangelist represents saying of Jesus, "This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased," from Him whom Professor Park
describes "drawing his sword on Calvary and smiting down his Son!"

Why may not pardon from unpurchased grace be vouchsafed as well
after death as before? What moral conditions alter the case then?
Ah! it is only the metaphysical theories of the theologians that
have altered the case in their fancies and made it necessary for
them to limit probation. The attributes of God are laws, his modes
of action are the essentialities of his being, the same in all the
worlds of boundless extension and all the ages of endless
duration. How far some of the theologians have perverted the
simplicity of the gospel, or rather how utterly they have strayed
from it, may be seen when we remember that Christ said concerning
little children, "Of such is the kingdom of heaven," and then
compare with this declaration such a statement as this: "Reprobate
infants are vipers of vengeance which Jehovah will hold over hell
in the tongs of his wrath, till they writhe up and cast their
venom in his face." We deliberately assert that no depraved,
insane, pagan imagination ever conceived of a fiend malignant and
horrible enough to be worthily compared with this Christian
conception of God. Edwards repeatedly says, in his two sermons on
the "Punishment of the Wicked" and "Sinners in the Hands of an
Angry God," "You cannot stand an instant before an infuriated
tiger even: what, then, will you do when God rushes against you in
all his wrath?" Is this Christ's Father?

The God we worship is "the Father of lights, with whom there is
neither variableness nor shadow of turning, from whom cometh down
every good and every perfect gift." It is the Being referred to by
the Savior when he said, in exultant trust and love, "I am not
alone; for the Father is with me." It is the infinite One to whom
the Psalmist says, "Though I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art
there." If God is in hell, there must be mercy and hope there,
some gleams of alleviation and promise there, surely; even as the
Lutheran creed says that "early on Easter morning, before his
resurrection, Christ showed himself to the damned in hell." If God
is in hell, certainly it must be to soothe, to save. "Oh, no,"
says the popular theologian. Let us quote his words. "Why is God
here? To keep the tortures of the damned freshly plied, and to see
that no one ever escapes!" Can the climax of horror and

22 Lord, Christ in Hades.


blasphemy any further go? How much more reasonable, more moral and
Christ like, to say, with one of the best authors of our time,

"What hell may be I know not: this I know: I cannot lose the
presence of the Lord: One arm humility takes hold upon His dear
Humanity; the other love Clasps his Divinity: so, where I go He
goes; and better fire wall'd Hell with him Than golden gated
Paradise without."

The irreconcilableness of the common doctrine of endless misery
with any worthy idea of God is made clear by a process of
reasoning whose premises are as undeniable as its logic is
irrefragable and its conclusion consolatory. God is infinite
justice and goodness. His purpose in the creation, therefore, must
be the diffusion and triumph of holiness and blessedness. God is
infinite wisdom and power. His design, therefore, must be
fulfilled. Nothing can avail to thwart the ultimate realization of
all his intentions. The rule of his omnipotent love pervades
infinitude and eternity as a shining leash of law whereby he holds
every child of his creation in ultimate connection with his
throne, and will sooner or later bring even the worst soul to a
returning curve from the career of its wildest orbit. In the realm
and under the reign of a paternal and omnipotent God every being
must be salvable. Remorse itself is a recoil which may fling the
penitent into the lap of forgiving love. Any different thought
appears narrow, cruel, heathen. The blackest fiend that glooms the
midnight air of hell, bleached through the merciful purgation of
sorrow and loyalty, may become a white angel and be drawn into
heaven.

Lavater writes of himself, and the same is true of many a good
man, "I embraced in my heart all that is called man, past,
present, and future times and nations, the dead, the damned, even
Satan. I presented them all to God with the warmest wishes that he
would have mercy upon all." This is the true spirit of a good man.
And is man better than his Maker? We will answer that question,
and leave this head of the discussion, by presenting an Oriental
apologue.

God once sat on his inconceivable throne, and far around him, rank
after rank, angels and archangels, seraphim and cherubim, resting
on their silver wings and lifting their dazzling brows, rose and
swelled, with the splendors of an illimitable sea of immortal
beings, gleaming and fluctuating to the remotest borders of the
universe. The anthem of their praise shook the pillars of the
creation, and filled the vault of heaven with a pulsing flood of
harmony. When, as they closed their hymn, stole up, faint heard,
as from some most distant region of all space, in dim accents
humbly rising, a responsive "Amen." God asked Gabriel, "Whence
comes that Amen?" The hierarchic peer replied, "It rises from the
damned in hell." God took, from where it hung above his seat, the
key that unlocks the forty thousand doors of hell, and, giving it
to Gabriel, bade him go release them. On wings of light sped the
enraptured messenger, rescued the millions of the lost, and, just
as they were, covered all over with the traces of their sin,
filth, and woe, brought them straight up into the midst of heaven.
Instantly they were transformed, clothed in robes of glory, and
placed next to the throne; and henceforth, for evermore, the
dearest strain to God's ear, of all the celestial music, was that
borne by the choir his grace had ransomed from hell. And, because
there is no envy or other selfishness in heaven, this promotion
sent but new thrills of delight and gratitude through the heights
and depths of angelic life.

We come now to the last class of reasons for disbelieving the
dogma of eternal damnation, namely, those furnished by the
principles of human nature and the truths of human experience. The
doctrine, as we think can be clearly shown, is literally
incredible to the human mind and literally intolerable to the
human heart. In the first place, it is, viewed in the abstract,
absolutely incredible because it is inconceivable: no man can
possibly grasp and appreciate the idea. The nearest approximation
to it ever made perhaps is in De Quincey's gorgeous elaboration of
the famous Hindu myth of an enormous rock finally worn away by the
brushing of a gauze veil; and that is really no approximation at
all, since an incommensurable chasm always separates the finite
and the infinite. John Foster says, "It is infinitely beyond the
highest archangel's faculty to apprehend a thousandth part of the
horror of the doom to eternal damnation." The Buddhists, who
believe that the severest sentence passed on the worst sinner will
be brought to an end and his redemption be attained, use the
following illustration of the staggering periods that will first
elapse. A small yoke is thrown into the ocean and borne about in
every direction by the various winds. Once in a hundred thousand
years a blind tortoise rises to the surface of the water. Will the
time ever come when that tortoise shall so rise up that its neck
shall enter the hole of the yoke? It may, but the time required
cannot be told; and it is equally difficult for the unwise man,
who has entered one of the great hells, to obtain deliverance.
There is a remarkable specimen of the attempt to set forth the
idea of endless misery, by Suso, a mystic preacher who flourished
several centuries ago. It runs thus. "O eternity, what art thou?
Oh, end without end! O father, and mother, and all whom we love!
May God be merciful unto you for evermore! for we shall see you no
more to love you; we must be separated forever! O separation,
everlasting separation, how painful art thou! Oh, the wringing of
hands! Oh, sighing, weeping, and sobbing, unceasing howling and
lamenting, and yet never to be pardoned! Give us a millstone, says
the damned, as large as the whole earth, and so wide in
circumference as to touch the sky all around, and let a little
bird come in a hundred thousand years, and pick off a small
particle of the stone, not larger than the tenth part of a grain
of millet, and after another hundred thousand years let him come
again, so that in ten hundred thousand years he would pick off as
much as a grain of millet, we wretched sinners would desire
nothing but that thus the stone might have an end, and thus our
pains also; yet even that cannot be."23 But, after all the
struggles of reason and all the illustrations of laboring
imagination, the meaning of the phrase "eternal suffering in hell"
remains remote, dim, unrealized, an abstraction in words. If we
could adequately apprehend it, if its full significance should
burst upon us, as sometimes in fearful dreams the spaceless,
timeless, phantasmal, reeling sense of

23 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 210.


the infinite seems to be threatening to break into the brain, an
annihilating shudder would seize and destroy the soul.

We say, therefore, that the doctrine of the eternity of future
punishment is not believed as an intellectually conceived truth,
because that is a metaphysical impossibility. But more: we affirm,
in spite of the general belief in it publicly professed, that it
is actually held by hardly any one as a practical vivid belief
even within the limits wherein, as an intellectual conception, it
is possible. When intellect and imagination do not fail, heart and
conscience do, with sickened faintness and convulsive protest. In
his direful poem on the Last Day, Young makes one of the condemned
vainly beg of God to grant "This one, this slender, almost no,
request: When I have wept a thousand lives away, When torment is
grown weary of its prey, When I have raved of anguish'd years in
fire Ten thousand thousands, let me then expire."

Such a thought, when confronted with any generous holy sentiment
or with any worthy conception of the Divine character, is
practically incredible. The men all around us in whose Church
creed such a doctrine is written down do not truly believe it.
"They delude themselves," as Martineau well says, "with the mere
fancy and image of a belief. The death of a friend who departs
from life in heresy affects them in the same way as the loss of
another whose creed was unimpeachable: while the theoretic
difference is infinite, the practical is virtually nothing." Who
that had a child, parent, wife, brother, or other precious friend,
condemned to be roasted to death by a slow fire, would not be
frantic with agony? But there are in the world literally millions
on millions, some of whose nearest and dearest ones have died
under circumstances which, by their professed creeds, can leave no
doubt that they must roast in the fires of hell in an anguish
unutterably fiercer, and for eternity, and yet they go about as
smilingly, engage in the battle for money, in the race for fame,
in all the vain shows and frivolous pleasures of life, as eagerly
and as gayly as others. How often do we see the literal truth of
this exemplified! It is clear they do not believe in the dogma to
whose technical terms they formally subscribe.

A small proportion of its professors do undeniably believe the
doctrine so far as it can be sanely believed; and accordingly the
world is to them robed in a sable shroud, and life is an awful
mockery, under a flashing surface of sports concealing a
bottomless pit of horror. Every observing person has probably
known some few in his life who, in a degree, really believed the
common notions concerning hell, and out of whom, consequently, all
geniality, all bounding impulses, all magnanimous generosities,
were crushed, and their countenances wore the perpetual livery of
mourning, despair, and misanthropy. We will quote the confessions
of two persons who may stand as representatives of the class of
sincere believers in the doctrine. The first is a celebrated
French preacher of a century and a half ago, the other a very
eminent American divine of the present day. Saurin says, in his
great sermon on Hell, "I sink under the weight of this subject,
and I find in the thought a mortal poison which diffuseth itself
into every period of my life, rendering society tiresome,
nourishment insipid, pleasure disgustful, and life itself a cruel
bitter." Albert Barnes writes, "In the distress and anguish of my
own spirit, I confess I see not one ray to disclose to me the
reason why man should suffer to all eternity. I have never seen a
particle of light thrown on these subjects that has given a
moment's ease to my tortured mind. It is all dark dark dark to my
soul; and I cannot disguise it."

Such a state of mind is the legitimate result of an endeavor
sincerely to grasp and hold the popularly professed belief. So
often as that endeavor reaches a certain degree of success, and
the idea of an eternal hell is reduced from its vagueness to an
embraced conception, the over fraught heart gives way, the brain,
stretched on too high a tension, reels, madness sets in, and one
more case is added to that list of maniacs from religious causes
which, according to the yearly reports of insane asylums, forms so
large a class. Imagine what a vast and sudden change would come
over the spirit and conduct of society if nineteen twentieths of
Christendom believed that at the end of a week a horrible influx
of demons, from some insurgent region, would rush into our world
and put a great majority of our race to death in excruciating
tortures! But the doctrine of future punishment professed by
nineteen twentieths of Christendom is, if true, an evil
incomparably worse than that, though every element of its
dreadfulness were multiplied by millions beyond the power of
numeration; and yet all goes on as quietly, the most of these
fancied believers live as chirpingly, as if heaven were sure for
everybody! Of course in their hearts they do not believe the
terrific formula which drops so glibly from their tongues.

Again: it is a fatal objection to the doctrine in question that if
it be true it must destroy the happiness of the saved and fill all
heaven with sympathetic woe. Jesus teaches that "there is joy in
heaven over every sinner that repenteth." By a moral necessity,
then, there is sorrow in heaven over the wretched, lost soul. That
sorrow, indeed, may be alleviated, if not wholly quenched, by the
knowledge that every retributive pang is remedial, and that God's
glorious design will one day be fully crowned in the redemption of
the last prodigal. But what shall solace or end it if they know
that hell's borders are to be enlarged and to rage with avenging
misery forever? The good cannot be happy in heaven if they are to
see the ascending smoke and hear the resounding shrieks of a hell
full of their brethren, the children of a common humanity, among
whom are many of their own nearest relatives and dearest friends.

True, a long list of Christian writers may be cited as maintaining
that this is to be a principal element in the felicity of the
redeemed, gloating over the tortures of the damned, singing the
song of praise with redoubled emphasis as they see their parents,
their children, their former bosom companions, writhing and
howling in the fell extremities of torture. Thomas Aquinas says,
"That the saints may enjoy their beatitude and the grace of God
more richly, a perfect sight of the punishment of the damned is
granted to them."24 Especially did the Puritans seem to revel in
this idea, that "the joys of the blessed were to be deepened and
sharpened by constant contrast with the sufferings of the damned."
One of them thus expresses the delectable thought: "The sight of
hell torments will exalt the happiness of the saints forever, as a
sense of the opposite misery always increases the relish of any
pleasure."

24 Summa, pars iii., Suppl. Qu. 93, art. i.


But perhaps Hopkins caps the climax of the diabolical pyramid of
these representations, saying of the wicked, "The smoke of their
torment shall ascend up in the sight of the blessed for ever and
ever, and serve, as a most clear glass always before their eyes,
to give them a bright and most affecting view. This display of the
Divine character will be most entertaining to all who love God,
will give them the highest and most ineffable pleasure. Should the
fire of this eternal punishment cease, it would in a great measure
obscure the light of heaven and put an end to a great part of the
happiness and glory of the blessed."25 That is to say, in plain
terms, the saints, on entering their final state of bliss in
heaven, are converted into a set of unmitigated fiends, out
sataning Satan, finding their chief delight in forever comparing
their own enjoyments with the pangs of the damned, extracting
morsels of surpassing relish from every convulsion or shriek of
anguish they see or hear. It is all an exquisite piece of
gratuitous horror arbitrarily devised to meet a logical exigency
of the theory its contrivers held. When charged that the knowledge
of the infinite woe of their friends in hell must greatly affect
the saints, the stern old theologians, unwilling to recede an inch
from their dogmas, had the amazing hardihood to declare that, so
far from it, on the contrary their wills would so blend with God's
that the contemplation of this suffering would be a source of
ecstasy to them. It is doubly a blank assumption of the most
daring character, first assuming, by an unparalleled blasphemy,
that God himself will take delight in the pangs of his creatures,
and secondly assuming, by a violation of the laws of human nature
and of every principle of morals, that the elect will do so too.
In this world a man actuated by such a spirit would be styled a
devil. On entering heaven, what magic shall work such a demoniacal
change in him? There is not a word, direct or indirect, in the
Scriptures to warrant the dreadful notion; nor is there any
reasonable explanation or moral justification of it given by any
of its advocates, or indeed conceivable. The monstrous hypothesis
cannot be true. Under the omnipotent, benignant government of a
paternal God, each change of character in his chosen children, as
they advance, must be for the better, not for the worse.

We once heard a father say, running his fingers the while among
the golden curls of his child's hair, "If I were in heaven, and
saw my little daughter in hell, should not I be rushing down there
after her?" There spoke the voice of human nature; and that love
cannot be turned to hatred in heaven, but must grow purer and
intenser there. The doctrine which makes the saints pleased with
contemplating the woes of the damned, and even draw much of their
happiness from the contrast, is the deification of the absolute
selfishness of a demon. Human nature, even when left to its
uncultured instincts, is bound to far other and nobler things.
Radbod, one of the old Scandinavian kings, after long resistance,
finally consented to be baptized. After he had put one foot into
the water, he asked the priest if he should meet his forefathers
in heaven. Learning that they, being unbaptized pagans, were
victims of endless misery, he drew his foot back, and refused the
rite, choosing to be with his brave ancestors in hell rather than
to be in heaven with the Christian priests. And, speaking from the
stand point of the highest refinement of feeling and virtue, who
that has a heart in his

25 Park, Memoir of Hopkins, pp. 201, 202.


bosom would not say, "Heaven can be no heaven to me, if I am to
look down on the quenchless agonies of all I have loved here!" Is
it not strictly true that the thought that even one should have
endless woe "Would cast a shadow on the throne of God And darken
heaven"?

If a monarch, possessing unlimited power over all the earth, had
condemned one man to be stretched on a rack and be freshly plied
with incessant tortures for a period of fifty years, and if
everybody on earth could hear his terrible shrieks by day and
night, though they were themselves all, with this sole exception,
blessed with perfect happiness, would not the whole human race,
from Spitzbergen to Japan, from Rio Janeiro to Liberia, rise in a
body and go to implore the king's clemency for the solitary
victim? So, if hell had but one tenant doomed to eternal anguish,
a petition reaching from Sirius to Alcyone, signed by the universe
of moral beings, borne by a convoy of angels representing every
star in space, would be laid and unrolled at the foot of God's
throne, and He would read thereon this prayer: "FORGIVE HIM, AND
RELEASE HIM, WE BESEECH THEE, O GOD." And can it be that every
soul in the universe is better than the Maker and Father of the
universe?

The popular doctrine of eternal torment threatening nearly all our
race is refuted likewise by the impossibility of any general
observance of the obligations morally and logically consequent
from it. In the first place, as the world is constituted, and as
life goes on, the great majority of men are upon the whole happy,
evidently were meant to be happy. But every believer of the
doctrine in debate is bound to be unutterably wretched. If he has
any gleam of generous sentiment or touch of philanthropy in his
bosom, if he is not a frozen petrifaction of selfishness or an
incarnate devil, how can he look on his family, friends,
neighbors, fellow citizens, fellow beings, in the light of his
faith seeing them quivering over the dizzy verge of a blind
probation and momentarily dropping into the lake of fire and
brimstone that burns forever, how can he do this without being
ceaselessly stung with wretchedness and crushed with horror by the
perception? For a man who appreciatingly believes that hell is
directly under our meadows, streets, and homes, and that nine
tenths of the dead are in it, and that nine tenths of the living
soon will be, for such a man to be happy and jocose is as horrible
as it would be for a man, occupying the second story of a house,
to light it up brilliantly with gas, and make merry with his
friends, eating tidbits, sipping wine, and tripping it on the
light fantastic toe to the strains of gay music, while,
immediately under him, men, women, and children, including his own
parents and his own children, were stretched on racks, torn with
pincers, lacerated with surgical instruments, cauterized, lashed
with whips of fire, their half suppressed shrieks and groans
audibly rising through the floor!

Secondly, if the doctrine be true, then all unnecessary worldly
enterprises, labors, and studies should at once cease. One moment
on earth, and then, accordingly as we spend that moment, an
eternity in heaven or in hell: in heaven, if we succeed in
placating God by a sound belief and ritual proprieties; in hell,
if we are led astray by philosophy, nature, and the attractions of
life! On these suppositions, what time have we for any thing but
reciting our creed, meditating on the atonement, and seeking to
secure an interest for ourselves with God by flouting at our
carnal reason, praying in church, and groaning, "Lord, Lord, have
mercy on us miserable sinners"? What folly, what mockery, to be
searching into the motions of the stars, and the occult forces of
matter, and the other beautiful mysteries of science! There will
be no astronomy in hell, save vain speculations as to the distance
between the nadir of the damned and the zenith of the saved; no
chemistry in hell, save the experiments of infinite wrath in
distilling new torture poisons in the alembics of memory and
depositing fresh despair sediments in the crucibles of hope. If
Calvin's doctrine be true, let no book be printed, save the
"Westminster Catechism;" no calculation be ciphered, save how to
"solve the problem of damnation;" no picture be painted, save
"pictures of hell;" no school be supported, save "schools of
theology;" no business be pursued, save "the business of
salvation." What have men who are in imminent peril, who are in
truth almost infallibly sure, of being eternally damned the next
instant, what have they to do with science, literature, art,
social ambition, or commerce? Away with them all! Lures of the
devil to snare souls are they! The world reflecting from every
corner the lurid glare of hell, who can do any thing else but
shudder and pray? "Who could spare any attention for the
vicissitudes of cotton and the price of shares, for the merits of
the last opera and the bets upon the next election, if the actors
in these things were really swinging in his eye over such a verge
as he affects to see?"

Thirdly, those who believe the popular theory on this subject are
bound to live in cheap huts, on bread and water, that they may
devote to the sending of missionaries among the heathen every cent
of money they can get beyond that required for the bare
necessities of life. If our neighbor were perishing of hunger at
our door, it would be our duty to share with him even to the last
crust we had. How much more, then, seeing millions of our poor
helpless brethren sinking ignorantly into the eternal fires of
hell, are we bound to spare no possible effort until the
conditions of salvation are brought within the reach of every one!
An American missionary to China said, in a public address after
his return, "Fifty thousand a day go down to the fire that is not
quenched. Six hundred millions more are going the same road.
Should you not think at least once a day of the fifty thousand who
that day sink to the doom of the lost?" The American Board of
Commissioners of Foreign Missions say, "To send the gospel to the
heathen is a work of great exigency. Within the last thirty years
a whole generation of five hundred millions have gone down to
eternal death." Again: the same Board say, in their tract entitled
"The Grand Motive to Missionary Effort," "The heathen are involved
in the ruins of the apostasy, and are expressly doomed to
perdition. Six hundred millions of deathless souls on the brink of
hell! What a spectacle!" How a man who thinks the heathen are thus
sinking to hell by wholesale through ignorance of the gospel can
live in a costly house, crowded with luxuries and splendors,
spending every week more money on his miserable body than he gives
in his whole life to save the priceless souls for which he says
Christ died, is a problem admitting but two solutions. Either his
professed faith is an unreality to him, or else he is as selfish
as a demon and as hard hearted as the nether millstone. If he
really believed the doctrine, and had a human heart, he must feel
it to be his duty to deny himself every indulgence and give his
whole fortune and earnings to the missionary fund. And when he had
given all else, he ought to give himself, and go to pagan lands,
proclaiming the means of grace until his last breath. If he does
not that, he is inexcusable.

Should he attempt to clear himself of this obligation by adopting
the theory of predestination, which asserts that all men were
unconditionally elected from eternity, some to heaven, others to
hell, so that no effort can change their fate, logical consistency
reduces him to an alternative more intolerable in the eyes of
conscience and common sense than the other was. For by this theory
the gates of freedom and duty are hoisted, and the dark flood of
antinomian consequences rushes in. All things are fated. Let men
yield to every impulse and wish. The result is fixed. We have
nothing to do. Good or evil, virtue or crime, alter nothing.

Fourthly, if the common doctrine of eternal damnation be true,
then surely no more children should be brought into the world: it
is a duty to let the race die out and cease. He who begets a
child, forcing him to run the fearful risk of human existence,
with every probability of being doomed to hell at the close of
earth, commits a crime before whose endless consequences of horror
the guilt of fifty thousand deliberate murders would be as
nothing. For, be it remembered, an eternity in hell is an infinite
evil; and therefore the crime of thrusting such a fate on a single
child, with the unasked gift of being, is a crime admitting of no
just comparison. Rather than populate an everlasting hell with
human vipers and worms, a hell whose fires, alive and wriggling
with ghastly shapes of iniquity and anguish, shall swell with a
vast accession of fresh recruits from every generation, rather
than this, let the sacred lights on the marriage altar go out, no
more bounding forms of childhood be seen in cottage or hall, the
race grow old, thin out, and utterly perish, all happy villages be
overgrown, all regal cities crumble down, and this world roll
among the silent stars henceforth a globe of blasted deserts and
rank wildernesses, resonant only with the shrieks of the wind, the
yells of wild beasts, and the thunder's crash.

Fifthly, there is one more conclusion of moral duty deducible from
the prevalent theory of infinite torment. It is this. God ought
not to have permitted Adam to have any children. Let us not seem
presumptuous and irreverent in speaking thus. We are merely
reasoning on the popular theory of the theologians, not on any
supposition of our own or on any truth; and by showing the
absurdity and blasphemy of the moral consequences and duties
flowing from that theory, the absurdity, blasphemy, and
incredibility of the theory itself appear. We are not responsible
for the irreverence, but they are responsible for it who charge
God with the iniquity which we repel from his name. If the sin of
Adam must entail total depravity and an infinite penalty of
suffering on all his posterity, who were then certainly innocent
because not in existence, then, we ask, why did not God cause the
race to stop with Adam, and so save all the needless and cruel woe
that would otherwise surely be visited on the lengthening line of
generations? Or, to go still further back, why did he not,
foreseeing Adam's fall, refrain from creating even him? There was
no necessity laid on God of creating Adam. No positive evil would
have been done by omitting to create him. An infinite evil,
multiplied by the total number of the lost, was done by creating
him. Why, then, was he not left in peaceful nonentity? On the
Augustinian theory we see no way of escaping this awful dilemma.
Who can answer the question which rises to heaven from the abyss
of the damned?  "Father of mercies, why from silent earth Didst
thou awake and curse me into birth, Push into being a reverse of
thee, And animate a clod with misery?"

Satan is a sort of sublime Guy Fawkes, lurking in the infernal
cellar, preparing the train of that stupendous Gunpowder Plot by
which he hopes, on the day of judgment, to blow up the world
parliament of unbelievers with a general petard of damnation. Will
the King connive at this nefarious prowler and permit him to carry
out his design?

The doctrine of eternal damnation, as it has prevailed in the
Christian Church, appears to the natural man so unreasonable,
immoral, and harrowingly frightful, when earnestly contemplated,
that there have always been some who have shrunk from its
representations and sought to escape its conclusions. Many of its
strongest advocates in every age have avowed it to be a fearful
mystery, resting on the inscrutable sovereignty of God, and beyond
the power of man's faculties to explain and justify. The dogma has
been eluded in two ways. Some have believed in the annihilation of
the wicked after they should have undergone just punishment
proportioned to their sins. This supposition has had a
considerable number of advocates. It was maintained, among others,
by Arnobius, at the close of the third century, by the Socini, by
Dr. Hammond, and by some of the New England divines.26 All that
need be said in opposition to it is that it is an arbitrary device
to avoid the intolerable horror of the doctrine of endless misery,
unsupported by proof, extremely unsatisfactory in many of its
bearings, and really not needed to achieve the consummation
desired.

Others have more wisely maintained that all will finally be saved:
however severely and long they may justly suffer, they will at
last all be mercifully redeemed by God and admitted to the common
heaven. Defenders of the doctrine of ultimate universal salvation
have appeared from the beginning of Christian history.27 During
the last century and a half their numbers have rapidly
increased.28 A dignified and influential class of theologians,
represented by such names as Tillotson. Bahrdt, and Less, say that
the threats of eternal punishment, in the Scriptures, are
exaggerations to deter men from sin, and that God will not really
execute them, but will mercifully abate and limit them.29 Another
class of theologians, much more free, consistent, and numerous,
base their reception of the doctrine of final restoration on
figurative explanations of the scriptural language seemingly
opposed to it, and on arguments drawn from the character of God,
from reason, and from morals. This view of the subject is
spreading fast. All independent, genial, and cultivated thought
naturally leads to it. The central principles of the gospel
necessitate it. The spirit of the age cries for it. Before it the
old antagonistic dogma must fall and perish from respect. Dr.
Spring says, in reference to the hopeless condemnation of the
wicked to hell, "It puts in requisition all our confidence

26 This theory bas been resuscitated and advocated within a few
years by quite a number of writers, among whom may be specified
the Rev. C. F. Hudson, author of "Debt and Grace," a learned,
earnest, and able work, pervaded by an admirable spirit.

27 Ballou, Ancient History of Universalism.

28 Whittemore, Modern History of Universalism.

29 Knapp, Christian Theology, Woods's translation, sect. 158.


in God to justify this procedure of his government."30

A few devout and powerful minds have sought to avoid the gross
horrors and unreasonableness of the usual view of this subject, by
changing the mechanical and arithmetical values of the terms for
spiritual and religious values. They give the word "eternity" a
qualitative instead of a quantitative meaning. The everlasting woe
of the damned consists not in mechanical inflictions of torture
and numerical increments of duration, but in spiritual discord,
alienation from God, a wretched state of being, with which times
and spaces have nothing to do.31

How much better were it for the advocates of the popular theory,
instead of forcing their moral nature to bear up against the awful
perplexities and misgivings as to the justice and goodness of God
necessarily raised in them whenever they really face the dark
problems of their system of faith,32 resolutely to ask whether
there are any such problems in the actual government of God, or
anywhere else, except in their own "Bodies of Divinity"! It is an
extremely unfortunate and discreditable evasion of responsibility
when any man, especially when a teacher, takes for granted the
received formularies handed down to him, and, instead of honestly
analyzing their genuine significance and probing their foundations
to see if they be good and true, spends his genius in contriving
excuses and supports for them.

It is the very worst policy at this day to strive to fasten the
dogma of eternal misery to the New Testament. If both must be
taken or rejected together, an alternative which we emphatically
deny, what sincere and earnest thinker now, whose will is
unterrifiedly consecrated to truth, can be expected to hesitate
long? The doctrine is sustained in repute at present principally
for two reasons. First, because it has been transmitted to us from
the Church of the past as the established and authoritative
doctrine. It is yet technically current and popular because it has
been so: that is, it retains its place simply by right of
possession. The question ought to be sincerely and universally
raised whether it is true or false. Then it will swiftly lose its
prestige and disappear. Secondly, it is upheld and patronized by
many as a useful instrument for frightening the people and through
their fears deterring them from sin. We have ourselves heard
clergymen of high reputation say that it would never do to admit,
before the people, that there is any chance whatever of penitence
and salvation beyond the grave, because they would be sure to
abuse the hope as a sort of permission to indulge and continue in
sin. Thus to ignore the only solemn and worthy standard of judging
an abstract doctrine, namely, Is it a truth or a falsehood? and
put it solely on grounds of working expediency, is disgraceful,
contemptible, criminal. Watts exposes with well merited rebuke a
gross instance of pious frail in Burnet, who advised preachers to
teach the eternity of future punishment whether they believed it
or not.33 It is by such a course that error and superstition
reign, that truckling conformity, intellectual disloyalty, moral
indifference, vice, and infidelity, abound. It is practical
atheism, debauchery of conscience, and genuine spiritual

30 Glory of Christ, vol. ii. p. 268.

31 Lange, Positive Dogmatik, sect. 131: Die Aeonen der Verdammten.
Maurice, Theological Essays: Future Punishment.

32 See Beecher's Conflict of Ages, b. ii. ch. 4, 13.

33 World to Come, Disc. XIII.


death. Besides, the course we are characterizing is actually as
inexpedient in practice as it is wrong in theory. Experience and
observation show it to be as pernicious in its result as it is
immoral in its origin. Is a threat efficacious over men in
proportion to its intrinsic terror, or in proportion as it is
personally felt and feared by them? Do the menacing penalties of a
sin deter a man from it in proportion to their awfulness, or in
proportion to his belief in their reality and unavoidableness?
Eternal misery would be a threat of infinite frightfulness, if it
were realized and believed. But it is incredible. Some reject it
with indignation and an impetuous recoil that sends them much too
far towards antinomianism. Others let it float in the spectral
background of imagination, the faint reflection of a disagreeable
and fading dream. To all it is an unreality. An earnest belief in
a sure retribution exactly limited to desert must be far more
effective. If an individual had a profound conviction that for
every sin he committed he must suffer a million centuries of
inexpressible anguish, realizing that thought, would he commit a
sin?

If he cannot appreciate that enormous penalty, much less can he
the infinite one, which is far more likely to shade off and blur
out into a vague and remote nothing. Truth is an expression of
God's will, which we are bound exclusively to accept and employ
regardless of consequences. When we do that, God, the author of
truth, is himself solely responsible for the consequences. But
when, thinking we can devise something that will work better, we
use some theory of our own, we are responsible for the
consequences. Let every one beware how he ventures to assume that
dread responsibility. It is surely folly as well as sin. For
nothing can work so well as truth, the simple, calm, living truth,
which is a chime in the infinite harmony of morals and things. It
is only the morbid melodramatic tastes and incompetencies of an
unfinished culture that make men think otherwise. The magnificent
poetry of the day of judgment an audience of five hundred thousand
millions gathered in one throng as the Judge rises to pronounce
the last oration over a dissolving universe takes possession of
the fancy, and people conceive it so vividly, and are so moved by
it, that they think they see it to be true.

Grant for a moment the truth of the conception of hell as a
physical world of fiery torture full of the damned. Suppose the
scene of probation over, hell filled with its prisoners shut up,
banished and buried in the blackest deeps of space. Can it be left
there forever? Can it be that the roar of its furnace shall rage
on, and the wail of the execrable anguish ascend, eternally?
Endeavor to realize in some faint degree what these questions
mean, and then answer. If anybody can find it in his heart or in
his head to say yes, and can gloat over the idea, and wish to have
it continually brandished in terrorem over the heads of the
people, one feels impelled to declare that he of all men the most
needs to be converted to the Christian spirit. An unmitigated hell
of depravity, pain, and horror, would be Satan's victory and God's
defeat; for the very wish of a Satanic being must be for the
everlasting prevalence of sin and wretchedness. As above the
weltering hosts of the lost, each dreadful second, the iron clock
of hell ticked the thunder word "eternity," how would the devil on
his sulphurous dais shout in triumph! But if such a world of fire,
crowded with the writhing damned, ever existed at all, could it
exist forever?

Could the saved be happy and passive in heaven when the muffled
shrieks of their brethren, faint from the distance, fell on their
ears? In tones of love and pity that would melt the very
mountains, they would plead with God to pardon and free the lost.
Many a mourning lover would realize the fable of the Thracian poet
who wandered into Hades searching for his Eurydice; many a heroic
son would emulate the legend of the Grecian god who burst through
the iron walls of Tartarus and rescued his mother, the unfortunate
Semele, and led her in triumph up to heaven.

Could the angels be contented when they contemplated the far off
lurid orb and knew the agonies that fed its conscious conflagration?
Their gentle bosoms would be racked with commiserating pangs,
they would fly down and hover around that anguished world,
to moisten its parched tongues with the dropping of their sympathetic
tears and to cool its burning brows with the fanning of their wings.

Could Christ be satisfied? he who once was rich but for our sakes
became poor? he whose loving soul breathed itself forth in the
tender words, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest"? he who poured his blood on
Judea's awful summit, be satisfied? Not until he had tried the
efficacy of ten thousand fresh crucifixions, on as many new
Calvaries, would he rest.

Could God suffer it? God! with the full rivers of superfluous
bliss rolling around thy throne, couldst thou look down and hear
thy creatures calling thee Father, and see them plunging in a sea
of fire eternally eternally eternally and never speak the
pardoning word? It would not be like thee, it would be like thine
adversary to do that. Not so wouldst thou do. But if Satan had
millions of prodigals, snatched from the fold of thy family, shut
up and tortured in hell, paternal yearnings after them would fill
thy heart. Love's smiles would light the dread abyss where they
groan. Pity's tears would fall over it, shattered by the radiance
into rainbows. And through that illumination THOU wouldst descend,
marching beneath the arch of its triumphal glories to the rescue
of thy children! Therefore we rest in hope, knowing that "Thou
wilt not leave our souls in hell."

