CHAPTER VIII.

ESSENTIAL CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE OF DEATH AND LIFE.

LET US first notice the uncommon amount of meaning which Christ
and the apostolic writers usually put into the words "death,"
"life," and other kindred terms. These words are scarcely ever
used in their merely literal sense, but are charged with a vivid
fulness of significance not to be fathomed without especial
attention. "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments."
Obviously this means more than simple life; because those who
neglect the laws of virtue may live. It signifies, distinctively,
true life, the experience of inward peace and of Divine favor.
"Whosoever hateth his brother hath not eternal life abiding in
him, but abideth in death;" that is to say, a soul rankling with
bad passions is "in the gall of bitterness and the bond of
iniquity," but, when converted from hatred to love, it passes from
wretchedness to blessedness. "Let the dead bury their dead." No
one reading this passage with its context can fail to perceive
that it means, substantially, "Let those who are absorbed in the
affairs of this world, and indifferent to the revelation I have
brought from heaven, attend to the interment of the dead; but
delay not thou, who art kindled with a lively interest in the
truth, to proclaim the kingdom of God." When the returning
prodigal had been joyfully received, the father said, in reply to
the murmurs of the elder son, "Thy brother was dead and is alive
again;" he was lost in sin and misery, he is found in penitence
and happiness. Paul writes to the Romans, "Without the law sin was
dead, and I was alive; but when the law was made known, sin came
to life, and I died." In other words, when a man is ignorant of
the moral law, immoral conduct does not prevent him from feeling
innocent and being at peace; but when a knowledge of the law shows
the wickedness of that conduct, he becomes conscious of guilt, and
is unhappy. For instance, to state the thought a little
differently, to a child knowing nothing of the law, the law, or
its purposed violation, sin, does not exist, is dead: he therefore
enjoys peace of conscience; but when he becomes aware of the law
and its authority, if he then break it, sin is generated and
immediately stings, and spiritual happiness dies.

These passages are sufficient to show that Christianity uses the
words "death" and "life" in a spiritual sense, penetrating to the
hidden realities of the soul. To speak thus of the guilty,
unbelieving man as dead, and only of the virtuous, believing man
as truly alive, may seem at first a startling use of figurative
language. It will not appear so when we notice its appropriateness
to the case, or remember the imaginative nature of Oriental speech
and recollect how often we employ the same terms in the same way
at the present time. We will give a few examples of a similar use
of language outside of the Scriptures. That which threatens or
produces death is sometimes, by a figure, identified with death.
Orpheus, in the Argonautika, speaks of "a terrible serpent whose
yawning jaw is full of death." So Paul says he was "in deaths
oft." Ovid says, "The priests poured out a dog's hot life on the
altar of Hecate at the crossing of two roads." The Pythagoreans,
when one of their number became impious and abandoned, were
accustomed to consider him dead, and to erect a tomb to him, on
which his name and his age at the time of his moral decease were
engraved. The Roman law regarded an excommunicated citizen as
civilis mortuus, legally dead. Fenelon writes, "God has kindled a
flame at the bottom of every heart, which should always burn as a
lamp for him who hath lighted it; and all other life is as death."
Chaucer says, in one of his Canterbury Tales, referring to a man
enslaved by dissolute habits,

"But certes, he that haunteth swiche delices Is ded while that he
liveth in tho' vices."

And in a recent poem the following lines occur:

"From his great eyes The light has fled: When faith departs, when
honor dies, The man is dead."

To be subjected to the lower impulses of our nature by degraded
habits of vice and criminality is wretchedness and death. The true
life of man consists, the Great Teacher declared, "not in the
abundance of the things which he possesseth, but rather in his
being rich toward God," in conscious purity of heart, energy of
faith, and union with the Holy Spirit. "He that lives in sensual
pleasure is dead while he lives," Paul asserts; but he that lives
in spiritual righteousness has already risen from the dead. To sum
up the whole in a single sentence, the service and the fruits of
sin form an experience which Christianity calls death, because it
is a state of insensibility to the elements and results of true
life, in the adequate sense of that term, meaning the serene
activity and religious joy of the soul.

The second particular in the essential doctrine of Christianity
concerning the states of human experience which it entitles death
and life is their inherent, enduring nature, their independence on
the objects and changes of this world. The gospel teaches that the
elements of our being and experience are transferred from the life
that now is into the life that is to come, or, rather, that we
exist continuously forever, uninterrupted by the event of physical
dissolution. "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give
him," Jesus declares, "shall never thirst; but the water that I
shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into
everlasting life." John affirms, "The world passeth away, and the
lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth forever."
Paul writes to the Christians at Rome, "In that Christ died, he
died unto sin once; but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God." Numerous additional texts of kindred import might
be cited. They announce the immortality of man, the unending
continuance of the Christian consciousness, unless forfeited by
voluntary defection. They show that sin and woe are not
arbitrarily bounded by the limits of time and sense in the grave,
and that nothing can ever exhaust or destroy the satisfaction of
true life, faith in the love of God: it abides, blessed and
eternal, in the uninterrupted blessedness and eternity of its
Object. The revelation and offer of all this to the acceptance of
men, its conditions, claims, and alternative sanctions, were first
divinely made known and planted in the heart of the world, as the
Scriptures assert, by Jesus Christ, who promulgated them by his
preaching, illustrated them by his example, proved them by his
works, attested them by his blood, and crowned them by his
resurrection.

And now there is opened for all of us, through him, that is to
say, through belief and obedience of what he taught and
exemplified, an access unto the Father, an assurance of his
forgiveness of us and of our reconciliation with him. We thus
enter upon the experience of that true life which is "joy and
peace in believing," and which remains indestructible through all
the vanishing vagrancy of sin, misery, and the world. "This is
eternal life, that they might know thee, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent:" that is, imperishable life is
to be obtained by union with God in faith and love, through a
hearty acceptance of the instructions of Christ.

The two points thus far considered are, first, that the sinful,
unbelieving, wretched man abides in virtual death, while the
righteous, happy believer in the gospel has the experience of
genuine life; and, secondly, that these essential elements of
human character and experience survive all events of time and
place in everlasting continuance.

The next consideration prominent in the Christian doctrine of
death and life is the distinction continually made between the
body and the soul. Man is regarded under a twofold aspect, as
flesh and spirit, the one a temporal accompaniment and dependent
medium, the other an immortal being in itself. The distinction is
a fundamental one, and runs through nearly all philosophy and
religion in their reference to man. In the Christian Scriptures it
is not sharply drawn, with logical precision, nor always
accurately maintained, but is loosely defined, with waving
outlines, is often employed carelessly, and sometimes, if strictly
taken, inconsistently. Let us first note a few examples of the
distinction itself in the instructions of the Savior and of the
different New Testament writers.

"That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born
of the spirit is spirit." "Fear not them which kill the body but
are not able to kill the soul." "Though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renewed." "He that soweth to his flesh shall
reap corruption; he that soweth to the spirit shall reap life
everlasting." "Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in
the spirit." "Knowing that I must shortly put off this
tabernacle." "The body without the spirit is dead." It would be
useless to accumulate examples. It is plain that these authors
distinguish the body and the soul as two things conjoined for a
season, the latter of which will continue to live when the other
has mixed with the dust. The facts and phenomena of our being from
which this distinction springs are so numerous and so influential,
so profound and so obvious, that it is impossible they should
escape the knowledge of any thinking person. Indeed, the
distinction has found a recognition everywhere among men, from the
ignorant savage, whose instincts and imagination shadow forth a
dim world in which the impalpable images of the departed dwell, to
the philosopher of piercing intellect and universal culture,

"Whose lore detects beneath our crumbling clay A soul, exiled, and
journeying back to day."

"Labor not for the meat which perisheth," Jesus exhorts his
followers, "but labor for the meat which endureth unto everlasting
life." The body and the luxury that pampers it shall perish, but
the spirit and the love that feeds it shall abide forever.

We now pass to examine some metaphorical terms often erroneously
interpreted as conveying merely their literal force. Every one
familiar with the language of the New Testament must remember how
repeatedly the body and the soul, or the flesh and the spirit, are
set in direct opposition to each other, sin being referred to the
former, righteousness to the latter. "I know that in my flesh
there is no good thing; but with my mind I delight in the law of
God." "The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit
lusteth against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the
other." All this language and it is extensively used in the
epistles is quite generally understood in a fixed, literal sense;
whereas it was employed by its authors in a fluctuating,
figurative sense, as the critical student can hardly help
perceiving. We will state the real substance of Christian teaching
and phraseology on this point in two general formulas, and then
proceed to illustrate them. First, both the body and the soul may
be corrupt, lawless, empty of Divine belief, full of restlessness
and suffering, in a state of moral death; or both may be pure,
obedient, acceptable in the sight of God, full of faith, peace,
and joy, in a state of genuine life. Secondly, whatever tends in
any way to the former result to make man guilty, feeble, and
wretched, to deaden his spiritual sensibilities, to keep him from
union with God and from immortal reliances is variously
personified as "the Flesh," "Sin," "Death," "Mammon," "the World,"
"the Law of the Members," "the Law of Sin and Death;" whatever, on
the contrary, tends in any way to the latter result to purify man,
to intensify his moral powers, to exalt and quicken his
consciousness in the assurance of the favor of God and of eternal
being is personified as "the Spirit," "Life," "Righteousness,"
"the Law of God," "the Law of the Inward Man," "Christ," "the Law
of the Spirit of Life in Christ." Under the first class of terms
are included all the temptations and agencies by which man is led
to sin, and the results of misery they effect; under the second
class are included all the aspirations and influences by which he
is led to righteousness, and the results of happiness they insure.
For example, it is written, in the Epistle to the Galatians, that
"the manifest works of the flesh are excessive sensuality,
idolatry, hatred, emulations, quarrels, heresies, murders, and
such like." Certainly some of these evils are more closely
connected with the mind than with the body. The term "flesh" is
obviously used in a sense coextensive with the tendencies and
means by which we are exposed to guilt and degradation. These
personifications, it will therefore be seen, are employed with
general rhetorical looseness, not with definite logical exactness.

It is self evident that the mind is the actual agent and author of
all sins and virtues, and that the body in itself is unconscious,
irresponsible, incapable of guilt. "Every sin that man doeth is
without the body." In illustration of this point Chrysostom says,
"If a tyrant or robber were to seize some royal mansion, it would
not be the fault of the house." And how greatly they err who think
that any of the New Testament writers mean to represent the flesh
as necessarily sinful and the spirit as always pure, the following
cases to the contrary from Paul, whose speech seems most to lean
that way, will abundantly show. "Glorify God in your body and in
your spirit, which are his." "Know ye not that your body is the
temple of the Holy Ghost?" "Yield not your members as instruments
of unrighteousness unto sin, but as instruments of righteousness
unto God." "That the life of Jesus might be made manifest in our
mortal flesh." "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God." It is clear that the author of these
sentences did not regard the body, or literal flesh, as
necessarily unholy, but as capable of being used by the man
himself in fulfilling the will of God. Texts that appear to
contradict this must be held as figures, or as impassioned
rhetorical exclamations. We also read of "the lusts of the mind,"
the "fleshly mind," "filthiness of the spirit," "seducing
spirits," "corrupt minds," "mind and conscience defiled,"
"reprobate mind,"  showing plainly that the spirit was sometimes
regarded as guilty and morally dead. The apostle writes, "I pray
that your whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved
blameless." The scriptural declarations now cited teach explicitly
that both the body and the soul may be subjected to the perfect
law of God, or that both may abide in rebellion and wickedness,
the latter state being called, metaphorically, "walking after the
flesh," the former "walking after the spirit," that being sin and
death, this being righteousness and life.

An explanation of the origin of these metaphors will cast further
light upon the subject. The use of a portion of them arose from
the fact that many of the most easily besetting and pernicious
vices, conditions and allurements of sin, defilements and clogs of
the spirit, come through the body, which, while it is itself
evidently fated to perish, does by its earthly solicitations
entice, contaminate, and debase the soul that by itself is invited
to better things and seems destined to immortality. Not that these
evils originate in the body, of course, all the doings of a man
spring from the spirit of man which is in him, but that the body
is the occasion and the aggravating medium of their manifestation.
This thought is not contradicted, it is only omitted, in the words
of Peter: "I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul." For such language
would be spontaneously suggested by the fact that to be in bondage
to the baser nature is hostile alike to spiritual dignity and
peace, and to physical health and strength. The principles of the
moral nature are at war with the passions of the animal nature;
the goading vices of the mind are at war with the organic
harmonies of the body; and on the issues of these conflicts hang
all the interests of life and death, in every sense the words can
be made to bear.

Another reason for the use of these figures of speech,
undoubtedly, was the philosophy of the ineradicable hostility of
matter and spirit, the doctrine, so prevalent in the East from the
earliest times, that matter is wholly corrupt and evil, the
essential root and source of all vileness. An old, unknown Greek
poet embodies the very soul of this faith in a few verses which we
find in the Anthology. Literally rendered, they run thus:

"The body is the torment, hell, fate, load, tyrant,
Dreadful pest, and punishing trial, of the soul
Which, when it quits the body, flies, as from the bonds
Of death, to immortal God."

It was this idea that produced the wild asceticism prevalent in
the Christian Church during the Middle Age and previously, the
fearful macerations, scourgings, crucifixions of the flesh. It
should be understood that, though some of the phraseology of the
Scriptures is tinged by the influence of this doctrine, the
doctrine itself is foreign to Christianity. Christ came eating and
drinking, not abjuring nature, but adopting its teachings, viewing
it as a Divine work through which the providence of God is
displayed and his glory gleams. He was no more of a Pharisee than
nature is. As corn grows on the Sabbath, so it may be plucked and
eaten on the Sabbath. The apostles never recommend self inflicted
torments. The ascetic expressions found in their letters grew
directly out of the perils besetting them and their expectation of
the speedy end of the world. Christianity, rightly understood,
renders even the body of a good man sacred and precious, through
the indwelling of the Infinite. "We have this treasure in earthen
vessels," and the poor, dying tenement of flesh is hallowed as
"A vase of earth, a trembling clod, Constrain'd to hold the breath
of God."

The chief secret, however, of the origin of the peculiar phrases
under consideration consisted in their striking fitness to the
nature and facts of the case, their adaptedness to express these
facts in a bold and vivid manner. The revelation of the
transcendent claims of holiness, of the pardoning love of God, of
the splendid boon of immortality, made by Christ and enforced by
the miraculous sanctions and the kindling motives presented in his
example, thrilled the souls of the first converts, shamed them of
their degrading sins, opened before their imaginations a vision
that paled the glories of the world, and regenerated them,
stirring up the depths of their religious sensibilities, and
flooding their whole being with a warmth, an energy, a
spirituality, that made their previous experience seem a gross
carnal slumber, a virtual death. "And you hath he quickened, who
were dead in trespasses and sins." They were animated and raised
to a new, pure, glad life, through the feeling of the hopes and
the practice of the virtues of the gospel of Christ. Unto those
who "were formerly in the flesh, the servants of sin, bringing
forth fruit unto death," but now obeying the new form of doctrine
delivered unto them, with renewed hearts and changed conduct, it
is written, "If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin;
but the spirit is life because of righteousness;" that is, If
Christian truth reign in you, the body may still be tormented, or
powerless, owing to your previous bad habits; but the soul will be
redeemed from its abandonment to error and vice, and be assured of
pardon and immortal life by the witnessing spirit of God.

The apostle likewise says unto them, "If the Spirit of God dwell
in you, it shall also quicken your mortal bodies." This remarkable
expression was meant to convey a thought which the observation of
common facts approves and explains. If the love of the pure
principles of the gospel was established in them, their bodies,
debilitated and deadened by former abandonment to their lusts,
should be freed and reanimated by its influence. The body to a
great extent reflects the permanent mind and life of a man. It is
an aphorism of Solomon that "a sound heart is the life of the
flesh." And Plotinus declares, "Temperance and justice are the
saviors of the body so far as they are received by it." Deficiency
of thought and knowledge, laziness of spirit, animality of habits,
betray themselves plainly enough in the state and expression of
the physical frame: they render it coarse, dim, and insensible;
the person verges towards the condition of a clod; spiritual
things are clouded, the beacon fire of his destiny wanes, the
possibilities of Christian faith lessen, "the external and the
insensate creep in on his organized clay," he feels the chain of
the brute earth more and more, and finally gives himself up to
utter death. On the other hand, the assimilation of Divine truth
and goodness by a man, the cherishing love of all high duties and
aspirations, exert a purifying, energizing power both on the flesh
and the mind, animate and strengthen them, like a heavenly flame
burn away the defiling entanglements and spiritual fogs that fill
and hang around the wicked and sensual, increasingly pervade his
consciousness with an inspired force and freedom, illuminate his
face, touch the magnetic springs of health and healthful sympathy,
make him completely alive, and bring him into living connection
with the Omnipresent Life, so that he perceives the full testimony
that he shall never die. For, when brought into such a state by
the experience of live spirits in live frames, "We feel through
all this fleshly dresse Bright shootes of everlastingnesse."

Spiritual sloth and sensual indulgence stupefy, blunt, and confuse
together in lifeless meshes, the vital tenant and the mortal
tenement; they grow incorporate, alike unclean, powerless, guilty,
and wretched. Then "Man lives a life half dead, a living death,
Himself his sepulchre, a moving grave." Active virtue, profound
love, and the earnest pursuit, in the daily duties of life, of
"Those lofty musings which within us sow The seeds of higher kind
and brighter being." Cleanse, vivify, and distinguish the body and
the soul, so that, when this tabernacle of clay crumbles from
around it, the unimprisoned spirit soars into the universe at
once, and, looking back upon the shadowy king bearing his pale
prey to the tomb, exclaims, "O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory?" The facts, then, of sin, guilt, weakness,
misery, unbelief, decay, insensibility, and death, joined with the
opposite corresponding class of facts, and considered in their
mutual spiritual and physical relations and results, originally
suggested, and now interpret and justify, that peculiar
phraseology of the New Testament which we have been investigating.
It has no recondite meaning drawn from arbitrary dogmas, but a
plain meaning drawn from natural truths.

It remains next to see what is the Christian doctrine concerning
literal, physical death,  concerning the actual origin and
significance of that solemn event. This point must be treated the
more at length on account of the erroneous notions prevailing upon
the subject. For that man's first disobedience was the procuring
cause of organic, as well as of moral, death, is a doctrine quite
generally believed. It is a fundamental article in the creeds of
all the principal denominations of Christendom, and is
traditionally held, from the neglect of investigation, by nearly
all Christians. By this theory the words of James who writes,
"Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death" are interpreted
with strict literalness. It is conceived that, had not evil
entered the first man's heart and caused him to fall from his
native innocence, he would have roamed among the flowers of Eden
to this day. But he violated the commandment of his Maker, and
sentence of death was passed upon him and his posterity. We are
now to prove that this imaginative theory is far from the truth.

1. The language in which the original account of Adam's sin and
its punishment is stated shows conclusively that the penalty of
transgression was not literal death, but spiritual, that is,
degradation, suffering. God's warning in relation to the forbidden
tree was, "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
die." Of course, Jehovah's solemn declaration was fulfilled as he
had said. But in the day that man partook of the prohibited fruit
he did not die a physical death. He lived, driven from the
delights of Paradise, (according to the account,) upwards of eight
hundred years, earning his bread by the sweat of his brow.
Consequently, the death with which he had been threatened must
have been a moral death, loss of innocence and joy, experience of
guilt and woe.

2. The common usage of the words connected with this subject in
the New Testament still more clearly substantiates the view here
taken of it. There is a class of words, linked together by
similarity of meaning and closeness of mutual relation, often used
by the Christian writers loosely, figuratively, and sometimes
interchangeably, as has been shown already in another connection.
We mean the words "sin," "flesh," "misery," "death." The same
remark may be made of another class of words of precisely opposite
signification,  "righteousness," "faith," "life," "blessedness,"
"eternal life." These different words frequently stand to
represent the same idea. "As the law hath reigned through sin unto
death, so shall grace reign through righteousness unto life." In
other terms, as the recognition of the retributive law of God
through rebellion and guilt filled the consciences of men with
wretchedness, so the acceptance of the pardoning love of God
through faith and conformity will fill them with blessedness. Sin
includes conscious distrust, disobedience, and alienation;
righteousness includes conscious faith, obedience, and
reconciliation. Sin and death, it will be seen, are related just
as righteousness and life are. The fact that they are sometimes
represented in the relation of identity "the minding of the flesh
is death, but the minding of the spirit is life" and sometimes in
the relation of cause and effect "the fruit of sin is death, the
fruit of righteousness is life" proves that the words are used
metaphorically, and really mean conscious guilt and misery,
conscious virtue and blessedness. No other view is consistent. We
are urged to be "dead unto sin, but alive unto God;" that is, to
be in a state of moral perfection which turns a deaf and
invincible front to all the influences of evil, but is open and
joyfully sensitive to every thing good and holy. Paul also wrote,
in his letter to the Philippians, that he had "not yet attained
unto the resurrection," but was striving to attain unto it; that
is, he had not yet reached, but was striving to reach, that lofty
state of holiness and peace invulnerable to sin, which no change
can injure, with which the event of bodily dissolution cannot
interfere, because its elements faith, truth, justice, and love
are the immutable principles of everlasting life.

3. In confirmation of this conclusion, an argument amounting to
certainty is afforded by the way in which the disobedience of Adam
and its consequences, and the obedience of Christ and its
consequences, are spoken of together; by the way in which a sort
of antithetical parallel is drawn between the result of Adam's
fall and the result of Christ's mission. "As by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon
all men, so much more shall all receive the gift of God by one
man, Jesus Christ, and reign unto eternal life." This means, as
the writer himself afterwards explains, that "as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners" and suffered the consequences
of sin, figuratively expressed by the word "death," "so by the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous" and enjoy the
consequences of righteousness, figuratively expressed by the word
"life." Give the principal terms in this passage their literal
force, and no meaning which is not absolutely incompatible with
the plainest truths can be drawn from it. Surely literal death had
come equally and fully upon all men everywhere; literal life could
do no more. But render the idea in this way, the blessedness
offered to men in the revelation of grace made by Jesus outweighs
the wretchedness brought upon them through the sin introduced by
Adam, and the sense is satisfactory. That which Adam is
represented as having lost, that, the apostle affirms, Christ
restored; that which Adam is said to have incurred, that Christ is
said to have removed. But Christ did not restore to man a physical
immortality on the earth: therefore that is not what Adam
forfeited; but he lost peace of conscience and trust in the Divine
favor. Furthermore, Christ did not free his followers from natural
decay and death: therefore that is not what Adam's transgression
brought upon his children; but it entailed upon them proclivities
to evil, spiritual unrest, and woe. The basis of the comparison is
evidently this: Adam's fall showed that the consequences of sin,
through the stern operation of the law, were strife, despair, and
misery, all of which is implied in the New Testament usage of the
word "death;" Christ's mission showed that the consequences of
righteousness, through the free grace of God, were faith, peace,
and indestructible happiness, all of which is implied in the New
Testament usage of the word "life." In the mind of Paul there was
undoubtedly an additional thought, connecting the descent of the
soul to the under world with the death of the sinful Adam, and its
ascent to heaven with the resurrection of the immaculate Christ;
but this does not touch the argument just advanced, because it
does not refer to the cause of physical dissolution, but to what
followed that event.

4. It will not be out of place here to demonstrate that sin
actually was not the origin of natural decay, by the revelations
of science, which prove that death was a monarch on the earth for
ages before moral transgression was known. As the geologist
wanders, and studies the records of nature, where earthquake,
deluge, and volcano have exposed the structure of the globe and
its organic remains in strata piled on strata, upon these, as upon
so many pages of the earth's autobiography, he reads the history
of a hundred races of animals which lived and died, leaving their
bones layer above layer, in regular succession, centuries before
the existence of man. It is evident, then, that, independent of
human guilt, and from the very first, chemical laws were in force,
and death was a part of God's plan in the material creation. As
the previous animals perished without sin, so without sin the
animal part of man too would have died. It was made perishable
from the outset. The important point just here in the theology of
Paul was, as previously implied, that death was intended to lead
the soul directly to heaven in a new "spiritual body" or "heavenly
house;" but sin marred the plan, and doomed the soul to go into
the under world, a naked manes, when "unclothed" of "the natural
body" or "earthly house." The mission of Christ was to restore the
original plan; and it would be consummated at his second coming.

5. There is a gross absurdity involved in the supposition that an
earthly immortality was the intended destiny of man. That
supposition necessarily implies that the whole groundwork of God's
first design was a failure, that his great purpose was thwarted
and changed into one wholly different. And it is absurd to think
such a result possible in the providence of the Almighty. Besides,
had there been no sin, could not man have been drowned if he fell
into the water without knowing how to swim? If a building tumbled
upon him, would he not have been crushed? Nor is this theory free
from another still more palpable absurdity; for, had there been no
interference of death to remove one generation and make room for
another, the world could not support the multitudes with which it
would now swarm. Moreover, the time would arrive when the earth
could not only not afford sustenance to its so numerous
inhabitants, but could not even contain them. So that if this were
the original arrangement, unless certain other parts which were
indisputable portions of it were cancelled, the surplus myriads
would have to be removed to some other world. That is just what
death accomplishes. Consequently, death was a part of God's primal
plan, and not a contingence accidentally caused by sin.

6. If death be the result of sin, then, of course, it is a
punishment inflicted upon man for his wickedness. In fact, this is
an identical proposition. But death cannot be intended as a
punishment, because, viewed in that light, it is unjust. It comes
equally upon old and young, good and bad, joyous and wretched. It
does not permit the best man to live longest; it does not come
with the greatest terror and agony to the most guilty. All these
things depend on a thousand contingencies strung upon an iron law,
which inheres to the physical world of necessity, and has not its
basis and action in the spiritual sphere of freedom, character,
and experience. The innocent babe and the hardened criminal are
struck at the same instant and die the same death. Solomon knew
this when he said, "As dieth the fool, so the wise man dieth."
Death regarded as a retribution for sin is unjust, because it is
destitute of moral discrimination. It therefore is not a
consequence of transgression, but an era, incident, and step in
human existence, an established part of the visible order of
things from the beginning. When the New Testament speaks of death
as a punishment, it always uses the word in a symbolic sense,
meaning spiritual deadness and misery, which is a perfect
retribution, because it discriminates with unerring exactness.
This has been conclusively proved by Klaiber,1 who shows that the
peculiar language of Paul in regard to the trichotomist division
of man into spirit, soul, and body necessarily involves the
perception of physical death as a natural fact.

7. Finally, natural death cannot be the penalty of
unrighteousness, because it is not a curse and a woe, but a
blessing and a privilege. Epictetus wrote, "It would be a curse
upon ears of corn not to be reaped; and we ought to know that it
would be a curse upon man not to die." 2 It cannot be the effect
of man's sin, because it is the improvement of man's condition.
Who can believe it would be better for man to remain on earth
forever, under any

1 Die Neutestamentliche Lehre von der Sunde and Erlosung, ss. 22
45.

2 Dissert. ii. 6, 2.


circumstances, than it is for him to go to heaven to such an
experience as the faithful follower of Christ supposes is there
awaiting him? It is not to be thought by us that death is a
frowning enemy thrusting us into the gloom of eternal night or
into the flaming waves of irremediable torment, but rather a
smiling friend ushering us into the endless life of the spiritual
world and into the unveiled presence of God. According to the
arrangement and desire of God, for us to die is gain: every
personal exception to this if there be any exception is caused
through the marring interference of personal wickedness with the
Creator's intention and with natural order. Who has not sometimes
felt the bondage of the body and the trials of earth, and peered
with awful thrills of curiosity into the mysteries of the unseen
world, until he has longed for the hour of the soul's liberation,
that it might plume itself for an immortal flight? Who has not
experienced moments of serene faith, in which he could hardly help
exclaiming, "I would not live alway; I ask not to stay: Oh, who
would live alway away from his God?"

A favorite of Apollo prayed for the best gift Heaven could bestow
upon man. The god said, "At the end of seven days it shall be
granted: in the mean time, live happy." At the appointed hour he
fell into a sweet slumber, from which he never awoke.3 He who
regards death as upon the whole an evil does not take the
Christian's view of it, not even the enlightened pagan's view, but
the frightened sensualist's view, the superstitious atheist's
view. And if death be upon the whole normally a blessing, then
assuredly it cannot be a punishment brought upon man by sin. The
common hypothesis of our mortality namely, that sin, hereditarily
lodged in the centre of man's life, spreads its dynamic virus
thence until it appears as death in the periphery, expending its
final energy within the material sphere in the dissolution of the
physical frame is totally opposed to the spirit of philosophy and
to the most lucid results of science. Science announces death
universally as the initial point of new life.4

The New Testament does not teach that natural death, organic
separation, is the fruit of sin, that, if man had not sinned, he
would have lived forever on the earth. But it teaches that moral
death, misery, is the consequence of sin. The pains and
afflictions which sometimes come upon the good without fault of
theirs do yet spring from human faults somewhere, with those
exceptions alone that result from the necessary contingencies of
finite creatures, exposures outside the sphere of human
accountability. With this qualification, it would be easy to show
in detail that the sufferings of the private individual and of
mankind at large are, directly or indirectly, the products of
guilt, violated law. All the woes, for instance, of poverty are
the results of selfishness, pride, ignorance, and vice. And it is
the same with every other class of miseries.

"The world in Titanic immortality Writhes beneath the burning
mountain of its sins."

3 Herod. i. 31; Cic. Tusc. Quast. i. 47.

4 Klencke, Das Buch vom Tode. Entwurf einer Lehre vom Sterben in
der Natur und vom Tode des Mensehen insbesondere. Fur denkende
Freunde der Wissenschaft.


Had there been no sin, men's lives would have glided on like the
placid rivers that flow through the woodlands. They would have
lived without strife or sorrow, grown old without sadness or
satiety, and died without a pang or a sigh. But, alas! sin so
abounds in the world that "there is not a just man that lives and
sins not;" and it is a truth whose omnipresent jurisdiction can
neither be avoided nor resisted that every kind of sin, every
offence against Divine order, shall somewhere, at some time, be
judged as it deserves. He who denies this only betrays the
ignorance which conceals from him a pervading law of inevitable
application, only reveals the degradation and insensibility which
do not allow him to be conscious of his own experience. A
harmonious, happy existence depends on the practice of pure morals
and communion with the love of God. This great idea that the
conscientious culture of the spiritual nature is the sole method
of Divine life is equally a fundamental principle of the gospel
and a conclusion of observation and reason: upon the devout
observance of it hinge the possibilities of true blessedness. The
pursuit of an opposite course necessitates the opposite
experience, makes its votary a restless, wretched slave, wishing
for freedom but unable to obtain it.

The thought just stated, we maintain, strikes the key note of the
Christian Scriptures; and the voices of truth and nature accord
with it. That Christianity declares sin to be the cause of
spiritual death, in all the deep and wide meaning of the term, has
been fully shown; that this is also a fact in the great order of
things has been partially illustrated, but in justice to the
subject should be urged, in a more precise and adequate form. In
the first place, there is a positive punishment flowing evidently
from sin, consisting both in outward inflictions of suffering and
disgrace through human laws and social customs, and in the private
endurance of bodily and mental pains and of strange misgivings
that load the soul with fear and anguish. Subjection to the animal
nature in the obedience of unrighteousness sensibly tends to bring
upon its victim a woeful mass of positive ills, public and
personal, to put him under the vile tyranny of devouring lusts, to
induce deathlike enervation and disease in his whole being, to
pervade his consciousness with the wretched gnawings of remorse
and shame, and with the timorous, tormenting sense of guilt,
discord, alienation, and condemnation.

In the second place, there is a negative punishment for impurity
and wrong doing, less gross and visible than the former, but
equally real and much more to be dreaded. Sin snatches from a man
the prerogatives of eternal life, by brutalizing and deadening his
nature, sinking the spirit with its delicate delights in the body
and its coarse satisfactions, making him insensible to his highest
good and glory, lowering him in the scale of being away from God,
shutting the gates of heaven against him, and leaving him to
wallow in the mire. The wages of sin is misery, and its gift is a
degradation which prevents any elevation to true happiness. These
positive and negative retributions, however delayed or disguised,
will come where they are deserved, and will not fail. Do a wrong
deed from a bad motive, and, though you fled on the pinions of the
inconceivable lightning from one end of infinite space to the
other, the fated penalty would chase you through eternity but that
you should pay its debt; or, rather, the penalty is grappling with
you from within on the instant, is a part of you.

Thirdly, if, by the searing of his conscience and absorption in
the world, a sinner escapes for a season the penal consequences
threatened in the law, and does not know how miserable he is, and
thinks he is happy, yet let him remember that the remedial,
restorative process through which he must pass, either in this
life or in the next, involves a concentrated experience of
expiatory pangs, as is shown both by the reason of the thing and
by all relevant analogies. When the bad man awakes as some time or
other he will awake to the infinite perfections and unalterable
love of the Father whose holy commands he has trampled and whose
kind invitations he has spurned, he will suffer agonies of
remorseful sorrow but faintly shadowed in the bitterness of
Peter's tears when his forgiving Master looked on him. Such is the
common deadness of our consciences that the vices of our corrupt
characters are far from appearing to us as the terrific things
they really are. Angels, looking under the fleshly garment we
wear, and seeing a falsehood or a sin assimilated as a portion of
our being, turn away with such feeling as we should experience at
beholding a leprous sore beneath the lifted ermine of a king. A
well taught Christian will not fail to contemplate physical death
as a stupendous, awakening crisis, one of whose chief effects will
be the opening to personal consciousness, in the most vivid
manner, of all the realities of character, with their relations
towards things above and things below himself.

This thought leads us to a fourth and final consideration, more
important than the previous. The tremendous fact that all the
inwrought elements and workings of our being are self retributive,
their own exceeding great and sufficient good or evil, independent
of external circumstances and sequences, is rarely appreciated.
Men overlook it in their superficial search after associations,
accompaniments, and effects. When all tangible punishments and
rewards are wanting, all outward penalties and prizes fail, if we
go a little deeper into the mysterious facts of experience we
shall find that still goodness is rewarded and evil is punished,
because "the mind is its own place, and can itself," if virtuous,
"make a heaven of hell, if wicked, "a hell of heaven." It is a
truth, springing from the very nature of God and his irreversible
relations towards his creatures, that his united justice and love
shall follow both holiness and iniquity now and ever, pouring his
beneficence upon them to be converted by them into their food and
bliss or into their bane and misery. There is, then, no essential
need of adventitious accompaniments or results to justify and pay
the good, or to condemn and torture the bad, here or hereafter. To
be wise, and pure, and strong, and noble, is glory and blessedness
enough in itself. To be ignorant, and corrupt, and mean, and
feeble, is degradation and horror enough in itself. The one abides
in true life, the other in moral death; and that is sufficient.
Even now, in this world, therefore, the swift and diversified
retributions of men's characters and lives are in them and upon
them, in various ways, and to a much greater extent than they are
accustomed to think. History preaches this with all her revealing
voices. Philosophy lays it bare, and points every finger at the
flaming bond that binds innocence to peace, guilt to remorse. It
is the substance of the gospel, emphatically pronounced. And the
clear experience of every sensitive soul confirms its truth,
echoing through the silent corridors of the conscience the
declarations which fell in ancient Judea from the lips of Jesus
and the pen of Paul: "The pure in heart shall see God;" "The wages
of sin is death."

We will briefly sum up the principal positions of the ground we
have now traversed. To be enslaved by the senses in the violation
of the Divine laws, neglecting the mind and abusing the members,
is to be dead to the goodness of God, the joys of virtue, and the
hopes of heaven, and alive to guilt, anguish, and despair. To obey
the will of God in love, keeping the body under, and cherishing a
pure soul, is to be dead to the evil of the world, the goading of
passions, and the fears of punishment, and alive to innocence,
happiness, and faith. According to the natural plan of things from
the dawn of creation, the flesh was intended to fall into the
ground, but the spirit to rise into heaven. Suffering is the
retributive result and accumulated merit of iniquity; while
enjoyment is the gift of God and the fruit of conformity to his
law. To receive the instructions of Christ and obey them with the
whole heart, walking after his example, is to be quickened from
that deadly misery into this living blessedness. The inner life of
truth and goodness thus revealed and proposed to men, its personal
experience being once obtained, is an immortal possession, a
conscious fount springing up unto eternity through the beneficent
decree of the Father, to play forever in the light of his smile
and the shadow of his arm. Such are the great component elements
of the Christian doctrine of life and death, both present and
eternal.

The purely interior character of the genuine teachings of
Christianity on this subject is strikingly evident in the
foregoing epitome. The essential thing is simply that the hate
life of error and sin is inherent alienation from God, in slavery,
wretchedness, death; while the love life of truth and virtue is
inherent communion with God, in conscious freedom and blessedness.
Here pure Christianity leaves the subject, declaring this with
authority, but not pretending to clear up the mysteries or set
forth the details of the subject. Whatever in the New Testament
goes beyond this and meddles with minute external circumstances we
regard as a corrupt addition or mixture drawn from various Gentile
and Pharisaic sources and erroneously joined with the authentic
words of Christ. What we maintain in regard to the apostles and
the early Christians in general is not so much that they failed to
grasp the deep spiritual principles of the Master's teaching, not
that they were essentially in error, but that, while they held the
substance of the Savior's true thoughts, they also held additional
notions which were errors retained from their Pharisaic education
and only partially modified by their succeeding Christian culture,
a set of traditional and mechanical conceptions. These errors, we
repeat, concern not the heart and essence of ideas, but their form
and clothing. For instance, Christ teaches that there is a heaven
for the faithful; the apostles suppose that it is a located region
over the firmament. The dying Stephen said, "Behold, I see the
heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of
God." Again: Christ teaches that there is a banishment for the
wicked; the apostles suppose that it is into a located region
under the earth. In accordance with the theological dogmas of
their time and countrymen, with such modification as the peculiar
character, teachings, and life of Jesus enforced, they believed
that sin sent through the black gates of Sheol those who would
otherwise have gone through the glorious doors of heaven; that
Christ would return from heaven soon, raise the dead from the
under world, judge them, rebanish the reprobate, establish his
perfect kingdom on earth, and reascend to heaven with his elect.
That these distinctive notions came into the New Testament
through the mistakes and imperfect knowledge of the apostles,
how can any candid and competent scholar doubt?5 In the
first place, the process whereby these conceptions were
transmitted and assimilated from Zoroastrian Persia to Pharisaic
Judea is historically traceable. Secondly, the brevity and
vagueness of the apostolic references to eschatology, and their
perfect harmony with known Pharisaic beliefs, prove their mutual
consonance and the derivation of the later from the earlier. If
the supposed Christian views had been unheard of before, their
promulgators would have taken pains to define them carefully and
give detailed expositions of them. Thirdly, it was natural almost
inevitable  that the apostles would retain at least some of their
original peculiarities of belief, and mix them with their new
ideas, unless they were prevented by an infallible inspiration. Of
the presence of any such infallibility there is not a shadow of
evidence; but, on the contrary, there is a demonstration of its
absence. For they differed among themselves, carried on violent
controversies on important points. Paul says of Peter, "I
withstood him to the face." The Gentile and Judaic dissensions
shook the very foundations of the Apostolic Church. Paul and
Barnabas "had a sharp controversy, insomuch that they parted
asunder." Almost every commentator and scholar worthy of notice
has been compelled to admit the error of the apostles in expecting
the visible return of Christ in their own day. And, if they erred
in that, they might in other matters. The progress of positive
science and the improvement of philosophical thought have rendered
the mechanical dogmas popularly associated with Christianity
incredible to enlightened minds. For this reason, as for many
others, it is the duty of the Christian teacher to show that those
dogmas are not an integral part of the gospel, but only an
adventitious element imported into it from an earlier and
unauthoritative system. Take away these incongruous and outgrown
errors, and the pure religion of Christ will be seen, and will be
seen to be the everlasting truth of God.

In attempting to estimate the actual influence of Christianity,
wherever it has spread, in establishing among men a faith in
immortality, we must specify six separate considerations. First,
the immediate reception of the resurrection and ascension of
Christ as a miraculous and typical fact, putting an infallible
seal on his teachings, and demonstrating, even to the senses of
men, the reality of a heavenly life, was an extremely potent
influence in giving form and vigor to faith, more potent for ages
than every thing else combined. The image of the victorious Christ
taken up to heaven and glorified there forever, this image,
pictured in every believer's mind, stimulated the imagination and
kept an ideal vision of heaven in constant remembrance as an
apprehended reality. "There is Jesus," they said, pointing up to
heaven; "and there one day we shall be with him."

Secondly, the obloquy and desertion experienced by the early
Christians threw them back upon a double strength of spiritual
faith, and opened to them an intensified communion with God. As
worldly goods and pleasures were sacrificed, the more powerful
became their

5 Eschatologie, oder die Lebre von den Letzten Dingen. Mit
besonderer Rucksicht anf die gangbare Irriehre vom Hades. Basel,
1840. De Wette interprets the doctrine of Christ's descent into
Hades as a myth derived from the idea that he was the Savior not
only of his living followers but also of the heathen and the dead.
Bibl. Dogmatik, s. 272.


perception of moral truths and their grasp of invisible treasures.
The more fiercely they were assailed, the dearer became the cause
for which they suffered, and the more profoundly the moral springs
of faith were stirred in their souls. The natural revulsion of
their souls was from destitution, contempt, peril, and pain on
earth to a more vivid and magnified trust in a great reward laid
up for them in heaven.

Thirdly, the unflinching zeal kindled in the early confessors of
Christianity, the sublime heroism shown by them amidst the awful
tortures inflicted on them by the persecuting Jews and Romans,
reacted on their brethren to give profounder firmness and new
intensity to their faith in a glorious life beyond the grave. The
Christians thrown into the amphitheatre to the lions calmly
kneeled in prayer, and to the superstitious bystanders a bright
nimbus seemed to play around their brows and heaven to be opened
above. As they perished at the stake, amidst brutal jeers and
shrivelling flames, serenely maintaining their profession, and
calling on Christ, over the lurid vista of smoke and fire broke on
their rapt vision the blessed splendors of Paradise; and their joy
seemed, to the enthusiastic believers around, no less than a
Divine inspiration, confirming their faith, and preaching, through
the unquestionable truthfulness of martyrdom, the certainty of
immortal life. The survivors celebrated the anniversaries of the
martyrs' deaths as their birthdays into the endless life.

Fourthly, another means by which Christianity operated to deepen
and spread a belief in the future life was, indirectly, through
its influence in calling out and cultivating the affections of the
heart. The essence of the gospel in theory, as taught by all its
teachers, in fact, as incarnated by Christ, and in practice, as
working in history is love. From the first it condemned and tended
to destroy all the coldness and hatred of human hearts; and it
strove to elicit and foster every kindly sentiment and generous
impulse, to draw its disciples together by those yearning ties of
sympathy and devotion which instinctively demand and divinely
prophesy an eternal union in a better world. The more mightily two
human hearts love each other, the stronger will be their
spontaneous longing for immortality. The unrivalled revelation of
the disinterested love of God made by Christianity, and its effect
in refining and increasing the love of men, have contributed in a
most important degree to sanction and diffuse the faith in a
blessed life reserved for men hereafter. One remarkable
specification may be noticed. The only pagan description of
children in the future life is that given by some of the classic
poets, who picture the infant shades lingering in groups around
the dismal gates of the under world, weeping and wailing because
they could never find admittance.

"Continuo audita voces, vagitus et ingens, Infantumque
animaflentes in limine primo."

Go the long round of the pagan heavens, you will find no trace of
a child. Children were withered blossoms blown to oblivion. The
soft breezes that fanned the Blessed Isles and played through the
perennial summer of Elysium blew upon no infant brows. The grave
held all the children very fast. By the memorable words, "Of such
is the kingdom of heaven," Christ unbarred the portals of the
future world and revealed therein hosts of angelic children. Ever
since then children have been seen in heaven. The poet has sung
that the angel child is first on the wing to welcome the parent
home. Painters have shown us, in their visions of the blessed
realms, crowds of cherubs, have shown us

"How at the Almighty Father's hand,
Nearest the throne of living light,
The choirs of infant seraphs stand,
And dazzling shine where all are bright."

Fifthly, the triumphant establishment of Christianity in the world
has thrown the prestige of public opinion, the imposing authority
of general affirmation and acceptance, around its component
doctrines chief among which is the doctrine of immortality and
secured in their behalf the resistless influences of current
custom and education. From the time the gospel was acknowledged by
a nation as the true religion, each generation grew up by habitual
tutelage to an implicit belief in the future life. It became a
dogma not to be questioned. And the reception of it was made more
reasonable and easy by the great superiority of its moral features
over those of the relative superstitions embodied in the ethnic
religions which Christianity displaced.

Finally, Christianity has exerted no small influence both in
expressing and imparting faith in immortality by means of the art
to which it has given birth. The Christian ritual and symbolism,
which culminated in the Middle Age, from the very first had their
vitality and significance in the truth of another life. Every
phase and article of them implied, and with mute or vocal
articulation proclaimed, the superiority and survival of mind and
heart, the truth of the gospel history, the reality of the opened
heaven. Who, in the excited atmosphere, amidst the dangers, living
traditions, and dramatic enactments of that time, could behold the
sacraments of the Church, listen to a mighty chant, kneel beside a
holy tomb, or gaze on a painting of a gospel scene, without
feeling that the story of Christ's ascent to God was true, being
assured that elsewhere than on earth there was a life for the
believer, and in rapt imagination seeing visions of the
supernatural kingdom unveiled?

The inmost thought or sentiment of mediaval art to adapt a
remarkable passage from Heine6 was the depression of the body and
the elevation of the soul. Statues of martyrs, pictures of
crucifixions, dying saints, pale, faint sufferers, drooping heads,
long, thin arms, meager bones, poor, awkwardly hung dresses,
emaciated features celestially illuminated by faith and love,
expressed the Christian self denial and unearthliness.
Architecture enforced the same lesson as sculpture and painting.
Entering a cathedral, we at once feel the soul exalted, the flesh
degraded. The inside of the dome is itself a hollow cross, and we
walk there within the very witness work of martyrdom. The gorgeous
windows fling their red and green lights upon us like drops of
blood and decay. Funereal music wails and fades away along the dim
arches. Under our feet are gravestones and corruption. With the
colossal columns the soul climbs aloft, loosing itself from the
body, which sinks to the floor as a weary weed. And when we look
on one of these vast Gothic structures from without, so airy,
graceful, tender, transparent, it seems cut out of one piece, or
may be taken for an ethereal lace work of marble.

6 Die Romantische Schule, buch i.


Then only do we feel the power of the inspiration which
could so subdue even stone that it shines spectrally possessed,
and make the most insensate of materials voice forth the grand
teaching of Christianity, the triumph of the spirit over the
flesh.

In these six ways, therefore, by placing a tangible image of it in
the imagination through the resurrection of Christ, by the
powerful stirring of the springs of moral faith through the
persecutions that attended its confession, by the apparent
inspiration of the martyrs who died in its strength, by calling
out the latent force of the heart's affections that crave it, by
the moulding power of establishment, custom, and education, by the
spiritualizing, vision conjuring effect of its worship and art,
has Christianity done a work of incalculable extent in
strengthening the world's belief in a life to come.7

A remarkable evidence of the impression Christianity carried
before it is furnished by an incident in the history of the
missionary Paulinus. He had preached before Edwin, King of
Northumbria. An old earl stood up and said, "The life of man
seems, when compared with what is hidden, like the sparrow, who,
as you sit in your hall, with your thanes and attendants, warmed
by the blazing fire, flies through. As he flies through from door
to door, he enjoys a brief escape from the chilling storms of rain
and snow without. Again he goes forth into the winter and
vanishes. So seems the short life of man. If this new doctrine
brings us something more certain, in my mind it is worthy of
adoption."8

The most glorious triumph of Christianity in regard to the
doctrine of a future life was in imparting a character of
impartialness and universality to the proud, oligarchic faith
which had previously excluded from it the great multitude of men.
The lofty conceptions of the fate of the soul cherished by the
illustrious philosophers of Greece and Rome were not shared by the
commonalty until the gospel its right hand touching the throne of
God, its left clasping humanity announced in one breath the
resurrection of Jesus and the brotherhood of man.

"Their highest lore was for the few conceived, By schools
discuss'd, but not by crowds believed. The angel ladder clomb the
heavenly steep, But at its foot the priesthoods lay, asleep. They
did not preach to nations, 'Lo, your God!' No thousands follow'd
where their footsteps trod: Not to the fishermen they said,
'Arise!' Not to the lowly offer'd they the skies. Wisdom was
theirs: alas! what men most need Is no sect's wisdom, but the
people's creed. Then, not for schools, but for the human kind, The
uncultured reason, the unletter'd mind, The poor, the oppress'd,
the laborer, and the slave, God said, 'Be light!' and light was on
the grave! No more alone to sage and hero given, For all wide oped
the impartial gates of heaven." 9

7 Compare Bengal's essay, Quid Doctrina de Animarum Immortalitate
Religioni Christiana debeat.

8 Venerable Bede, book ii. ch. xiv.

9 Bulwer, New Timon, part iv.


PART FOURTH


CHRISTIAN THOUGHTS CONCERNING A FUTURE LIFE.

