CHAPTER III.

RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH.

A DOCTRINE widely prevalent asserts that, at the termination of
this probationary epoch, Christ will appear with an army of angels
in the clouds of heaven, descend, and set up his tribunal on the
earth. The light of his advancing countenance will be the long
waited Aurora of the Grave. All the souls of men will be summoned
from their tarrying places, whether in heaven, or hell, or
purgatory, or the sepulchre; the fleshly tabernacles they formerly
inhabited will be re created, a strong necromancy making the rooty
and grave floored earth give up its dust of ruined humanity, and
moulding it to the identical shapes it formerly composed; each
soul will enter its familiar old house in company with which its
sins were once committed; the books will be opened and judgment
will be passed; then the accepted will be removed to heaven, and
the rejected to hell, both to remain clothed with those same
material bodies forever, the former in celestial bliss, the latter
in infernal torture.

In the present dissertation we propose to exhibit the sources,
trace the developments, explain the variations, and discuss the
merits, of this doctrine.

The first appearance of this notion of a bodily restoration which
occurs in the history of opinions is among the ancient Hindus.
With them it appears as a part of a vast conception, embracing the
whole universe in an endless series of total growths, decays, and
exact restorations. In the beginning the Supreme Being is one and
alone. He thinks to himself, "I will become many." Straightway the
multiform creation germinates forth, and all beings live. Then for
an inconceivable period a length of time commensurate with the
existence of Brahma, the Demiurgus the successive generations
flourish and sink. At the end of this period all forms of matter,
all creatures, sages, and gods, fall back into the Universal
Source whence they arose. Again the Supreme Being is one and
alone. After an interval the same causes produce the same effects,
and all things recur exactly as they were before.1

We find this theory sung by some of the Oriental poets:
"Every external form of things, and every object which
disappear'd, Remains stored up in the storehouse of fate: When the
system of the heavens returns to its former order, God, the All
Just, will bring them forth from the veil of mystery." 2

The same general conception, in a modified form, was held by the
Stoics of later Greece, who doubtless borrowed it from the East,
and who carried it out in greater detail. "God is an artistic
fire, out of which the cosmopoeia issues." This fire proceeds in a
certain fixed course, in obedience to a fixed law, passing through
certain intermediate gradations and established periods, until it
ultimately returns into itself and closes with a universal
conflagration. It is to this catastrophe that reference is made in
the following passage of Epictetus: "Some say that when Zeus is
left alone at the time of the conflagration, he is solitary, and
bewails himself

1 Wilson, Lectures on the Hindus, pp. 53-56.

2 The Dabistan, vol. iii. p. 169.


that he has no company."3 The Stoics supposed each succeeding
formation to be perfectly like the preceding. Every particular
that happens now has happened exactly so a thousand times before,
and will happen a thousand times again. This view they connected
with astronomical calculations, making the burning and re creating
of the world coincide with the same position of the stars as that
at which it previously occurred.4 This they called the restoration
of all things. The idea of these enormous revolving identical
epochs Day of Brahm, Cycle of the Stoics, or Great Year of Plato
is a physical fatalism, effecting a universal resurrection of the
past, by reproducing it over and over forever.

Humboldt seems more than inclined to adopt the same thought. "In
submitting," he says, "physical phenomena and historical events to
the exercise of the reflective faculty, and in ascending to their
causes by reasoning, we become more and more penetrated by that
ancient belief, that the forces inherent in matter, and those
regulating the moral world, exert their action under the presence
of a primordial necessity and according to movements periodically
renewed." The wise man of old said, "The thing that hath been, it
is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall
be done, and there is no new thing under the sun." The conception
of the destinies of the universe as a circle returning forever
into itself is an artifice on which the thinking mind early
seizes, to evade the problem that is too mighty for its feeble
powers. It concludes that the final aim of Nature is but the
infinite perfecting of her material in infinite transformations
ever repeating the same old series. We cannot comprehend and
master satisfactorily the eternal duration of one visible order,
the incessant rolling on of races and stars:

"And doth creation's tide forever flow, Nor ebb with like
destruction? World on world Are they forever heaping up, and still
The mighty measure never, never full?"

And so, when the contemplation of the staggering infinity
threatens to crush the brain, we turn away and find relief in the
view of a periodical revolution, wherein all comes to an end from
time to time and takes a fresh start. It would be wiser for us
simply to resign the problem as too great. For the conception to
which we have recourse is evidently a mere conceit of imagination,
without scientific basis or philosophical confirmation.

The doctrine of a bodily resurrection, resting on a wholly
different ground, again emerges upon our attention in the
Zoroastrian faith of Persia. The good Ormuzd created men to be
pure and happy and to pass to a heavenly immortality. The evil
Ahriman insinuated his corruptions among them, broke their primal
destiny, and brought death upon them, dooming their material
frames to loathsome dissolution, their unclothed spirits to a
painful abode in hell. Meanwhile, the war between the Light God
and the Gloom Fiend rages fluctuatingly. But at last the Good One
shall prevail, and the Bad One sink in discomfiture, and all evil
deeds be neutralized, and the benignant arrangements decreed at
first be restored. Then all

3 Epictetus, lib. iii. cap. 13. Sonntag, De Palingenesia
Stoicorum.

4 Ritter's Hist. of An. Phil., lib. xi. cap. 4.


souls shall be redeemed from hell and their bodies be rebuilt from
their scattered atoms and clothed upon them again.5 This
resurrection is not the consequence of any fixed laws or fate, nor
is it an arbitrary miracle. It is simply the restoration by Ormuzd
of the original intention which Ahriman had temporarily marred and
defeated. This is the great bodily resurrection, as it is still
understood and looked for by the Parsees.

The whole system of views out of which it springs, and with which
it is interwrought, is a fanciful mythology, based on gratuitous
assumptions, or at most on a crude glance at mere appearances. The
hypothesis that the creation is the scene of a drawn battle
between two hostile beings, a Deity and a Devil, can face neither
the scrutiny of science, nor the test of morals, nor the logic of
reason; and it has long since been driven from the arena of
earnest thought. On this theory it follows that death is a violent
curse and discord, maliciously forced in afterwards to deform and
spoil the beauty and melody of a perfect original creation. Now,
as Bretschneider well says, "the belief that death is an evil, a
punishment for sin, can arise only in a dualistic system." It is
unreasonable to suppose that the Infinite God would deliberately
lay a plan and allow it to be thwarted and ruined by a demon. And
it is unscientific to imagine that death is an accident, or an
after result foisted into the system of the world. Death that is,
a succession of generations is surely an essential part of the
very constitution of nature, plainly stamped on all those "medals
of the creation" which bear the features of their respective ages
and which are laid up in the archives of geological epochs.
Successive growth and decay is a central part of God's original
plan, as appears from the very structure of living bodies and the
whole order of the globe. Death, therefore, which furthermore
actually reigned on earth unknown ages before the existence of
man, could not have been a fortuitous after clap of human sin. And
so the foregoing theory of a general resurrection as the
restoration of God's broken plan to its completeness falls to the
ground.

The Jews, in the course of their frequent and long continued
intercourse with the Persians, did not fail to be much impressed
with the vivid melodramatic outlines of the Zoroastrian doctrine
of the resurrection. They finally adopted it themselves, and
joined it, with such modifications as it naturally underwent from
the union, with the great dogmas of their own faith. A few faint
references to it are found in the Old Testament. Some explicit
declarations and boasts of it are in the Apocrypha. In the
Targums, the Talmud, and the associated sources, abundant
statements of it in copious forms are preserved. The Jews rested
their doctrine of the resurrection on the same general ground as
the Persians did, from whom they borrowed it. Man was meant to be
immortal, either on earth or in heaven; but Satan seduced him to
sin, and thus wrested from him his privilege of immortality, made
him die and descend into a dark nether realm which was to be
filled with the disembodied souls of his descendants. The
resurrection was to annul all this and restore men to their
original footing.

We need not labor any disproof of the truth or authority of this
doctrine as the Pharisees held it, because, admitting that they
had the record of a revelation from God, this doctrine was not a
part of it. It is only to be found in their canonic scriptures by
way of vague and hasty allusion, and is historically traceable to
its derivation from the pagan oracles of Persia.

5 Frazer, History of Persia, chap. iv. Baur, Symbolik und
Mythologice thl. ii. absch. ii. cap. ss. 394-404.


Of course it is possible that the doctrine of the resurrection, as
the Hebrews held it, was developed by themselves, from imaginative
contemplations on the phenomena of burials and graves; spectres
seen in dreams; conceptions of the dead as shadowy shapes in the
under world; ideas of God as the deliverer of living men from the
open gates of the under world when they experienced narrow escapes
from destruction; vast and fanatical national hopes. Before
advancing another step, it is necessary only to premise that some
of the Jews appear to have expected that the souls on rising from
the under world would be clothed with new, spiritualized,
incorruptible bodies, others plainly expected that the identical
bodies they formerly wore would be literally restored.

Now, when Christianity, after the death of its Founder, arose and
spread, it was in the guise of a new and progressive Jewish sect.
Its apostles and its converts for the first hundred years were
Christian Jews. Christianity ran its career through the apostolic
age virtually as a more liberal Jewish sect. Most natural was it,
then, that infant Christianity should retain all the salient
dogmas of Judaism, except those of exclusive nationality and
bigoted formalism in the throwing off of which the mission of
Christianity partly consisted. Among these Jewish dogmas retained
by early Christianity was that of the bodily resurrection. In the
New Testament itself there are seeming references to this
doctrine. We shall soon recur to these. The phrase "resurrection
of the body" does not occur in the Scriptures. Neither is it found
in any public creed whatever among Christians until the fourth
century.6 But these admissions by no means prove that the doctrine
was not believed from the earliest days of Christianity. The fact
is, it was the same with this doctrine as with the doctrine of the
descent of Christ into Hades: it was not for a long time called in
question at all. It was not defined, discriminated, lifted up on
the symbols of the Church, because that was not called for. As
soon as the doctrine came into dispute, it was vehemently and all
but unanimously affirmed, and found an emphatic place in every
creed. Whenever the doctrine of a bodily resurrection has been
denied, that denial has been instantly stigmatized as heresy and
schism, even from the days of "Hymeneus and Philetas, who
concerning the truth erred, saying that the resurrection was past
already." The uniform orthodox doctrine of the Christian Church
has always been that in the last day the identical fleshly bodies
formerly inhabited by men shall be raised from the earth, sea, and
air, and given to them again to be everlastingly assumed. The
scattered exceptions to the believers in this doctrine have been
few, and have ever been styled heretics by their contemporaries.

Any one who will glance over the writings of the Fathers with
reference to this subject will find the foregoing statements amply
confirmed.7 Justin Martyr wrote a treatise on the resurrection, a
fragment of which is still extant. Athenagoras has left us an
extremely elaborate and able discussion of the whole doctrine, in
a separate work. Tertullian is author of a famous book on the
subject, entitled "Concerning the Resurrection of the Flesh," in
which he says, "The teeth are providentially made eternal to serve
as the seeds of the

6 Dr. Sykes, Inquiry when the Article of the Resurrection of the
Body or Flesh was first introduced into the Public Creeds.

7 Mosheim, De Resurrectione Mortuorum.


resurrection." Chrysostom has written fully upon it in two of his
eloquent homilies. All these, in company indeed with the common
body of their contemporaries, unequivocally teach a carnal
resurrection with the grossest details. Augustine says, "Every
man's body, howsoever dispersed here, shall be restored perfect in
the resurrection. Every body shall be complete in quantity and
quality. As many hairs as have been shaved off, or nails cut,
shall not return in such enormous quantities to deform their
original places; but neither shall they perish: they shall return
into the body into that substance from which they grew." 8 As if
that would not cause any deformity! 9 Some of the later Origenists
held that the resurrection bodies would be in the shape of a ball,
the mere heads of cherubs! 10

In the seventh century Mohammed flourished. His doctrinal system,
it is well known, was drawn indiscriminately from many sources,
and mixed with additions and colors of his own. Finding the dogma
of a general bodily resurrection already prevailing among the
Parsees, the Jews, and the Christians, and perceiving, too, how
well adapted for purposes of vivid representation and practical
effect it was, or perhaps believing it himself, the Arabian
prophet ingrafted this article into the creed of his followers. It
has ever been with them, and is still, a foremost and controlling
article of faith, an article for the most part held in its literal
sense, although there is a powerful sect which spiritualizes the
whole conception, turning all its details into allegories and
images. But this view is not the original nor the orthodox view.

The subject of the resurrection was a prominent theme in the
theology of the Middle Age. Only here and there a dissenting voice
was raised against the doctrine in its strict physical form. The
great body of the Scholastics stood stanchly by it. In defence and
support of the Church thesis they brought all the quirks and
quiddities of their subtle dialectics. As we take down their
ponderous tomes from their neglected shelves, and turn over the
dusty, faded old leaves, we find chapter after chapter in many a
formidable folio occupied with grave discussions, carried on in
acute logical terminology, of questions like these: "Will the
resurrection be natural or miraculous?" "Will each one's hairs and
nails all be restored to him in the resurrection?" "When bodies
are raised, will each soul spontaneously know its own and enter
it? or will the power of God distribute them as they belong?"
"Will the deformities and scars of our present bodies be retained
in the resurrection?" "Will all rise of the same age?" "Will all
have one size and one sex?" 11 And so on with hundreds of kindred
questions. For instance, Thomas Aquinas contended "that no other
substance would rise from the grave except that which belonged to
the individual in the moment of death."12 What dire prospects this
proposition must conjure up before many minds! If one chance to
grow prodigiously obese before death, he must lug that enormous
corporeity wearily about forever; but if he happen to die when
wasted, he must then flit through eternity as thin as a lath.

8 De Civ. Dei, lib. xxii. cap. 19, 20.

9 See the strange speculations of Opitz in his work "De Statura et
Atate Resurgentium.

10 Redepenning, Origenes, b. ii. s. 463.

11 Summa Theologia, Thoma Aquinatis, tertia pars, Supplementum,
Quastiones 79-87.

12 Hagenbuch, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 204.


Those who have had the misfortune to be amputated of legs or arms
must appear on the resurrection stage without those very
convenient appendages. There will still be need of hospitals for
the battered veterans of Chelsea and Greenwich, mutilated heroes,
pensioned relics of deck and field. Then in the resurrection the
renowned "Mynheer von Clam, Richest merchant in Rotterdam,"
will again have occasion for the services of the "patent cork leg
manufacturer," though it is hardly to be presumed he will accept
another unrestrainable one like that which led him so fearful a
race through the poet's verses.

The Manichaans denied a bodily resurrection. In this all the sects
theologically allied to them, who have appeared in ecclesiastical
history, for instance, the Cathari, have agreed. There have also
been a few individual Christian teachers in every century who have
assailed the doctrine. But, as already declared, it has uniformly
been the firm doctrine of the Church and of all who acknowledged
her authority. The old dogma still remains in the creeds of the
recognised Churches, Papal, Greek, and Protestant. It has been
terribly shattered by the attacks of reason and of progressive
science. It lingers in the minds of most people only as a dead
letter. But all the earnest conservative theologians yet cling to
it in its unmitigated grossness, with unrelaxing severity. We hear
it in practical discourses from the pulpit, and read it in
doctrinal treatises, as offensively proclaimed now as ever.
Indeed, it is an essential part of the compact system of the
ruling theology, and cannot be taken out without loosening the
whole dogmatic fabric into fragments. Thus writes to day a
distinguished American divine, Dr. Spring: "Whether buried in the
earth, or floating in the sea, or consumed by the flames, or
enriching the battle field, or evaporate in the atmosphere, all,
from Adam to the latest born, shall wend their way to the great
arena of the judgment. Every perished bone and every secret
particle of dust shall obey the summons and come forth. If one
could then look upon the earth, he would see it as one mighty
excavated globe, and wonder how such countless generations could
have found a dwelling beneath its surface." 13 This is the way the
recognised authorities in theology still talk. To venture any
other opinion is a heresy all over Christendom at this hour.

We will next bring forward and criticize the arguments for and
against the doctrine before us. It is contended that the doctrine
is demonstrated in the example of Christ's own resurrection. "The
resurrection of the flesh was formerly regarded as incredible,"
says Augustine; "but now we see the whole world believing that
Christ's earthly body was borne into heaven." 14 It is the faith
of the Church that "Christ rose into heaven with his body of flesh
and blood, and wears it there now, and will forever." "Had he been
there in body before, it would have been no such wonder that he
should have returned with it; but that the flesh of our flesh and
bone of our bone should be seated at the right hand of God is
worthy of the greatest admiration." 15 That is to say, Christ was
from eternity God, the Infinite Spirit, in

13 The Glory of Christ, vol. ii. p. 237.

14 De Civ. Dei, lib. xxii. cap. 5.

15 Pearson on the Creed, 12th ed., pp. 272-275.


heaven; he came to earth and lived in a human body; on returning
to heaven, instead of resuming his proper form, he bears with him,
and will eternally retain, the body of flesh he had worn on earth!
Paul says, "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God."
The Church, hastily following the senses, led by a carnal,
illogical philosophy, has deeply misinterpreted and violently
abused the significance of Christ's ascension. The drama of his
resurrection, with all its connected parts, was not meant
throughout as a strict representation of our destiny. It was a
seal upon his commission and teachings, not an exemplification of
what should happen to others. It was outwardly a miracle, not a
type, an exceptional instance of super natural power, not a
significant exhibition of the regular course of things. The same
logic which says, "Christ rose and ascended with his fleshly body:
therefore we shall," must also say, "Christ rose visibly on the
third day: therefore we shall." Christ's resurrection was a
miracle; and therefore we cannot reason from it to ourselves. The
common conception of a miracle is that it is the suspension, not
the manifestation, of ordinary laws. We have just as much logical
right to say that the physical appearance in Christ's resurrection
was merely an accommodation to the senses of the witnesses, and
that on his ascension the body was annihilated, and only his soul
entered heaven, as we have to surmise that the theory embodied in
the common belief is true. The record is according to mere
sensible appearances. The reality is beyond our knowledge. The
record gives no explanation. It is wiser in this dilemma to follow
the light of reason than to follow the blind spirit of tradition.
The point in our reasoning is this. If Christ, on rising from the
world of the dead, assumed again his former body, he assumed it by
a miracle, and for some special purpose of revealing himself to
his disciples and of finishing his earthly work; and it does not
follow either that he bore that body into heaven, or that any
others will ever, even temporarily, reassume their cast off forms.

The Christian Scriptures do not in a single passage teach the
popular doctrine of the resurrection of the body. Every text in
the New Testament finds its full and satisfactory explanation
without implying that dogma at all. In the first place, it is
undeniably implied throughout the New Testament that the soul does
not perish with the body. It also appears, in the next place, from
numerous explicit passages, that the New Testament authors, in
common with their countrymen, supposed the souls of the departed
to be gathered and tarrying in what the Church calls the
intermediate state, the obscure under world. In this subterranean
realm they were imagined to be awaiting the advent of the Messiah
to release them. Now, we submit that every requirement of the
doctrine of the resurrection as it is stated or hinted in the New
Testament is fully met by the simple ascension of this
congregation of souls from the vaults of Sheol to the light of the
upper earth, there to be judged, and then some to be sent up to
heaven, some sent back to their prison. For, let it be carefully
observed, there is not one text in the New Testament, as before
stated, which speaks of the resurrection of the "body" or of the
"flesh." The expression is simply the resurrection of "the dead,"
or of "them that slept." If by "the dead" was meant "the bodies,"
why are we not told so? Locke, in the Third Letter of his
controversy with the Bishop of Worcester on this subject, very
pointedly shows the absurdity of a literal interpretation of the
words "All that are in their graves shall hear my voice and shall
come forth." Nothing can come out of the grave except what is in
it. And there are no souls in the grave: they are in the separate
state. And there are no bodies in millions of graves: they long
ago, even to the last grain of dust, entered into the circulations
of the material system. "Coming forth from their graves unto the
resurrection" either denotes the rising of souls from the under
world, or else its meaning is something incredible. At all events,
nothing is said about any resurrection of the body: that is a
matter of arbitrary inference. The angels are not thought to have
material bodies; and Christ declares, "In the resurrection ye
shall neither marry nor be given in marriage, but shall be as the
angels of heaven." It seems clear to us that the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews also looked for no restoration of the
fleshly body; for he not only studiously omits even the faintest
allusion to any such notion, but positively describes "the spirits
of just men made perfect in the heavenly Jerusalem, with an
innumerable company of angels, and with the general assembly and
church of the first born." The Jews and early Christians who
believed in a bodily resurrection did not suppose the departed
could enter heaven until after that great consummation.

The most cogent proof that the New Testament does not teach the
resurrection of the same body that is buried in the grave is
furnished by the celebrated passage in Paul's Epistle to the
Corinthians. The apostle's premises, reasoning, and conclusion are
as follows: "Christ is risen from the dead, become the first
fruits of them that slept." That is to say, all who have died,
except Christ, are still tarrying in the great receptacle of souls
under the earth. As the first fruits go before the harvest, so the
solitary risen Christ is the forerunner to the general
resurrection to follow. "But some one will say, How are the dead
raised up? and with what body do they come?" Mark the apostle's
reply, and it will appear inexplicable how any one can consider
him as arguing for the resurrection of the identical body that was
laid in the grave, particle for particle. "Thou fool! that which
thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but naked
grain, and God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him." "There
are celestial bodies, and terrestrial bodies;" "there is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body;" "the first man is of the
earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven;" "flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God;" "we shall all be
changed," and "bear the image of the heavenly, as we have borne
the image of the earthy." The analogy which has been so strangely
perverted by most commentators is used by Paul thus. The germ
which was to spring up to a new life, clothed with a new body, was
not any part of the fleshly body buried in the grave, but was the
soul itself, once contained in the old body, but released from its
hull in the grave and preserved in the under world until Christ
shall call it forth to be invested with a "glorious," "powerful,"
"spiritual," "incorruptible" body. When a grain of wheat is sown,
that is not the body that shall be; but the mysterious principle
of life, latent in the germ of the seed, springs up and puts on
its body fashioned appropriately for it. So, according to Paul's
conception, when a man is buried, the material corpse is not the
resurrection body that shall be; but the living soul which
occupied it is the germ that shall put on a new body of
immortality when the spring tide of Christ's coming draws the
buried treasures of Hades up to the light of heaven.

A species of proof which has been much used by the advocates of
the dogma of a bodily resurrection is the argument from analogy.
The intimate connection of human feeling and fancy with the
changing phenomena of Nature's seasons would naturally suggest to
a pensive mind the idea, Why, since she has her annual
resurrection, may not humanity some time have one? And what first
arose as a poetic conceit or stray thought, and was expressed in
glowing metaphors, might by an easy process pass abroad and harden
into a prosaic proposition or dogmatic formula.

"O soul of the spring time, now let us behold The stone from the
mouth of the sepulchre roll'd, And Nature rise up from her death's
damp mould; Let our faith, which in darkness and coldness has
lain, Revive with the warmth and the brightness again, And in
blooming of flower and budding of tree The symbols and types of
our destiny see."

Standing by the graves of our loved and lost ones, our inmost
souls yearn over the very dust in which their hallowed forms
repose. We feel that they must come back, we must be restored to
each other as we were before. Listening to the returned birds
whose warble fills the woods once more, gazing around on the
verdant and flowery forms of renewed life that clothe the
landscape over again, we eagerly snatch at every apparent emblem
or prophetic analogy that answers to our fond imagination and
desiring dream. Sentiment and fancy, especially when stimulated by
love and grief, and roving in the realms of reverie, free from the
cold guidance and sharp check of literal fact and severe logic,
are poor analysts, and then we easily confuse things distinct and
wander to conclusions philosophy will not warrant. Before building
a dogmatic doctrine on analogies, we must study those analogies
with careful discrimination, must see what they really are, and to
what they really lead. There is often an immense difference
between the first appearance to a hasty observer and the final
reality to a profound student. Let us, then, scrutinize a little
more closely those seeming analogies which, to borrow a happy
expression from Flugge, have made "Resurrection a younger sister
of Immortality."

Nature, the old, eternal snake, comes out afresh every year in a
new shining skin. What then? Of course this emblem is no proof of
any doctrine concerning the fate of man. But, waiving that, what
would the legitimate correspondence to it be for man? Why, that
humanity should exhibit the fresh specimens of her living
handiwork in every new generation. And that is done. Nature does
not reproduce before us each spring the very flowers that perished
the previous winter: she makes new ones like them. It is not a
resurrection of the old: it is a growth of the new. The passage of
the worm from its slug to its chrysalis state is surely no symbol
of a bodily resurrection, but rather of a bodily emancipation, not
resuming a deserted dead body, but assuming a new live one. Does
the butterfly ever come back to put on the exuvia that have
perished in the ground? The law of all life is progress, not
return, ascent through future developments, not descent through
the stages already traversed. "The herb is born anew out of a
seed, Not raised out of a bony skeleton. What tree is man the seed
of? Of a soul."

Sir Thomas Browne, after others, argues for the restoration of
man's body from the grave, from the fancied analogy of the
palingenesis or resurrection of vegetables which the magicians of
the antique East and the mystic chemists of the Middle Age boasted
of effecting. He having asserted in his "Religion of a Physician"
that "experience can from the ashes of a plant revive the plant,
and from its cinders recall it into its stalk and leaves again,"
Dr. Henry Power wrote beseeching "an experimental eviction of so
high and noble a piece of chemistry, the reindividuality of an
incinerated plant." We are not informed that Sir Thomas ever
granted him the sight. Of this beautiful error, this exquisite
superstition, which undoubtedly arose from the crystallizations of
certain salts in arborescent forms which suddenly surprised the
early alchemists in some of their experiments, we have the
following account in Disraeli's "Curiosities of Literature:" "The
semina of resurrection are concealed in extinct bodies, as in the
blood of man. The ashes of roses will again revive into roses,
though smaller and paler than if they had been planted
unsubstantial and unodoriferous, they are not roses which grew on
rose trees, but their delicate apparitions; and, like apparitions,
they are seen but for a moment. This magical phoenix lies thus
concealed in its cold ashes till the presence of a certain
chemical heat produces its resurrection." Any refutation of this
now would be considered childish. Upon the whole, then, while
recurrent spring, bringing in the great Easter of the year,
typifies to us indeed abundantly the development of new life, the
growth of new bodies out of the old and decayed, but nowhere hints
at the gathering up and wearing again of the dusty sloughs and
rotted foliage of the past, let men cease to talk of there being
any natural analogies to the ecclesiastical dogma of the
resurrection of the flesh. The teaching of nature finds a truer
utterance in the words of Aschylus: "There is no resurrection for
him who is once dead." 16

The next argument is that based on considerations of reason and of
ethics. The supporters of the doctrine of the resurrection of the
body have often disingenuously evaded the burden of proof thrown
upon them by retreating beneath loud assertions of God's power.
From the earliest dawn of the hypothesis to the present time,
every perplexity arising from it, every objection brought against
it, every absurdity shown to be involved in it, has been met and
confidently rebutted with declarations of God's abundant power to
effect a physical resurrection, or to do any thing else he
pleases, however impossible it may appear to us. Now, it is true
the power of God is competent to innumerable things utterly beyond
our skill, knowledge, or conception. Nevertheless, there is a
province within which our reason can judge of probabilities, and
can, if not absolutely grasp infallible truth, at least reach
satisfactory convictions. God is able to restore the vast coal
deposits of the earth, and the ashes of all the fuel ever burned,
to their original condition when they covered the world with

16 Eumenides, 1. 648, Oxford edition.


dense forests of ferns; but we have no reason to believe he will
do it. The truth or falsity of the popular theory of the
resurrection is not a question of God's power; it is simply a
question of God's will. A Jewish Rabbin relates the following
conversation, as exultingly as if the quibbling evasion on which
it turns positively settled the question itself, which in fact it
does not approach. A Sadducee says, "The resurrection of the dead
is a fable: the dry, scattered dust cannot live again." A by
standing Pharisee makes this reply: "There were in a city two
artists: one made vases of water, the other made them of clay:
which was the more wondrous artist?" The Sadducee answered, "The
former." The Pharisee rejoins, "Cannot God, then, who formed man
of water, (gutta seminis humida,) much more re form him of clay?"
Such a method of reasoning is an irrelevant impertinence. God can
call Nebuchadnezzar from his long rest, and seat him on his old
throne again to morrow. What an absurdity to infer that therefore
he will do it! God can give us wings upon our bodies, and enable
us to fly on an exploring trip among the planets. Will he do it?
The question, we repeat, is not whether God has the power to raise
our dead bodies, but whether he has the will. To that question
since, as we have already seen, he has sent us no miraculous
revelation replying to it we can only find an answer by tracing
the indications of his intentions contained in reason, morals, and
nature.

One of the foremost arguments urged by the Fathers for the
resurrection was its supposed necessity for a just and complete
judgment. The body was involved and instrumental in all the sins
of the man: it must therefore bear part in his punishment. The
Rabbins tell this allegory: "In the day of judgment the body will
say, The soul alone is to blame: since it left me, I have lain
like a stone in the grave. The soul will retort, The body alone is
sinful: since released from it, I fly through the air like a bird.
The Judge will interpose with this myth: A king once had a
beautiful garden full of early fruits. A lame man and a blind man
were in it. Said the lame man to the blind man, Let me mount upon
your shoulders and pluck the fruit, and we will divide it. The
king accused them of theft; but they severally replied, the lame
man, How could I reach it? the blind man, How could I see it? The
king ordered the lame man to be placed upon the back of the blind
man, and in this position had them both scourged. So God in the
day of judgment will replace the soul in the body, and hurl them
both into hell together." There is a queer tradition among the
Mohammedans implying, singularly enough, the same general thought.
The Prophet's uncle, Hamzah, having been slain by Hind, daughter
of Atabah, the cursed woman cut out his liver and gnawed it with
fiendish joy; but, lest any of it should become incorporated with
her system and go to hell, the Most High made it as hard as a
stone; and when she threw it on the ground, an angel restored it
to its original nature and place in the body of the martyred hero,
that lion of God.

The Roman Catholic Church endorses the representation that the
body must be raised to be punished. In the Catechism of the
Council of Trent, which is an authoritative exposition of Romanist
theology, we read that the "identical body" shall be restored,
though "without deformities or superfluities;" restored that "as
it was a partner in the man's deeds, so it may be a partner in his
punishments." The same Catechism also gives in this connection the
reason why a general judgment is necessary after each individual
has been judged at his death, namely, this: that they may be
punished for the evil which has resulted in the world since they
died from the evil they did in the world while they lived! Is it
not astonishing how these theologians find out so much? A living
Presbyterian divine of note says, "The bodies of the damned in the
resurrection shall be fit dwellings for their vile minds. With all
those fearful and horrid expressions which every base and
malignant passion wakes up in the human countenance stamped upon
it for eternity and burned in by the flaming fury of their own
terrific wickedness, they will be condemned to look upon their own
deformity and to feel their fitting doom." It is therefore urged
that the body must be raised to suffer the just penalty of the
sins man committed while occupying it. Is it not an absurdity to
affirm that nerves and blood, flesh and bones, are responsible,
guilty, must be punished? Tucker, in his "Light of Nature
Pursued," says, "The vulgar notion of a resurrection in the same
form and substance we carry about at present, because the body
being partaker in the deed ought to share in the reward, as well
requires a resurrection of the sword a man murders with, or the
bank note he gives to charitable uses." We suppose an intelligent
personality, a free will, indispensable to responsibleness and
alone amenable to retributions. Besides, if the body must be
raised to undergo chastisement for the offences done in it and by
means of it, this insurmountable difficulty by the same logic
confronts us. The material of our bodies is in a constant change,
the particles becoming totally transferred every few years. Now,
when a man is punished after the general judgment for a certain
crime, he must be in the very body he occupied when that crime was
perpetrated. Since he was a sinner all his days, his resurrection
body must comprise all the matter that ever formed a part of his
corporeity, and each sinner may hereafter be as huge as the
writhing Titan, Tityus, whose body, it was fabled, covered nine
acres. God is able to preserve the integral soul in being, and to
punish it according to justice, without clothing it in flesh. This
fact by itself utterly vacates and makes gratuitous the hypothesis
of a physical resurrection from punitive considerations, an
hypothesis which is also refuted by the truth contained in Locke's
remark to Stillingfleet, "that the soul hath no greater congruity
with the particles of matter which were once united to it, but are
so no longer, than it hath with any other particles of matter."
When the soul leaves the body, it would seem to have done with
that stage of its existence, and to enter upon another and higher
one, leaving the dust to mix with dust forever. The body wants not
the soul again; for it is a senseless clod and wants nothing. The
soul wants not its old body again: it prefers to have the freedom
of the universe, a spirit. Philip the Solitary wrote, in the
twelfth century, a book called "Dioptra," presenting the
controversy between the soul and the body very quaintly and at
length. The same thing was done by Henry Nicholson in a
"Conference between the Soul and Body concerning the Present and
Future State." William Crashaw, an old English poet, translated
from the Latin a poem entitled "The Complaint: a Dialogue between
the Body and the Soul of a Damned Man."17 But any one who will
peruse with intelligent heed the works that have been written on
this whole subject must be amazed to see how exclusively the
doctrine which we are opposing has rested on pure grounds of
tradition and fancy, alike destitute of authority and reason. Some
authors have indeed attempted to support the doctrine with
arguments: for

17 Also see Dialogue inter Corpus et Animam, p. 95 of Latin Poems
attributed to Walter Mapes.


instance, there are two German works, one by Bertram, one by
Pflug, entitled "The Resurrection of the Dead on Grounds of
Reason," in which recourse is had to every possible expedient to
make out a case, not even neglecting the factitious assistance of
Leibnitz's scheme of "Pre established Harmony." But it may be
deliberately affirmed that not one of their arguments is worthy of
respect. Apparently, they do not seek to reach truth, but to
bolster up a foregone conclusion held merely from motives of
tradition.

The Jews had a favorite tradition, developed by their Rabbins in
many passages, that there was one small, almond shaped bone,
(supposed now to have been the bone called by anatomists the os
coccygis,) which was indestructible, and would form the nucleus
around which the rest of the body would gather at the time of the
resurrection. This bone, named Luz, was miraculously preserved
from demolition or decay. Pound it furiously on anvils with heavy
hammers of steel, burn it for ages in the fiercest furnaces, soak
it for centuries in the strongest solvents, all in vain: its magic
structure still remained. So the Talmud tells. "Even as there is a
round dry grain In a plant's skeleton, which, being buried, Can
raise the herb's green body up again; So is there such in man, a
seed shaped bone, Aldabaron, call'd by the Hebrews Luz, Which,
being laid into the ground, will bear, After three thousand years,
the grass of flesh, The bloody, soul possessed weed called man."

The Jews did not, as these singular lines represent, suppose this
bone was a germ which after long burial would fructify by a
natural process and bear a perfect body: they regarded it only as
a nucleus around which the Messiah would by a miracle compel the
decomposed flesh to return as in its pristine life. All that the
Jews say of Luz the Mohammedans repeat of the bone Al Ajib.

This conceit of superstition has been developed by a Christian
author of considerable reputation into a theory of a natural
resurrection. The work of Mr. Samuel Drew on the "Identity and
General Resurrection of the Human Body" has been quite a standard
work on the subject of which it treats. Mr. Drew believes there is
a germ in the body which slowly ripens and prepares the
resurrection body in the grave. As a seed must be buried for a
season in order to spring up in perfect life, so must the human
body be buried till the day of judgment. During this period it is
not idle, but is busily getting ready for its consummation. He
says, "There are four distinct stages through which those parts
constituting the identity of the body must necessarily pass in
order to their attainment of complete perfection beyond the grave.
The first of these stages is that of its elementary principles;
the second is that of an embryo in the womb; the third is that of
its union with an immaterial spirit, and with the fluctuating
portions of flesh and blood in our present state; and the fourth
stage is that of its residence in the grave. All these stages are
undoubtedly necessary to the full perfection of the body: they are
alembics through which its parts must necessarily move to attain
that vigor which shall continue forever."18 To state this figment
is enough. It would be folly to attempt any refutation of a fancy
so obviously a pure contrivance to fortify a preconceived opinion,
a fancy, too, so preposterous, so utterly without countenance,
either from experience, observation, science, reason, or
Scripture. The egg of man's divinity is not laid in the nest of
the grave.

Another motive for believing the resurrection of the body has been
created by the exigencies of a materialistic philosophy. There was
in the early Church an Arabian sect of heretics who were reclaimed
from their errors by the powerful reasonings and eloquence of
Origen.19 Their heresy consisted in maintaining that the soul dies
with the body being indeed only its vital breath and will be
restored with it at the last day. In the course of the Christian
centuries there have arisen occasionally a few defenders of this
opinion. Priestley, as is well known, was an earnest supporter of
it. Let us scan the ground on which he held this belief. In the
first place, he firmly believed that the fact of an eternal life
to come had been supernaturally revealed to men by God through
Christ. Secondly, as a philosopher he was intensely a materialist,
holding with unwavering conviction to the conclusion that life,
mind, or soul, was a concomitant or result of our physical
organism, and wholly incapable of being without it. Death to him
was the total destruction of man for the time. There was therefore
plainly no alternative for him but either to abandon one of his
fundamental convictions as a Christian and a philosopher, or else
to accept the doctrine of a future resurrection of the body into
an immortal life. He chose the latter, and zealously taught always
that death is an annihilation lasting till the day of judgment,
when all are to be summoned from their graves. To this whole
course of thought there are several replies to be made. In the
first place, we submit that the philosophy of materialism is
false: standing in the province of science and reason, it may be
affirmed that the soul is not dependent for its existence on the
body, but will survive it. We will not argue this point, but
merely state it. Secondly, it is certain that the doctrine which
makes soul perish with body finds no countenance in the New
Testament. It is inconsistent with the belief in angelic spirits,
in demoniac possessions, in Christ's descent as a spirit to preach
to the spirits of departed men imprisoned in the under world, and
with other conceptions underlying the Gospels and the Epistles.
But, thirdly, admitting it to be true, then, we affirm, the
legitimate deduction from all the arrayed facts of science and all
the presumptive evidence of appearances is not that a future
resurrection will restore the dead man to life, but that all is
over with him, he has hopelessly perished forever. When the breath
ceases, if nothing survives, if the total man is blotted out, then
we challenge the production of a shadow of proof that he will ever
live again. The seeming injustice and blank awfulness of the fate
may make one turn for relief to the hypothesis of a future
arbitrary miraculous resurrection; but that is an artificial
expedient, without a shadow of justification. Once admit that the
body is all, its dissolution a total death, and you are gone
forever. One intuition of the spirit, seizing the conscious
supports of eternal ideas, casts contempt on "The doubtful
prospects of our painted dust,"

18 Drew on Resurrection, ch. vi. sect. vii. pp. 326-332.

19 Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. lib. vi. cap. xxxvii.


and outvalues all the gross hopes of materialism. Between
nonentity and being yawns the untraversable gulf of infinity. No:
the body of flesh falls, turns to dust and air; the soul,
emancipated, rejoices, and soars heavenwards, and is its own
incorruptible frame, mocking at death, a celestial house, whose
maker and builder is God.

Finally, there remain to be weighed the bearings of the argument
from chemical and physiological science on the resurrection. Here
is the chief stumbling block in the way of the popular doctrine.
The scientific absurdities connected with that doctrine have been
marshalled against it by Celsus, the Platonist philosopher, by
Avicenna, the Arabian physician, and by hundreds more, and have
never been answered, and cannot be answered. As long as man lives,
his bodily substance is incessantly changing; the processes of
secretion and absorption are rapidly going forward. Every few
years he is, as to material, a totally new man. Dying at the age
of seventy, he has had at least ten different bodies. He is one
identical soul, but has lived in ten separate houses. With which
shall he be raised? with the first? or the fifth? or the last? or
with all? But, further, the body after death decays, enters into
combination with water, air, earth, gas, vegetables, animals,
other human bodies. In this way the same matter comes to have
belonged to a thousand persons. In the resurrection, whose shall
it be? We reply, nearly in the language of Christ to the
Sadducees, "Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the will of
God: in the resurrection they have not bodies of earthly flesh,
but are spirits, as the angels of God."

The argument against the common theory of a material resurrection,
on account of numerous claimants for the same substance, has of
late derived a greatly increased force from the brilliant
discoveries in chemistry. It is now found that only a small number
of substances ever enter into the composition of animal bodies.20
The food of man consists of nitrogenized and non nitrogenized
substances. The latter are the elements of respiration; the former
alone compose the plastic elements of nutrition, and they are few
in number and comparatively limited in extent. "All life depends
on a relatively small quantity of matter. Over and over again, as
the modeller fashions his clay, are plant and animal formed out of
the same material." The particles that composed Adam's frame may
before the end of the world have run the circuit of ten thousand
bodies of his descendants: "'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been
slave to thousands." To proclaim the resurrection of the flesh as
is usually done, seems a flat contradiction of clear knowledge.21
A late writer on this subject, Dr. Hitchcock, evades the
insuperable difficulty by saying, "It is not necessary that the
resurrection body should contain a single particle of the body
laid in the grave, if it only contain particles of the same kind,
united in the same proportion, and the compound be made to assume
the same form and structure as the natural body." 22 Then two men
who look exactly alike may in the resurrection exchange bodies
without any harm! Here the theory of punishment clashes. Does not
the esteemed author see that this would not be a resurrection of
the old bodies, but a creation of new ones

20 Liebig, Animal Chemistry, sect. xix.

21 The Circulation of Matter, Blackwood's Magazine, May, 1853.

22 The Resurrection of Spring, p. 26.


just like them? And is not this a desertion of the orthodox
doctrine of the Church? If he varies so far from the established
formularies out of a regard for philosophy, he may as well be
consistent and give up the physical doctrine wholly, because it
rests solely on the tradition which he leaves and is every whit
irreconcilable with philosophy. This device is as wilful an
attempt to escape the scientific difficulty as that employed by
Candlish to avoid the scriptural difficulty put in the way of the
doctrine by the apostolic words "Flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God." The eminent Scottish divine affirms that
"flesh and bones"  that is, these present bodies made
incorruptible can inherit the kingdom of God; although "flesh and
blood" that is, these present bodies subject to decay cannot.23 It
is surely hard to believe that the New Testament writers had such
a distinction in their minds. It is but a forlorn resource
conjured up to meet a desperate exigency.

At the appearing of Christ in glory,

"When the Day of Fire shall have dawn'd, and sent Its deadly
breath into the firmament," as it is supposed, the great earth
cemetery will burst open and its innumerable millions swarm forth
before him. Unto the tremendous act of habeas corpus, then
proclaimed, every grave will yield its prisoner. Ever since the
ascension of Jesus his mistaken followers have been anxiously
expecting that awful advent of his person and his power in the
clouds; but in vain. "All things remain as they were: where is the
promise of his appearing?" As the lookers out hitherto have been
disappointed, so they ever will be. Say not, Lo here! or, Lo
there! for, behold, he is within you. The reason why this carnal
error, Jewish conceit, retains a hold, is that men accept it
without any honest scrutiny of its foundations or any earnest
thought of their own about it. They passively receive the
tradition. They do not realize the immensity of the thing, nor the
ludicrousness of its details. To their imaginations the awful
blast of the trumpet calling the world to judgment, seems no more,
as Feuerbach says, than a tone from the tin horn of a postillion,
who, at the post station of the Future, orders fresh horses for
the Curriculum Vita! President Hitchcock tells us that, "when the
last trumpet sounds, the whole surface of the earth will become
instinct with life, from the charnels of battle fields alone more
than a thousand millions of human beings starting forth and
crowding upwards to the judgment seat." On the resurrection
morning, at the first tip of light over acres of opening monument
and heaving turf, "Each member jogs the other, And whispers, Live
you, brother?"

And how will it be with us then? Will Daniel Lambert, the mammoth
of men, appear weighing half a ton? Will the Siamese twins then be
again joined by the living ligament of their congenital band?
Shall "infants be not raised in the smallness of body in which
they died, but increase by the wondrous and most swift work of
God"? 24

23 Candlish, Life in a Risen Savior: Discourse XV.

24 Augustine, De Civ. Dei, lib. xxii. cap. xiv.


Young sings, "Now charnels rattle; scatter'd limbs, and all The
various bones, obsequious to the call, Self moved, advance; the
neck perhaps to meet The distant head; the distant head the feet.
Dreadful to view! see, through the dusky sky Fragments of bodies
in confusion fly, To distant regions journeying, there to claim
Deserted members and complete the frame."

The glaring melodramatic character, the startling mechanico
theatrical effects, of this whole doctrine, are in perfect keeping
with the raw imagination of the childhood of the human mind, but
in profound opposition to the working philosophy of nature and the
sublime simplicity of God.

Many persons have never distinctly defined their views upon the
subject before us. In the minds even of many preachers and
writers, several different and irreconcilable theories would seem
to exist together in confused mixture. Now they speak as if the
soul were sleeping with the body in the grave; again they appear
to imply that it is detained in an intermediate state; and a
moment afterwards they say it has already entered upon its final
reward or doom. Jocelyn relates, in his Life of St. Patrick, that
"as the saint one day was passing the graves of two men recently
buried, observing that one of the graves had a cross over it, he
stopped his chariot and asked the dead man below of what religion
he had been. The reply was, 'A pagan.' 'Then why was this cross
put over you?' inquired St. Patrick. The dead man answered, 'He
who is buried near me is a Christian; and one of your faith,
coming hither, placed the cross at my head.' The saint stepped out
of his chariot, rectified the mistake, and went his way." Calvin,
in the famous treatise designated "Psychopannychia," which he
levelled against those who taught the sleep of souls until the day
of judgment, maintained that the souls of the elect go immediately
to heaven, the souls of the reprobate to hell. Here they tarry in
bliss and bale until the resurrection; then, coming to the earth,
they assume their bodies and return to their respective places.
But if the souls live so long in heaven and hell without their
flesh, why need they ever resume it? The cumbrous machinery of the
scheme seems superfluous and unmeaning. As a still further
specimen of the arbitrary thinking the unscientific and
unphilosophical thinking carried into this department of thought
by most who have cultivated it, reference may be made to Bishop
Burnet's work "De Statu Mortuorum et Resurgentium," which teaches
that at the first resurrection the bodies of the risen will be the
same as the present, but at the second resurrection, after the
millennium, from the rudiments of the present body a new spiritual
body will be developed.

The true idea of man's future destiny appears to be that no
resurrection of the flesh is needed, because the real man never
dies, but lives continuously forever. There are two reasonable
ways of conceiving what the vehicle of his life is when he leaves
his present frame. It may be that within his material system lurks
an exquisite spiritual organization, invisibly pervading it and
constituting its vital power. This ethereal structure is
disengaged at last from its gross envelope, and, unfettered, soars
to the Divine realms of ether and light. This theory of an "inner
body" is elaborately wrought out and sustained in Bonnet's
"Palingenesie Philosophique." Or it may be that there is in each
one a primal germ, a deathless monad, which is the organic
identity of man, root of his inmost stable being, triumphant,
unchanging ruler of his flowing, perishable organism. This spirit
germ, born into the present life, assimilates and holds the
present body around it, out of the materials of this world; born
into the future life, it will assimilate and hold around it a
different body, out of the materials of the future world.25 Thus
there are bodies terrestrial and bodies celestial: the glory of
the terrestrial is one, fitted to this scene of things; the glory
of the celestial is another, fitted to the scene of things
hereafter to dawn. Each spirit will be clothed from the material
furnished by the world in which it resides. Not forever shall we
bear about this slow load of weary clay, this corruptible mass,
heir to a thousand ills. Our body shall rather be such  "If
lightning were the gross corporeal frame Of some angelic essence,
whose bright thoughts As far surpass'd in keen rapidity The
lagging action of his limbs as doth Man's mind his clay; with like
excess of speed To animated thought of lightning flies That spirit
body o'er life's deeps divine, Far past the golden isles of
memory."

What man knows constitutes his present world. All beyond that
constitutes another world. He can imagine two modes in which his
desire for a life after death may be gratified, a removal into the
Unknown World, or a return into the Known World. With the latter
supposition the restoration of the flesh is involved.

Upon the whole, our conclusion is, that in the original plan of
the world it was fixed that man should not live here forever, but
that the essence of his life should escape from the flesh and
depart to some other sphere of being, there either to fashion
itself a new form, or to remain disembodied. If those who hold the
common doctrine of a carnal resurrection should carry it out with
philosophical consistency, by extending the scheme it involves to
all existing planetary races as well as to their own, should they
cause that process of imagination which produced this doctrine to
go on to its legitimate completion, they would see in the final
consummation the sundered earths approach each other, and
firmaments conglobe, till at last the whole universe concentred in
one orb. On the surface of that world all the risen races of being
would be distributed, the inhabitants of a present solar system
making a nation, the sum of gigantic nationalities constituting
one prodigious, death exempted empire, its solitary sovereign GOD.
But this is pure poetry, and not science nor philosophy.

25 Lange on the Resurrection of the Body, Studien und Kritiken, 1836.


