CHAPTER IV.

THE GATES OF HEAVEN; OR, THE LAW OF SALVATION IN ALL WORLDS.

HEAVEN, in the crude fancy of mankind, has generally been
conceived as a definite, exclusive, material abode; either some
elysian clime on the surface of the earth; or some happy isle
beyond the setting sun; or this whole globe, renovated by fire and
peopled with a risen and ransomed race; or else some halcyon spot
in the sky, curtained with inaccessible splendor and crowded with
eternal blessings. It was natural that men should think thus of
heaven as a place whence all the evils which they knew were
excluded and where all the goods which they knew were carried to
the highest pitch, God himself visibly enthroned there in
entrancing glory amidst throngs of worshippers.

This was unavoidable, because, in an early age, before knowledge
and reflection had trained men to the critical examination and
correction of their instinctive conclusions, all the data which
they possessed would naturally lead them to imagine the unknown
God in the glorified form and circumstances of the most enviable
being their experience had yet revealed to them; and to paint the
unknown future state of perfected souls under the purest aspects
of the most desirable boons they had known in the present state.
It being a necessity of their uncritical minds to personify God by
a definite picture of imagination, and to portray heaven to
themselves as an external place, they could not do otherwise than
work out the results by means of the most intense experiences and
the most impressive imagery familiar to them. The highest idea
they had of man, purified and expanded to the utmost, would be
their idea of God; and the grandest and happiest conditions of
existence within their observation, enhanced by the removal of
every limiting ill, would form their notion of heaven. Both would
be outward, definite, local, and, as it were, tangible. Royal
courts with their pomp of power and luxury; priestly temples, with
their exclusive sanctity, their awe inspiring secrets, their
processions and anthems, would inevitably furnish the prevailing
casts and colors to the dogmas and the scenery of early religion.
For what were the most vivid of all the experiences men had among
their fellows on earth? Why, the exhibitions of the sultan with
his gorgeous ceremonial state, and of the high priest with the
dread sacrifice and homage he paid amidst clouds of incense and
rolling waves of song; the admission of the favored, in glittering
robes, to share the privileges; the exclusion of the profane and
vulgar in squalid misery and outer darkness. Consequently, except
by a miracle, these sights could not fail largely to constitute
the scenic elements for the popular belief concerning God and
heaven. What should men reflect over into the unknown to portray
their ideals there, if not the most coveted ingredients and the
most impressive forms of the known? The great thing, then,
inevitably, would be supposed to be to gain the personal favor of
the supreme Sovereign by some artifice, some flattery, some
fortunate compliance with his arbitrary caprice, and to get into
the charmed enclosure of his abode by some special grace some
authoritative passport or magic art.

But as soon as science and philosophy, and a spiritual experience
rectifying its own errors by reflective criticism, have created a
more competent theology it discredits all these raw schemes. It
teaches that God, being the eternal omnipresent power and mystery
which foreran, underlies, pervades and includes all things, cannot
justly be figured as a man, locally here or there, and not
elsewhere. He can be justly thought of only as the almighty
Creator of the universe, intelligible in the order of his works
and ways, but inscrutable in his essence, absent nowhere, present
everywhere in general, and specially revealed anywhere whenever a
fit experience in the soul awakens a special consciousness of him.
This conception of God the only one any longer defensible as the
Infinite Spirit, incapable, except in his various incarnations, of
particular local enthronement and uncovering to the outward gaze
of worshippers, necessitates a correspondent alteration in the
vulgar idea of heaven as an exclusive spot in space.

In every form of being, in any portion of the universe, the
central idea of a state of salvation, is the fulfillment of the
will of the Creator in the faculties of the creature, the fruition
of the ends of the whole in the consciousness of the part, the
congruity of the forces of the soul with the requirements of its
situation. If this definition be accepted, it is clear that no
mere place of residence, however excellent, can be heaven. That is
but one factor of heaven, and worthless without a corresponding
factor of a spiritual kind. Essentially, heaven is a divine
experience, not a divine location; yet constructively it is both
of these. Ever so serene and pure a space, perfectly free from
every perturbation of ill, and surrounded with all the outer
provisions of power and order, would be no heaven, until a
prepared soul entered it, furnishing the spiritual conditions for
the forces to run into fruition, for the melody of blissful being
to play. The material elements of the universe, so far as we know,
are unconscious dynamics. However perfectly marshalled, they can
by themselves compose no heaven. So the conscious soul, as far as
we know, is incapable of an independent and unrelated existence in
itself. All its experience, when ultimately analyzed, is the
resultant of the mutual relations between its own energies and
capacities and the forms and forces of things outside of itself.
When there is a right arrangement of right realities in the
residence, and a right development of faculties and affections
within the resident, and such an adjustment of the spiritual
states with the surrounding conditions, that, as these act and
react upon each other, the laws of the universe break into
conscious harmony, or the will of God is realized in a life of
blessedness; that harmony, that blessedness, is what we mean by
heaven; and the conditions of its realization constitute the law
of salvation.

Such being the true idea of heaven, obviously, it cannot be
limited to any particular locality. It may be here, elsewhere,
anywhere, everywhere, before death, in death, after death;
whenever and wherever the proper conditions meet inward state and
outward circumstances so adjusted as to produce an experience
which fulfills the will of God and realizes the end of the
creation. Hereafter this may be, as we know it now on earth, a
spiritual fruition in material conditions, or it may be something
altered in accordance with the varying exigences of worlds whose
details are as yet inconceivable by us, altogether hidden behind
the veil of futurity and our ignorance. But its one fundamental
condition, its eternal essence under all circumstances which can
possibly happen, must always be the same. Whatever changes await
the soul, embodied in a new form in the state after death, or
remaining in pure disembodiment; whatever be the relation of the
immaterial entity of mind to the circumference and contents of its
new home, it can be in paradise, it can command peace and bliss,
or any equivalent of these terms, only by the fulfillment of the
will of God in its being. Heaven is, therefore, the reconciliation
and unison of the soul with its divinely appointed lot, the
identification of the ideal and the real.

The will of God is expressed in the soul in the submissive
services and virtues of a pure and pious character it is expressed
in the outward creation by the unbreakable persistency of his laws
through all the aberrations and discords of accompaning evil or
limitation. Nowhere can it ever be an impossibility to conjoin
these and thus to make a heaven. The one thing which everywhere is
variable and evanescent, is evil, or the imperfect adjustment of
the creature with the works and designs of the Creator. The one
thing which forever stays, and steadily invites the intelligent
soul to its embrace, is good, that is, the opportunity to realize
the divinely intended correspondence of the relations in the part
with the relations in the whole, a serene movement of life through
the unison of the soul with its true fate. Now, the one predicate
which is essential in all things, without whose presence nothing
can be, is the will of God. Even could that will be violated or
withstood, still it would be there, upholding, forgiving, wooing
Salvation, or a life of conscious harmony, is capable of
realization, of course, wherever the means are offered for the
performance and enjoyment of the will of God; and the infinity of
his attributes necessarily makes that condition an omnipresent
possibility in the realm of free spirits. Therefore, heaven is not
outwardly limited to one place, or to one period, but may be
achieved at any time, and anywhere. This throws light on the
fallacy of the current, narrow doctrine of a limited probation.
The oriental belief that the action of the present is the fate of
the future unquestionably covers a profound truth. Yet, if there
is always a future there must likewise always be a present, and
the right action in this may forever redeem that. Probation is
limited by no decree, only by the duration of free being.

Although the essential element in the idea of heaven is forever
the same, it may be regarded in three different aspects, or on
three different scales as an individual experience, as a social
state, as a far off universal event. Heaven, as a private
experience, is the harmonized intercourse of the soul with the
divineness in its surrounding conditions. Heaven, as a public
society, is the blessed communion of blessed souls, a complete
adjustment of the lives of kindred natures. Heaven, as a final
consummation, is the publication of the vindicated will of God in
the total harmony of the universe, all individual wills so many
separate notes blent in the collective consonance of the whole.

But, for all practical purposes, we may overlook this triple
distinction and think of heaven simply as the correspondence of
the life of the soul with those outward conditions which represent
the will of God. And towards this conclusion everything, in its
profoundest and most persistent tendency, is bearing. In spite of
interruptions and seeming exceptions, it is towards this that the
entire confluence of forces and beings gravitates and slowly
advances. The universal law of evolution, in which a scientific
philosophy has generalized its most comprehensive induction, is
but a history and prophecy of the progress towards a moving
equilibrium of the totality of worlds and intelligences, which can
eventuate only in a universal heaven, or unimpeded completion of
the creative design.

Do we not see all creatures tending towards the perfection of
their respective types, every improvement selectively taken up and
carried on, every deteriorating deviation eliminated, all errors
and failures doomed to perish or change into new conditions for
more hopeful attempts? This confirms the faith first based on the
deeper argument. For, since the will of God is the one persistent
reality, the one all evolving and all inclusive power of which
evil is only the distorted and shadowy negation, that opposition
to the will of God which constitutes sin and misery, that discord
with him which generates hell, must prove an ever smaller
accompaniment of his plan, a transitory phenomenon ceasing in even
degree with the spreading conquests of his almighty purpose, as
race on race of creatures, and system on system of worlds, sweep
into the victorious harmony, until the boundless realm of being
shall be boundless heaven.

Heaven, then, in essence, is not merely a favored locality, not
merely a resigned soul, but the result of a combination of these
in a just relation. It is not a playing power in the material
environment nor an inherent attribute of the spiritual instrument;
but it is the music which flows from the instrument when it is
attuned to react in coordination with the acting environment.
Salvation, consequently, is not simply a divine place of abode,
not simply a divine state of soul; but it is these two conjoined.
It is the experimental deposit between the two poles of rightly
ordered conditions in the realm and rightly directed energies in
the inhabitant. Heaven, then, in the best and briefest definition
we can give, is the will of God in fulfillment, or the law of the
whole in uncrossed action.

Hell is the experience produced by the rebound of violated law.
Or, if we hold that, strictly speaking, a divine law is incapable
of violation; as every seeming resistance to gravitation is in
fact a deeper obedience to gravitation, then we may say, in more
accurate phrase, hell is the collision and friction of the
limitations of different laws. It is the discord of the part with
the whole. It is the antagonism of the soul with God. But the
perpetual preservation of a perfectly balanced antagonism with God
is inconceivable. It must vary, totter, grow either worse or
better. If it grows worse, it will finally destroy itself, the
aberrant individuality or malign insurgence vanishing in the
totality of force, as the filth of our sewers vanishes purely in
the purity of the ocean. If it grows better, its improvement will
finally transform the opposition into reconciliation, the evil
disappearing in good. Therefore, every being must at length be
saved from misery, if not by redemptive atonement then by
absolvent annihilation, and one absolute heaven finally absorb the
dwindling hells.

The question of chief importance to us in relation to heaven is,
How can we gain admission into it. The limitations of language
necessitate the use of imagery for the expression of religious
ideas: and there is no objection to it if it be recognized as
imagery, and be interpreted accordingly. Considering, then, that
beatific experience of which heaven consists, under the metaphor
of a city, what are its ways of entrance? How can we pass to its
citizenship?

The obstacles to our entrance exist not in the city itself. Its
gates are never closed. The supreme conditions of redemption are
spiritual, and not local or material. If there be within
no fatal impediments to the free course of the will of God, all
outer obstacles easily give way and cease. If we are ever to know
heaven, it is within ourselves that we must find it out. Whatever
abolishes that internal rebellion of the soul which makes its
experience a purgatory, whatever replaces this confusion with an
accord of the faculties, is a road to heaven. Whatever removes
vices and inserts virtues in their stead, attuning us to the
eternal laws of things, leads us through some gate into paradise.
And nothing else can no ceremonial artifice, no external
transference, no sacramental exorcism, no priestly dodge.

The same mistake generally committed in regard to the nature of
heaven, making it a mere local residence, has been as generally
committed in regard to the conditions of admission. They have been
made arbitrary, whereas they are intrinsic. They are inwrought
with the substantial laws of being. The idea of God being first
fashioned after the image of a sultan throned in his palace amidst
his courtiers, ruling an empire by his whims, it was but natural
that heaven, and the terms of entrance there, should be in a
similar manner conceived under the forms of court ceremonial with
its capricious favoritisms. Thus it has been supposed that by the
atoning sacrifice of an incarnate person of the Godhead
satisfaction has been made for the sins of the world, which was
hopelessly ruined by its original federal representative, and that
thus a pardon was offered to those alone who mentally accept the
formula of the correspondent belief.

According to this view, the only open gateway of heaven is faith
in the vicarious atonement, a baptismal passage through the blood
of Christ. Science explodes this narrow and repulsive doctrine by
demonstrating its irreconcilableness alike with physical fact and
with moral law, first tracing the affiliated lines of our race
back to many separate Adams in the shadows of an indeterminable
antiquity, and then showing that the divine method of salvation is
through substantial rejection of evil and appropriation of good in
personal character, and not through royal proclamation and
forensic conformity.

The plan of God for the salvation of men, as its culmination is
seen in Christ, is the exhibition of the true type of being, the
true style of motive and action, for their assimilation and
reproduction: but Calvinism, when fundamentally analyzed, reduces
it to a monarchical manifesto and spectacular drama working its
effects through verbal terms, acts of mental assent and gesticular
deeds. Every sound teaching of philosophy refutes this exclusive
and arbitrary creed. In fact, its fictitious and mythological
nature is obvious the moment we see that the will of God is
represented in those laws of nature which are the direct
articulations and embodiments of his eternal mind, and not in
those political regulations or priestly and judicial formalities
which express the perverted desires and artificial devices of men.
The wearing of a certain dress, the bending of the knee, the
muttering of a phrase, may flatter an earthly sovereign and gain a
seat at his banquets. But it is childish folly to fancy any such
thing of God. It is absurd to suppose that he has two schemes of
government, one for the present state, another for the future; one
for the elect, another for the reprobate; one for those who gaze
on the spectacle of the crucifixion and make a certain sign,
another for those who do not. His laws, identified with the
unchangeable nature and course of the creation, sweep in one
unbroken order throughout immensity and eternity, awarding perfect
justice, and perfect mercy to all alike, making the experience of
all souls a hell or a heaven to them accordingly as they strive
against or harmonize with the divine system of existence in
which they have their being. The mere acceptance of a technical
dogma, the mere performance of a ritual action, cannot adjust
a discordant character with the conditions of blessedness so
as to reinstate an exile of heaven. To imagine that God will,
in consideration of some technical device, place in heaven a
man whose character fits him for hell, or, in default of that
conventionality, place in hell a man whose character fits him
for heaven, is to represent him as acting on an eccentric whim.
And surely every one who has a worthy idea of God must find
it much easier to believe that men have mixed mythological
dreams with their religion, than to believe that the infinite
God is capable of despotic freaks or melo dramatic caprices.

The poor, odious figment that baptism with the blood of Christ
is the sole entrance to heaven, is rebuked by the sweet and awful
imperturbableness with which the laws of being act, distributing
the ingredients of hell or heaven to every one accordingly as his
vices disobey or his virtues obey the will of God.

In a universe of law where God with all his attributes is
omnipresent no trick can ever be the pathway into paradise. The
true method of salvation is by the production of a good character
through divine grace and the discipline of life. Thus, the real
law of salvation through Christ consists not in the technical
belief that he shed his blood for our redemption, but in the
personal derival from him of that spirit which will make us
willing to shed our own blood for the good of others.

There was, not long ago, called to her eternal home, a young
woman, who, by the sweet gentleness, the heroic generosity and the
unspotted fidelity of her whole life, deserves an exalted place on
the roll of feminine chivalry and saintliness. Not a brighter
name, or one associated with a more fearless and accomplished
spirit, is recorded on the list of those Christian women who
volunteered to serve as nurses in the great American war of
nationality. No soldier was braver, few were more under fire, than
she; still plying her holy work with unfaltering love and
fortitude, both in the horrid miasma of camps and before the
charge of cavalry and the blaze of cannon. Many a time, the
livelong night, under the solemn stars, equipped with assuaging
stores, she threaded her way alone through the debris of carnage,
seeking out the wounded among the dead, lifting her voice in song
as a signal for any lingering survivor who might be near. Many a
time she broke on the vision of mutilated and dying men, with the
light of love in her eyes, a hymn of cheer on her lips, and
unwearied ministrations in her hands, transfigured with courage
and devotion, gleaming on their sight through the sulphurous flame
of battle or the darkening mists of disease like an angel from
heaven. Receiving the seeds of fatal illness from her exposures,
she returned home to delight with her noble qualities all who knew
her, to make a husband happy, and then to die a contented martyr.
Meekly folding her hands, and saying: "Thanks, Father, for what
thou hast enabled me to do, and still more for the new home to
which thou art calling me now" she was gone. The cruel creed of
superstition says: "Since she was a Universalist, having no part,
by faith, in the mystic sacrifice of Christ, she is doomed to
hell." But every attribute of God, every promise written by his
own finger in the sacred instincts of our nature, as well as the
cardinal teachings of the New Testament, assure us that as the
victorious purity and devotedness of her soul bore her away from
the tabernacle of flesh, the welcoming Savior said: "Come, thou
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared from the
foundation of the world." And heaven swung wide its gate for her;
and excited fancy conceives that, as she passed in, there was a
gratulatory flutter of wings and waving of palms through the
angelic ranks.

In distinction from that hypothetical gate of blood, set up by a
crude theology in one narrow place alone, what, then, are the real
gates of heaven, which stand open throughout the realms of
responsible being? All the causes which bring the will of man into
consent with the will of God. Truth is the harmony of mind with
the divine order; beauty, the harmony of taste with the divine
symmetries; good, the harmony of volition with the divine ends.
Everything that secures these for us is an avenue into the
peaceful city of bliss. To be in heaven is to be a transparent
medium through which the qualities of objects, the reflections of
phenomena, the vibrations of aboriginal power, pass in blessed
freedom, without deflection or jar, and on which the mysterious
attraction of the Infinite exerts its supreme spell. To be there
in a superlative degree is to have a mind which is an
infinitesimal mirror of the All, and a heart responsive to that
mind, every perception of truth in the realm of the intellect
generating a correspondent emotion of good in the realm of
affection. Not any forensic act of faith in atoning blood, but
ingrained piety a modest renunciation before the reality of things
is the grand gateway of souls to the blessedness and repose of
God. Anselm, the great sainted Archbishop of Canterbury, said: "I
would rather be in hell without a fault than in heaven with one."
Can any defective technicality damn such a man? No; such a spirit
carries and radiates heaven is itself heaven. That spirit is God
himself in his creature, and can no more be imprisoned in hell
than God can be. On the other hand, any professing Orthodoxist
who, according to a horrible doctrine of the Calvinists in former
days, should hope in heaven to obtain a sharper relish for his own
joy by looking down on the tortures of the damned, and contrasting
his blissful safety with the hopeless agony of their perdition,
would find himself in hell. The infernal scenery, even there,
would burst on his gaze, its atmosphere of pain reek around him,
and the detestable turmoil of its experience rage in his breast.
The selfishness of his character, in steep contradiction to the
public disinterestedness belonging to the divine will, must invert
every proper experience of heaven. Could any conventional
arrangement, or accident of locality, save such a man, while his
character remained unchanged? No; such a spirit carries and
radiates hell, is itself hell.

A Mohammedan author says of the seventy three sects into which his
coreligionists are divided, that seventy two are wrong ways,
terminating in eternal damnation; the remaining one alone, in
which are the party of salvation, leads through the true faith
into the City of Allah. The same unwise bigotry, the same
unripeness of judgment, has been generally shown by Christians. It
is time they were ashamed of it, and allowed their souls to mature
and expand into a more liberal creed in fuller keeping with the
hospitable amplitude of the righteousness and goodness of God.
Everything that tends to bring the will of man into loving
submission to the infinite Father, to mould the structure of
character into correspondence with those established conditions of
rightful being represented by the moral and religious
virtues, is an open highway of salvation. And all the great
cardinal ordinations of life do legitimately tend to this result.
Therefore all these are gates of heaven. Some pass in through one
of them, others through another; and by means of them all, it is
decreed in the sovereign councils of the Divinity, as we believe,
that, sooner or later, every intelligence shall reach the goal.

First is the gate of innocence. Little children, spotless youths
and maidens who have known no malice or guile, the saintly few
among mature men and women who by the untempted elevation and
serenity of their temper have kept their integrity unmarred and
their robes unsullied, enter by this nearest and easiest gate.
Borne aloft by their own native gravitation, we see the white
procession of the innocent ones winding far up the cerulean height
and defiling in long melodious line into heaven.

The second gate is prosperity. Through this enter those to whom
good fortune has served as the guiding smile of God, not pampering
them with arrogance, nor hardening them with careless egotism, but
shaping them to thankful meekness and generosity. Exempt from
lacerating trials, every want benignly supplied, girt with
friends, they have grown up in goodness and gratitude, obeying the
will of God by the natural discharge of their duties, diffusing
benedictions and benefits around them. To such beautiful spirits,
saved from wrong and woe by the redemptive shelter of their lot,
happiness is a better purgatory than wretchedness. The crystal
stream of joy percolating throughout the soul cleanses it more
perfectly than any flames of pain can. And so the virtuous
children of a favored fortune, who have improved their privileges
with pious fidelity, move on into heaven.

Then the third gate is victory. This is more arduous of approach,
and yet a throng of heroic souls, the very chivalry of heaven,
press through it, wounded and bleeding from the struggle, but
triumphant. These are they who have endured hardship with
uncomplaining fortitude and fought their way through all enemies,
seductions and tribulations. These are they who, armed with the
native sacrament of righteousness, inspired with a loyal love,
would never stoop their crests to wrong nor make a league with
iniquity the conquering champions who tread down every vile
temptation, ever hearing their Leader say, "In the world ye shall
have trouble and sorrow; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world."

Penitence is another gate of heaven. By the instructions of
Providence, by the natural progress of experience, the evolution
of wisdom, a sinner may become aware of the ingratitude of his
disobedience, ashamed of the odiousness of his guilt; be smitten
with a regenerating love of truth, beauty, goodness, God; and,
without waiting for the lash of an external judgment to drive him
the way he should go, by voluntary preference may grieve over his
folly and sin, and turn to his duty and his Savior. Then the
blessed gate of a spontaneous repentance stands open before him;
and through this hospitable entrance multitudes find admission to
the divine home.

Death often gives an otherwise unattainable deliverance, and so
yields the poor victim of unhappy outer conditions a passage to
heaven. It is a thought no less false than it is frightful, which
represents death as the vindictive turnkey of the creation, at
whose approach probation ends, and the shuddering convict is
thrust into hell, the hopeless bolt dropping into its ward behind
him. It is rather the divine messenger of deliverance for those
who are borne down here under a fate too hard for them. Oh, what
myriads of afflicted ones orphan children crushed by brutal
treatment; poor seamstresses starving in garrets; men and women
ground and grimed almost out of the semblance of humanity, in the
drudgery and darkness of coal mines; hapless suicides, who have
rashly fled from this step dame world, and whose alabaster forms,
purpled with bruises, are laid on the dismal beds of brass in the
morgue, where a ghastly light strains through the grates, and the
crowd of gazers sweeps endlessly on; unsuccessful men of genius,
unappreciated, neglected, cruelly wronged, their extreme
sensitiveness making their lives a long martyrdom to these what a
blessed angel is death, freeing them, setting them in a new state,
starting them on a fresh career, amidst fairer circumstances, in
front of better opportunities! To be saved, and in paradise, what
is it but to be a pure instrument to echo the music of divine
things? When the corruptible parts of the instrument are
hopelessly discordant, or the circumstances of its place here are
jangled with evils which it cannot overcome, then the
disentanglement of the spiritual harp, and the translation of it
to some finer sphere; where its free chords may ring their proper
music clearly out, are a blessed redemption, making death itself a
triumphant gate of heaven.

Retribution is the remotest and most difficult of all the heavenly
gates; and yet it is one, and one that is indispensable for many a
neglectful, halting, and obstinate child of man. It is an extreme
error to think punishment a gate of hell. It is rather a result of
being already inside, and it legitimately serves as an outlet
thence. Whatever may be the case with imperfect human rulers, in
the government of God no punishment is ever inflicted for the sake
of vengeance, a gratuitous evil. It is blasphemy to deem God
vindictive. He always punishes for the sake of good, to awaken
attention, produce insight and sorrow, and cause a reattunement of
character and conduct with the laws of right, seen at last to be
supremely authoritative and benignant, indissolubly bound up with
the truest good of each and with the sole good of all. On every
gate of hell may be written. Wherever retribution is actual,
salvation is possible, equivalent to the great maxim of
jurisprudence: Ubi jus ibi remedium! So, even the dark door of
retribution, when men will advance by no other way, leads them to
thoughtfulness, regret, and a redemptive readjustment of their
passions and acts. Thus it becomes the ultimate gate of heaven.
And, alas! what a dismal crowd of sufferers, refusing all shorter
and happier ways, wait to be drawn through this torturing passage
of remedial mercy! May the number entering by the other gates ever
increase, and those entering this dwindle! And yet, may it forever
stand open for the unhappy culprits who must be lost unless saved
here!

Besides all these gates, and commanding them all, there is one
everywhere accessible, and never shut on any soul which has the
grace to try it the omnipresent gate of resignation. Remove the
conditions of resistance, or friction, by a total surrender of
self will and an absolute acceptance of the Divine Will, and, it
matters not where you are, the essence of perdition is destroyed
in your soul. The utter abandonment of pride, a pious submission
to the laws of things, a glad and grateful acquiescence in
whatever the Supreme Authority decrees this is the unrestricted
way into heaven which waits before the steps of all who will only
exhibit the requisite spirit, and enter. Yes, let any being but
banish from himself every vestige of personal dictation before God
and unexactingly identify his desires with universal good; and,
even though he stand on the bottom of hell, heaven will be directly
before him through the open gate of resignation. For the organic
attitude of a pure and loving submission tunes the discordant
creature to that eternal breath of God which blows everywhere
through the universe of souls, sighing until they conspire with
it to make the music of redemption.

