CHAPTER IX.

MORALITY OF THE DOCTRINE OF A FUTURE LIFE. IN discussing the
ethics of the doctrine of a future life a subject here amazingly
neglected, there more amazingly maltreated, and nowhere, within
our knowledge, truly analyzed and exhibited1 it is important that
the theme be precisely defined and the debate kept strictly to the
lines. Let it be distinctly understood, therefore, that the
question to be handled is not, "Whether there ought to be a future
life or not," nor, "Whether there is a future life or not." The
question is, "What difference should it make to us whether we
admit or deny the fact of a future life?" If we believe that we
are to pass through death into an immortal existence, what
inferences pertaining to the present are right, fully to be drawn
from the supposition? If, on the other hand, we think there is
nothing for us after the present, what are the logical
consequences of that faith in regard to our aims and rules of
conduct in this world?

Suppose a man who has always imagined that death is utter
annihilation should in some way suddenly acquire knowledge that an
endless existence immediately succeeds the termination of this:
what would be the legitimate instructions of his new information?
Before we can fairly answer this inquiry, we need to know what
relations connect the two states of existence. A knowledge of the
law and method and means of man's destiny is more important for
his guidance than the mere ascertainment of its duration. With
reference to the query before us, four hypotheses are conceivable.
If, in the first place, there be no connection whatever except
that of temporal sequence between the present life and the future,
then, so far as duty is concerned, the expectation of a world to
come yields not the slightest practical application for the
experience that now is. It can only be a source of comfort or of
terror; and that will be accordingly as it is conceived under the
aspect of benignity or of vengeance. If, secondly, the character
of the future life depend on conditions to be fulfilled here, but
those conditions be not within our control, then, again, no
inferences of immediate duty can be drawn from the apprehended
hereafter. Being quasi actors in a scene prearranged and with a
plot predetermined, we can no more be capable of any obligation or
choice, in regard to the end, than puppets which some unseen
Harlequin moves by the terrible wires of primitive decree or
transmitted depravity towards the genial or the tragic crisis. If
the soul's fate there is to be heaven or hell according to the
part enacted here, it must have free will and a fair opportunity
to work the unmarred problem safely out. Otherwise the future life
is reduced, as far as it affects us here, to a mere source of
complacency or of horror as it respectively touches the elect and
the reprobate.

Thirdly, it may be conceived that the future life is a state of
everlasting reward and punishment unchangeably decided by the way
in which the probationary period allotted on

1 The only direct treatise on the subject known to us is
Tilemann's Kritik der Unsterblichkeitslehre in Ansehung des
Sittengesetzes, published in 1789. And this we have not seen.


earth is passed through. Here are men, for a brief time, free to
act thus or otherwise. Do thus, and the endless bliss of heaven is
won. Do otherwise, and the endless agony of hell is incurred. The
plain rule of action yielded by this doctrine is, Sacrifice all
other things to the one thing needful. The present life is in
itself a worthless instant. The future life is an inexhaustible
eternity. And yet this infinite wealth of glory or woe depends on
how you act during that poor moment. Therefore you have nothing to
do while on earth but to seek the salvation of your soul. To waste
a single pulse beat on any thing else is the very madness of
folly. To find out how to escape hell and secure heaven, and then
to improve the means, this should absolutely absorb every energy
and every thought and every desire of every moment. This world is
a bridge of straw over the roaring gulf of eternal fire. Is there
leisure for sport and business, or room for science and
literature, or mood for pleasures and amenities? No: to get
ourselves and our friends into the magic car of salvation, which
will waft us up from the ravenous crests of the brimstone lake
packed with visages of anguish, to bind around our souls the
floating cord of redemption, which will draw us up to heaven, this
should intensely engage every faculty. Nothing else can be
admitted save by oversight of the awful facts. For is it not one
flexible instant of opportunity, and then an adamantine
immortality of doom? That doctrine of a future life which makes
eternal unalterable happiness or misery depend on the fleeting
probation allowed here yields but one practical moral; and that it
pronounces with imminent urgency and perfect distinctness. The
only true duty, the only real use, of this life is to secure the
forensic salvation of the soul by improvement of the appointed
means. Suspended by such a hair of frailty, for one breathless
moment, on such a razor edged contingence, an entrancing sea of
blessedness above, a horrible abyss of torture beneath, such
should be the all concentrating anxiety to secure safety that
there would be neither time nor taste for any thing else. Every
object should seem an altar drenched with sacrificial blood, every
sound a knell laden with dolorous omen, every look a propitiatory
confession, every breath a pleading prayer. From so single and
preternatural a tension of the believer's faculties nothing could
allow an instant's cessation except a temporary forgetting or
blinking of the awful scene and the immeasurable hazard. Such
would be a logical application to life of the genuine morals of
the doctrine under consideration. But the doctrine itself is to be
rejected as false on many grounds. It is deduced from Scripture by
a technical and unsound interpretation. It is unjust and cruel,
irreconcilable with the righteousness or the goodness of God. It
is unreasonable, opposed to the analogies of nature and to the
experience of man. It is wholly impossible to carry it out
consistently in the practice of life. If it were thoroughly
credited and acted upon, all the business of the world would
cease, and the human race would soon die out.

There remains one other view of the relationship of a future life
with the present. And it seems to be the true view. The same
Creator presiding, the same laws prevailing, over infinitude and
eternity that now rule over time and earth, our immortality cannot
reasonably be imagined either a moment of free action and an
eternity of fixed consequences, or a series of separate fragments
patched into a parti colored experience with blanks of death
between the patterns of life. It must be conceived as one endless
existence in linear connection of cause and effect developing in
progressive phases under varying conditions of motive and scenery.
With what we are at death we live on into the next life. In every
epoch and world of our destiny our happiness depends on the
possession of a harmoniously working soul harmoniously related
with its environment. Each stage and state of our eternal
existence has its peculiarities of duty and privilege. In this one
our proper work is to improve the opportunities, discharge the
tasks, enjoy the blessings, belonging here. We are to do the same
in the next one when we arrive in that. All the wealth of wisdom,
virtue, strength, and harmony we acquire in our present life is
the vantage ground and capital wherewith we start in the
succeeding life. Therefore the true preparation for the future is
to fit ourselves to enter it under the most favorable auspices, by
accumulating in our souls all the spiritual treasures afforded by
the present. In other words, the truest aim we can set before
ourselves during our existence on earth is to make it yield the
greatest possible results of the noblest experience. The life
hereafter is the elevated and complementary continuation of the
life here; and certainly the directest way to ameliorate the
continuation is to improve the commencement.

But, it may be said, according to this representation, the fact of
a future life makes no difference in regard to our duty now; for
if the grave swallows all, still, it is our duty and our interest
to make the best and the most of our life in the world while it
lasts. True; and really that very consideration is a strong proof
of the correctness of the view in question. It corresponds with
the other arrangements of God. He makes every thing its own end,
complete in itself, at the same time that it subserves some
further end and enters into some higher unity. He is no mere
Teleologist, hobbling towards his conclusions on a pair of decayed
logic crutches,2 but an infinite Artist, whose means and ends are
consentaneous in the timeless and spaceless spontaneity and
perfection of his play. If the tomb is our total goal, our genuine
aim in this existence is to win during its course an experience
the largest in quantity and the best in quality. On the other
hand, if another life follows this, our wisdom is just the same;
because that experience alone, with the favor of God, can
constitute our fitness and stock to enter on the future. And yet
between the two cases there is this immense difference,  not
indeed in duty, but in endowment, that in the latter instance we
work out our allotted destiny here, in a broader illumination,
with grander incentives, and with vaster consolations. A future
life, then, really imposes no new duty upon the present, alters no
fundamental ingredient in the present, takes away none of the
charms and claims of the present, but merely sheds an additional
radiance upon the shaded lights already shining here, infuses an
additional motive into the stimulants already animating our
purposes, distills an additional balm into the comforts which
already assuage our sorrows amidst an evanescent scene. The belief
that we are to live hereafter in a compensating world explains to
us many a sad mystery, strengthens us for many an oppressive
burden, consoles us in many a sharp grief. Else we should oftener
go mad in the baffling whirl of problems, oftener obey the baser
voice, oftener yield to despair. These three are the moral uses,
in the present life, of the

2 "Seht, an der morschen Syllogismenkrucke Hinkt Gott in Seine
Welt."Lenau's Satire auf einen Professor philosophia.


doctrine of a future life. Outside of these three considerations
the doctrine has no ethical meaning for human observance here.

It will be seen, according to the foregoing representation, that
the expectation of a future life, instead of being harmful to the
interests and attractions of the present, simply casts a cheering
and magnifying light upon them. It does not depreciate the
realities or nullify the obligations now upon us, but emphasizes
them, flinging their lights and shades forward through a mightier
vista. Consequently there is no reason for assailing the idea of
another life in behalf of the interests of this. Such an
opposition between the two states is entirely sophistical,
resulting from a profound misinterpretation of the truemoral
relations connecting them.

The belief in immortality has been mistakenly attacked, not merely
as hostile to our welfare on earth, but likewise as immoral in
itself, springing from essential selfishness, and in turn
nourishing selfishness and fatally tainting every thing with that
central vice. To desire to live everlastingly as an identical
individual, it has been said, is the ecstasy and culmination of
avaricious conceitedness. Man, the vain egotist, dives out of
sight in God to fish up the pearl of his darling self. He makes
his poor individuality the measure of all things, his selfish
desire the law of endless being. Such a rampant proclamation of
self will and enthronement of pure egotism, flying in the face of
the solemn and all submerging order of the universe, is the very
essence and climax of immorality and irreligiousness. To this
assault on the morality of the belief in a future life, whether
made in the devout tones of magnanimous sincerity, as by the
sublime Schleiermacher, or with the dishonest trickiness of a
vulgar declaimer for the rehabilitation of the senses, as by some
who might be named, several fair replies may be made. In the first
place, the objection begs the question, by assuming that the
doctrine is a falsehood, and that its disciples wilfully set up
their private wishes against the public truth. Such tremendous
postulates cannot be granted. It is seizing the victory before the
battle, grasping the conclusion without establishing the premises.
For, if there be a future life provided by the Creator, it cannot
be sinful or selfish in us to trust in it, to accept it with
humble gratitude, and to prepare our souls for it. That, instead
of being rebellious arrogance or overweening selfishness, would
simply be conforming our thoughts and plans, our desires and
labors, to the Divine arrangements. That would be both morality
and piety. When one clings by will to a doctrine known to be a
falsehood, obstinately suppressing reason to affirm it as a truth,
and, in obedience to his personal whims, trying to force all
things into conformity with it, he does act as a selfish egotist
in full violation of the moral law and the spirit of religion. But
a future life we believe to be a fact; and therefore we are, in
every respect, justified in gladly expecting it and consecratedly
living with reference to it.

Furthermore, admitting it to be an open question, neither proved
nor disproved, but poised in equal uncertainty, still, it is not
immoral nor undevout deeply to desire and fondly to hope a
personal immortality. "The aim of religion," it has been said, "is
the annihilation of one's own individuality, the living in the
All, the becoming one with the universe." But in such a definition
altogether too much is assumed. The aim of religion is only the
annihilation of the self will of the individual as opposed to the
Will of the Whole, not the losing of one's self in the unconscious
wastes of the universe, but the harmonizing of one's self with the
Supreme Law of the universe.

An humble, loving, and joyous conformity to the truth constitutes
morality and religion. This is not necessarily inconsistent with a
personal immortality. Besides, the charge may be retorted. To be
identified with the universe is a prouder thought than to be
subordinated to it as an infinitesimal individual. It is a far
haughtier conceit to fancy one's self an integral part of God's
substance than to believe one's self a worshipping pensioner of
God's will. The conception, too, is less native to the mind, has
been more curiously sought out, and is incomparably more pampering
to speculative luxury. If accusations of selfishness and
wilfulness are to be hurled upon any modes of preferred faith as
to our destiny, this self styled disinterested surrender of our
personality to the pantheistic Soul is as obnoxious to them as the
common belief.

If a desire for personal immortality be a normal experience in the
development of our nature, it cannot be indictable as an offence,
but must be recognised as an indication of God's design. Whether
the desire is a cold and degraded piece of egotism deserving
rebuke and contempt, or a lofty and sympathetic affection worthy
of reverence and approval, depends on no intrinsic ingredient of
the desire itself, but on the character in which it has its being.
One person will be a heartless tyrant, another a loving saint, in
his hope of a future life. Shall our love of the dead, our prayers
to meet them again, our unfathomed yearnings to know that they
still live and are happy, be stigmatized as mean and evil? Regard
for others as much as for ourselves prompts the eternal sigh. Nor
will Divinity ever condemn the feeling himself has awakened. It is
said that Xerxes, gazing once upon his gorgeous army of a million
men spread out below hire, sheathed in golden armor, white plumes
nodding, purple standards waving, martial horns blowing, wept as
he thought that in thirty years the entire host composing that
magnificent spectacle would be dead. To have gazed thoughtfully
upon such a sight with unmoved sensibilities would imply a much
more selfish and hard hearted egotist. So when a lonely
philanthropist from some meditative eminence looks down on the
human race, if, as the contemplation of their pathetic fading and
decay wounds his saddened heart, he heals and cheers it with the
faith of a glorious immortality for them all, who shall call him
selfish and sinful? To rest contented with the speedy night and
the infinite oblivion, wiping off all the unsolved sums from the
slate of existence with annihilation's remorseless sponge, that
would be the selfishness and the cruelty.

When that sweet asp, death, fastens on our vein of earthly life,
we all feel, like the dying queen of Egypt, that we have "immortal
longings" in us. Since the soul thus holds by a pertinacious
instinct to the eternity of her own existence, it is more rational
to conclude that this is a pledge of her indestructible
personality, God's impregnable defence reared around the citadel
of her being, than to consider it the artificial rampart flung up
by an insurgent egotism. In like manner, it is a misrepresentation
of the facts to assert the culpable selfishness of the faith in a
future life as a demanded reward for fidelity and merit here. No
one demands immortality as pay for acquired desert. It is modestly
looked for as a free boon from the God who freely gave the present
and who has by a thousand symbolic prophecies promised it. Richter
says, with great insight, "We desire immortality not as the reward
of virtue, but as its continuance. Virtue can no more be rewarded
than joy can: it is its own reward." Kant says, "Immortality has
been left so uncertain in order that pure freedom of choice, and
no selfish views, shall prompt our aspirations." "But," Jean Paul
keenly replies, "as we have now discovered this intention, its
object is defeated. Besides, if the belief in immortality makes
virtue selfish, the experience of it in the next world would make
it more so." The anticipation of heaven can hardly make man a
selfish calculator of profit; because heaven is no reward for
crafty reckoning, but the home of pure and holy souls. Virtue
which resists temptation and perseveres in rectitude because it
has a sharp eye to an ulterior result is not virtue. No credible
doctrine of a future life offers a prize except to those who are
just and devout and strenuous in sacred service from free loyalty
to the right and the good, spontaneously obeying and loving the
higher and better call because it divinely commands their
obedience and love. The law of duty is the superior claim of truth
and goodness. Virtue, yielding itself filially to this, finds in
heaven not remuneration, but a sublimer theatre and an immortal
career. Egotistic greed, all mere prudential considerations as
determining conditions or forces in the award, are excluded as
unclean and inadmissible by the very terms; and the doctrine
stands justified on every ground as pure and wholesome before the
holiest tribunal of ethics. Surely it is right that goodness
should be blessed; but when it continues good only for the sake of
being blessed it ceases to be goodness. It is not the belief in
immortality, but only the belief in a corrupt doctrine of
immortality which can poison the springs of disinterested virtue.

The morality of the doctrine of a future life having thus been
defended from the attacks of those who have sought to destroy it
in the fancied interests either of the enjoyments of the earth or
of the purity of virtue and religion, it now remains to free it
from the still more fatal supports which false or superficial
religionists have sought to give it by wrenching out of it
meanings it never held, by various perverse abuses of it, by
monstrous exaggerations of its moral importance to the present. We
have seen that the supposition of another life, correctly
interpreted, lays no new duty upon man, takes away from him no old
duty or privilege, but simply gives to the previously existing
facts of the case the intensifying glory and strength of fresh
light, motive, and consolation. But many public teachers, not
content to treat the subject with this sobriety of reason, instead
of presenting the careful conclusions of a conscientious analysis,
have sought to strengthen their argument to the feelings by help
of prodigious assumptions, assumptions hastily adopted, highly
colored, and authoritatively urged. Upon the hypothesis that
annihilation is the fate of man, they are not satisfied merely to
take away from the present all the additional light, incentive,
and comfort imparted by the faith in a future existence, but they
arbitrarily remove all the alleviations and glories intrinsically
belonging to the scene, and paint it in the most horrible hues,
and set it in a frame of midnight. Thus, instead of calmly seeking
to elicit and recommend truth, they strive, by terrifying the
fancy and shocking the prejudices, to make people accept their
dogma because frightened at the seeming consequences of rejecting
it. It is necessary to expose the fearful fallacies which have
been employed in this way, and which are yet extensively used for
the same purpose.

Even a Christian writer usually so judicious as Andrews Norton has
said, "Without the belief in personal immortality there can be no
religion; for what can any truths of religion concern the feelings
and the conduct of beings whose existence is limited to a few
years in this world?" 3 Such a statement from such a quarter is
astonishing. Surely the sentiments natural to a person or
incumbent upon him do not depend on the duration of his being, but
on the character, endowments, and relations of his being. The
hypothetical fact that man perishes with his body does not destroy
God, does not destroy man's dependence on God for all his
privileges, does not annihilate the overwhelming magnificence of
the universe, does not alter the native sovereignty of holiness,
does not quench our living reason, imagination, or sensibility,
while they last. The soul's gratitude, wonder, love, and worship
are just as right and instinctive as before. If our experience on
earth, before the phenomena of the visible creation and in
conscious communion with the emblemed attributes of God, does not
cause us to kneel in humility and to adore in awe, then it may be
doubted if heaven or hell will ever persuade us to any sincerity
in such acts. The simple prolongation of our being does not add to
its qualitative contents, cannot increase the kinds of our
capacity or the number of our duties. Chalmers utters an injurious
error in saying, as he does, "If there be no future life, the
moral constitution of man is stripped of its significancy, and the
Author of that constitution is stripped of his wisdom and
authority and honor." 4 The creative Sovereign of fifty million
firmaments of worlds "stripped of his wisdom and authority and
honor" because a few insects on a little speck are not eternal!
Can egotistic folly any further go? The affirmation or denial of
immortality neither adds to nor diminishes the numerical relations
and ingredients of our nature and experience. If religion is
fitted for us on the former supposition, it is also on the latter.
To any dependent intelligence blessed with our human susceptibilities,
reverential love and submission are as obligatory, natural, and
becoming on the brink of annihilation as on the verge of immortality.

Rebellious egotism makes all the difference. Truth is truth,
whatever it be. Religion is the meek submission of self will to
God's will. That is a duty not to be escaped, no matter what the
future reserves or excludes for us.

Another sophism almost universally accepted needs to be shown.
Man, it is said, has no interest in a future life if not conscious
in it of the past. If, on exchange of worlds, man loses his
memory, he virtually ceases to exist, and might just as well be
annihilated. A future life with perfect oblivion of the present is
no life at all for us. Is not this style of thought the most
provincial egotism, the utter absence of all generous thought and
sympathy unselfishly grasping the absolute boons of being? It is a
shallow error, too, even on the grounds of selfishness itself. In
any point of view the difference is diametric and immense between
a happy being in an eternal present, unconscious of the past, and
no being at all. Suppose a man thirty years of age were offered
his choice to die this moment, or to live fifty years longer of
unalloyed success and happiness, only with a complete
forgetfulness of all that has happened up to this moment. He would
not hesitate to grasp the gift, however much he regretted the
condition.

3 Tracts concerning Christianity, p. 307.

4 Bridgewater Treatise, part ii. ch. 10, sect. 15.


It has often been argued that with the denial of a retributive
life beyond the grave all restraints are taken off from the
passions, free course given to every impulse. Chateaubriand says,
bluntly, "There can be no morality if there be no future state." 5
With displeasing coarseness, and with most reprehensible
recklessness of reasoning, Luther says, in contradiction to the
essential nobleness of his loving, heroic nature, "If you believe
in no future life, I would not give a mushroom for your God. Do,
then, as you like. For if no God, so no devil, no hell: as with a
fallen tree, all is over when you die. Then plunge into lechery,
rascality, robbery, and murder." What bible of Moloch had he been
studying to form, for the time, so horrid a theory of the happiest
life, and to put so degrading an estimate upon human nature? Is
man's will a starved wolf only held back by the triple chain of
fear of death, Satan, and hell, from tearing forth with ravenous
bounds to flesh the fangs of his desires in bleeding virtue and
innocence? Does the greatest satisfaction man is capable of here,
the highest blessedness he can attain to, consist in drunkenness,
gluttony, dishonesty, violence, and impiety? If he had the
appetite of a tiger or a vulture, then, thus to wallow in the
offal of vice, dive into the carrion of sensuality, abandon
himself to revelling in carnivorous crime, might be his instinct
and his happiness. But by virtue of his humanity man loves his
fellows, enjoys the scenery of nature, takes delight in thought
and art, dilates with grand presentiments of glory and eternity,
mysteriously yearns after the hidden God. To a reasonable man and
no other is to be reasoned with on matters of truth and interest
the assumption of this brief season as all, will be a double
motive not to hasten and embitter its brevity by folly, excess,
and sin. If you are to be dead to morrow, for that very reason, in
God's name, do not, by gormandizing and guzzling, anticipate death
to day! The true restraint from wrong and degradation is not a
crouching conscience of superstition and selfishness, fancying a
chasm of fire, but a high toned conscience of reason and honor,
perceiving that they are wrong and degradation, and spontaneously
loathing them.

Still worse, many esteemed authors have not hesitated to assert
that unless there be a future life there is not only no check on
passion within, but no moral law without; every man is free to do
what he pleases, without blame or fault. Sir Kenelm Digby says, in
his "Treatise on Man's Soule," that "to predicate mortality in the
soule taketh away all morality, and changeth men into beastes, by
removing the ground of all difference in those thinges which are
to governe our actions." 6 This style of teaching is a very
mischievous absurdity. Admit, for a moment, that Jocko in the
woods of Brazil, and Schiller in the brilliant circles of Weimar,
will at last meet the same fate in the dusty grasp of death; yet,
while they live, one is an ape, the other is a man. And the
differences of capacity and of duty are numberless and immense.
The statement is enough: argument would be ridiculous. The words
of an audacious French preacher are yet more shocking than those
of the English nobleman. It is hard to believe they could be
uttered in good faith. Says Massillon, in his famous declamation
on immortality, "If we wholly perish with the body, the maxims of
charity, patience, justice, honor, gratitude, and friendship, are
but empty words. Our own passions shall decide our duty.

5 Genie du Christianisme, partie ii. livre vi. chap. 3.

6 Ch. ix. sect. 10.


If retribution terminate with the grave, morality is a mere
chimera, a bugbear of human invention." 7 What debauched
unbeliever ever inculcated a viler or a more fatal doctrine? Its
utter barelessness, as a single illustration may show, is obvious
at a glance. As the sciences of algebra and geometry, the
relations of numbers and bodies, are true for the material world
although they may be lost sight of when time and space are
transcended in some higher state, so the science of ethics, the
relations of nobler and baser, of right and wrong, the manifold
grades and qualities of actions and motives, are true for human
nature and experience in this life even if men perish in the
grave. However soon certain facts are to end, while they endure
they are as they are. In a moment of carelessness, by some strange
slip of the mind, showing, perhaps, how tenaciously rooted are the
common prejudice and falsehood on this subject,  even so bold and
fresh a thinker as Theodore Parker has contradicted his own
philosophy by declaring, "If to morrow I perish utterly, then my
fathers will be to me only as the ground out of which my bread
corn is grown. I shall care nothing for the generations of
mankind. I shall know no higher law than passion. Morality will
vanish." 8 Ah, man reveres his fathers and loves to act nobly, not
because he is to live forever, but because he is a man. And,
though all the summer hopes of escaping the grave were taken from
human life, choicest and tenderest virtues might still flourish,
as it is said the German crossbill pairs and broods in the dead of
winter. The martyr's sacrifice and the voluptuary's indulgence are
very different things to day, if they do both cease to morrow. No
speed of advancing destruction can equalize Agamemnon and
Thersites, Mansfield and Jeffries, or hustle together justice and
fraud, cowardice and valor, purity and corruption, so that they
will interchange qualities. There is an eternal and immutable
morality, as whiteness is white, and blackness is black, and
triangularity is triangular. And no severance of temporal ties or
compression of spatial limits can ever cut the condign bonds of
duty and annihilate the essential distinctions of good and evil,
magnanimity and meanness, faithfulness and treachery.

Reducing our destiny from endless to definite cannot alter the
inherent rightfulness and superiority of the claims of virtue. The
most it can do is to lessen the strength of the motive, to give
the great motor nerve of our moral life a perceptible stroke of
palsy. In reference to the question, Can ephemera have a moral
law? Richter reasons as follows: "Suppose a statue besouled for
two days. If on the first day you should shatter it, and thus rob
it of one day's life, would you be guilty of murder? One can
injure only an immortal." 9 The sophistry appears when we rectify
the conclusion thus: one can inflict an immortal injury only on an
immortal being. In fact, it would appear to be a greater wrong and
injury, for the time, to destroy one day's life of a man whose
entire existence was confined to two days, than it would be to
take away the same period from the bodily existence of one who
immediately thereupon passes into a more exalted and eternal life.
To the sufferer, the former would seem an immitigable calamity,
the latter a benign furtherance; while, in the agent, the overt
act is the same. This general moral problem has been more
accurately answered by Isaac Taylor, whose lucid statement is as
follows: "The creatures of a summer's day might be imagined, when

7 OEuvres Completes, tome xiii.: Immortalite de l'Ame.

8 Sermons of Theism, Sermon VII.

9 Werke, band xxxiii. s. 240.


they stand upon the threshold of their term of existence, to make
inquiry concerning the attributes of the Creator and the rules of
his government; for these are to be the law of their season of
life and the measure of their enjoyments. The sons of immortality
would put the same questions with an intensity the greater from
the greater stake."

Practically, the acknowledged authority of the moral law in human
society cannot be destroyed. Its influence may be unlimitedly
weakened, its basis variously altered, but as a confessed
sovereign principle it cannot be expelled. The denial of the
freedom of the will theoretically explodes it; but social custom,
law, and opinion will enforce it still. Make man a mere dissoluble
mixture of carbon and magnetism, yet so long as he can distinguish
right and wrong, good and evil, love and hate, and, unsophisticated
by dialectics, can follow either of opposite courses of action,
the moral law exists and exerts its sway.

It has been asked, "If the incendiary be, like the fire he kindles,
a result of material combinations, shall he not be treated in the
same way?" 10 We should reply thus: No matter what man springs
from or consists of, if he has moral ideas, performs moral
actions, and is susceptible of moral motives, then he is morally
responsible: for all practical and disciplinary purposes he is
wholly removed from the categories of physical science.

Another pernicious misrepresentation of the fair consequences of
the denial of a life hereafter is shown in the frequent
declaration that then there would be no motive to any thing good
and great. The incentives which animate men to strenuous services,
perilous virtues, disinterested enterprises, spiritual culture,
would cease to operate. The essential life of all moral motives
would be killed. This view is to be met by a broad and indignant
denial based on an appeal to human consciousness and to the reason
of the thing. Every man knows by experience that there are a
multitude of powerful motives, entirely disconnected with future
reward or punishment, causing him to resist evil and to do good
even with self sacrificing toil and danger. When the fireman risks
his life to save a child from the flames of a tumbling house, is
the hope of heaven his motive? When the soldier spurns an offered
bribe and will not betray his comrades nor desert his post, is the
fear of hell all that animates him? A million such decisive
specifications might be made. The renowned sentence of Cicero,
"Nemo unquam sine magna spe immortalitatis se pro patria offerret
ad mortem," 11 is effective eloquence; but it is a baseless libel
against humanity and the truth. In every moment of supreme
nobleness and sacrifice personality vanishes. Thousands of
patriots, philosophers, saints, have been glad to die for the
freedom of native land, the cause of truth, the welfare of fellow
men, without a taint of selfish reward touching their wills. Are
there not souls "To whom dishonor's shadow is a substance More
terrible than death here and hereafter"?

He must be the basest of men who would decline to do any sublime
act of virtue because he did not expect to enjoy the consequences
of it eternally. Is there no motive for the

10 Some discussion of this general subject is to be found in
Schaller, Leib nod Seele. kap. 5: Die Consequentzen des
Materialismus. And in Schopenhauer, Die beiden Grundprobleme der
Ethik.

11 Tuscul. Quast. lib. i. cap. 15.


preservation of health because it cannot be an everlasting
possession? Since we cannot eat sweet and wholesome food forever,
shall we therefore at once saturate our stomachs with nauseating
poisons?

If all experienced good and evil wholly terminate for us when we
die, still, every intrinsic reason which, on the supposition of
immortality, makes wisdom better than folly, industry better than
sloth, righteousness better than iniquity, benevolence and purity
better than hatred and corruption, also makes them equally
preferable while they last. Even if the philosopher and the idiot,
the religious philanthropist and the brutal pirate, did die alike,
who would not rather live like the sage and the saint than like
the fool and the felon? Shall heaven be held before man simply as
a piece of meat before a hungry dog to make him jump well? It is a
shocking perversion of the grandest doctrine of faith. Let the
theory of annihilation assume its direst phase, still, our
perception of principles, our consciousness of sentiments, our
sense of moral loyalty, are not dissolved, but will hold us firmly
to every noble duty until we ourselves flow into the dissolving
abyss. But some one may say, "If I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me if the dead rise not?" It
advantageth you every thing until you are dead, although there be
nothing afterwards. As long as you live, is it not glory and
reward enough to have conquered the beasts at Ephesus? This is
sufficient reply to the unbelieving flouters at the moral law.
And, as an unanswerable refutation of the feeble whine of
sentimentality that without immortal endurance nothing is worth
our affection, let great Shakspeare advance, with his matchless
depth of bold insight reversing the conclusion, and pronouncing,
in tones of cordial solidity,

"This, thou perceivest, will make thy love more strong, To love
that well which thou must leave ere long."

What though Decay's shapeless hand extinguish us? Its foreflung
and enervating shadow shall neither transform us into devils nor
degrade us into beasts. That shadow indeed only falls in the
valleys of ignoble fear and selfishness, leaving all the clear
road lines of moral truth and practical virtue and heroic
consecration still high and bright on the table land of a worthy
life; and every honorable soul, calmly confronting its fate, will
cry, despite the worst, "The pathway of my duty lies in sunlight;
And I would tread it with as firm a step, Though it should
terminate in cold oblivion, As if Elysian pleasures at its
Close Gleam'd palpable to sight as things of earth."

If a captain knew that his ship would never reach her port, would
he therefore neglect his functions, be slovenly and careless,
permit insubordination and drunkenness among the crew, let the
broad pennon draggle in filthy rents, the cordage become tangled
and stiff, the planks be covered with dirt, and the guns be grimed
with rust? No: all generous hearts would condemn that. He would
keep every inch of the deck scoured, every piece of metal polished
like a mirror, the sails set full and clean, and, with shining
muzzles out, ropes hauled taut in their blocks, and every man at
his post, he would sweep towards the reef, and go down into the
sea firing a farewell salute of honor to the sun, his flag flying
above him as he sunk.

The dogmatic assertors of a future life, in a partisan spirit set
upon making out the most impressive case in its behalf, have been
guilty of painting frightful caricatures of the true nature and
significance of the opposite conclusion. Instead of saying, "If
such a thing be fated, why, then, it must be right, God's will be
done," they frantically rebel against any such admission, and
declare that it would make God a liar and a fiend, man a "magnetic
mockery," and life a hellish taunt. This, however unconscious it
may be to its authors, is blasphemous egotism. One of the
tenderest, devoutest, richest, writers of the century has
unflinchingly affirmed that if man who trusted that love was the
final law of creation, although nature, her claws and teeth red
with raven, shrieked against his creed be left to be blown about
the desert dust or sealed within the iron hills,

"No more! a monster, then, a dream,
A discord; dragons of the prime,
That tare each other in their slime,
Were mellow music match'd with Him!"

Epictetus says, "When death overtakes me, it is enough if I can
stretch out my hands to God, and say, 'The opportunities which
thou hast given me of comprehending and following thy government,
I have not neglected. I thank thee that thou hast brought me into
being. I am satisfied with the time I have enjoyed the things thou
hast given me. Receive them again, and assign them to whatever
place thou wilt.'" 12 Surely the pious heathen here speaks more
worthily than the presumptuous Christian! How much fitter would it
be, granting that death is the end all, to revise our interpretation,
look at the subject from the stand point of universal order,
not from this opinionative narrowness, and see if it be not
susceptible of a benignant meaning, worthy of grateful acceptance
by the humble mind of piety and the dispassionate spirit of science!
Yea, let God and his providence stand justified, though man prove
to have been egregiously mistaken.

"Though He smite me, yet will I praise Him; though He slay me, yet
will I trust in Him."

To return into the state we were in before we were created is not
to suffer any evil: it is to be absolutely free from all evil. It
is but the more perfect playing of that part, of which every sound
sleep is a rehearsal. The thought of it is mournful to the
enjoying soul, but not terrific; and even the mournfulness ceases
in the realization. He uttered a piece of cruel madness who said,
"Hell is more bearable than nothingness." Is it worse to have
nothing than it is to have infinite torture? Milton asks,

"For who would lose, Though full of pain, this intellectual
being?"

Every creature that exists, if full of pain, would snatch at the
boon of ceasing to be. To be blessed is a good; to be wretched is
an evil; not to be is neither a good nor an evil, but simply

12 Dissert., lib. iv. cap. x. sect. 2.


nothing. If such be our necessary fate, let us accept it with a
harmonized mind, not entertaining fear nor yielding to sadness.
Why should we shudder or grieve? Every time we slumber, we try on
the dress which, when we die, we shall wear easily forever.

Not satisfied to let the result rest in this somewhat sad but
peaceful aspect, it is quite customary to give it a turn and hue
of ghastly horribleness, by casting over it the dyspeptic dreams,
injecting it with the lurid lights and shades, of a morbid and
wilful fancy. The most loathsome and inexcusable instance in point
is the "Vision of Annihilation" depicted by the vermicular,
infested imagination of the great Teutonic phantasist while yet
writhing under the sanguinary fumes of some horrid attack of
nightmare. Stepping across the earth, which is but a broad
executioner's block for pale, stooping humanity, he enters the
larva world of blotted out men. The rotten chain of beings reaches
down into this slaughter field of souls. Here the dead are
pictured as eternally horripilating at death! "As annihilation,
the white shapelessness of revolting terror, passes by each
unsouled mask of a man, a tear gushes from the crumbled eye, as a
corpse bleeds when its murderer approaches." Pah! Out upon this
execrable retching of a nauseated fancy! What good is there in the
baseless conceit and gratuitous disgust of saying, "The next world
is in the grave, betwixt the teeth of the worm"? In the case
supposed, the truth is merely that there is no next world
anywhere; not that all the horrors of hell are scooped together
into the grave, and there multiplied by others direr yet and
unknown before. Man's blended duty and interest, in such a case,
are to try to see the interior beauty and essential kindness of
his fate, to adorn it and embrace it, fomenting his resignation
with the sweet lotions of faith and peace, not exasperating his
wounds with the angry pungents of suspicion, alarm, and complaint.
At the worst, amidst all our personal disappointments, losses, and
decay, "the view of the great universal whole of nature," as
Humboldt says, "is reassuring and consolatory." If the boon of a
future immortality be not ours, therefore to scorn the gift of the
present life, is to act not like a wise man, who with grateful
piety makes the best of what is given, but like a spoiled child,
who, if he cannot have both his orange and his gingerbread,
pettishly flings his gingerbread in the mud.

The future life, outside of the realm of faith, to an earnest and
independent inquirer, and considered as a scientific question,
lies in a painted mist of uncertainty. There is room for hope, and
there is room for doubt. The wavering evidences in some moods
preponderate on that side, in other moods on this side. Meanwhile
it is clear that, while he lives here, the best thing he can do is
to cherish a devout spirit, cultivate a noble character, lead a
pure and useful life in the service of wisdom, humanity, and God,
and finally, when the appointed time arrives, meet the issue with
reverential and affectionate conformity, without dictating terms.
Let the vanishing man say, like Ruckert's dying flower, "Thanks to
day for all the favors I have received from sun and stream and
earth and sky, for all the gifts from men and God which have made
my little life an ornament and a bliss. Heaven, stretch out thine
azure tent while my faded one is sinking here. Joyous spring tide,
roll on through ages yet to come, in which fresh generations shall
rise and be glad. Farewell all! Content to have had my turn, I now
fall asleep, without a murmur or a sigh." Surely the mournful
nobility of such a strain of sentiment is preferable by much to
the selfish terror of that unquestioning belief which in the
Middle Age depicted the chase of the soul by Satan, on the columns
and doors of the churches, under the symbol of a deer pursued by a
hunter and hounds; and which has in later times produced in
thousands the feeling thus terribly expressed by Bunyan, "I
blessed the condition of the dog and toad because they had no soul
to perish under the everlasting weight of hell!"

Sight of truth, with devout and loving submission to it, is an
achievement whose nobleness outweighs its sorrow, even if the
gazer foresee his own destruction.

It is not our intention in these words to cast doubt on the
immortality of the soul, or to depreciate the value of a belief in
it. We desire to vindicate morality and religion from the
unwitting attacks made on them by many self styled Christian
writers in their exaggeration of the practical importance of such
a faith. The qualitative contents of human nature have nothing to
do with its quantitative contents: our duties rest not on the
length, but on the faculties and relations, of our existence. Make
the life of a dog endless, he has only the capacity of a dog; make
the life of a man finite, still, within its limits, he has the
psychological functions of humanity. Faith in immortality may
enlarge and intensify the motives to prudent and noble conduct; it
does not create new ones. The denial of immortality may pale and
contract those motives; it does not take them away.

Knowing the burden and sorrow of earth, brooding in dim solicitude
over the far times and men yet to be, we cannot recklessly utter a
word calculated to lessen the hopes of man, pathetic creature, who
weeps into the world and faints out of it. It is our faith not
knowledge that the spirit is without terminus or rest. The
faithful truth hunter, in dying, finds not a covert, but a better
trail. Yet the saintliness of the intellect is to be purged from
prejudice and self will. With God we are not to prescribe
conditions. The thought that all high virtue and piety must die
with the abandonment of belief in immortality is as pernicious and
dangerous as it is shallow, vulgar, and unchristian. The view is
obviously gaining prevalence among scientific and philosophical
thinkers, that life is the specialization of the universal in the
individual, death the restoration of the individual to the whole.
This doubt as to a personal future life will unquestionably
increase. Let traditional teachers beware how they venture to
shift the moral law from its immutable basis in the will of God to
a precarious poise on the selfish hope and fear of man. The sole
safety, the ultimate desideratum, is perception of law with
disinterested conformity.

The influence of the doctrine of reward and punishment in a future
state, as a working motive for the observance of the moral law, is
enormously overestimated. The influence, as such a motive, of the
public opinion of mankind, with the legal and social sanctions, is
enormously underestimated. And the authority of a personal
perception of right is also most unbecomingly depreciated.
UNIVERSAL ORDER is the expression of the purposes of God, not as
arbitrarily chosen by his will and capriciously revealed in a
book, but as necessitated by his nature and embodied in his works.
The true basis of morality is universal order. The true end of
morality is life, the sum of moral laws being identical with the
sum of the conditions in accordance with which the fruition of the
functions of life can be secured with nearest approach to
perfectness, perpetuity, and universality. The true sanctions of
morality are the manifold forms in which consciousness of life is
heightened by harmony with universal order or lowered by discord
with it. The true law of moral sacrifice or resistance to
temptation is misrepresented by the common doctrine of heaven and
hell, which makes it consist in the renunciation of a present good
for the clutching of a future good, the voluntary suffering of a
small present evil to avoid the involuntary suffering of an
immense future evil. The true law of moral sacrifice is deeper,
purer, more comprehensive, than that. It expresses our duty, in
accordance with the requirements of universal order, to
subordinate the gratification of any part of our being to that of
the whole of our being, to forego the good of any portion of our
life in deference to that of all our life, to renounce any
happiness of the individual which conflicts with the welfare of
the race, to hold the spiritual atom in absolute abeyance to the
spiritual universe, to sink self in God. If a man believe in no
future life, is he thereby absolved from the moral law? The kind
and number of his duties remain as before: only the apparent
grandeur of their scale and motives is diminished. The two halves
of morality are the co ordination of separate interests in
universal order, and the loyalty of the parts to the wholes. The
desire to remove the obligations and sanctions of the moral law
from their intrinsic supports, and posit them on the fictitious
pedestals of a forensic heaven and hell, reveals incompetency of
thought and vulgarity of sentiment in him who does it, and is a
procedure not less perilous than unwarranted. If the creation be
conceived as a machine, it is a machine self regulating in all its
parts by the immanent presence of its Maker.

When we die, may the Spirit of Truth, the Comforter of Christ, be
our confessor; the last inhaled breath our cup of absolution; the
tears of some dear friend our extreme unction; no complaint for
past trials, but a grateful acknowledgment for all blessings, our
parting word. And then, resigning ourselves to the universal
Father, assured that whatever ought to be, and is best to be, will
be, either absolute oblivion shall be welcome, or we will go
forward to new destinies, whether with preserved identity or with
transformed consciousness and powers being indifferent to us,
since the will of God is done. In the mean time, until that
critical pass and all decisive hour, as Milnes says:

"We all must patient stand, Like statues on appointed pedestals:
Yet we may choose since choice is given to shun Servile
contentment or ignoble fear In the expression of our attitude; And
with far straining eyes, and hands upcast, And feet half raised,
declare our painful state, Yearning for wings to reach the fields
of truth, Mourning for wisdom, panting to be free."

PART SIXTH SUPPLEMENTARY.

[FIFTEEN YEARS LATER]

