CHAPTER I.

THE END OF THE WORLD.

WE read in the New Testament that the heavens and the earth are
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, when they shall be
burned up, and all be made new. It is said that the elements shall
melt with ferment heat, the stars fall, and the sky pass away like
a scroll that is rolled together. On these and similar passages is
based the belief of Christendom in the destined destruction of the
world by fire and in the scenic judgment of the dead and the
living gathered before the visible tribunal of Christ. This belief
was once general and intense. It is still common, though more
vague and feeble than formerly. In whatever degree it is held, it
is a doctrine of terror. We hope by tracing its origin, and
showing how mistaken it is, to help dispel its sway, free men from
the further oppression of its fearfulness, and put in its place
the just and wholesome authority of the truth. The true doctrine
of the divine government of the world, the correct explanation of
the course and sequel of history, must be more honorable to God,
more useful to men, of better working and omen in the life of
society, than any error can be. Let us then, as far as we are
able, displace by the truth the errors prevalent around us in
regard to the end of the world and the day of judgment.

It will help us in our proposed investigation, if we first notice
that the ecclesiastical doctrine as to an impending destruction of
the world is not solitary, but has prototypes and parallels in the
faiths of other nations and ages. Almost every people, every
tribe, has its cosmogony or theory of the creation, in which there
are accounts, more or less rude or refined, general or minute, of
the supposed beginning and of the imagined end of nature. All
early literatures from the philosophic treatises of the Hindus to
the oral traditions of the Polynesians are found to contain either
sublime dreams or obscure prophecies or awful pictures of the
final doom and destruction of earth and man. The Hebrew symbols
and the Christian beliefs in relation to this subject therefore
stand not alone, but in connection with a multitude of others,
each one plainly reflecting the degree of knowledge and stage of
development attained by the minds which originated it. Before
proceeding to examine the familiar doctrine so enveloped in our
prejudices, a brief examination of some kindred doctrines, less
familiar to us and quite detached from our prejudices, will be of
service.

The sacred books of the Hindus describe certain enormous periods
of time in which the universe successively begins and ends,
springs into being and sinks into nothing. These periods are
called kalpas, and each one covers a duration of thousands of
millions of years. Each kalpa of creation is called a day of
Brahma; each kalpa of destruction, a night of Brahma. The belief
is that Brahma, waking from the slumber of his self absorbed
solitude, feels his loneliness, and his thoughts and emotions go
forth in creative forms, composing the immense scheme of worlds
and creatures. These play their parts, and run their courses,
until the vast day of Brahma is completed; when he closes his
eyes, and falls to rest, while the whole system of finite things
returns to the silence and darkness of its aboriginal unity, and
remains there in invisible annihilation through the stupendous
night that precedes the reawaking of the slumbering Godhead and
the appearance of the creation once more.

A little reflection makes the origin of this imagery and belief
clear. Each night, as the darkness comes down, and the outer world
disappears, man falls asleep, and, so far as he is consciously
concerned, every thing is destroyed. In his unconsciousness,
everything ceases to be. The light dawns again, he awakes, and his
reopened senses create anew the busy frame and phenomena of
nature. Transfer this experience from man to God; consider it not
as abstract and apparent, but as concrete and real, and you have
the Hindu doctrine of the kalpa. When we sleep, to us all things
are destroyed; and when we awake, to us they reappear. When God
sleeps, all things in themselves really end; and when he wakes,
they begin anew to be. The visible and experimental phenomena of
day and night, sleeping and waking, are universalized, and
attributed to God, It is a poetic process of thought, natural
enough to a rich minded, simple people, but wholly illegitimate as
a logical ground of belief, But being stated in books supposed to
be infallibly inspired, and in the absence of critical tests for
the discrimination of sound from unsound thought, it was
implicitly accepted by multitudes.

Closely allied to the foregoing doctrine, yet in several
particulars strikingly different from it, and evidently quite
independent in its origin, was the Great Year of the Stoics, or
the alternative blotting out and restoration of all things. This
school of philosophers conceived of God as a pure artistic force
or seed of universal energy, which exhibits its history in the
evolution of the kosmos, and, on its completion, blossoms into
fire, and vanishes. The universal periodical conflagration
destroys all evil, and leaves the indestructible God alone in his
pure essence again. The artistic germ or seed force then begins,
under its laws of intrinsic necessity, to go once more through the
same process to the same end.

The rise of this imagery and belief is not so obvious as in the
last instance, but it is equally discoverable and intelligible.
Every animal, every flower, every plant, begins from its proper
specific germ or force, goes through a fixed series of growths and
changes, and relapses into its prime elements, and another and
another follow after it in the same order. The seasons come and
go, and come again and go again, Every planet repeats its
revolutions over and over. Wherever we look, this repetition of
identical processes greets our vision. Now, by imaginative
association universalize this repetition of the course of
phenomena as seen in the parts, and take it up and apply it to the
whole creation, and you have the doctrine in hand.

It is a poetic process of thought not scientific or philosophic,
and without claim to belief; yet, in the absence of scientific
data and standards, it might easily win acceptance on authority.

The Scandinavians, also, have transmitted to us, in their sacred
books, descriptions of their belief in the approaching end of the
world, descriptions rude, wild, terrible, not without elements of
appalling grandeur. They foretell a day called Ragnarok, or the
Twilight of the gods, when all the powers of good and evil shall
join in battle, and the whole present system of things perish in a
scene of unutterable strife and dismay. The Eddas were composed in
an ignorant but deeply poetic and fertile age, when all the
mythological elements of mind were in full action. Their authors
looking within, on their own passions, and without, on the natural
scenery around them, conscious of order and disorder, love and
hate, virtue and crime, beholding phenomena of beauty and horror,
sun and stars, night and tempest, winter and summer, icebergs and
volcanoes, placid moonlight and blinding mist, assisting friends
and battling foes, personified everything as a demon or a
divinity. Asgard, above the blue firmament, was the bright home of
the gods, the Asir. Helheim, beneath the rocky earth and the
frozen ocean, was the dark and foul abode of the bad spirits, the
Jotuns. Everywhere in nature, fog and fire, fertility and
barrenness, were in conflict; everywhere in society, law and crime
were contending. In the moon followed by a drifting cloud, they
saw a goddess chased by a wolf. The strife goes on waxing, and
must sooner or later reach a climax. Each side enlists its allies,
until all are ranged in opposition, from Jormungandur, the serpent
of the deep, to Heindall, the warder of the rainbow, gods and
brave men there, demons, traitors, and cowards here. Then sounds
the horn of battle, and the last day dawns in fire and splendor
from the sky, in fog and venom from the abyss. Flame devours the
earth. For the most part, the combatants mutually slay each other.
Only Gimli, the high, safe heaven of All Father, remains as a
refuge for the survivors and the beginning of a new and fairer
world.

The natural history of this mythological mess is clear enough. It
arises from the poetic embodiment and personification of
phenomena, the grouping together of all evil and of all good, then
imaginatively universalizing the conflict, and carrying it out in
idea to its inevitable ultimatum. The process of thought was
obviously natural in its ground, but fictitious in its result. Yet
in a period when no sharp distinction was drawn between fancy and
fact, song and science, but an indiscriminate faith was often
yielded to both, even such a picturesque medley as this might be
held as religious truth.

The Zarathustrian or Persian scheme of a general judgment of men
and of the world in some respects resembles the systems already
set forth, in other respects more closely approaches that
Christian doctrine partially borrowed from it, and which is
hereafter to be noticed. Ahura Mazda, the God of light and truth,
creates the world full of all sorts of blessings. His adversary,
Angra Mainyus, the author of darkness and falsehood, seeks to
counteract and destroy the works of Ahura Mazda by means of all
sorts of correspondent evils and woes. When Ahura Mazda creates
the race of men happy and immortal, Angra Mainyus, the old serpent,
full of corruption and destruction, steals in, seduces them from
their allegiance, and brings misery and death on them, and then
leads their souls to his dark abode. The whole creation is
supposed to be crowded with good spirits, the angels of Ahura
Mazda,

seeking to carry out his beneficent designs; and also with evil
spirits, the ministers of Angra Mainyus, plotting to make men
wicked, and to pervert and poison every blessing with an answering
curse. Light is the symbol of God, darkness the symbol of his
Antagonist. Under these hostile banners are ranged all living
creatures, all created objects. For long periods this dreadful
contention rages, involving everything below in its fluctuations.
But at last Ahura Mazda subdues Angra Mainyus, overturns all the
mischief he has done, by means of a great deliverer whom he has
sent among men to instruct and redeem them raises the dead,
purifies the world with fire, and, after properly punishing the
guilty, restores all nature to its original paradisal condition,
free from pain and death.

In the primitive state of mankind, when the germs of this religion
were conceived, when men dwelt in ignorance, exposure, and fear,
they naturally shuddered at darkness as a supernatural enemy, and
worshipped light as a supernatural friend. That became the emblem
or personification of the Devil, this the emblem or personification
of God. They grouped all evils with that, all goods with this.

Imaginatively associating all light and darkness, all blessing
and bale, respectively with Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyus,
they universalized the fragmentary embodiments and oppositions
of these into one great battle; and under the impulse of
worshipping faith and hope, carried it to its crisis in the
final victory of the good. Plainly, it is mere poetry injected a
little with a later speculative element, and dealing in
mythological fashion chiefly with the phenomena of nature as
related to the experience of man. No one now can accept it
literally.

This survey of the various heathen myths of the end of the world
has prepared us, in some degree, to consider the corresponding
view held by the Jews, and more completely developed by the
Christian successors to the Jewish heritage of thought and
feeling.

The Hebrews believed themselves to be exclusively the chosen
people of God, who directly ruled over them himself by a
theocratic government represented in their patriarchs, law givers,
prophets, and kings. Jehovah was the only true God; they were his
only pure and accepted worshippers, sharply distinguished from the
whole idolatrous world. The heathen nations, uncircumcised
adorers of vain idols or of demons, were by consequence enemies
both of the true God and of his servants. This contrast and
hostility they even carried over into the unseen world, and
imagined that each nation had its own guardian angel in the Court
of Jehovah in heaven, who contended there for its interests; their
own national guardian, the angel Michael, being more powerful and
nearer to the throne than any other one. In the calamities that
fell on them, they recognized the vengeance of Jehovah for the
violation of his commands. In their victories, their deliverances,
their great blessings, especially in their rescue from Egypt, and
in the many miracles which they believed to have accompanied that
great passage, they saw the signal superiority of their God over
every other god, and the proofs of his particular providence over
them in distinct preference to all other peoples. He had, as they
piously believed, made a special covenant with Abraham, and set
apart his posterity as a sacred family, exclusively intrusted with
the divine law, and commissioned to subdue and govern all the
other families of the earth. When this proud and intensely
cherished faith was baffled of fulfillment, they never dreamed of
abandoning it.

They only supposed its triumphant execution postponed, as a
penalty for their sins, and looked forward with redoubled ardor to
a better time when their hopes should break into fruition, their
exile be ended, their captivity appear as a dream, Jerusalem be
the central gem of the world, and the anointed ruler wield his
sceptre over all mankind.

But misfortunes and woes were heaped on them. Their city was
sacked, their temple desecrated, their people dragged into foreign
slavery, forbidden to celebrate the rites of their religion,
slaughtered by wholesale. Many times, during the two centuries
before and the first century after Christ, did they suffer these
terrible sorrows. Their hatred and scorn of their heathen
persecutors; their faith in their own incomparable destiny; their
expectation of the speedy appearance of an anointed deliverer,
raised up by Jehovah to avenge them and vindicate their trust, all
became the more fervent and profound the longer the delay. Under
these circumstances grew up the Jewish doctrine of the Messiah, as
it is seen in that Apocalyptic literature represented by the Book
of Daniel, the Sibylline Oracles, the Book of Enoch, the
Assumption of Moses, the Fourth Book of Esdras, and similar
documents.

The Jews were remarkably free from that habit of mind which led
almost all the other nations to personify the most startling
phenomena of nature as living beings, which created fetiches of
stocks and stones and animals; saw a god in every wind, season,
star, and cloud. The Semitic mind and literature were more sober,
rational, and monotheistic. The place occupied in the thoughts of
other peoples by the phenomena of nature was held in the thoughts
of the Jews by political phenomena, by ritual, legal, and military
relations. And the poetic action of fancy, the mythological
creativeness and superstitious feeling which other people
exercised on the objects and changes of nature, the Jews exercised
on the phenomena of their own national history. The burning
central point of their polity and belief and imagination was the
conviction of their own national consecration as the exclusive
people of God, meant to conquer, teach, and rule all the infidel
nations; that Jehovah was literally their invisible King,
represented in their chief ruler; that every great triumph or
disaster was a signal Day of the Lord, a special Coming of Jehovah
to reward or punish his people. During their repeated bondages
under the Persians, Syrians, Greeks, Parthians, Romans, their
feeling of the antagonism between themselves and the other people
increased. From the time of the Babylonish captivity the Persian
doctrine of good and evil spirits had infiltrated into their
belief; and they adopted the notion of Angra Mainyus, and
developed it (with certain modifications) into their conception of
Satan. Then, in their faith, the war of Jews and Gentiles spread
into the invisible world, and took up on its opposite sides the
good and the fallen angels. And, finally, the idea of their
Messiah became the centre of a battle and a judgment in which all
the generations of the dead as well as of the living were to have
a part; and which should culminate in the overthrow of evil, the
subjection of the heathen, the assignment of the righteous to a
paradisal reign, and of the wicked to a doom typified by the
submersion of Sodom and Gomorrah in fiery brimstone.

How plainly this doctrine was the result of the same poetic
process of thought with the other schemes already depicted! Only
they were developed on the basis of natural phenomena; this, on
the basis of political phenomena. It is simply the imaginative
universalization of the struggle between Jew and Gentile, and the
carrying of it to its crisis and sequel. And when inexplicable
delays and the accumulation of obstacles made the realization of
the expected result amidst the conditions of the present world
seem ever more and more hopeless, the growing and assimilative
action of faith and fancy expanded the scene, and transferred it
to a transmundane state, involving the destruction of the heavens
and earth and their replacement with a new creation.

Is there any more real reason for believing this doctrine than
there is for believing the other kindred schemes? Not a whit. It
is a mistake of the same poetic nature, and resting on the same
grounds with them. Two thousand years have passed, and it has not
been fulfilled; and there is ever less and less sign of its
fulfillment. It never will be fulfilled, except in a spiritual
sense. The Jews will finally lose their pride of race and
covenant, abandon their special Messianic creed, and blend
themselves and their opinions in the mass of redeemed and
progressive humanity, and no more dream of a physical resurrection
of the dead amidst the dissolving elements of nature.

And now we must notice that besides all these poetic pictures of
the end of the world, there are prophecies of a similar result
which wear an apparently scientific garb. Many men of science
firmly believe that our world is destined to be destroyed, that a
close for the earthly fortunes of mankind can be plainly foreseen.
No little alarm was felt a century or more ago, when it was
discovered that there was a progressive diminution going on in the
orbit of the moon, which must cause it at length to impinge upon
the earth. But La Grange exhibited the fallaciousness of the
prophecy, by showing that the decrease was periodical and
succeeded by a corresponding increase. Intense and widely spread
terror has repeatedly been felt less a comet should come within
our planetary orbit, and shatter or melt our globe by its contact.
But the discovery of the nebulous nature of comets, of their great
numbers and regular movements, has quite dissipated that fear from
the popular mind in our day.

There are, however, other forms of scientific speculation which
put the prophesied destruction of the world on a more plausible
and formidable basis. It is supposed by many scientists that all
force is derived from the consumption of heat; and that the fuel
must at last be used up, and therefore no life or energy be left
for sustaining the present system of the creation. This theory is
met by the counter statement that the heat of the sun and other
similar centres may possibly not depend on any material
consumption; or, if it does, there may be a self replenishing
supply, loss and repair forming an endless circle.

It is foretold by some chemists, that the progressive interior
cooling and contraction of our orb will cause ever greater
interstices or vacant spaces among the solid substances below the
outer crust; and that into these pores, first all liquids, then
all gases and the whole atmosphere, will be absorbed: so that the
world will be left desolate, utterly uninhabitable by life.

Again: it is said that all force or energy tends at every
transformation to pass (at least partially) into heat; and
therefore that, finally, all force will be frittered down into the
one form of heat, all matter vanishing from its separate shapes
into the state of a homogeneous, nebulous fire. The portentous
sight, repeatedly descried by astronomers, of a nameless world,
away in remotest space, which has suddenly kindled, blazed,
smouldered, darkened, and vanished forever from its place, is
perhaps a solemn symbol of the fate of our own planet; hinting at
a time when the earth, too, shall make itself a funeral pyre,

And, awed in distant orbs, some race unknown Shall miss one star
whose smile had lit their own.

This same final crisis is also prophesied on the basis of a slight
retardation to which the planets are subjected in their passage
through the ethereal medium. No matter how slight the resistance
thus interposed, its consequence, it is thought, must accumulate
and ultimately compel all material bodies to approach each other;
and, as their successive collisions convert them into heat and
vapor, nothing will be left at last but one uniform nebula. The
process of evolution will then begin anew, and so the stupendous
history of the universe repeat itself eternally.

This is the sublimest of all the generalizations of science. It
may be true, and it may not be true. At any rate, it differs
immensely in the moral impression it makes from that made by the
current theological doctrine of the same catastrophe. We can
contemplate the scientific prophecy of the end of the world with a
peace of mind which the traditional prophecy does not permit.

In the first place, the ecclesiastical doctrine makes the
destruction of the world a result of wrath and vengeance. The
angry God looms above us with flaming features and avenging
weapons to tread down his enemies. We shrink in fright from the
wrath and power of the personal Judge, the inexorable Foe of the
wicked. But the scientific doctrine makes the end a result of
passionless laws, a steady evolution of effects from causes,
wholly free from everything vindictive.

Secondly. The ecclesiastical doctrine makes the dreadful
conclusion a sudden event, an inconceivable shock of horror,
falling in an instant, overwhelming all its victims with the
swiftness of lightning in the unutterable agony of their ruin. But
the scientific doctrine makes the climax a matter of slow and
gradual approach. Whether the worlds are to be frozen up by
increasing cold, or to evaporate in culminating heat, or to be
converted into gas as they meet in their career, the changes of
the chemical conditions will be so steady and moderate beforehand
as to cause all living creatures to have diminished in numbers by
insensible degrees, and to have utterly ceased long before the
final shock arrives.

Thirdly. The ecclesiastical doctrine makes the sequel imminent,
near, ready to fall at a moment's warning. At any hour the signal
may strike. Thus it is to the earnest believer a constant, urgent
alarm, close at hand. But the scientific doctrine depicts the
close as almost unimaginably remote. All the data in the hands of
our scientists lead their calculations as to the nearest probable
end to land them in an epoch so far off as to be stated only in
thousands of millions of years. Thus the picture is so distant as
to be virtually enfeebled into nothing. We cannot, even by the
most vivid imagination, bring it home closely enough to make it
real and effective on our plans.

And, finally, the theological dogma of the destruction of the
world professes to be an infallible certainty. The believer holds
that he absolutely knows it by a revelation of supernatural
authority. But with the scientist such a belief is held as merely
a probability. A billion of centuries hence the world may perhaps
come to an end; and, on the other hand, the phenomena which lead
to such a belief may yet be explained as implying no such result.
And these two issues, so far as our social or ideal experience is
concerned, are virtually the same.

A brilliant French writer has suggested that even if the natural
course of evolution does of itself necessitate the final
destruction of the world, yet our race, judging from the
magnificent achievements of science and art already reached, may,
within ten thousand centuries, which will be long before the
foreseen end approaches, obtain such a knowledge and control of
the forces of nature as to make collective humanity master of this
planet, able to shape and guide its destinies, ward off every
fatal crisis, and perfect and immortalize the system as now
sustained. It is an audacious fancy. But like many other
incredible conceptions which have forerun their own still more
incredible fulfillment, the very thought electrifies us with hope
and courage.

And thus the conclusion in which we rest at the close of our
investigation is the belief that the world is to last, and our
race to flourish on it virtually forever. This conclusion is
equally a relief from the frightful burdens of superstition, and a
consolation for our own personal evanescence. The stable harmony
of natural beauty and beneficence, amidst which we individually
play our brief part and vanish, shall stand fast, blooming with
fresh growths, and shining with fadeless light, and the successive
generations of our dear fellow men shall grow ever wiser and
happier, beyond the reach of our farthest vision into the future.
And if we recognize in the great catastrophic myths and previsions
of the poets and scientists the fundamental truth that the things
which are seen are temporal, while the things alone which are
unseen are eternal, the end being a regular and remote sequel in
the creative plan of God, free from anger, retributive
disappointment, or cruelty will not alarm us. For if souls are
substantial entities, and not mere phenomenal processes, they will
survive the universal crisis, and either at the lucid goals of
their perfected destiny rejoice forever in a reflected individual
fruition of the attributes of God, or else start refreshed on a
new career with that redistribution of the cosmic matter and
motion which in its gigantic and eternal rhythm of development and
dissolution the ancient Hindu mind figured as the respiration of
Brahm and which ambitious science now generalizes as the law of
evolution.

