CHAPTER II.

THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.

JUDAISM so largely supplied the circumstantial and doctrinal germs
out of which dogmatic Christianity grew, that we cannot thoroughly
understand the Christian belief in a final day of judgment, unless
we first notice the historic and literary derivation of that
belief from Judaism, and then trace its development in the new
conditions through which it passed. The personal character,
teachings, life, and death of Jesus Christ, together with his
subsequent resurrection and career in the consciousness of
ecclesiastical Christendom, constituted the crystalizing centre
which, dipped in the inherited solution of ideal and social
materials furnished by the Church, has gathered around it the
accretion of faith and dogma composing the theoretic Christianity
of the present day. To follow this process with reference to the
particular tenet before us, analyze it, discriminate the
appropriate in it from the inappropriate, the true from the false,
maybe difficult; but it is necessary for a satisfactory
conclusion. To this task let us therefore now address ourselves,
putting away all bias and prejudice, invoking in equal degree
candor, fearlessness and charity.

The Jews believed themselves to be a people chosen out of all the
world as the exclusive favorites of God. By the covenant of
Abraham, and the code of Moses, Jehovah had entered, as they
thought, into a special contract with them to be their peculiar
God, Guardian, and Ruler. In contrast with the depraved habits and
idolatrous rites of the heathen nations, the Israelites were
strictly to keep the moral law, and, at the same time, to pay a
pure worship to Jehovah through the scrupulous observance of their
ceremonial law. The bond of race and family descent from Abraham,
the practice of circumcision, and the ceremonies of the Mosaic
ritual, sealed them as accepted members of this divine covenant.
So long as they were true to the duties involved in this relation,
Jehovah would watch over them, defend them from their enemies, set
them proudly above the alien Gentiles, and crown them with every
spiritual and temporal blessing. The noblest representatives of
the people believed this with unparalleled thoroughness and
intensity. They looked down on the uncircumcised nations as wicked
idolaters, destined to be their servants until they should be
adopted into the same covenant by becoming proselytes to their
faith. Jehovah was literally their direct, though invisible, King,
Law giver, and Judge, palpably rewarding their fidelity by overt
temporal blessings, punishing their dereliction by awful temporal
calamities and sufferings.

Every signal instance of his providential intervention in their
affairs they called a Day of the Lord, a Coming of Jehovah, a
Judgment from heaven. Thus the prophet Joel foretells the
vengeance which God would take on Tyre and Sidon and Philistia,
because they had assailed and scattered his people. "Behold the
day of Jehovah cometh, the great and terrible day. And I will show
wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood and fire and
pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
moon into blood. Then whosoever calleth on the name of Jehovah
shall be delivered: for upon Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance. I will contend with the Gentiles for my people, and
will bring back the captives.

The multitudes, the multitudes in the valley of judgment: for the
day of Jehovah is near in the valley of judgment." In a similar
strain Isaiah prophesies against Edom: "Draw near, O ye nations,
and hear! For the wrath of Jehovah is kindled against the nations,
and he hath given up their armies to slaughter. The stench of
their carcasses shall ascend, and the mountains shall melt with
their blood. And all the hosts of heaven shall melt away; and all
their host shall fall down, as the blighted fruit from the fig
tree. For my sword shall rush drunk from heaven: behold, upon Edom
shall it descend. For it is a day of vengeance from Jehovah. Her
streams shall be turned into pitch, and her dust into brimstone,
and her whole land shall become burning pitch. It shall lie waste
forever, and none shall pass through it. The pelican and the
hedgehog shall possess it; the heron and the raven shall dwell in
it."

Tremendous and appalling as this imagery is, it is obvious that
the whole meaning of it is earthly and temporal, a local judgment
of Jehovah in vindication of his people against the heathen. And
kindred judgments are threatened against his own people when they
lapse into wickedness and idolatry. "Thus saith the Lord, Behold,
I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and
turning it upside down." "Jehovah appeareth as a hostile witness,
the Lord from his holy place. Behold, Jehovah cometh forth from
his dwelling place, and advanceth on the high places of the earth.
The mountains melt under him, and the valleys cleave asunder like
wax before the fire. For the sin of the house of Israel is all
this."

Thus the earliest meaning of the phrase, Day of the Lord, or Day
of Judgment, according to Biblical usage, was the occurrence of
any severe calamity, either to the Jews, as a punishment for their
apostasy; or to the Gentiles, as a punishment for their
wickedness, or for their violent encroachment on the rights of the
chosen people. These visitations of military disaster or political
subjection, though purely local and temporal, are depicted in the
most terrific images, such as flaming brimstone, falling stars,
heaven and earth dissolving in darkness, blood, and fire. Ezekiel,
alluding to the barbarous invasion headed by Prince Gog,
represents Jehovah as declaring, "I will contend against him, and
will rain fire and brimstone upon him and his hosts. Thus will I
show myself in my greatness and glory before the eyes of many
nations, and they shall know that I am Jehovah." The highly
figurative character of this imagery must be apparent to every
candid critic.

For example, in the following passage from Zechariah, no one will
suppose for a moment that it is meant that Jehovah will appear
visibly in person and reign in Jerusalem, but only that his
promise shall be fulfilled, and his law shall prevail there in the
triumphant establishment of his chosen people: "Behold the day of
Jehovah cometh, when I will gather all nations to battle against
Jerusalem; and the city shall be taken. Then shall Jehovah go
forth, and fight against those nations. And his feet shall stand
in that day upon the Mount of Olives. And Jehovah shall be king
over all the earth. And it shall be that whoso of all the families
of the earth will not go up to Jerusalem to worship the King,
Jehovah of hosts, upon them shall be no rain."

When the prophets burst out in the lyric metaphors, "Jehovah will
roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem;" "Egypt shall
be a waste and Edom a wilderness for their violence to the sons of
Judah; but Jerusalem shall be inhabited forever, and Jehovah shall
dwell upon Zion," the meaning is simply that "Jehovah will be a
refuge to his people, a stronghold to the sons of Israel, and all
people shall know that Jehovah is God." It would imply the
grossest ignorance in any critic if he imagined that the Jews ever
believed that Jehovah was visibly to come down and reign over them
in person. They did however, believe that an awful token or the
presence of Jehovah dwelt in the holy of holies of their temple.
They also believed that every anointed ruler who governed them in
justice and piety represented the authority of Jehovah. And as, in
the long times of their natural captivity and oppression, their
hopes sought refuge from the depressing present in bright visions
of a glorious future, when some inspired deliverer should justify
their faith by carrying the national power and happiness to the
highest pitch, they naturally believed that the spirit and signet
of the Lord would, in a special manner, rest on that Messianic
hero.

By the assimilative action of faith and imagination, this idea of
a divinely accredited Messiah developed, and grew ever richer and
more complete. It began simply with the expectation of a holy
leader and ruler who should subdue the heathen and establish the
favored people of Jehovah in peerless purity, power, and happiness
in the land of Judea. Little by little the rewards of the
righteous and the punishments of the wicked were extended beyond
those living on the earth, and took in the dead. The prophet
Ezekiel depicted the promised restoration of the Jews from their
captivity at Babylon to Jerusalem under the poetic image of a
revivification of a heap of dead bones. This metaphor slowly
assumed the form of a literal dogma, which grew from its beginning
as an exceptional belief in the resurrection of a chosen few,
stated in the book of Daniel and the second book of Maccabees, to
the belief in the universal resurrection of the dead, avowed by
Paul as the common Pharisaic belief. The belief, too, in regard to
the scene of the Messianic triumph, the penalties to be inflicted
on the enemies of Jehovah, and the kind and number of those
enemies, underwent the same process of development and growth. The
world was conceived as a sort of three story house connected with
passage ways; heaven above the firmament, the earth between, and a
penal region below. The imagery of fire and brimstone associated
in the Hebrew mind with Sodom and Gomorrah, and the fearful
imagery of idolatory, filth, and flames in the detested valley of
Hinnom where the refuse of Jerusalem was carried to be burned, had
been transferred by the popular imagination to the subterranean
place of departed souls. The story in the book of Genesis about
the sons of God forming an alliance with the daughters of men, and
begetting a wicked brood of giants, had been wrought into the
belief in a race of fallen angels, foes of God and men, whose
dwelling place was the upper air. Above these wicked spirits in
high places, but below the heaven of Jehovah, was the paradise
whither Enoch and Elijah were supposed to have been translated,
and whence they would come again in the last days. The Jewish
apocryphal book of Enoch which was written probably about a
century and a half before the birth of Christ, and is explicitly
quoted in the Epistle of Jude contains a minute account of the
final judgment, including in its scope this whole scenery and all
these agents, and closely anticipating both the doctrinal and
verbal details of the same subject as recorded in the New
Testament itself. There is not, with one exception, a single
essential feature of the now current Christian belief, in regard
to the day of judgment at the end of the world, which is not
distinctly brought out in the same form in the book of Enoch,
written certainly more than a hundred years before a line of the
Gospels was composed. The exception referred to relates to the
person of the Messiah. In the book of Enoch he is indeed called
the Son of man, but is wrapt in mysterious obscurity, undefined
and unnamed: in the Christian documents and faith he is, of
course, identified with Jesus of Nazareth, and, at a later period,
identified also with God.

The growth of the Messianic personality in distinctness,
prominence, importance, and completeness of associated grouping,
is not only historically traceable, but was also perfectly
natural. At first the prophecy of the triumphant re establishment
of the Jews was conceived as the result of the favoring power of
Jehovah, not in a personal manifestation, but providentially
displayed. Thus Joel represents Jehovah as saying, in his promise
to vindicate Jerusalem, "Let the heathen be wakened, and come up
to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to judge all
the heathen round about." It cannot be denied that this was purely
metaphorical. But in all imagery of a kingdom, of war, of
judgment, the idea of the king, the leader, the judge, would
naturally be the strongest point of imaginative action, the center
of crystalizing association around which congruous particulars
would be drawn until the picture was complete. So it actually
happened. Perhaps the most striking example of this is seen in the
growth of the notion of the great Adversary who precedes and
fights against the Messiah. The book of Daniel, written just after
Antiochus Epiphanes had oppressed the Jews with such frightful
cruelties and profaned their temple with such abominable
desecrations, impersonated in him the whole head and front of the
impious hostility which the promised deliverer would have to
subdue in vindicating the rights and hopes of the chosen people.
"The figure of Antiochus Epiphanes," Martineau has happily said,
"placed in immediate antecedence and antithesis to that of the
Messiah, as the predicted crisis moved forward, was carried with
it, and spread its portentous shadow over the expected close." The
writer of the book of Daniel looked for the immediate arising of
some inspired hero and servant of Jehovah to overthrow this wicked
despot, this persecuting monster, and avenge the oppressed Jews on
their Gentile tyrants. When subsequent events postponed this
expected sequel, the opposed parties in it, the Antichrist and the
Christ, were thrown forward together in ever dilating proportions
of gloom and brightness: the fierce countenanced king in Daniel
becomes the Man of Sin in Paul and the Beast drunk with the blood
of saints in the Apocalypse. And in the Rabbinical books of the
Jews the belief in Antichrist, under the name of Armillus, is
developed into a mass of mythological details, afterwards adopted
quite in the gross by the Mohammedans. Terrible signs will precede
the appearance of the Messiah, such as a dew of blood, the
darkening of the sun, the destruction of the holy city, with the
slaughter and dispersion of the Israelites, and the suffering of
awful woes. The Messiah shall gather his people and rebuild and
occupy Jerusalem. Armillus shall collect an army and besiege that
city. But God shall say to Messiah, "Sit thou on my right hand,"
and to the Israelites, "Stand still, and see what God will work
for you to day." Then God will pour down sulphur and fire from
heaven, and consume Armillus and his hosts. Then the trumpet will
sound, the tombs be opened, the ten tribes be led to Paradise to
celebrate the marriage supper of the Messiah, the aliens be
consigned to Gehenna, and the earth be renovated.

As the doctrine of the functions of the Messiah, in this finished
form, is not stated in the Old Testament, but was familiar in the
Christian Church, it is commonly supposed to be exclusively a
later Christian development from the Jewish germ. It did, however,
exist in the Jewish mind, before the birth of Christ, in the
mature form already set forth. It is found clearly laid down and
drawn out in Jewish apocryphal books dated earlier than the
Christian era. It is likewise explicitly and minutely detailed in
the Talmud, where its subsequent adoption from the Christians must
have been impossible to the bigoted scorn and hate of the Jews for
the Christians; while the historic affiliation of Christianity on
Judaism made the Christians avowedly adopt all the vital doctrines
of the older creed. The gradual growth of the Christian doctrine
of the connection of the Messiah with the final judgment, out of
the previous Jewish and Rabbinical notions, by the hardening of
metaphors into dogmas and the universalizing of local peculiarities,
is confessedly an obscure process, in many of its particulars
extremely difficult to trace. But that it did thus grow up,
no impartial scholar, who has mastered what is now known
on the subject, can doubt. A world of new knowledge and light has
been thrown on this whole field during the last thirty five years
by Gfrorer, Baur, Ewald, Hoffmann, Hilgenfeld, Dilmann, Ceriani,
Volkmar, and other students of kindred power and spirit.
Researches and discussions in this department are still pushed
with the greatest zeal; and it is confidently believed that in a
few years the views adopted in the present writing will be
established beyond all cavil from any fair minded critic. Then all
the steps will have been clearly defined in the development of
that doctrine of the great Day of the Lord, which, beginning with
a poetic picture of a Jewish overthrow of the Gentiles, through
the inspiring power of Jehovah, before the walls of Jerusalem,
ended with a literal belief in the setting up, by the Messiah, of
a tribunal in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, the assemblage there of
all the living and the dead for judgment, the installation of the
immortalized righteous in Paradise, and the submerging of the
wicked under the Vale of Hinnom in a rainstorm of blazing
brimstone.

And now what must we think in regard to the truth or falsehood of
the outward, forensic, military, and ritual part of the doctrine
of historic and literary development we have imperfectly followed.
Is it not perfectly clear, that the growth of the doctrine in
question has been but a natural action of the imagination on the
materials furnished it; adding congruous particulars, one after
another, until the view was complete, and therefore could extend
no further? And is it not equally obvious, that it can lay no sort
of claim to logical validity? The superstitious and arbitrary
character of its intrinsic constituents, its irreconcilableness
with science and philosophy, disprove, to all who dare honestly
face the facts, every plea set up for it as an inspired revelation
of truth. It is a mixture of poetry and speculation, credible
enough in an early and uncritical age, but a hopeless stumbling
block to the educated reason of the present day. Every one who
brings a free intelligence to the subject will find it impossible
not to recognize the same fanciful process of thought, the same
poetic ingredients, here as in the schemes of those heathen
religions whose principal portrayals we all regard as mythology.
To argue that because earthly rulers, in their anger and power,
send retributive armies against their rebellious subjects, to
bring them to judgment, destroy their homes and cities, and lay
waste their lands with fire and sword, therefore God, the supreme
King, will do so by the whole world, is not to reason logically,
but to poetize creatively. There can be no warrant for
transferring the political and military relations between men and
earthly sovereigns to the moral and spiritual relations between
the human race and God, since the two sets of relations are wholly
different. The relation of Creator and creature is immensely
higher and wider than that of king and subject. He whose laws are
everywhere incessantly self executing needs not to select and
group and reserve his friends or foes for any climateric
catastrophe. The common notion of a final judgment day the
fanciful association of all the good together, on one side, to be
saved; of all the bad together, on the other side, to be damned,
applies to the divine government an imperfection belonging only to
human governments. Surely every one must see, the moment the
thought is stated, that this imaginative universalizing of the
indignation of God, and carrying it to a climax, in the
destruction of the world, is a mythological procedure utterly
inapplicable to a Being who can know no anger, no caprice, no
change, a Being whose will is universal truth, whose throne is
immensity, whose robe is omnipresence.

Original Christianity, internally regarded in its divine truth,
was the pure moral law exemplified in the personal traits of Jesus
Christ, and universalized by his ascent out of the flesh into that
kingdom of heaven which knows not nationalities or ceremonies. But
original Christianity, externally and historically regarded, in
the belief of its first disciples, was simply Judaism, with the
addition of the faith that the Messiah had actually come in the
person of Jesus Christ. The first disciples vividly cherished the
prevalent Pharisaic doctrine that the Messiah would glorify his
people, vanquish the heathen, raise and judge the dead, change the
face of the earth, and inaugurate a holy reign of Israel in joy
and splendor. This the Messiah was to do. But they believed Jesus
to be the Messiah. Yet, before doing these things, he had been put
to death. Therefore, they argued, he must come again, to finish
his uncompleted mission. Such was the derivation of the apostolic
and ecclesiastical doctrine of the speedy second advent of Christ
to judge the dead and the living, and to wind up the present
scheme of things. The belief was inevitable under the circumstances.
To have believed otherwise, they must have reconstructed the current
idea of the Messiah, and have seen in him no political monarch
with an outward realm, but purely a king of truth.

For this they were not ready; though it seems as if, after
the experience of eighteen hundred years, we ought by this
time to be prepared to see that such was really the intention of
Providence.

It is a question of primary interest, whether Jesus himself, in
assuming the Messiahship, regarded it personally as an exclusively
spiritual office, or as a literally including these royal and
judicial functions in a visible form.

Jesus foretold, in the same imaginary used by the previous
prophets, and familiar to the minds of his contemporaries, the
speedy approach of frightful calamities, wars, rumor of wars,
famine and slaughter, Jerusalem compassed with armies and
destroyed. Then, he adds, the Son of man shall come in the clouds
of heaven, with all his holy angels, and take possession of the
scene, apportioning the destinies of the righteous and the wicked.
The question is, whether this pictured reappearance, in such
transcendent pomp and power, was meant by him as a literal
prophecy, to be physically fulfilled in his own person; or as a
moral horoscope of the destined fortunes of his religion, a
figurative representation of the establishment and reign of his
spiritual truth. The latter view seems to us to be the correct one.

In the first place, this is what has actually taken place. In the
growing recognition of his spirit and power, in the spread of his
teachings and name, in the revolutionizing advancement of his
kingdom among men, Jesus has come again and again. Jerusalem was
destroyed by the Romans, as he foretold, amidst unspeakable
tribulations, and the disciples of the new faith installed in
domination over the world. He said the time was then at hand, even
at the doors, that some of those standing by should not taste
death until all these things came to pass. If his prophecy bore a
moral sense, the sequel justified it; if it bore a physical sense,
the sequel refuted and falsified it. For that generation passed
away, fifty generations since have passed away, and yet there has
been no literal second advent of Jesus in person to judge the dead
and the living, and to destroy the world. The event proves that we
must either give the words of Jesus a metaphorical interpretation
or hold that he was in error.

But, secondly, such an error would be incompatible with soundness
of mind. For any man, even for him called by an apostle "the man
Christ Jesus," to believe that after his death he should reappear,
swooping down from heaven, convoyed by squadrons of angels, to
collect all men from their graves, and replace the old creation
with a new one, would imply a profound disturbance of reason, a
monomaniacal fanaticism if not an actual insanity. It is such a
pure piece of theatrics that no one deeply in unison with that
spirit of truth which expresses the mind of God through the order
of nature and providence could possibly believe it. Such a nature
was preeminently that of Jesus. All his most characteristic
utterances, such as: "blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God;" "who loves much shall be forgiven much;" reveal
unsurpassed saneness and truth of perception. It is by much the
most probable supposition, that Jesus employed in the deepest and
purest moral sense alone those Messianic images and catastrophic
prophecies which were indeed originally used as moral metaphors,
but had been afterwards degraded into material dogmas.

Still further, the literal belief commonly attributed to Jesus, in
his own physical reappearance and reign, is not only incompatible
with his supreme soundness of mind, it is also irreconcilable with
his other explicit teachings. "My kingdom is not of this world."
"Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice." He warns his
disciples against the many false Christs who will appear, and says
that "the kingdom of heaven cometh not with observation." "Say
not, lo here! or lo there! for the kingdom of heaven is within
you." "I am the truth, the way, and the life." "He that rejecteth
me, I judge him not; the word that I have spoken, that shall judge
him." "Whoever doeth the will of my Father in heaven, the same is
my brother." In view of these and kindred utterances of the
profoundest insight, irreconcilable with any gross mythological
beliefs, we must hold to the purely spiritual character of the
doctrine of Jesus concerning his personal offices, and think that
all the speeches, if any such there be, which cannot be fairly
explained in accordance with this view, have been refracted in
their transmission through incompetent reporters, or even perhaps
fictitiously ascribed to him from the faith of a later age. There
is a grateful satisfaction in thus discharging, as we feel we are
fairly entitled to do, from the authority of Jesus a burden too
great even for his peerless name any longer to support. For, say
what its advocates may, this gigantic melo drama of the second
advent, this world wide mixture and display of martial and
forensic elements before an audience of all mankind and amidst a
convulsed and closing universe, is inherently incredible by any
mind not grossly ignorant and undisciplined or drilled to the most
slavish servility of traditional thought. Every one really
educated in science and philosophy, and familiar with the
physiological conditions and literary history of mythology in the
other nations of the world, will plainly perceive the intrinsic
fancifulness and falsity of the belief, at the same time that he
easily accounts for its rise and prevalence.

The same picture of the siege of Jerusalem by a league of
idolatrous armies, and of the mighty coming of the Messiah, found
in the New Testament, is drawn in the third book of the Sibylline
Oracles, which was composed by a Jew two hundred years before one
word of Matthew or Luke was written. Jesus took up this current
and fitting imagery wherein to express the conflict of his
religion with the world, and to predict its ultimate triumph. He
identifies himself with the truths he has brought, with the
regenerating energies he has inaugurated to combat and overcome
the wickedness and despotism of the nations of men. Every advent
of his universal principles to a wider conflict or a higher seat
of authority, is a true coming of the Son of Man. The vices and
crimes of men, the selfishness and tyranny of governments,
accumulate impediments in the way of the free working of the will
of God in human society. Therefore from period to period
convulsive crises occur, shocks of progressive truth and liberty
against the obstacles gathered in their way. Thus, not only the
destruction of Jerusalem, but the destruction of Rome, the French
Revolution, and all the terrible social crises in the advancing
affairs of the world, write on the earth and the sky, in huge
characters of blood, smoke and fire, the true meaning of the
repeated coming of Christ. This is the only kind of judicial
second advent he will ever make, and this will occur over and over
in calamitous but helpful revolutions, until all removable evils
are done away, all the laws of men made just and all the hearts of
men pure. Then the spirit once manifested by Jesus in his lonely
mission will be a universal presence on earth, and the genuine
millennium prevail without end.

It is necessary now, as preliminary to a clear exposition of the
true Christian doctrine of judgment, to explain the cause and
process of the dark perversion which the teachings of Christ
himself have so unfortunately undergone in the Church. For this
purpose we must again, for a moment, refer to the original
connection of Christianity with Judaism.

Judaism was composed of two parts: one an accidental form; the
other, essential truth. The first was the ceremonial peculiarities
of the Jewish race and history; the second was the absolute and
eternal principles of morality and religion. These two parts the
ritual law and moral law were closely joined in all the best
representatives of the nation at all the best periods of its
history. Yet there was a constant tendency to separate these. One
party exalted the ritual element, another party the spiritual
element; the priestly class and the vulgar populace the former;
the prophets the men of poetic, fiery heart and genius the latter.

Such men as Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, always insisted on personal
and national righteousness, purity, and devotion, as the one
essential thing. But the natural tendency of the common multitude,
and of every professional class, to an external routine of
mechanised forms, manifested itself more and more in a party which
made an overt covenant and ritualistic conformity the all
important thing. This party reached its head in the sect of the
Pharisees, who, at the time of Jesus, possessed the offices, and
represented the dominant spirit and authority of the Jewish
nation. The character of this sect of bigoted formalists, as
indignantly described and denounced by Jesus, is too well known to
need illustration. They subordinated and trivialized the weightier
matters of justice, mercy, humility, and peace, but enthroned and
glorified the regime of mint, anise, and cummin.

What was the Jewish idea of salvation, or citizenship in the
kingdom of God? What was the condition of acceptance in the
Pharisaic church? It was heirship in the Jewish race, either by
descent or adoption, with ceremonial blamelessness in belief and
act. Do you belong to the chosen family of Abraham, and are you
undefiled in relation to all the requirements of our code? Then
you are one of the elect. Are you a Gentile, an idolatrous member
of the uncircumcision, or a scorner of the Levitic and Rabbinical
customs? Then you are unfit to enter beyond the outer precincts of
the Temple; you are a hopeless alien from the kingdom of heaven.
Thus the Jewish test of acceptance with God was national,
external, formal, a local and temporal peculiarity.

When Jesus arose and began to teach, his transcendent genius,
working under the unparalleled inspiration of God, an unprecedented
sensibility to divine truth in its utmost purity and freedom,
expanded beyond all these shallow material accidents and
bonds; and he propounded a perfectly moral and spiritual test of
acceptance before God; namely, the possession of an intrinsically
good character. He made nothing of the distinction between Jew and
Gentile, declaring, "My father is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham." He affirmed the condition of admittance
into the kingdom of God to be simply the doing of the will of God.
When he saw the young lawyer who had kept the two commandments,
loving God with all his soul, and his neighbor as himself, his
heart yearned towards him in benediction. And, finally, in his
sublime picture of the last judgment, he, in the most explicit and
unmistakable manner, makes the one essential condition of
rejection to be inhumanity of life, cruel selfishness of
character; the one essential condition of acceptance, the spirit
of love, the practical doing of good. He utters not a solitary
syllable about immaculateness of ceremonial propriety or soundness
of dogmatic belief. He only says, Inasmuch as ye have or have not
visited the sick and the imprisoned, fed the hungry, and clothed
the naked, ye shall be justified or condemned at the divine
tribunal. This test of personal goodness or wickedness, benevolent
or malignant conduct, proclaimed by Jesus, is the true standard,
free from everything local and temporary, fitted for application
to all nations and all ages.

But no sooner had Christianity obtained a foothold on earth,
multiplied its converts, and gained some outward sway, than its
Judaizing disciples and promulgators, fastening on that which was
easiest to comprehend and practise, that which was most impressive
to the imagination, that which seemed most sharply to distinguish
them from the unbelieving and unconforming world around, thrust
far into the background this universal and eternal test of
judgment set up by Jesus himself, and in place of it installed an
exclusive test fashioned after a more developed and aggravated
pattern of the very narrowest and worst elements in the
Phariasaism which he expressly came to supersede. The Pharisaic
condition of salvation was inheritance, by blood or adoption, in
the Jewish race and Abrahamic covenant, together with exactitude
of ceremonial observance. Everybody else was an unclean alien, an
uncircumcised dog, an uncovenanted leper. In place of this test,
the orthodox ecclesiastical party made their test dogmatic belief
in the supernatural Messiahship of Jesus Christ, formal profession
of allegiance to the official person of Jesus Christ. It is summed
up in the formula, "Whoso believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is
of God; whoso denieth this, is of the Devil."

Exactly here is where Paul, the noble apostle to the Gentiles,
broke with the Judaizing apostles, and taught a doctrine more
fully developed in its historic sequence, but substantially in
perfect unison with the free teachings and spirit of Jesus
himself. With Paul the test of Christian salvation was the
possession of the mind of Christ. "If any man have not the spirit
of Christ, he is none of his;" "but as many as are led by the
spirit of God are sons of God." "Neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision; but a new creature," begotten in the
image of Christ, availeth everything before God. "God rewardeth
every man, the Jew and the Gentile, according to his works." With
Paul, descent from Abraham was nothing, observance of the legal
code was nothing: a just and pure character, full of self
sacrificing love, evoked by faith in Christ, was the all in all.
Jesus Christ was the head of a new race, the second Adam; and all
disciples, who, through moral faith in him, were regenerated into
his likeness and unto newness of living, were thereby adopted as
sons of God and joint heirs with him. The Pauline formula of
salvation, freely open to all the world, was, spiritual
assimilation and reproduction of Christ in the disciple.

But the Judaizing party bore a heavy preponderance in the early
Church, and has succeeded unto this day in imposing on
ecclesiastical Christendom its own test: namely, a sound dogmatic,
belief in the supreme personal rank and office of Christ, as the
only means of admission to the kingdom of heaven. The one
peculiarity which most sharply and broadly contrasted the early
Christians with the rest of the world was unquestionably their
belief in the miraculous mission of Jesus, a belief growing
deeper, higher, intenser, until it actually identified him with
the omnipotent God. There was an inevitable tendency, it was a
perfectly natural and necessary process, for them to make this
point of contrast the central condition on which depended the
possession of all the special privileges supposed to be promised
to its disciples by the new religion. The result is well expressed
by Polycarp in these words: "Whosoever confesses not that Christ
is come in the flesh, is an Antichrist; and whosoever acknowledges
not the martyrdom of the cross, is of the Devil; and whosoever
says that there is no resurrection nor judgment, is the first born
of Satan." This extract strikes the key note of the Orthodox
Church all through Christendom from the second century to the
present hour. In place of the true condition of salvation
announced by Jesus, personal and practical goodness, it
inaugurates the false ecclesiastic standard, soundness of dogmatic
belief in relation to Jesus himself! Those who hold this are the
elect, and shall stand in heaven with white robes and palms and a
new song, while all the rest of the world apostate and detested
enemies of God and his saints shall be trampled down in merciless
slaughter, and flung into the pit whence the smoking signal of
their torment shall ascend for ever and ever. It is a transformation
of the bigoted scorn and hate of the covenanted Jew for his
Gentile foes into the intensified horror of the Orthodox
believer for the reprobate infidel. And it finally culminated in
the following frightful picture which still lowers and blazes in
the imagination of ecclesiastical Christendom as a veritable
revelation of what is to take place at the end of the world:

While the stars are falling, the firmament dissolving, the dead
swarming from their graves, and the nations assembling, Christ
will come in the clouds of heaven with a host of angels and sit in
judgment on collected mankind. All who submissively believed in
his Divinity, and have the seal of his blood on their foreheads,
he will approve and accept; all others he will condemn and reject.
No matter for the natural goodness and integrity of the
unbeliever: his unbelief dooms him. No matter for the natural
depravity and iniquity of the believer: his faith in the atoning
sacrifice saves him. The Judge will say to the orthodox, on his
right, "You may have been impure and cruel, lied, cheated, hated
your neighbor, rolled in vice and crime, but you have believed in
me, in my divinity: therefore, come, ye blessed, inherit my
kingdom." To the heretical, on his left, he will say, "You may
have been pure and kind, sought the truth, self sacrificingly
served your fellow men, fulfilled every moral duty in your power,
but you have not believed in me, in my deity, and my blood:
therefore, depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire." Such is a
fit verdict to be pronounced by the avenging Warrior depicted in
the Apocalypse, from whose mouth issues a two edged sword, to cut
his enemies asunder; who sits on a white charger, in a vesture
dipped in blood, with a bow and a crown, and goes forth conquering
and to conquer; whose eyes are flames of fire; who treads his
rejecters in the wine press of his wrath until their blood reaches
to the horse bridles. It was the natural reflection of an age
filled with the most murderous hatreds and persecutions, based on
political and dogmatic distinctions. But how contradictory it is
to the teachings of Jesus himself! How utterly irreconcilable it
is with the image and spirit of that meek and lowly Son of Man who
said that he "came not to destroy men's lives but to save them;"
who declared, "of mine own self I can do nothing;" who modestly
deprecated all personal homage, asking, "Why callest thou me
good?" who sat with the publican, and forgave the harlot, and
denounced bigotry in many an immortal breathing of charity; and
who, even in his final agony, pardoned and prayed for his
murderers! What reason is there for supposing that he who was so
infinitely gentle, unselfish, forgiving, when on earth, will
undergo such a fiendish metamorphosis in his exaltation and
return? It is the most monstrous, the most atrocious travesty of
the truth that ever was perpetrated by the superstitious ignorance
and audacity of the human mind. It is a direct transference into
the Godhead of the most egotistical and hateful feelings of a bad
man. No good man who had been ever so grossly misconceived,
vilified, and wronged, if he saw his enemies prostrate in
submissive terror at his feet, perfectly powerless before his
authority, could bear to trample on them and wreak vengeance on
them. He would say, "Unhappy ones, fear not; you have misunderstood
me; I will not injure you; if there be any favor which I can
bestow on you, freely take it." And is it not an incredible
blasphemy to deny to the deified Christ a magnanimity equal to
that which any good man would exhibit?

It is with pain and regret that the writer has penned the
foregoing sentences, which, he supposes, some persons will read
with the feeling that they are inexcusable misrepresentations,
others, with a shocked and resentful horror, relieving itself in
the cry, Infidelity! Blasphemy! The reply of the writer is simply
that, while reluctant to wound the sensibility of any, he feels
bound in conscience to make this exposition, because he believes
it to be a true statement; and loyalty to truth is the first duty
of every man. Truth is the will of God, obedience to which alone
is sound morality, reverential love of which alone is pure piety.
Frightful as is the picture drawn above of Christ in the judgment,
it is impossible to deny, without utter stultification, that every
lineament of it is logically implied in the formula. "There is no
salvation for the man who unbelievingly rejects, no damnation for
the man who believingly accepts, the official Christ and his
blood." And what teacher will have the presumption to deny that
just this has been, and still is, the central dogma in the faith
of ecclesiastical Christendom? The legitimate result of this view,
unflinchingly carried out, and applied to the precise point we now
have in hand, is seen in that horrible portrayal of the Last
Judgment wherewith Michael Angelo has covered the ceiling of the
Sistine Chapel, in Rome. The great anatomical artist consistently
depicts Christ as an almighty athlete, towering with vindictive
wrath, flinging thunderbolts on the writhing and helpless
wilderness of his victims. The popular conception of Christ in the
judgment has been borrowed from the type of a king, who, hurling
off the incognito in which he has been outraged, breaks out in his
proper insignia, to sentence and trample his scorners. The true
conception is to be fashioned after the type given in his own
example during his life. So far as Christ is the representative of
God, there must be no vanity or egotism in him. Every such quality
ascribed to the Godhead is anthropomorphizing sophistry. However
much more God may be, he is the General Mind of the Universe. He
includes, while he transcends, all other beings. Now, the General
Mind must represent the interests of all, the disinterested good
of the whole, and not any particular and selfish exactions, or
resentful caprices, fashioned on the pattern shown among human
egotists by a kingly despot.

The Church, in developing Christianity out of Judaism through the
person and life of Jesus, has given prominence and emphasis to the
wrong elements, seeking to universalize and perpetuate, in a
transformed guise, the local spirit and historic errors of that
Pharisaic sect against which he had himself launched all his
invective. That temper of bigotry and ceremonial technicality
which hates all outside of its own pale as reprobate, and which
ultimated itself in the virtual Pharisaic formula, "Keep the hands
and platter washed, and it is no matter how full of uncleanness
you are within," at a later period embodied itself through the
leaders of ecclesiastical Orthodoxy in the central dogma, "Nothing
but faith in Christ can avail man anything before God." Instead of
this the true doctrine is, Nothing but obedience, surrender, and
trust, personal penitence and aspiration, can avail man anything
before God.

The Christians, as the Jews did before them, have made a wrong
selection of the doctrine to be, on the one hand, particularized
and left behind; on the other hand, carried forward and
universalized. This immense error demands correction. Let us
notice a few specimens in exemplication of it. Jehovah is not the
only true God in distinction from odious idols; but Brahma, Ahura
Mazda, Osiris, Zeus, Jupiter, and the rest, are names given by
different nations to the Infinite Spirit whom each nation worships
according to its own light. The Jews and the Christians are not
the only chosen people of God; but all nations are his people,
chosen in the degree of their harmony with his will. The
providence of God is not an exceptional interference from without,
exclusively for the Jews and Christians; but it is for all, a
steady order of laws within, as much to be seen in the shining of
the sun, or the regular harvest, as in any shocks of political
calamity and glory. Not the Messiah alone reveals God; but, in his
degree, every ruler, prophet, priest, every man who stands for
wisdom, justice, purity, and devotion, represents him. It is not
doctrinal belief in the Messiah, but vital adoption of his spirit
and character, of the principles of real goodness, that
constitutes the salvation of the disciple. We are to look not for
the resurrection of the flesh from the grave, but for the
resurrection of the soul from all forms of sin, ignorance, and
misery. It is the universal prevalence of truth and virtue,
knowledge, love, and peace, in the hearts of men, not the physical
reign of the returning Messiah, which will make a millennium on
earth. The kingdom of God which Judaism localized exclusively in
Palestine, and the early church exclusively in heaven or on the
millennial earth, should be recognized in every place, whether
above the sky or on the globe, where duty is done, and pure
affection, trust, and joy experienced; for God is not excluded
from all other spaces by any enthronization in one. We ought not
to cling, as to permanent fixtures of revealed truth, to the rigid
outlines of that scheme of faith which was struck out when the
three story house of the Hebrew cosmogony showed the limits of
what men knew, before exact science was born, or criticism
conceived, or the telescope invented, or America and Australia and
the Germanic races heard of; but we should hold our speculative
theological beliefs freely and provisionally, ready to reconstruct
and read just them, from time to time, in accordance with the
demands of the growing body of human knowledge.

Reflecting, in the light of these general ideas of truth, on the
whole subject of the current doctrine of the end of the world and
the day of judgment, we shall see that that doctrine presents no
valid claim for our belief, but is a mythological growth out of
the historic and literary conditions amidst which Christianity
arose on the basis of Judaism. The doctrine was formed by the
unconscious transmutation of metaphors into dogmas. Poetic figures
came, by dint of familiarizing repetition, by dint of imaginative
collection and contemplation, to be taken as expressive of literal
truths. To any reader of the Apocalypse, with competent historical
and critical information for entering into the book from the point
of view occupied by its author, it is just as evident that its
imagery was meant to describe the immediate conflict of Hebrew
Christianity with pagan Rome, and not the literal blotting out of
the universe, as it is unquestionable that the book of Daniel
depicts, not the impending destruction of the world, but the
relations of the chosen nation with the hostile empires of
Persia, Media, Babylon, and Macedonia, from which they had
suffered so much, and which they then hoped speedily to put
beneath their feet. The slain Lamb, standing amidst the throne of
God, with seven eyes and seven horns; Death, on a pale horse, with
Hell following him; the woman, clothed with the sun, and the moon
under her feet; the great red dragon, whose tail casts to the
earth the third part of the stars of heaven; the worm wood star,
that falls as a blazing lamp, and turns a third of the waters of
the earth into bitterness; the seven thunders, seven seals, seven
vials, seven spirits before the throne, seven candlesticks, seven
angels, seven trumpets, seven epistles to the seven churches,
seven horns, seven headed beast, all these things must, perforce,
be taken as free poetic imagery; it would require a lunatic or an
utterly unthinking verbalist to interpret them literally. Why,
then, shall we select from the mass of metaphors a few of the most
violent, and insist on rendering these as veritable statements of
fact? If the rest is symbolism, so are the pictures of the
avenging armies of angels, the reeking gulf of sulphur, and the
golden streets of the city.

The entire scheme of thought, as it still stands in the mind of
the Orthodox believer, is to be rejected as spurious, because it
rests on a process of imaginative accumulation and transference
which is absolutely illegitimate; namely, the association and
universalizing of political and military images, which are then
hardened from emblems into facts, and cast over upon the mutual
relations of God and mankind. We ought to break open the
metaphors, extract their significance, and throw the shells aside.
But ignorant bibliolatary and ecclesiasticism insist on
worshipping the shells, with no insight of their contents.

There is one all important fact which should convince of their
error those who hold the current view of a general judgment at the
end of the world as having been revealed from God through Christ.
We refer to the fact that the system of ideas in which a final
resurrection and judgment of the dead are logical parts, existed
in the Zoroastrian theology five or six centuries before the birth
of Christ. It was adopted thence by the Jews, and afterwards
adopted from the Jews by the Christians. If, therefore, this
doctrine be a revelation from God, it was revealed by him to the
Persians in a dark and credulous antiquity. In that case it is
Zoroaster and not Christ to whom we are indebted for the central
dogmas of our religion! No, these things are imagery, not essence,
the human element of imaginative error with which the divine
element of truth has been overlaid, and from whose darkening and
corrupt company this is to be extricated.

There are, in the New Testament, in addition to the relevant
metaphors which we have already examined, several others of great
impressiveness and importance. We must now explain these, separate
the truths and errors popularly associated with them, and leave
the subject with an exposition of the real method of the divine
government and the true idea of the day of judgment, in contrast
with the prevalent ecclesiastical perversions of them.

The part played in theological speculation and popular religious
belief by imagery borrowed from the scenery and methods of
judicial tribunals, the procedures and enforcement of penal law,
has not been less prominent and profound than the influence
exerted by natural, political, and military metaphors. The power,
the pomp, the elaborate spectacle, the mysterious formalities, the
frightful penalties, the intense personal hopes and fears,
associated with the trial of culprits in courts or before the head
of a nation, must always have sunk so deeply into the minds of men
as to be vividly present in imagination to be affixed as typical
stamps on their theories concerning the judgments of God and the
future world. This process is perhaps nowhere more distinctly
shown than in the belief of the ancient Egyptians. Before the
sarcophagus containing the mummy was ferried over the holy lake to
be deposited in the tomb, the friends and relatives of the
departed, and his enemies and accusers, if he had any, together
with forty two assessors, each of whom had the oversight of a
particular sin, assembled on the shore and sat in judgment. The
deceased was put on his trial before them: and, if justified,
awarded an honorable burial; if condemned, disgraced by the
withholding of the funeral rites. Now the papyrus rolls found with
the mummies give a description of the judgment of the dead, a
picture of the fate of the disembodied soul in the Egyptian Hades,
minutely agreeing in many particulars with the foregoing ceremony.
Ma, the Goddess of Justice, leads the soul into the judgment hall,
before the throne of Osiris, where stands a great balance with a
symbol of truth in one scale, the symbol of a human heart in the
other. The accuser is heard, and the deceased defends himself
before forty two divine judges who preside over the forty two sins
from which he must be cleared. The gods Horus and Anubis attend to
the balance, and Thoth writes down the verdict and the sentence.
The soul then passes on through adventures of penance or bliss,
the details of which are obviously copied, with fanciful changes
and additions, from the connected scenery and experience known on
the earth.

Taking it for all in all, there perhaps never was any other scene
in human society so impressive as the periodical sitting in
judgment of the great Oriental kings. It was the custom of those
half deified rulers the King of Egypt, the Sultan of Persia, the
Emperor of India, the Great Father of China to set up, each in the
gate of his palace, a tribunal for the public and irreversible
administration of justice. Seated on his throne, blazing in
purple, gold, and gems, the members of the royal family nearest to
his person; his chief officers and chosen favorites coming next in
order; his body guards and various classes of servants, in
distinctive costumes, ranged in their several posts; vast masses
of troops, marshalled far and near. The whole assemblage must have
composed a sight of august splendor and dread. Then appeared the
accusers and the accused, criminals from their dungeons, captives
taken in war, representatives of tributary nations, all who had
complaints to offer, charges to repel, or offences to expiate. The
monarch listened, weighed, decided, sentenced; and his executioners
carried out his commands. Some were pardoned, some rewarded, some
sent to the quarries, some to prison, some to death. When the
tribunal was struck, and the king retired, and the scene ended,
there was relief with one, joy with another, blood here, darkness
there, weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth in many a place.

Dramatic scenes of judgment, public judicial procedures, in some
degree corresponding with the foregoing picture, are necessary in
human governments. The prison, the culprit, the witnesses, the
judge, the verdict, the penalty, are inevitable facts of the
social order. Offences needing to be punished by overt penalties,
wrongs demanding to be rectified by outward decrees, criminals
gathered in cells, appeals from lower courts to higher ones, may
go on accumulating until a grand audit or universal clearing up of
arrears becomes indispensable. Is it not obvious how natural it
would be for a mind profoundly impressed with these facts, and
vividly stamped with this imagery, to think of the relation
between mankind and God in a similar way, conceiving of the
Creator as the Infinite King and Judge, who will appoint a final
day to set everything right, issue a general act of jail delivery,
summon the living and the dead before him, and adjudicate their
doom according to his sovereign pleasure?

The tremendous language ascribed to Jesus, in the twenty fifth
chapter of Matthew, was evidently based on the historic picture of
an Eastern king in judgment. "When the Son of Man shall come in
his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all
nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a
shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: and he shall set the
sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left." If Jesus
himself used these words, we suppose he meant figuratively to
indicate by them the triumphant installation, as a ruling and
judging power in human society, of the pure eternal principles of
morality, the true universal principles of religion, which he had
taught and exemplified. But unfortunately the image proved so
overpoweringly impressive to the imagination of subsequent times,
that its metaphorical import was lost in its physical setting.

This momentous error has arisen from the inevitable tendency of
the human mind to conceive of God after the type of an earthly
king, as an enthroned local Presence; from the rooted incapacity
of popular thought to grasp the idea that God is an equal and
undivided Everywhereness. In his great speech on Mar's Hill, the
apostle Paul told the Athenians that "God had appointed a day in
the which he would judge the world in righteousness by that man
whom he hath ordained." Is not this notion of the judgment being
delegated to Jesus plainly adopted from the political image of a
deputy? The king himself rarely sits on a judicial tribunal: he is
generally represented there by an inferior officer. But this
arrangement is totally inapplicable to God, who can never abdicate
his prerogatives, since they are not legal, but dynamic. The
essential nature of God is infinity. Certainly, there can be no
substitution of this. It cannot be put off, nor put on, nor
multiplied. There is one Infinite alone.

The Greeks located, in the future state, three judges of the dead,
Minos, who presided at the trial of souls arriving from Europe;
Rhadamanthus, who examined those coming from Asia; and Aacus, who
judged those from Africa. They had no fourth and fifth inspectors
for the souls from America and Australia, because those divisions
of the earth were, as yet, unknown! How suggestive is this mixture
of knowledge and ignorance! The heaven of the Esquimaux is a place
where they will have a plenty of fine boats and harpoons, and find
a summer climate, and a calm ocean abounding with fat seals and
walruses. The Greenlander's hell is a place of torment from cold;
the Arab's, a place of torment from heat. Every people and every
man unless they have learned by comparative criticism to correct
the tendency  conceive their destiny in the unknown future in
forms and lights copied, more or less closely, from their familiar
experiences here. Is there not just as much reason for holding to
the literal accuracy and validity of the result in one case as in
another? The popular picture, in the imagination of Christendom,
of Gabriel playing a trumpet solo at the end of the world, and a
huge squad of angelic police darting about the four quarters of
heaven, gathering the past and present inhabitants of the earth,
while the Judge and his officers take their places in the
Universal Assize, instead of being received as sound theology,
should be held as moral symbol. Taken in any other way, it sinks
into gross mythology. Can any one fail to see that this picture of
the Last Judgment is the result of an illogical process; namely,
the poetic association and universalizing of our fragmentary
judicial experiences, and the bodily transfer of them over upon
our relations with God? The procedure is clearly a fallacious one,
because the relations of men with God in the sphere of eternal
truths are wholly different from their relations with each other
in the sphere of political society. They are, in no sense, formal
or forensic, but substantial and moral; not of the nature of a
league or compact, but interior and organic; not acting by fits
and starts, or gathering through interruptions and delays to
convulsive catastrophes, but going on in unbreakable continuity.
God is a Spirit; and we too, in essence, are spirits. The rewards
and punishments imparted from God to us, then, are spiritual,
results of the regular action of the laws of our being as related
to all other being. Consequently, no figures borrowed from those
judicial and police arrangements inevitable in the broken and
hitching affairs of earthly rulers, can be directly applicable,
the circumstances are so completely different. The true
illustration of the divine government must be adopted from
physiology and psychology, where the perfect working of the
Creator is exemplified,  not from the forum and the court, where
the imperfect artifices of men are exhibited.

God forever sits in judgment on all souls, in the reactions of
their own acts. The divine retribution for every deed is the kick
of the gun, not an extra explosion arbitrarily thrown in. The
thief, the liar, the misanthrope, the drunkard, the poet, the
philosopher, the hero, the saint, all have their just and
intrinsic returns for what they are and for what they do, in the
fitness of their own characters and their harmonies or discords
with the will of God, with the public order of creation. Thus is
the daily experience of one man made a lake of peace threaded with
thrilling rivulets of bliss; that of another, a stream of
devouring fire and poison, or a heaving and smoking bed of
uncleanness and torment. The virtues represent the conditions of
universal good; the vices represent private opposition to those
conditions. Accordingly, the good man is in attracting and
cooperative connection with all good; the bad man, in antagonistic
and repulsive connection with it. In these facts a perfect
retribution resides. If any one does not see it, does not feel its
working, it is because he is too insensible to be conscious of the
secrets of his own being, too dull to read the lessons of his own
experience. And this self ignorant degradation, so far from
refuting, is itself the profoundest exemplification of the truth
of that wonderful word of Jesus: "Verily, I say unto you, they
have their reward." Those who consider themselves saints indulge
in an unspeakable vulgarity, when they feel, "Well, the sinners
have their turn in this world; we shall have ours in the next."
The law of retribution in the spiritual sphere is identical with
the first law of motion in the material sphere; action and
reaction are equal, and in opposite directions. This law being
instantaneous and incessant in its operation, there can be no
occasion for a final epoch to redress its accumulated disbalancements.
It has no disbalancements, save in our erroneous or defective vision.

The true conception of the relation of the all judging Creator to
his creatures is that of the Infinite Being who supplies all
finite receptacles in accordance with their special forms of
organization and character, and who causes exact retributions of
good and evil intrinsically to inhere in their indulged modes of
thought and feeling and will, their own virtues and vices,
fruitions and battlements. This internal, continuous, dynamic view
worthily represents the perfection of the Divine government. The
incomparably inferior view the external, intermittent,
constabulary theory rests, as it seems to us, merely on the
traditions of ignorance and fancy. It has, in every instance,
originated from the unwarrantable interpretation of a trope as a
truth.

For example, the picture of the Last Judgment, supposed to be
drawn by Jesus, in the Parable of the Tares, must be considered,
not as a rigid prophecy of the end of the earth, and the
transmundane destination of souls, but as a free emblem of the
approaching close of the Jewish dispensation, and the terrible
calamities which would then come on the proud, obstinate and
rebellious people. The reaping angels are the Roman and Jewish
armies, and other kindred agencies and collisions in the destined
evolution of the fortunes of Christianity and mankind in the
future. Taken literally, the symbols are incongruous with fact,
and absolutely incredible in doctrine. For they are based on the
image of a royal land owner, who draws his support from the income
of his fields and subjects, and who rewards the faithful bringer
of fruits, and punishes the slothful defaulter; who welcomes and
stores sheaves, because they are wealth: rejects and burns tares,
because they are an injury and a nuisance. But nothing can be
riches or a nuisance to the infinite God, who neither lives on
revenue nor judges by jerks. Men are not literally wheat, the
property of the good sower, Christ; nor tares, the property of the
bad sower, the Devil: they are souls, responsibly belonging to
themselves, under God. And the pay of the human agriculturists, in
the moral fields of the divine King, consists in the daily crops
of experience they raise, not in being advanced to a seat at the
right hand of their Lord, or in being flagellated and flung into a
flaming furnace.

Jesus himself, undoubtedly, used this physical imagery as the
vehicle of spiritual truths; it is lamentable that perfunctory
minds have so generally overlooked the substance in the dress. He
is represented, in Matthew, as having said to his apostles: "When
the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."
Now, that he used this figure to convey an impersonal moral
meaning, and that his profound thought underwent a materializing
degradation in the minds of his hearers and reporters, appears
clearly from the incident related immediately afterward. The wife
of Zebedee asked that her two sons might sit, the one on his right
hand, and the other on the left, in his kingdom. And Jesus said,
"Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism
that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my
left, is not mine to give." The imagery meant that the missionary
assistants, in forwarding and spreading the kingdom of truth and
love he came to establish, would be represented in common with
himself in the power it would acquire and sway over the world.
When his hearers interpreted the imagery in a physical sense, as
indicating that he was hereafter to be a visible king, and that
his favorites might expect to share in his authority, honor, and
glory, he solemnly repudiated it.

There is yet another and a wholly different style of imagery
employed by Jesus to convey his instructions as to the judgment
which is to separate the justified from the condemned. The
consideration of this species of imagery would afford an
independent proof, of a cogent character, that they strangely
misapprehend the mind of Jesus who interpret the moral meaning of
his parable in an outward and dramatic sense. The metaphors to
which we now refer are of a domestic and convivial nature, based
on some of the most impressive social customs of the Oriental
nations. It was the habit of kings, governors, and other rich and
powerful men, to give, on certain occasions, great banquets, to
which the guests were invited by special favor. These feasts were
celebrated with the utmost pomp and splendor, by night, in
brilliantly illuminated apartments. The contrast of the blazing
lights, the richly costumed guests, the music and talk, the honor
and luxury within, set against the darkness, the silence, the
envious poverty and misery without, must have deeply struck all
who saw it, and would naturally secure rhetorical reflections in
speech and literature. The Jews illustrated their idea of the
Kingdom of God by the symbol of a table at which Abraham and Isaac
and Jacob were banqueting, and would be joined by all their
faithful countrymen. In his parable of the Supper, describing how
a king, on occasion of the marriage of his son, made a feast and
sent out generous invitations to it, Jesus works up this imagery
still more elaborately. What did he really mean to teach by it? Is
it not clearly apparent from the whole context that he intended it
as an illustration of the fact that the Jews, to whom he first
announced his gospel, and offered all its privileges, having
rejected it, its blessings would be freely thrown open to the
Gentiles, and that they would crowd in to occupy the place of joy
and honor, which the chosen people of Jehovah had refused to
accept? It is by a pure effect of fancy and doctrinal bias that
the parable has been perverted into a description of the Last
Judgment. The reference plainly indicates admission to or
exclusion from the privileges of the new dispensation, a matter of
personal experience in the heart of the disciple and in the
society of the church on this earth. The wedding garment, without
which no one can come to the royal table, is a holy, humble, and
loving character. In consequence of his destitution of this,
Judas, although seated at the table, with the most honored guests,
in the very presence of his Lord, was proved to have no right
there, and was thrust into the outer darkness. His bad spirit, his
inability to appreciate and enjoy the pure truths of the kingdom,
constituted his expulsion. That such was the idea in the mind of
Jesus, something to be experienced personally and spiritually in
the present, and not something to be shown collectively and
materially at the end of the world, appears from the great number
of different forms in which he reiterates his doctrine. Had he
meant to teach literally that he was to come in person at the last
day, and sit in judgment on all men, would he not have had a
distinct conception of the method, and have always drawn one and
the same consistent picture of it? But if he meant to teach that
all who were fitted by their spirit, character and conduct to
assimilate the living substance of his kingdom were thereby made
members of it, while all others were, by their own intrinsic
unfitness, excluded, then it was perfectly natural that his
fertile mind would on a hundred different occasions convey this
one truth in a hundred different figures of speech. That in which
the images all differ is unessential: that in which they all agree
must be the essential thought. Now the parables differ in the
forms of judgment they picture. Therefore these forms are
metaphoric dress. The parables agree in assigning a different fate
to the righteous and the wicked. Therefore this difference is the
vital truth. And Jesus nowhere makes righteousness consist in
anything national, dogmatic, or ceremonial, but everywhere is
something moral.

The doctrine of an unfailing tribunal in the soul, the belief that
we are all judged momentarily at the continuous bar of the truth
reflected in our own conscience, is too deep, delicate, and
elusive a view for the ignorance and hardness of some ages, and of
some persons in every age. They cannot understand that the mind of
man is itself a living table of the law and judgment seat of the
Creator, by its positive and negative polarities, in sympathetic
connection with the standards of good and evil, pronouncing the
verdicts and executing the sentences deserved. They need to
project the scheme of retribution into the startling shape of a
trial in a formal court, and then to universalize it into an
overwhelming world assize. The semi dramatic figment, no doubt,
was an inevitable stage of thought, and has wrought powerfully for
good in certain periods of history. But the pure truth must be as
much better for all who can appreciate it, as it is more real and
more pervasive.

Since God, the indefeasible Creator, is a resistless power of
justice and love in omnipresent relations with his creatures, the
genuine day of judgment to each being must be the entire career of
that being. In a lower degree, every day is a day of judgment;
because all acts, in the spirit from which they spring and the end
at which they aim, carry their own immediate retributions. If we
could survey the whole, at once, from the Divine point of view,
and comprehend the relation of the parts to the whole, undoubtedly
we should perceive that the deserts and the receipts of each
ephemeral existence are balanced between the rise and set of its
sun. But death may, with most solemn emphasis, be regarded as the
final day of judgment to each man, in this sense; that then the
sum of his earthly life and deeds is sealed up and closed from all
further alteration by him, passing into history as a collective
cause or total unit of influence. As long as the creation rolls in
space, and conscious beings live and die, that bequeathal will
tell its good or evil tale of him. What sensitive spirit will not
tremble at the thought of a judgment so unavoidable and so
tremendous as this! The votaries of superstition are mistaken in
supposing that the removal of their false beliefs will destroy or
weaken the sanctions of duty among men. The removal of imaginary
sanctions will but cause the true ones to appear more clearly and
to work more effectively.

The judgment of God then, we conclude, is no vengeful wreaking of
arbitrary royal volitions; but it is the return of the laws of
being on all deeds, actual or ideal. This is, in itself, perpetual
and infallible: but it sometimes forces itself on our recognition
in sudden shocks or crises caused by the gathering obstacles and
opposition made to it by our ignorance, vice, and crime. Every
other doctrine of the Divine judgment is either an error or a
figurative statement of this one. In the latter case, the physical
cover should be dissolved and thrown away, the moral nucleus laid
bare and appropriated. But the popular mind of Christendom has
unfortunately pursued the contrary course, first exaggerating and
consolidating the metaphors, then putting their forms literally in
the place of their meaning.

The awful panorama of the last things, as painted in the
Apocalypse, the sun becoming as sackcloth of hair, and the moon as
blood; the blighted stars dropping; the unveiling of the great
white throne, from before the face of whose occupant the
frightened heaven and earth flee away; the standing up of the
dead, both small and great, the opening of the books, and the
judging of the dead out of the things written therein, this scenic
array has, by its terrible vividness and power of fanciful
plausibility, sunk so deeply into the imagination, and taken such
a tenacious hold on the feelings of the Christian world, secured
for itself so constant a contemplation and encrusted itself with
such a mass of associations, that it has actually come to be
regarded as a veritable revelation of the reality, and to act as
such. And yet, surely, surely, no one who will stop to think on
the subject, with conscious clearness, can believe that books are
provided in heaven with the names of men in them and recording
angels appointed to keep their accounts by double or by single
entry, and that God will literally sit upon a vast white dais
raised on the earth, and go through an overt judicial ceremony. On
what principle is a part of the undivided apocalyptic portrayal
rendered as emblem, the rest accepted as absolute verity? If the
blood red warrior on his white horse followed by the shining
cavalry of heaven, the horrible vials of wrath, the chimerical
angels and beasts, the sky and globe converted into terror struck
fugitives, the bridal city descending from God with its incredible
walls and its impossible gates and its magic tree of life yielding
twelve kinds of fruit, are imagery; then the lake of burning
sulphur, and the resurrection trumpet, and the indictment of the
dead before the dazzling throne, are imagery too. The reader
smiles at the idea that the good Esquimau will sit in Leaven
amidst boiling pots of walrus meat, while in hell the fish lines
of the bad Esquimau will break, and his canoe be crushed by
falling ice. But what better reason can the civilized man give for
the reflecting over upon the judgments of the future his present
experience in the imagery of criminal courts? The same process of
thought is exemplified in both cases. Can any one literally credit
the following verses:

"There are two angels that attend, unseen Each one of us, and in
great books record Our good and evil deeds. He who writes down The
good ones after every action closes His volume and ascends to God.
The other keeps his dreadful day book open Till sunset, that we
may repent, which doing, The record of the action fades away, And
leaves a line of white across the page."

No more should we literally credit the kindred phraseology in the
New Testament. It is free metaphor. The sultan may keep in his
treasury a book with the names of all his favorites enrolled in
it. Is it not a peurility to suppose that God has such documents?

When the Gospels and the Epistles of the New Testament were
written, the reappearance of Christ for the last judgment was
almost universally supposed by the Church to be just at hand. At
any instant of day or night the signal blast might be blown, the
troops of the sky pour down the swarms of the dead surge up, and
the sheep and the goats for ever be parted to the right and left.
Each day when they saw "the sun write its irrevocable verdict in
the flame of the west," the believers felt that the supreme Dies
iroe was so much nearer to its dawn. But as generation after
generation died, without the sight, and the tokens of its approach
seemed no clearer, the belief itself subsided from its early
prominence into the background. But as it retreated, and became
more obscure and vague in its date and other details, it grew ever
more sombre, appalling, and stupendous in its general certainty
and preternatural accompaniments. When the tenth century drew nigh
its close, a literal acceptance of the scriptural text that "the
dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, after
being bound in the bottomless pit for a thousand years," should
"be loosed a little season," filled Christendom with the most
intense agitation and alarm. From all the literature and history
of that period the reverberations of the frightful effects of the
general expectation of the impending judgment and destruction of
the world have rolled down to the present time. The portentous
season passed, all things continuing as they were, and the immense
incubus rose and dissolvingly vanished. And the Mediaval Church,
like the Apostolic Church before, instead of logically saying: Our
expectation of the physical return of Christ was a delusion,
fancifully concluded: We were wrong as to the date; and still
continued to expect him.

The longer the crisis was delayed, and the more it was brooded
over, the more awful the suppositious picture became. The
Mohammedans held that the end would be announced by three blasts:
the blast of consternation, so terrible that mothers will neglect
the babes on their breasts, and the solid world will melt; the
blast of disembodiment, which will annihilate everything but
heaven and hell and their inhabitants; and the blast of
resurrection, which will call up brutes, men, genii, and angels,
in such numbers that their trial will occupy the space of
thousands of years.

But in the later imagination of Christendom the vision assumed a
shape even more fearful than this. The Protestant Reformation,
when one party identified the Pope, the other, Luther, with
Antichrist, gave a new impulse to the common expectation of the
avenging advent of the Lord. The horrible cruelties inflicted on
each other by the hostile divisions of the Church aggravated the
fears and animosities reflected in the sequel at the last day.
Probably nothing was ever seen in this world more execrable or
more dreadful than those great ceremonies celebrated in Spain and
Portugal, in the seventeenth century, at the execution of heretics
condemned to death by the Inquisition. The slow, dismal tolling of
bells; the masked and muffled familiars; the Dominicans carrying
their horrid flag, followed by the penitents behind a huge cross;
the condemned ones, barefoot, clad in painted caps and the
repulsive sanbenito; next the effigies of accused offenders who
had escaped by flight; then, the bones of dead culprits in black
coffins painted with flames and other hellish symbols; and,
finally, the train closing with a host of priests and monks. The
procession tediously winds to the great square in front of the
cathedral, where the accused stand before a crucifix with
extinguished torches in their hands. The king, with all his court
and the whole population of the city, exalt the solemnity by their
presence. The flames are kindled, and the poor victims perish in
long drawn agonies. Now can anything conceivable give one a more
vivid idea of the terrors embodied in the day of judgment than the
fact that it came to be thought of under the terrific image of an
Auto da Fe magnified to the scale of the human race and the earth,
Christ, the Grand Inquisitor, seated as judge; his familiars
standing by ready with their implements of torture to fulfil his
bidding; his fellow monks enthroned around him; his sign, the
crucifix, towering from hell to heaven in sight of the universe;
the whole heretical world, dressed in the sanbenito, helpless
before him, awaiting their doom? Who will not shudder at the
inexorable horrors of such a scheme of doctrine, and devoutly
thank God that he knows it to be a fiction as baseless as it is
cruel?

Since the cooling down of the great Anabaptist fanaticism, the
millennarian fever has raged less and less extensively. But if the
literature it has produced, in ignorant and declamatory books,
sermons, and tracts, were heaped together, they would make a pile
as big as one of the pyramids. The preaching of Miller, about a
quarter of a century ago, with his definite assignment of the time
for the appointed consummation, caused quite a violent panic in
the United States. Several prophets of a similar order in Germany
have also stirred transient commotions. In England, the celebrated
London preacher, Dr. Cumming, whose works entitled "The End," and
"The Great Tribulation," have been circulated in tens of thousands
of copies, is now the most prominent representative of this
catastrophic belief. He has, however, made himself so ridiculous
by his repeated postponements of the crisis, that he has become
more an object of laughter than of admiration. Mathematical
calculations, based on mystic numbers transmitted in apocalyptic
poetry, are at a heavy discount. And yet there is a considerable
sect, called the Second Adventists, composed of the most
illiterate believers, and swelled by clergymen wrought up to the
fanatic pitch by an exclusive dogmatic drill, who lead an
eleemosynary life on mouldy scraps of Scripture, and anxiously
wait for the sound of the archangelic trump. Every earthquake,
pestilence, revolution, violent thunderstorm, comet, meteoric
shower, or extraordinary gleaming of the aurora borealis, startles
them as a possible avant courier of the crack of doom. Some of
them are said to keep their white robes in their closets all ready
for ascension. What a dismal thing it must be to live in such a
lurid and lugubrious dream; their best hope for the world the hope
that its end is at hand,

"Impatient of the stars that keep their course And make no pathway
for the coming Judge!"

But this excited and uneasy anticipation is now a rare exception.
In the minds of most intelligent Christians, even of those who
still cling to the old Orthodox dogmas, the day of judgment has
been put forward as far as the day of creation has been put
backward. Less and less do religious believers shudder before the
theatric trials depicted in heathen and Christian mythology; more
and more do they reverently recognize the intrinsic jurisdiction
in the structure of the soul, and in the organism of society. The
time is not far remote, let us trust, when the ancient spirit of
national separation, political antipathy, and sectarian hatred,
whose subjects identify themselves with the party of God, all
others with the party of the Devil, and cry, "How long, O Lord,
dost thou not judge and avenge us on our enemies," will give way
to that better spirit of philanthropy and true piety, which sees
brethren in all men, and prays to the common Father for the equal
salvation and blessedness of all. Then the faith of the self
righteous, who plume themselves on their sound creed, and so
relentlessly consign the heretics to perdition, gloating over the
idea of the time "when the kings of the earth, and the chief
captains, and the rich men, and the mighty men, and every bondman,
and every freeman, shall hide themselves in dens and caves, saying
to the mountains and the rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand?"  then the temper of this faith will be seen to be
as wicked as its doctrine is erroneous. It will be recognized as a
remnant of the barbaric past in steep contradiction with the whole
mind of the modest and loving Jesus, who, when the disciples
wished to call down fire from heaven to consume his opponents,
rebuked them in words still condemning all their imitators, "Ye
know not what spirit ye are of." Many a bigoted and complacent
dogmatist, wrapt in that same ignorance to day, fails to read his
own heart, and obstinately shuts his eyes to the truth, foolishly
fancying himself better and safer, on account of his blind
conservatism, than he who fearlessly seeks the guidance of
science. Yet are not the principles of science as much glimpses of
the mind of God as any sentences in the Bible are? The whole
ecclesiastical scheme of eschatology is a delusion. No such
gigantic melodrama, no such grotesque and horrible extravaganza,
will ever get itself enacted between heaven and earth. Forever, as
freshly as on the first morning, the Creator pours his will
through his works in irresistible vibrations of goodness and
justice; and forever may all his creatures come to him unimpeded,
and trust in him without limit.

Away, then, monstrous horrors, bred in the night of the past!
Dreadful incubi! too cruelly and too long ye have sat on the
breast of man. The cockcrow of reason has been heard, and it is
time ye were gone. Fade, terrible dream, painted by superstition
on the cope of the sky, picture of contending fiends and angels,
fiery rain, a frowning God, and shuddering millions of victims!
Away forever, and leave the blue space free for the benignant
mysteries of the unknown eternity to lure us blessedly forward to
our fate. Come, believers in the merciful God of truth, lend your
aid to the glorious work of spiritual emancipation. In this benign
battle for the deliverance of the world from error and fear, every
free mind should be a champion, every loving heart a volunteer.
Free leaders of the free, forward! out of the darkness into the
light. Lift your banner in the front of the field of opinions
where all may see it, and then follow it as far as truth itself
shall lead. On! Progress is the eternal rule. Man was made to
outgrow the old and struggle into the new, as every morning the
sun mounts afresh out of the dead day, and drives the night before
him. Ignorance and despotism have crushed us long. But now, now we
fling our fetters off, and, marching from good to better, hope to
escape from every falsehood, and to conquer every wrong, under the
inspiration of the omnipresent Judge who executes his decrees in
the very working itself of that Universal Order whose progressive
unfolding will be fulfilled at last, not in any magic resurrection
and assize, but in the simple lifting of the veil of ignorance
from all souls brought into full community, and the illumination
before their opened faculties of the whole contents of history.
For we believe that all history is by its own enactment
indestructibly registered in the theatre of space, and that every
consciousness is educating to read it and adore the perfect
justification of the ways of God. The eternal immensity of the
universe is the true Aula Regis in which God holds perpetual
session, overlooking no suppliant, omitting no case.

