CHAPTER III.

MODERN DOCTRINE OF A FUTURE LIFE.

THE folly and paganism of some of the Church dogmas, the rapacious
haughtiness of its spirit, the tyranny of its rule, and the
immoral character of many of its practices, had often awakened the
indignant protests and the determined opposition of men of
enlightened minds, vigorous consciences, and generous hearts, both
in its bosom and out of it. Many such men, vainly struggling to
purify the Church from its iniquitous errors or to relieve mankind
from its outrageous burdens, had been silenced and crushed by its
relentless might. Arnold, Wickliffe, Wessel, Savonarola, and a
host of others, are to be gratefully remembered forever as the
heroic though unsuccessful forerunners of the mighty monk of
Wittenberg.1 The corruption of the mediaval Church grew worse, and
became so great as to stir a very extensive disgust and revulsion.
Wholesale pardons for all their sins were granted indiscriminately
to those who accepted the terms of the papal officials; while
every independent thinker, however evangelical his faith and
exemplary his character, was hopelessly doomed to hell. Especially
were these pardons given to pilgrims and to the Crusaders. Bernard
of Clairvaux, exhorting the people to undertake a new Crusade,
tells them that "God condescends to invite into his service
murderers, robbers, adulterers, perjurers, and those sunk in other
crimes; and whosoever falls in this cause shall secure pardon for
the sins which he has never confessed with contrite heart."2 At
the opening of "Piers the Ploughman's Crede" a person is
introduced saying, "I saw a company of pilgrims on their way to
Rome, who came home with leave to lie all the rest of their
lives!" Nash, in his "Lenten Stuff," speaks of a proclamation
which caused "three hundred thousand people to roam to Rome for
purgatorie pills." Ecclesiasticism devoured ethics. Allegiance to
morality was lowered into devotion to a ritual. The sale of
indulgences at length became too impudent and blasphemous to be
any longer endured, when John Tetzel, a Dominican monk, travelled
over Europe, and, setting up his auction block in the churches,
offered for sale those famous indulgences of Leo X. which
promised, to every one rich enough to pay the requisite price,
remission of all sins, however enormous, and whether past,
present, or future!3 This brazen but authorized charlatan boasted
that "he had saved more souls from hell by the sale of indulgences
than St. Peter had converted to Christianity by his preaching." He
also said that "even if any one had ravished the Mother of God he
could sell him a pardon for it!" The soul of Martin Luther took
fire. The consequence to which a hundred combining causes
contributed was the Protestant Reformation. This great movement
produced, in relation to our subject, three important results. It
noticeably modified the practice and the popular preaching of the
Roman Catholic Church.

1 Ullmann, Reformatoren vor der Reformation.

2 Epist. CCCLXIII. ad Orientalis Francia Clerum et Populum.

3 D'Aubigne, Hist. Reformation, book iii.


The dogmas of the Romanist theology remained as they were before.
But a marked change took place in the public conduct of the papal
functionaries. Morality was made more prominent, and mere
ritualism less obtrusive. Comparatively speaking, an emphasis was
taken from ecclesiastic confession and indulgence, and laid upon
ethical obedience and piety. The Council of Trent, held at this
time, says, in its decree concerning indulgences, "In granting
indulgences, the Church desires that moderation be observed, lest,
by excessive facility, ecclesiastical discipline be enervated."
Imposture became more cautious, threats less frequent and less
terrible; the teeth of persecution were somewhat blunted; miracles
grew rarer; the insufferable glare of purgatory and hell faded,
and the open traffic in forgiveness of sins, or the compounding
for deficiencies, diminished. But among the more ignorant papal
multitudes the mediaval superstition holds its place still in all
its virulence and grossness. "Heaven and hell are as much a part
of the Italian's geography as the Adriatic and the Apennines; the
Queen of Heaven looks on the streets as clear as the morning star;
and the souls in purgatory are more readily present to conception
than the political prisoners immured in the dungeons of Venice."

A second consequence of the Reformation is seen in the numerous
dissenting sects to which its issues gave rise. The chief
peculiarities of the Protestant doctrines of the future life are
embodied in the four leading denominations commonly known as
Lutheran, Calvinistic, Unitarian, and Universalist. Each of these
includes a number of subordinate parties bearing distinctive
names, (such as Arminian, Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist,
Restorationist, and many others;) but these minor differences are
too trivial to deserve distinctive characterization here. The
Lutheran formula is that, through the sacrifice of Christ,
salvation is offered to all who will accept it by a sincere faith.
Some will comply with these terms and secure heaven; others will
not, and so will be lost forever. Luther's views were not firmly
defined and consistent throughout his career; they were often
obscure, and they fluctuated much. It is true he always insisted
that there was no salvation without faith, and that all who had
faith should be saved. But, while he generally seems to believe in
the current doctrine of eternal damnation, he sometimes appears to
encourage the hope that all will finally be saved. In a remarkable
letter to Hansen von Rechenberg, dated 1522, he says, in effect,
"Whoso hath faith in Christ shall be saved. God forbid that I
should limit the time for acquiring this faith to the present
life! In the depths of the Divine mercy, there may be opportunity
to win it in the future state."

The Calvinistic formula is that heaven is attainable only for
those whom the arbitrary predestination of God has elected; all
others are irretrievably damned. Calvin was the first Christian
theologian who succeeded in giving the fearful doctrine of
unconditional election and reprobation a lodgment in the popular
breast. The Roman Catholic Church had earnestly repudiated it.
Gotteschalk was condemned and died in prison for advocating it, in
the ninth century. But Calvin's character enabled him to believe
it, and his talents and position gave great weight to his advocacy
of it, and it has since been widely received. Catholicism,
Lutheranism, Calvinism, all agreed in the general proposition that
by sin physical death came into the world, heaven was shut against
man, and all men utterly lost. They differed only in some
unessential details concerning the condition of that lost state.
They also agreed in the general proposition that Christ came, by
his incarnation, death, descent to hell, resurrection, and
ascension, to redeem men from their lost state. They only differed
in regard to the precise grounds and extent of that redemption.
The Catholic said, Christ's atonement wiped off the whole score of
original sin, and thus enabled man to win heaven by moral fidelity
and the help of the Church. The Lutheran said, Christ's atonement
made all the sins of those who have faith, pardonable; and all may
have faith. The Calvinist said, God foresaw that man would fall
and incur damnation, and he decreed that a few should be snatched
as brands from the burning, while the mass should be left to
eternal torture; and Christ's atonement purchased the predestined
salvation of the chosen few. Furthermore, Lutherans and
Calvinists, in all their varieties, agree with the Romanist in
asserting that Christ shall come again, the dead be raised bodily,
a universal judgment be held, and that then the condemned shall
sink into the everlasting fire of hell, and the accepted rise into
the endless bliss of heaven.

The Socinian doctrine relative to the future fate of man differed
from the foregoing in the following particulars. First, it limited
the redeeming mission of Christ to the enlightening influences of
the truths which he proclaimed with Divine authority, the moral
power of his perfect example, and the touching motives exhibited
in his death. Secondly, it asserted a natural ability in every man
to live a life conformed to right reason and sound morality, and
promised heaven to all who did this in obedience to the
instructions and after the pattern of Christ. Thirdly, it declared
that the wicked, after suffering excruciating agonies, would be
annihilated. Respecting the second coming of Christ, a physical
resurrection of the dead, and a day of judgment, the Socinians
believed with the other sects.4 Their doctrine scarcely
corresponds with that of the present Unitarians in any thing. The
dissent of the Unitarian from the popular theology is much more
fundamental, detailed, and consistent than that of the Socinian
was, and approaches much closer to the Rationalism of the present
day.

The Universalist formula every soul created by God shall sooner or
later be saved from sin and woe and inherit everlasting happiness
has been publicly defended in every age of the Christian Church.5
It was first publicly condemned as a heresy at the very close of
the fourth century. It ranks among its defenders the names of
Clement of Alexandria, Origen, Gregory of Nazianzus, Gregory of
Nyssa, and several other prominent Fathers. Universalism has been
held in four forms, on four grounds. First, it has been supposed
that Christ died for all, and that, by the infinite efficacy of
his redeeming merits, all sins shall be cancelled and every soul
be saved. This was the scheme of those early Universalist
Christians whom Epiphanius condemns as heretics; also of a few in
more modern times. Secondly, it has been thought that each person
would be punished in the future state according to the deeds done
in the body, each sin be expiated by a proportionate amount of
suffering, the retribution of some souls being severe and long,
that of others light and brief; but, every penalty being at

4 Flugge gives a full exposition of these points with references
to the authorities. Lehre vom Zustande, u. s. f., abth. ii. ss.
243-260.

5 Dietelmaier, Commenti Fanatici [non-ASCII characters omitted] Hist.
Antiquar.


length exhausted, the last victim would be restored. This was the
notion of Origen, the basis of the doctrine of purgatory, and the
view of most of the Restorationists. Thirdly, it has been imagined
that, by the good pleasure and fixed laws of God, all men are
destined to an impartial, absolute, and instant salvation beyond
the grave: all sins are justly punished, all moral distinctions
equitably compensated, in this life; in the future an equal glory
awaits all men, by the gracious and eternal election of God, as
revealed to us in the benignant mission of Christ. This is the
peculiar conception distinguishing some members of the
denomination now known as Universalists. Finally, it has been
believed that the freedom and probation granted here extend into
the life to come; that the aim of all future punishment will be
remedial, beneficent, not revengeful; that stronger motives will
be applied for producing repentance, and grander attractions to
holiness be felt; and that thus, at some time or other, even the
most sunken and hardened souls will be regenerated and raised up
to heaven in the image of God. Almost all Universalists, most
Unitarians, and large number of individual Christians outwardly
affiliated with other denominations, now accept and cherish this
theory.

One important variation from the doctrine of the dominant sects,
in connection with the present subject, is worthy of special
notice. We refer to the celebrated controversy waged in England,
in the first part of the eighteenth century, in regard to the
intermediate state of the dead. The famous Dr. Coward and a few
supporters labored, with much zeal, skill, and show of learning,
to prove the natural mortality of the soul. They asserted this to
be both a philosophical truth proved by scientific facts and a
Christian doctrine declared in Scripture and taught by the
Fathers. They argued that the soul is not an independent entity,
but is merely the life of the body. Proceeding thus far on the
principles of a materialistic science, they professed to complete
their theory from Scripture, without doing violence to any
doctrine of the acknowledged religion.6 The finished scheme was
this. Man was naturally mortal; but, by the pleasure and will of
God, he would have been immortally preserved alive had he not
sinned. Death is the consequence of sin, and man utterly perishes
in the grave. But God will restore the dead, through Christ, at
the day of the general resurrection which he has foretold in the
gospel.7 Some of the writers in this copious controversy
maintained that previous to the advent of Christ death was eternal
annihilation to all except a few who enjoyed an inspired
anticipatory faith in him, but that all who died after his coming
would be restored in the resurrection, the faithful to be advanced
to heaven, the wicked to be the victims of unending torture.8
Clarke and Baxter both wrote with extreme ability in support of
the natural immortality and separate existence of the soul. On the
other hand, the learned Henry Dodwell cited, from the lore of
three thousand years, a plausible body of authorities to show that
the soul is in itself but a mortal breath. He also contended, by a
singular perversion of figurative phrases from the New Testament
and from some of the Fathers, that,

6 Coward, Search after Souls.

7 Hallet, No Resurrection, no Future State.

8 Coward, Defence of the Search after Souls. Dodwell, Epistolary
Discourse. Peckard, Observations. Fleming, Survey of the Search
after Souls. Law, State of Separate Spirits. Layton, Treatise of
Departed Souls.


in counteraction of man's natural mortality, all who undergo
baptism at the hands of the ordained ministers of the Church of
England the only true priesthood in apostolic succession thereby
receive an immortalizing spirit brought into the world by Christ
and committed to his successors. This immortalizing spirit
conveyed by baptism would secure their resurrection at the last
day. Those destitute of this spirit would never awake from the
oblivious sleep of death, unless as he maintained will actually be
the case with a large part of the dead they are arbitrarily
immortalized by the pleasure of God, in order to suffer eternal
misery in hell! Absurd and shocking as this fancy was, it obtained
quite a number of converts, and made no slight impression at the
time. One of the writers in this controversy asserted that Luther
himself had been a believer in the death or sleep of the soul
until the day of judgment.9 Certain it is that such a belief had
at one period a considerable prevalence. Its advocates were called
Psychopannychians. Calvin wrote a vehement assault on them. The
opinion has sunk into general disrepute and neglect, and it would
be hard to find many avowed disciples of it. The nearly universal
sentiment of Christendom would now exclaim, in the quaint words of
Henry More,

"What! has old Adam snorted all this time Under some senselesse
clod, with sleep ydead?" 10

John Asgill printed, in the year 1700, a tract called "An argument
to prove that by the new covenant man may be translated into
eternal life without tasting death." He argues that the law of
death was a consequence of Adam's sin and was annulled by Christ's
sacrifice. Since that time men have died only because of an
obstinate habit of dying formed for many generations. For his
part, he has the independence and resolution to withstand the
universal pusillanimity and to refuse to die. He has discovered
"an engine in Divinity to convey man from earth to heaven." He
will "play a trump on death and show himself a match for the
devil!"

While treating of the various Protestant views of the future life,
it would be a glaring defect to overlook the remarkable doctrine
on that subject published by Emanuel Swedenborg and now held by
the intelligent, growing body of believers called after his name.
It would be impossible to exhibit this system adequately in its
scientific bases and its complicated details without occupying
more space than can be afforded here. Nor is this necessary, now
that his own works have been translated and are easily accessible
everywhere. His "Heaven and Hell," "Heavenly Arcana," "Doctrine of
Influx," and "True Christian

9 Blackburne, View of the Controversy Concerning an Intermediate
State: appendix. It is probable that the great Reformer's opinion
on this point was not always the same. For he says, distinctly,
"The first man who died, when he awakes at the last day, will
think he has been asleep but an hour" Beste, Dr. M. Luther's
Glaubenslehre, cap. iv.: Die Lehre von den Letzen Dingen. Yet. J.
S. Muller seems conclusively to prove the truth of the proposition
which forms the title of his book, "Dass Luther die Lehre vom
Seelenschlafe nie geglaubt habe."

10 The controversy concerning the natural immortality of the soul
has within a few years raged afresh. The principal combatants were
Dobney, Storrs, White, Morris, and Hinton. See Athanasia, by J. H.
Hinton, London, 1849.


Religion," contain manifold statements and abundant illustrations
of every thing important bearing on his views of the theme before
us. We shall merely attempt to present a brief synopsis of the
essential principles, accompanied by two or three suggestions of
criticism.

Swedenborg conceives man to be an organized receptacle of truth
and love from God. He is an imperishable spiritual body placed for
a season of probation in a perishable material body. Every moment
receiving the essence of his being afresh from God, and returning
it through the fruition of its uses devoutly rendered in conscious
obedience and joyous worship, he is at once a subject of personal,
and a medium of the Divine, happiness. The will is the power of
man's life, and the understanding is its form. When the will is
disinterested love and the understanding is celestial truth, then
man fulfils the end of his being, and his home is heaven; he is a
spirit frame into which the goodness of God perpetually flows, is
humbly acknowledged, gratefully enjoyed, and piously returned. But
when his will is hatred or selfishness and his understanding is
falsehood or evil, then his powers are abused, his destiny
inverted, and his fate hell. While in the body in this world he is
placed in freedom, on probation, between these two alternatives.

The Swedenborgian universe is divided into four orders of abodes.
In the highest or celestial world are the heavens of the angels.
In the lowest or infernal world are the hells of the demons. In
the intermediate or spiritual world are the earths inhabited by
men, and surrounded by the transition state through which souls,
escaping from their bodies, after a while soar to heaven or sink
to hell, according to their fitness and attraction. In this life
man is free, because he is an energy in equilibrium between the
influences of heaven and hell. The middle state surrounding man is
full of spirits, some good and some bad. Every man is accompanied
by swarms of both sorts of spirits, striving to make him like
themselves. Now, there are two kinds of influx into man. Mediate
influx is when the spirits in the middle state flow into man's
thoughts and affections. The good spirits are in communication
with heaven, and they carry what is good and true; the evil
spirits are in communication with hell, and they carry what is
evil and false. Between these opposed and reacting agencies man is
in an equilibrium whose essence is freedom. Deciding for himself,
if he turns with embracing welcome to the good spirits, he is
thereby placed and lives in conjunction with heaven; but if he
turns, on the contrary, with predominant love to the bad spirits,
he is placed in conjunction with hell and draws his life thence.
From heaven, therefore, through the good spirits, all the elements
of saving goodness flow sweetly down and are appropriated by the
freedom of the good man; while from hell, through the bad spirits,
all the elements of damning evil flow foully up and are
appropriated by the freedom of the bad man.

The other kind of influx is called immediate. This is when the
Lord himself, the pure substance of truth and good, flows into
every organ and faculty of man. This influx is perpetual, but is
received as truth and good only by the true and good. It is
rejected, suffocated, or perverted by those who are in love with
falsities and evils. So the light of the sun produces colors
varying with the substances it falls on, and water takes forms
corresponding to the vessels it is poured into.

The whole invisible world heaven, hell, and the middle state is
peopled solely from the different families of the human race
occupying the numerous material globes of the universe. The good,
on leaving the fleshly body, are angels, the bad, demons. There is
no angel nor demon who was created such at first. Satan is not a
personality, but is a figurative term standing for the whole
complex of hell. In the invisible world, time and space in one
sense cease to be; in another sense they remain unchanged. They
virtually cease because all our present measures of them are
annihilated;11 they virtually remain because exact correspondences
to them are left. To spirits, time is no longer measured by the
revolution of planets, but by the succession of inward states;
space is measured not by way marks and the traversing of
distances, but by inward similitudes and dissimilitudes. Those who
are unlike are sundered by gulfs of difference. Those who are
alike are together in their interiors. Thought and love,
forgetfulness and hate, are not hampered by temporal and spatial
boundaries. Spiritual forces and beings spurn material
impediments, and are united or separate, reciprocally visible or
invisible, mutually conscious or unconscious, according to their
own laws of kindred or alien adaptedness.

The soul the true man is its own organized and deathless body, and
when it leaves its earthly house of flesh it knows the only
resurrection, and the cast off frame returns to the dust forever.
Swedenborg repeatedly affirms with emphasis that no one is born
for hell, but that all are born for heaven, and that when any one
comes into hell it is from his own free fault. He asserts that
every infant, wheresoever born, whether within the Church or out
of it, whether of pious parents or of impious, when he dies is
received by the Lord, and educated in heaven, and becomes an
angel. A central principle of which he never loses sight is that
"a life of charity, which consists in acting sincerely and justly
in every function, in every engagement, and in every work, from a
heavenly motive, according to the Divine laws, is possible to
every one, and infallibly leads to heaven." It does not matter
whether the person leading such a life be a Christian or a
Gentile. The only essential is that his ruling motive be divine
and his life be in truth and good.

The Swedenborgian doctrine concerning Christ and his mission is
that he was the infinite God incarnate, not incarnate for the
purpose of expiating human sin and purchasing a ransom for the
lost by vicarious sufferings, but for the sake of suppressing the
rampant power of the hells, weakening the influx of the infernal
spirits, setting an example to men, and revealing many important
truths. The advantage of the Christian over the pagan is that the
former is enlightened by the celestial knowledge contained in the
Bible, and animated by the affecting motives presented in the
drama of the Divine incarnation. There is no probation after this
life. Just as one is on leaving the earth he goes into the
spiritual world. There his

11 Philo the Jew says, (vol. i. p. 277, ed. Mangey,) "God is the
Father of the world: the world is the father of time, begetting it
by its own motion: time, therefore, holds the place of grandchild
to God." But the world is only one measure of time; another, and a
more important one, is the inward succession of the spirit's
states of consciousness. Between Philo and Swedenborg, it may be
remarked here, there are many remarkable correspondences both of
thought and language. For example, Philo says, (vol. i. p. 494,)
"Man is a small kosmos, the kosmos is a grand man."


ruling affection determines his destiny, and that affection can
never be extirpated or changed to all eternity. After death, evil
life cannot in any manner or degree be altered to good life, nor
infernal love be transmuted to angelic love, inasmuch as every
spirit from head to foot is in quality such as his love is, and
thence such as his life is, so that to transmute this life into
the opposite is altogether to destroy the spirit. It were easier,
says Swedenborg, to change a night bird into a dove, an owl into a
bird of paradise, than to change a subject of hell into a subject
of heaven after the line of death has been crossed. But why the
crossing of that line should make such an infinite difference he
does not explain; nor does he prove it as a fact.

The moral reason and charitable heart of Swedenborg vehemently
revolted from the Calvinistic doctrines of predestination and
vicarious atonement, and the group of thoughts that cluster around
them. He always protests against these dogmas, refutes them with
varied power and consistency; and the leading principles of his
own system are creditable to human nature, and attribute no
unworthiness to the character of God. A debt of eternal gratitude
is due to Swedenborg that his influence, certainly destined to be
powerful and lasting, is so clearly calculated to advance the
interests at once of philosophic intelligence, social affection,
and true piety. The superiorities of his view of the future life
over those which it seeks to supplant are weighty and numerous.
The following may be reckoned among the most prominent.

First, without predicating of God any aggravated severity or
casting the faintest shadow on his benevolence, it gives us the
most appalling realization of the horribleness of sin and of its
consequences. God is commonly represented in effect, at least as
flaming with anger against sinners, and forcibly flinging them
into the unappeasable fury of Tophet, where his infinite vengeance
may forever satiate itself on them. But, Swedenborg says, God is
incapable of hatred or wrath: he casts no one into hell; but the
wicked go where they belong by their own election, from the
inherent fitness and preference of their ruling love. The evil man
desires to be in hell because there he finds his food, employment,
and home; in heaven he would suffer unutterable agonies from every
circumstance. The wicked go into hell by the necessary and
benignant love of God, not by his indignation; and their
retributions are in their own characters, not in their prison
house. This does not flout and trample all magnanimity, nor shock
the heart of piety; and yet, showing us men compelled to prefer
wallowing in the filth and iniquities of hell, clinging to the
very evils whose pangs transfix them, it gives us the direst of
all the impressions of sin, and beneath the lowest deep of the
popular hell opens to our shuddering conceptions a deep of
loathsomeness immeasurably lower still.

Secondly, the Swedenborgian doctrine of the conditions of
salvation or reprobation, when compared with the popular doctrine,
is marked by striking depth of insight, justice, and liberality.
Every man is free. Every man has power to receive the influx of
truth and good from the Lord and convert it to its blessed and
saving uses, piety towards God, good will towards the neighbor,
and all kinds of right works. Who does this, no matter in what
land or age he lives, becomes an heir of heaven. Who perverts
those Divine gifts to selfishness and unrighteous deeds becomes a
subject of hell. No mere opinion, no mere profession, no mere
ritual services, no mere external obedience, not all these things
together, can save a man, nor their absence condemn him; but the
controlling motive of his life, the central and ruling love which
constitutes the substance of his being, this decides every man's
doom. The view is simple, reasonable, just, necessary. And so is
the doctrine of degrees accompanying it; namely, that there are in
heaven different grades and qualities of exaltation and delight,
and in hell of degradation and woe, for different men according to
their capacities and deserts. A profoundly ethical character
pervades the scheme, and the great stamp of law is over it all.

Thirdly, a manifest advantage of Swedenborg's doctrine over the
popular doctrine is the intimate connection it establishes between
the present and the future, the visible and the invisible, God and
man. Heaven and hell are not distant localities, entrance into
which is to be won or avoided by moral artifices or sacramental
subterfuges, but they are states of being depending on personal
goodness or evil. God is not throned at the heart or on the apex
of the universe, where at some remote epoch we hope to go and see
him, but he is the Life feeding our lives freshly every instant.
The spiritual world, with all its hosts, sustains and arches,
fills and envelops us. Death is the dropping of the outer body,
the lifting of an opaque veil, and we are among the spirits,
unchanged, as we were before. Judgment is not a tribunal dawning
on the close of the world's weary centuries, but the momentary
assimilation of a celestial or an infernal love leading to states
and acts, rewards and retributions, corresponding. Before this
view the dead universe becomes a live transparency overwritten
with the will, tremulous with the breath, and irradiate with the
illumination of God.

We cannot but regret that the Swedenborgian view of the future
life should be burdened and darkened with the terrible error of
the dogma of eternal damnation, spreading over the state of all
the subjects of the hells the pall of immitigable hopelessness,
denying that they can ever make the slightest ameliorating
progress. We have never been able to see force enough in any of
the arguments or assertions advanced in support of this tremendous
horror to warrant the least hesitation in rejecting it. For
ourselves, we must regard it as incredible, and think that God
cannot permit it. Instruction, reformation, progress, are the
final aims of punishment. Aspiration is the concomitant of
consciousness, and the authentic voice of God. Surely, sooner or
later, in the boonful eternities of being, every creature capable
of intelligence, allied to the moral law, drawing life from the
Infinite, must begin to travel the ascending path of virtue and
blessedness, and never retrograde again.

Neither can we admit in general the claim made by Swedenborg and
by his disciples that the way in which he arrived at his system of
theology elevates it to the rank of a Divine revelation. It is
asserted that God opened his interior vision, so that he saw what
had hitherto been concealed from the eyes of men in the flesh,
namely, the inhabitants, laws, contents, and experiences of the
spiritual world, and thus that his statements are not speculations
or arguments, but records of unerring knowledge, his descriptions
not fanciful pictures of the imagination, but literal transcripts
of the truth he saw. This, in view of the great range of known
experience, is not intrinsically probable, and we have seen no
proof of it. Judging from what we know of psychological and
religious history, it is far more likely that a man should
confound his intangible reveries with solid fact than that he
should be inspired by God to reveal a world of mysterious truths.
Furthermore, while we are impressed with the reasonableness,
probability, and consistency of most of the general principles of
Swedenborg's exposition of the future life, we cannot but shrink
from many of the details and forms in which he carries them out.
Notwithstanding the earnest avowals of able disciples of his
school that all his details are strictly necessitated by his
premises, and that all his premises are laws of truth, we are
compelled to regard a great many of his assertions as purely
arbitrary and a great many of his descriptions as purely fanciful.
But, denying that his scheme of eschatology is a scientific
representation of the reality, and looking at it as a poetic
structure reared by co working knowledge and imagination on the
ground of reason, nature, and morality,  whose foundation walls,
columns, and grand outlines are truth, while many of its details,
ornaments, and images are fancy, it must be acknowledged to be one
of the most wonderful examples of creative power extant in the
literature of the world. No one who has mastered it with
appreciative mind will question this. There are, expressed and
latent, in the totality of Swedenborg's accounts of hell and
heaven, more variety of imagery, power of moral truth and appeal,
exhibition of dramatic justice, transcendent delights of holiness
and love, curdling terrors of evil and woe, strength of
philosophical grasp, and sublimity of emblematic conception, than
are to be found in Dante's earth renowned poem. We say this of the
substance of his ideas, not of the shape and clothing in which
they are represented. Swedenborg was no poet in language and form,
only in conception.

Take this picture. In the topmost height of the celestial world
the Lord appears as a sun, and all the infinite multitudes of
angels, swarming up through the innumerable heavens, wherever they
are, continually turn their faces towards him in love and joy. But
at the bottom of the infernal world is a vast ball of blackness,
towards which all the hosts of demons, crowding down through the
successive hells, forever turn their eager faces away from God. Or
consider this. Every thing consists of a great number of perfect
leasts like itself: every heart is an aggregation of little
hearts, every lung an aggregation of little lungs, every eye an
aggregation of little eyes. Following out the principle, every
society in the spiritual world is a group of spirits arranged in
the form of a man, every heaven is a gigantic man composed of an
immense number of individuals, and all the heavens together
constitute one Grand Man, a countless number of the most
intelligent angels forming the head, a stupendous organization of
the most affectionate making the heart, the most humble going to
the feet, the most useful attracted to the hands, and so on
through every part.

With exceptions, then, we regard Swedenborg's doctrine of the
future life as a free poetic presentment, not as a severe
scientific statement, of views true in moral principle, not of
facts real in literal detail. His imagination and sentiment are
mathematical and ethical instead of asthetic and passionate. Milk
seems to run in his veins instead of blood, but he is of
truthfulness and charity all compact. We think it most probable
that the secret of his supposed inspiration was the abnormal
frequent or chronic turning of his mind into what is called the
ecstatic or clairvoyant state. This condition being spontaneously
induced, while he yet, in some unexplained manner, retained
conscious possession and control of his usual faculties, he
treated his subjective conceptions as objective realities,
believed his interior contemplations were accurate visions of
facts, and took the strange procession of systematic reveries
through his teeming brain for a scenic revelation of the
exhaustive mysteries of heaven and hell. "Each wondrous guess
beheld the truth it sought, And inspiration flash'd from what was
thought."

This hypothesis, taken in conjunction with the comprehensiveness
of his mind, the vastness of his learning, the integral
correctness of his conscience, and his disciplined habits of
thought, will go far towards explaining the unparalleled
phenomenon of his theological works; and, though it leaves many
things unaccounted for, it seems to us more credible than any
other which has yet been suggested.

The last of the three prominent phenomena which as before said
followed the Protestant Reformation was rationalism, an attempt to
try all religious questions at the tribunal of reason and by the
tests of conscience. The great movement led by Luther was but one
element in a numerous train of influences and events all yielding
their different contributions to that resolute rationalistic
tendency which afterwards broke out so powerfully in England,
France, and Germany, and, spreading thence into every country in
Christendom, has been, in secret and in public, with slow, sure
steps, irresistibly advancing ever since. In the history of
scholasticism there were three distinct epochs. The first period
was characterized by the servile submission and conformity of
philosophy to the theology dictated by the Church. The second
period was marked by the formal alliance and attempted
reconciliation of philosophy and theology. The third period saw an
ever increasing jealousy and separation between the philosophers
and the theologians.12 Many an adventurous thinker pushed his
speculations beyond the limits of the established theology, and
deliberately dissented from the orthodox standards in his
conclusions. Perhaps Abelard, who openly strove to put all the
Church dogmas in forms acceptable to philosophy, and who did not
hesitate to reject in many instances what seemed to him
unreasonable, deserves to be called the father of rationalism. The
works of Des Cartes, Leibnitz, Wolf, Kant's "Religion within the
Bounds of Pure Reason," together with the influence and the
writings of many other eminent philosophers, gradually gave
momentum to the impulse and popularity to the habits of free
thought and criticism even in the realm of theology. The dogmatic
scheme of the dominant Church was firmly seized, many errors
shaken out to the light and exposed, and many long received
opinions questioned and flung into doubt.13 The authenticity of
many of the popular doctrines regarding the future life could not
fail to be denied as soon as it was attempted as was extensively
done about the middle of the eighteenth century to demonstrate
them by mathematical methods, with all the array of axioms,
theorems, lemmas, doubts, and solutions. Flugge has historically
illustrated the employment of this method at considerable
length.14

12 Cousin, Hist. Mod. Phil., lect. ix.

13 Staudlin, Geschichte des Rationalismus. Saintes, Histoire
Critique du Rationalisme en Allemagne, Eng. trans. by Dr. Beard.

14 Geschichte des Glaubens an Unsterblichkeit, u. s. f., th. iii.
abth. ii. ss. 281-289.


The essence of rationalism is the affirmation that neither the
Fathers, nor the Church, nor the Scriptures, nor all of them
together, can rightfully establish any proposition opposed to the
logic of sound philosophy, the principles of reason, and the
evident truth of nature. Around this thesis the battle has been
fought and the victory won; and it will stand with spreading favor
as long as there are unenslaved and cultivated minds in the world.
This position is, in logical necessity, and as a general thing in
fact, that of the large though loosely cohering body of believers
known as "Liberal Christians;" and it is tacitly held by still
larger and ever growing numbers nominally connected with sects
that officially eschew it with horror. The result of the studies
and discussions associated with this principle, so far as it
relates to the subject before us, has been the rejection of the
following popular doctrines:  the plenary inspiration of the
Scriptures as an ultimate authority in matters of belief;
unconditional predestination; the satisfaction theory of the
vicarious atonement; the visible second coming of Christ, in
person, to burn up the world and to hold a general judgment; the
intermediate state of souls; the resurrection of the body; a local
hell of material fire in the bowels of the earth; the eternal
damnation of the wicked. These old dogmas,15 scarcely changed,
still remain in the stereotyped creeds of all the prominent
denominations; but they slumber there to an astonishing extent
unrealized, unnoticed, unthought of, by the great multitude of
common believers, while every consciously rational investigator
vehemently repudiates them. To every candid mind that has really
studied their nature and proofs their absurdity is now transparent
on all the grounds alike of history, metaphysics, morals, and
science.

The changes of the popular Christian belief in regard to three
salient points have been especially striking. First, respecting
the immediate fate of the dead, an intermediate state. The
predominant Jewish doctrine was that all souls went indiscriminately
into a sombre under world, where they awaited a resurrection.

The earliest Christian view prevalent was the same, with the
exception that it divided that place of departed spirits
into two parts, a painful for the bad, a pleasant for the good.
The next opinion that prevailed the Roman Catholic was the same as
the foregoing, with two exceptions: it established a purgatory in
addition to the previous paradise and hell, and it opened heaven
itself for the immediate entrance of a few spotless souls. Pope
John XXII., as Gieseler shows, was accused of heresy by the
theological doctors of Paris because he declared that no soul
could enter heaven and enjoy the beatific vision until after the
resurrection. Pope Benedict XII. drew up a list of one hundred and
seventeen heretical opinions held by the Armenian Christians. One
of these notions was that the souls of all deceased adults wander
in the air until the Day of Judgment, neither hell, paradise, nor
heaven being open to them until after that day. Thomas Aquinas
says, "Each soul at death immediately flies to its appointed
place, whether in hell or in heaven, being without the body until
the resurrection, with it afterwards."16 Then came the

15 They are defended in all their literal grossness in the two
following works, both recent publications. The World to Come; by
the Rev. James Cochrane. Der Tod, das Todtenreich, und der Zustand
der abgeschiedenen Seelen; von P. A. Maywahlen.

16 Summa iii. in Suppl. 69. 2.

dogma of the orthodox Protestants, slightly varying in the
different sects, but generally agreeing that at death all redeemed
souls pass instantly to heaven and all unredeemed souls to hell.17
The principal variation from this among believers within the
Protestant fellowship has been the notion that the souls of all
men die or sleep with the body until the Day of Judgment, a notion
which peeps out here and there in superstitious spots along the
pages of ecclesiastical history, and which has found now and then
an advocate during the last century and a half. The Council of
Elvin, in Spain, forbade the lighting of tapers in churchyards,
lest it should disturb the souls of the deceased buried there. At
this day, in prayers and addresses at funerals, no phrases are
more common than those alluding to death as a sleep, and implying
that the departed one is to slumber peacefully in his grave until
the resurrection. And yet, at the same time, by the same persons
contrary ideas are frequently expressed. The truth is, the
subject, owing to the contradictions between their creed and their
reason, is left by most persons in hopeless confusion and
uncertainty. They have no determinately reconciled and conscious
views of their own. Rationalism sweeps away all the foregoing
incongruous medley at once, denying that we know any thing about
the precise localities of heaven and hell, or the destined order
of events in the hidden future of separate souls; affirming that
all we should dare to say is simply that the souls whether of good
or of bad men, on leaving the body, go at once into a spiritual
state of being, where they will live immortally, as God decrees,
never returning to be reinvested with the vanished charnel houses
of clay they once inhabited.

Secondly, the thought that Christ after his death descended into
the under world to ransom mankind, or a part of mankind, from the
doom there, is in the foundation of the apostolic theology. It was
a central element in the belief of the Fathers, and of the Church
for fourteen hundred years. None of the prominent Protestant
reformers thought of denying it. Calvin lays great stress on it.18
Apinus and others, at Hamburg, maintained that Christ's descent
was a part of his humiliation, and that in it he suffered
unutterable pains for us. On the other hand, Melancthon and the
Wittenbergers held that the descent was a part of Christ's
triumph, since by it he won a glorious victory over the powers of
hell.19 But gradually the importance and the redeeming effects
attached to Christ's descent into hell were transferred to his
death on the cross. Slowly the primitive dogma dwindled away, and
finally sunk out of sight, through an ever encroaching disbelief
in the physical conditions on which it rested and in the pictorial
environments by which it was recommended. And now it is scarcely
ever heard of, save when brought out from old scholastic tomes by
some theological delver. Baumgarten Crusius has learnedly
illustrated the important place long held by this notion, and well
shown its gradual retreat into the unnoticed background.20

17 Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland, ch. xxxii.
Calvin, Institutes, lib. iii. cap. xxv.; and his Psychopannychia.
Quenstedt also affirms it. Likewise the Confession of Faith of the
Westminster Divines, art. xxxii., says, "Souls neither die nor
sleep, but go immediately to heaven or hell."

18 Institutes, lib. ii. cap. 16, sects. 16, 19.

19 Ledderhose, Life of Melancthon, Eng. trans. by Krotel, ch. xxx.

20 Compendium der Christliche Dogmengeschichte, thl. ii. sects.
100-109.


The other particular doctrine which we said had undergone
remarkable change is in regard to the number of the saved. A
blessed improvement has come over the popular Christian feeling
and teaching in respect to this momentous subject. The Jews
excluded from salvation all but their own strict ritualists. The
apostles, it is true, excluded none but the stubbornly wicked. But
the majority of the Fathers virtually allowed the possibility of
salvation to few indeed. Chrysostom doubted if out of the hundred
thousand souls constituting the Christian population of Antioch in
his day one hundred would be saved! 21 And when we read, with
shuddering soul, the calculations of Cornelius a Lapide, or the
celebrated sermon of Massillon on the "Small Number of the Saved,"
we are compelled to confess that they fairly represent the almost
universal sentiment and conviction of Christendom for more than
seventeen hundred years. A quarto volume published in London in
1680, by Du Moulin, called "Moral Reflections upon the Number of
the Elect," affirmed that not one in a million, from Adam down to
our times, shall be saved. A flaming execration blasted the whole
heathen world, 22 and a metaphysical quibble doomed ninety nine of
every hundred in Christian lands. Collect the whole relevant
theological literature of the Christian ages, from the birth of
Tertullian to the death of Jonathan Edwards, strike the average
pitch of its doctrinal temper, and you will get this result: that
in the field of human souls Satan is the harvester, God the
gleaner; hell receives the whole vintage in its wine press of
damnation, heaven obtains only a few straggling clusters plucked
for salvation. The crowded wains roll staggering into the iron
doorways of Satan's fire and brimstone barns; the redeemed
vestiges of the world crop of men are easily borne to heaven in
the arms of a few weeping angels. How different is the prevailing
tone of preaching and belief now! What a cheerful ascent of views
from the mournful passage of the dead over the river of oblivion
fancied by the Greeks, or the excruciating passage of the river of
fire painted by the Catholics, to the happy passage of the river
of balm, healing every weary bruise and sorrow, promised by the
Universalists! It is true, the old harsh exclusiveness is still
organically imbedded in the established creeds, all of which deny
the possibility of salvation beyond the little circle who vitally
appropriate the vicarious atonement of Christ; but then this is,
for the most part, a dead letter in the creeds. In the hearts and
in the candid confessions of all but one in a thousand it is
discredited and sincerely repelled as an abomination to human
nature, a reflection against God, an outrage upon the substance of
ethics. Remorseless bigots may gloat and exult over the thought
that those who reject their dogmas shall be thrust into the
roaring fire gorges of hell; but a better spirit is the spirit of
the age we live in; and, doubtless, a vast majority of the men we
daily meet really believe that all who try to the best of their
ability, according to their light and circumstances, to do what is
right, in the love of God and man, shall be saved. In that moving
scene of the great dramatist where the burial of the innocent and
hapless Ophelia is represented, and Lacrtes vainly seeks to win
from the Church official

21 In Acta Apostolorum, homil. xxiv.

22 Gotze, Ueber die Neue Meinung von der Seligkeit der angeblich
guten und redlichen Seelen unter Juden, Heiden, und Turken durch
Christum, ohne dass sie an ihn glauben.


the full funeral rites of religion over her grave, the priest may
stand for the false and cruel ritual spirit, the brother for the
just and native sentiment of the human heart. Says the priest,
"We should profane the service of the dead To sing a requiem and
such rest to her As to peace parted souls." And Laertes replies,
"Lay her in the earth; And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
Shall violets spring. I tell thee, churlish priest, A ministering
angel shall my sister be When thou liest howling."

Indeed, who that has a heart in his bosom would not be ashamed not
to sympathize with the gentle hearted Burns when he expresses even
to the devil himself the quaint and kindly wish, "Oh wad ye tak' a
thought and mend!"

The creeds and the priests, in congenial alliance with many evil
things, may strive to counteract this progressive self
emancipation from cruel falsehoods and superstitions, but in vain.
The terms of salvation are seen lying in the righteous will of a
gracious God, not in the heartless caprice of a priesthood nor in
the iron gripe of a set of dogmas. The old priestly monopoly over
the way to heaven has been taken off in the knowledge of the
enlightened present, and, for all who have unfettered feet to walk
with, the passage to God is now across a free bridge. The ancient
exactors may still sit in their toll house creeds and confessionals;
but their authority is gone, and the virtuous traveller, stepping
from the ground of time upon the planks that lead over into eternity,
smiles as he passes scot free by their former taxing terrors.

The reign of sacramentalists and dogmatists rapidly declines.
Reason, common sentiment, the liberal air, the best and
strongest tendencies of the people, are against them to
day, and will be more against them in every coming day. Every
successive explosion of the Second Adventist fanaticism will leave
less of that element behind. Its rage in America, under the
auspices of Miller, in the nineteenth century, was tame and feeble
when compared with the terror awakened in Europe in the fifteenth
century by Stofler's prediction of an approaching comet.23 Every
new discovery of the harmonies of science, and of the perfections
of nature, and of the developments of the linear logic of God
consistently unfolding in implicated sequences of peaceful order
unperturbed by shocks of failure and epochs of remedy, will
increase and popularize an intelligent faith in the original
ordination and the intended permanence of the present constitution
of things. Finally men will cease to be looking up to see the blue
dome cleave open for the descent of angelic squadrons headed by
the majestic Son of God, the angry breath of his mouth consuming
the world, cease to

23 Bayle, Historical Dictionary, art. Stofler, note B.


expect salvation by any other method than that of earnest and
devout truthfulness, love, good works, and pious submissiveness to
God, cease to fancy that their souls, after waiting through the
long sleep or separation of death, will return and take on their
old bodies again. Recognizing the Divine plan for training souls
in this lower and transient state for a higher and immortal state,
they will endeavor, in natural piety and mutual love, while they
live, to exhaust the genuine uses of the world that now is, and
thus prepare themselves to enter with happiest auspices, when they
die, the world prepared for them beyond these mortal shores.

These cheerful prophecies must be verified in the natural course
of things. The rapid spread of the doctrine of a future life
taught by the "Spirit rappers" is a remarkable revelation of the
great extent to which the minds of the common people have at last
become free from the long domination of the ecclesiastical dogmas
on that subject. The leading representatives of the "Spiritualists"
affirm, with much unanimity, the most comforting conclusions
as to the condition of the departed. They exclude all wrath
and favoritism from the disposition of the Deity. They have
little in fact, they often have nothing whatever to say of hell.
They emphatically repudiate the ordinarily taught terms of
salvation, and deny the doctrine of hopeless reprobation. All
death is beautiful and progressive. "Every form and thing is
constantly growing lovelier and every sphere purer." The abode of
each soul in the future state is determined, not by decrees or
dogmas or forms of any kind, but by qualities of character,
degrees of love, purity, and wisdom. There are seven ascending
spheres, each more abounding than the one below it in beauties,
glories, and happiness. "The first sphere is the natural; the
second, the spiritual; the third, the celestial; the fourth, the
supernatural; the fifth, the superspiritual; the sixth, the
supercelestial; the seventh, the Infinite Vortex of Love and
Wisdom."24 Whatever be thought of the pretensions of this doctrine
to be a Divine revelation, whatever be thought of its various
psychological, cosmological, and theological characteristics, its
ethics are those of natural reason. It is wholly irreconcilable
with the popular ecclesiastical system of doctrines. Its epidemic
diffusion until now burdened as it is with such nauseating
accompaniments of crudity and absurdity, it reckons its adherents
by millions is a tremendous evidence of the looseness with which
the old, cruel dogmas sit on the minds of the masses of the
people, and of their eager readiness to welcome more humane views.

In science the erroneous doctrines of the Middle Age are now
generally discarded. The mention of them but provokes a smile or
awakens surprise. Yet, as compared with the historic annals of our
race, it is but recently that the true order of the solar system
has been unveiled, the weight of the air discovered, the
circulation of the blood made known, the phenomena of insanity
intelligently studied, the results of physiological chemistry
brought to light, the symmetric domain and sway of calculable law
pushed far out in every direction of nature and experience. It
used to be supposed that digestion was effected by means of a
mechanical power equal to many tons. Borelli asserted that the
muscular force of the heart was one hundred and eighty thousand
pounds. These absurd estimates only disappeared when the

24 Andrew Jackson Davis, Nature's Divine Revelations, sects. 192
203.


properties of the gastric juice were discerned. The method in
which we distinguish the forms and distances of objects was not
understood until Berkeley published his "New Theory of Vision."
Few persons are aware of the opposition of bigotry, stolidity, and
authority against which the brilliant advances of scientific
discovery and mechanical invention and social improvement have
been forced to contend, and in despite of which they have slowly
won their way. Excommunications, dungeons, fires, sneers, polite
persecution, bitter neglect, tell the story, from the time the
Athenians banned Anaxagoras for calling the sun a mass of fire, to
the day an English mob burned the warehouses of Arkwright because
he had invented the spinning jenny. But, despite all the hostile
energies of establishment, prejudice, and scorn, the earnest
votaries of philosophical truth have studied and toiled with ever
accumulating victories, until now a hundred sciences are ripe with
emancipating fruits and perfect freedom to be taught. Railroads
gird the lands with ribs of trade, telegraphs thread the airs with
electric tidings of events, and steamships crease the seas with
channels of foam and fire. There is no longer danger of any one
being put to death, or even being excluded from the "best
society," for saying that the earth moves. An eclipse cannot be
regarded as the frown of God when it is regularly foretold with
certainty. The measurement of the atmosphere exterminated the
wiseacre proverb, "Nature abhors a vacuum," by the burlesque
addition, "but only for the first thirty two feet." The madman
cannot be looked on as divinely inspired, his words to be caught
as oracles, or as possessed by a devil, to be chained and
scourged, since Pinel's great work has brought insanity within the
range of organic disease. When Franklin's kite drew electricity
from the cloud to his knuckle, the superstitious theory of thunder
died a natural death.

The vast progress effected in all departments of physical science
during the last four centuries has not been made in any kindred
degree in the prevailing theology. Most of the harsh, unreasonable
tenets of the elaborately morbid and distorted mediaval
theologyare still retained in the creeds of the great majority of
Christendom. The causes of this difference are plain. The
establishment of newly discovered truths in material science being
less intimately connected with the prerogatives of the ruling
classes, less clearly hostile to the permanence of their power,
they have not offered so pertinacious an opposition to progress in
this province: they have yielded a much larger freedom to
physicists than to moralists, to discoverers of mathematical,
chemical, and mechanical law than to reformers of political and
religious thought. Livy tells us that, in the five hundred and
seventy third year of Rome, some concealed books of Numa were
found, which, on examination by the priests, being thought
injurious to the established religion, were ordered to be
burned.25 The charge was not that they were ungenuine, nor that
their contents were false; but they were dangerous. In the second
century, an imperial decree forbade the reading of the Sibylline
Oracles, because they contained prophecies of Christ and doctrines
of Christianity. By an act of the English Parliament, in the
middle of the seventeenth century, every copy of the Racovian
Catechism (an exposition of the Socinian doctrine) that could be
obtained was burned in the streets.

25 Lib. xl. cap. xxix.


The Index Expurgatorius for Catholic countries is still freshly
filled every year. And in Protestant countries a more subtle and a
more effectual influence prevents, on the part of the majority,
the candid perusal of all theological discussions which are not
pitched in the orthodox key. Certain dogmas are the absorbed
thought of the sects which defend them: no fresh and independent
thinking is to be expected on those subjects, no matter how purely
fictitious these secretions of the brain of the denomination or of
some ancient leader may be, no matter how glaringly out of keeping
with the intelligence and liberty which reign in other realms of
faith and feeling. There is nowhere else in the world a tyranny so
pervasive and despotic as that which rules in the department of
theological opinion. The prevalent slothful and slavish surrender
of the grand privileges and duties of individual thought,
independent personal conviction and action in religious matters,
is at once astonishing, pernicious, and disgraceful. The effect of
entrenched tradition, priestly directors, a bigoted, overawing,
and persecuting sectarianism, is nowhere else a hundredth part so
powerful or so extensive.

In addition to the bitter determination by interested persons to
suppress reforming investigations of the doctrines which hold
their private prejudices in supremacy, and to the tremendous
social prestige of old establishment, another cause has been
active to keep theology stationary while science has been making
such rapid conquests. Science deals with tangible quantities,
theology with abstract qualities. The cultivation of the former
yields visible practical results of material comfort; the
cultivation of the latter yields only inward spiritual results of
mental welfare. Accordingly, science has a thousand resolute
votaries where theology has one unshackled disciple. At this
moment, a countless multitude, furnished with complex apparatus,
are ransacking every nook of nature, and plucking trophies, and
the world with honoring attention reads their reports. But how few
with competent preparation and equipment, with fearless
consecration to truth, unhampered, with fresh free vigor, are
scrutinizing the problems of theology, enthusiastically bent upon
refuting errors and proving verities! And what reception do the
conclusions of those few meet at the hands of the public? Surely
not prompt recognition, frank criticism, and grateful acknowledgment
or courteous refutation. No; but studied exclusion from notice,
or sophistical evasions and insulting vituperation.

What a striking and painful contrast is afforded by the generous
encouragement given to the students of science by the annual
bestowment of rewards by the scientific societies such as the
Cuvier Prize, the Royal Medal, the Rumford Medal and the jealous
contempt and assaults visited by the sectarian authorities upon
those earnest students of theology who venture to propose any
innovating improvement! Suppose there were annually awarded an
Aquinas Prize, a Fenelon Medal, a Calvin Medal, a Luther Medal, a
Channing Medal, not to the one who should present the most
ingenious defence of any peculiar tenet of one of those masters,
but to him who should offer the most valuable fresh contribution
to theological truth! What should we think if the French Institute
offered a gold medal every year to the astronomer who presented
the ablest essay in support of the Ptolemaic system, or if the
Royal Society voted a diploma for the best method of casting
nativities? Such is the course pursued in regard to dogmatic
theology. The consequence has been that while elsewhere the
ultimate standard by which to try a doctrine is, What do the
most competent judges say? What does unprejudiced reason dictate?
What does the great harmony of truth require? in theology it is,
What do the committed priests say? How does it comport with the
old traditions?

We read in the Hak ul Yakeen that the envoy of Herk, Emperor of
Rum, once said to the prophet, "You summon people to a Paradise
whose extent includes heaven and earth: where, then, is hell?"
Mohammed replied, "When day comes, where is night?" That is to
say, according to the traditionary glosses, as day and night are
opposite, so Paradise is at the zenith and hell at the nadir. Yes;
but if Paradise be above the heavens, and hell below the seventh
earth, then how can Sirat be extended over hell for people to pass
to Paradise? "We reply," say the authors of the Hak ul Yakeen,
"that speculation on this subject is not necessary, nor to be
regarded. Implicit faith in what the prophets have revealed must
be had; and explanatory surmises, which are the occasion of
Satanic doubts, must not be indulged."26 Certainly this exclusion
of reason cannot always be suffered. It is fast giving way
already. And it is inevitable that, when reason secures its right
and bears its rightful fruits in moral subjects as it now does in
physical subjects, the mediaval theology must be rejected as
mediaval science has been. It is the common doctrine of the Church
that Christ now sits in heaven in a human body of flesh and blood.
Calvin separated the Divine nature of Christ from this human body;
but Luther made the two natures inseparable and attributed
ubiquity to the body in which they reside, thus asserting the
omnipresence of a material human body, a bulk of a hundred and
fifty pounds' weight more or less. He furiously assailed Zwingle's
objection to this monstrous nonsense, as "a devil's mask and
grandchild of that old witch, mistress Reason." 27 The Roman
Church teaches, and her adherents devoutly believe, that the house
of the Virgin Mary was conveyed on the wings of angels from
Nazareth to the eastern slope of the Apennines above the Adriatic
Gulf.28 The English Church, consistently interpreted, teaches that
there is no salvation without baptism by priests in the line of
apostolic succession. These are but ordinary specimens of
teachings still humbly received by the mass of Christians. The
common distrust with which the natural operations of reason are
regarded in the Church, the extreme reluctance to accept the
conclusions of mere reason, seem to us discreditable to the
theological leaders who represent the current creeds of the
approved sects. Many an influential theologian could learn
invaluable lessons from the great guides in the realm of science.
The folly which acute learned wise men will be guilty of the
moment they turn to theological subjects, where they do not allow
reason to act, is both ludicrous and melancholy. The victim of
lycanthropy used to be burned alive; he is now placed under the
careful treatment of skilful and humane physicians. But the
heretic or infidel is still thought to be inspired by the devil, a
fit subject for discipline here and hell hereafter. The light shed
abroad by the rising spirit of rational investigation must
gradually dispel the delusions which lurk in the vales of
theology, as it already has dispelled those that formerly haunted
the hills of science. The spectres which have so long terrified a
childish world will successively vanish

26 Merrick, Hyat ul Kuloob, note 74.

27 Hagenbach, Dogmengeschichte, sect. 265, note 2.

28 Christian Remembrancer, April, 1855. A full and able history of
the "Holy House of Loretto."


from the path of man as advancing reason, in the name of the God
of truth, utters its imperial "Avaunt!"

Henry More wrote a book on the "Immortality of the Soul," printed
in London in 1659, just two hundred years ago. It is full of
beauty, acumen, and power. He was one of the first men of the
time. Yet he seriously elaborates an argument like this: "The scum
and spots that lie on the sun are as great an Argument that there
is no Divinity in him as the dung of Owls and Sparrows that is
found on the faces and shoulders of Idols in Temples are clear
evidences that they are no true Deities."29 He also in good faith
tells a story like this: "That a Woman with child, seeing a
Butcher divide a Swine's head with a Cleaver, brought forth her
Child with its face cloven in the upper jaw, the palate, and upper
lip to the very nose."30 The progress marked by the contrast of
the scientific spirit of the present time with the ravenous
credulity of even two centuries back must continue and spread into
every province. Some may vilify it; but in vain. Some may
sophisticate against it; but in vain. Some may invoke authority
and social persecution to stop it; but in vain. Some may appeal to
the prejudices and fears of the timid; but in vain. Some may close
their own eyes, and hold their hands before their neighbors' eyes,
and attempt to shut out the light; but in vain. It will go on. It
is the interest of the world that it should go on. It is the manly
and the religious course to help this progress with prudence and
reverence. Truth is the will of God, the way he has made things to
be and to act, the way he wishes free beings to exist and to act.
He has ordained the gradual discovery of truth. And despite the
struggles of selfish tyranny, and the complacence of luxurious
ease, and the terror of ignorant cowardice, truth will be more and
more brought to universal acceptance. Some men have fancied their
bodies composed of butter or of glass; but when compelled to move
out into the sunlight or the crowd they did not melt nor break.31
Esquirol had a patient who did not dare to bend her thumb, lest
the world should come to an end. When forced to bend it, she was
surprised that the crack of doom did not follow.

The mechanico theatrical character of the popular theology is
enough to reveal its origin and its fundamental falsity. The
difference between its lurid and phantasmal details and the calm
eternal verities in the divinely constituted order of nature is as
great as the difference between those stars which one sees in
consequence of a blow on the forehead and those he sees by turning
his gaze to the nightly sky. To every competent thinker, the bare
appreciation of such a passage as that which closes
Chateaubriand's chapter on the Last Judgment, with the huge bathos
of its incongruous mixture of sublime and absurd, is its
sufficient refutation: "The globe trembles on its axis; the moon
is covered with a bloody veil; the threatening stars hang half
detached from the vault of heaven, and the agony of the world
commences. Now resounds the trump of the angel. The sepulchres
burst: the human race issues all at once, and fills the Valley of
Jehoshaphat! The Son of Man appears in the clouds; the powers of
hell ascend from the infernal depths; the goats are separated from
the sheep; the wicked are plunged into the gulf; the just ascend
to heaven; God returns to his repose,

29 Preface, p. 10.

30 Ibid. p. 392.

31 Bucknill and Tuke, Psychological Medicine, ch. ix.


and the reign of eternity begins."32 Nothing saves this whole
scheme of doctrine from instant rejection except neglect of
thought, or incompetence of thought, on the part of those who
contemplate it. The peculiar dogmas of the exclusive sects are the
products of mental and social disease, psychological growths in
pathological moulds. The naked shapes of beautiful women floating
around St. Anthony in full display of their maddening charms are
interpreted by the Romanist Church as a visible work of the devil.
An intelligent physician accounts for them by the laws of
physiology, the morbid action of morbid nerves. There is no doubt
whatever as to which of these explanations is correct. The
absolute prevalence of that explanation is merely a question of
time. Meanwhile, it is the part of every wise and devout man,
without bigotry, without hatred for any, with strict fidelity to
his own convictions, with entire tolerance and kindness for all
who differ from him, sacredly to seek after verity himself and
earnestly to endeavor to impart it to others. To such men forms of
opinion, instead of being prisons, fetters, and barriers, will be
but as tents of a night while they march through life, the burning
and cloudy column of inquiry their guide, the eternal temple of
truth their goal.

The actual relation, the becoming attitude, the appropriate
feeling, of man towards the future state, the concealed segment of
his destiny, are impressively shown in the dying scene of one of
the wisest and most gifted of men, one of the fittest representatives
of the modern mind. In a good old age, on a pleasant spring day,
with a vast expanse of experience behind him, with an immensity of
hope before him, he lay calmly expiring.

"More light!" he cried, with departing breath; and Death, solemn
warder of eternity, led him, blinded, before the immemorial veil
of awe and secrets. It uprolled as the flesh bandage fell from his
spirit, and he walked at large, triumphant or appalled, amidst the
unimagined revelations of God.

And now, recalling the varied studies we have passed through, and
seeking for the conclusion or root of the matter, what shall we
say? This much we will say. First, the fearless Christian, fully
acquainted with the results of a criticism unsparing as the
requisitions of truth and candor, can scarcely, with intelligent
honesty, do more than place his hand on the beating of his heart,
and fix his eye on the riven tomb of Jesus, and exclaim, "Feeling
here the inspired promise of immortality, and seeing there the
sign of God's authentic seal, I gratefully believe that Christ has
risen, and that my soul is deathless!" Secondly, the trusting
philosopher, fairly weighing the history of the world's belief in
a future life, and the evidences on which it rests, can scarcely,
with justifying warrant, do less than lay his hand on his body,
and turn his gaze aloft, and exclaim, "Though death shatters this
shell, the soul may survive, and I confidently hope to live
forever." Meanwhile, the believer and the speculator, combining to
form a Christian philosophy wherein doubt and faith, thought and
freedom, reason and sentiment, nature and revelation, all embrace,
even as the truth of things and the experience of life demand, may
both adopt for their own the expression wrought for himself by a
pure and fervent poet in these freighted lines of pathetic beauty:

32 Genius of Christianity, part ii. book vi. ch. vii.


"I gather up the scattered rays Of wisdom in the early days, Faint
gleams and broken, like the light Of meteors in a Northern night,
Betraying to the darkling earth The unseen sun which gave them
birth; I listen to the sibyl's chant, The voice of priest and
hierophant; I know what Indian Kreeshna saith, And what of life
and what of death The demon taught to Socrates, And what, beneath
his garden trees Slow pacing, with a dream like tread, The solemn
thoughted Plato said; Nor Lack I tokens, great or small, Of God's
clear light in each and all, While holding with more dear regard
Than scroll of heathen seer and bard The starry pages, promise
lit, With Christ's evangel overwrit, Thy miracle of life and
death, O Holy One of Nazareth!" 33

33 Whittier, Questions of Life.


PART FIFTH.


HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL DISSERTATIONS CONCERNING A FUTURE LIFE.


