CHAPTER VIII.

CRITICAL HISTORY OF DISBELIEF IN A FUTURE LIFE.

IF the first men were conscious spirits who, at the command of
God, dropped from the skies into organic forms of matter, or who
were created here on an exalted plane of insight and communion far
above any thing now experienced by us, then the destination of man
to a life after death may originally have been a fact of direct
knowledge, universally seen and grasped without any obscuring
peradventure. From that state it gradually declined into dubious
dimness as successive generations grew sinful, sensual, hardened,
immersed and bound in affairs of passion and earth. It became
remoter, assumed a questionable aspect, gave rise to discussions
and doubts, and here and there to positive disbelief and open
denial. Thus, beginning as a clear reality within the vision of
all, it sank into a matter of uncertain debate among individuals.

But if the first men were called up into being from the earth, by
the creative energy of God, as the distinct climax of the other
species, then the early generations of our race, during the long
ages of their wild and slowly ameliorating state, were totally
ignorant of any conscious sequel to the fate seemingly closed in
death. They were too animal and rude yet to conceive a spiritual
existence outside of the flesh and the earth. Among the
accumulating trophies of their progressive intellectual conquests
hung up by mankind in the historic hall of experience, this
marvellous achievement is one of the sublimest. What a day was
that for all humanity forever after, when for the first time, on
some climbing brain, dawned from the great Sun of the spirit world
the idea of a personal immortality! It was announced. It dawned
separately wherever there were prepared persons. It spread from
soul to soul, and became the common faith of the world. Still,
among every people there were pertinacious individuals, who swore
not by the judge and went not with the multitude, persons of less
credulous hearts and more skeptical faculties, who demurred at the
great doctrine, challenged it in many particulars, gainsaid it on
various grounds, disbelieved it from different motives, and fought
it with numerous weapons.

Whichever of the foregoing suppositions be adopted, that the
doctrine of a future life subsided from universal acceptance into
party contention, or that it arose at length from personal
perception and authority into common credit, the fact remains
equally prominent and interesting that throughout the traceable
history of human opinion there is a line of dissenters who have
thought death the finality of man, and the next world an illusion.
The history of this special department of thought opens a wide and
fertile subject. To gain a comprehensive survey of its boundaries
and a compact epitome of its contents, it will be well to consider
it in these two lights and divisions, all the time trying to see,
step by step, what justice, and what injustice, is done: first,
the dominant motive forces animating the disbelievers; secondly,
the methods and materials they have employed.

At first thought it would appear difficult to tell what impulses
could move persons to undertake, as many constantly have
undertaken, a crusade against a faith so dear to man, so ennobling
to his nature. Peruse the pages of philosophical history with
careful reflection, and the mystery is scattered, and various
groups of disbelievers stand revealed, with earnest voices and
gestures assailing the doctrine of a future life.1

One company, having their representatives in every age, reject it
as a protest in behalf of the right of private judgment against
the tyranny of authority. The doctrine has been inculcated by
priesthoods, embodied in sacred books, and wrought into the
organic social life of states; and acceptance of it has been
commanded as a duty, and expected as a decent and respectable
thing. To deny it has required courage, implied independent
opinions, and conferred singularity. To cast off the yoke of
tradition, undermine the basis of power supporting a galling
religious tyranny, and be marked as a rebellious freethinker in a
generation of slavish conformists, this motive could scarcely fail
to exhibit results. Some of the radical revolutionists of the
present time say that the doctrine of the divine right of kings
and the infallible authority of the priesthood is the living core
of the power of tyranny in the world. They therefore deny God and
futurity in order to overthrow their oppressors, who reign over
them and prey upon them in the name of God and the pretended
interests of a future life.2 The true way to secure the real
desideratum corruptly indicated in this movement is not by denying
the reality of a future life, but by removing the adjustment of
its conditions and the administration of its rewards and penalties
out of the hands of every clique of priests and rulers. A
righteously and benignly ordered immortality, based in truth and
adjudicated by the sole sovereignty of God, is no engine of
oppression, though a doctrine of heaven and hell irresponsibly
managed by an Orphic association, the guardians of a Delphic
tripod, the owners of a secret confessional, or the interpreters
of an exclusive creed, may be. In a matter of such grave
importance, that searching and decisive discrimination, so rare
when the passions get enlisted, is especially needed. Because a
doctrine is abused by selfish tyrants is no reason for supposing
the doctrine itself either false or injurious.

No little injury has been done to the common faith in a future
life, great disbelief has been provoked unwittingly, by writers
who have sought to magnify the importance of revealed religion at
the expense of natural religion. Many such persons have labored to
show that all the scientific, philosophical, and moral arguments
for immortality are worthless, the teachings and resurrection of
Christ, the revealed word of God, alone possessing any validity to
establish that great truth. An accomplished author says, in a
recent work, "The immortality of the soul cannot be proved without
the aid of revelation." 3 Bishop Courtenay published, a few years
since, a most deliberate and unrelenting attack upon the arguments
for the deathlessness of the soul, seeking with persevering
remorselessness to demolish every one of them, and to prove that
man totally perishes, but will be restored to life at the second
coming of Christ.4 There can scarcely be a question that such
statements usually awaken and confirm a deep skepticism as to a
future life, instead of enhancing a grateful estimate of the
gospel.

1 J. A. Luther, Recensetur numerus eorum, qui immortalitatem
inficiati sunt.

2 Schmidt, Geschichte der Deutschen Literatur im neunzehnten
Jahrhundert, band iii. kap. iv.: Der philosophische Radicalismus.


3 Bowen, Metaphysical and Ethical Science, part ii. ch. ix. The
Future States: Their Evidences and Nature considered on Principles
Physical, Moral, and Scriptural, with the Design of Showing the
Value of the Gospel Revelation.


If man is once annihilated, it is hardly credible that he will be
identically restored. Such a stupendous and arbitrary miracle
clashes with the continuity of the universe, and staggers rather
than steadies faith. We should beg such volunteers however sincere
and good their intentions to withhold the impoverishing gift of
their service. And when kindred reasonings are advanced by such
men as the unbelieving Hume, we feel tempted to say, in the
language of a distinguished divine speaking on this very point,
"Ah, gentlemen, we understand you: you belong to the sappers and
miners in the army of the aliens!"

Another party of disbelievers have repudiated the whole conception
of a future state as a protest against the nonsense and cruelty
associated with it in the prevailing superstitions and dogmatisms
of their time. From the beginning of history in most nations, the
details of another existence and its conditions have been
furnished to the eager credulity of the people by the lawless
fancies of poets, the fine spinning brains of metaphysicians, and
the cold blooded calculations or hot headed zeal of sectarian
leaders. Of course a mass of absurdities would grow up around the
central germ and a multitude of horrors sprout forth. While the
common throng would unquestioningly receive all these ridiculous
and revolting particulars, they could not but provoke doubt,
satire, flat rejection, from the bolder and keener wits. So we
find it was in Greece. The fables about the under world the
ferriage over the Styx, poor Tantalus so torturingly mocked, the
daughters of Danaus drawing water in sieves all were accredited by
the general crowd on one extreme.5 On the other extreme the whole
scheme, root and branch, was flung away with scorn. The following
epitaph on an unbeliever is attributed to Callimachus. "O
Charidas, what are the things below? Vast darkness. And what the
returns to earth? A falsehood. And Pluto? A fable. We have
perished: this is my true speech to you; but, if you want the
flattering style, the Pellaan's great ox is in the shades."6
Meanwhile, a few judicious mediators, neither swallowing the whole
gross draught at a gulp, nor throwing the whole away with utter
disgust, drank through the strainer of a discriminative
interpretation. Because caprice, hatred, and favoritism are
embalmed in some perverse doctrine of future punishment is no
defensible reason for denying a righteous retribution. Because
heaven has been located on a hill top, and its sublime denizens
made to eat ambrosia and sometimes to fall out among themselves,
is no adequate reason for rejecting the idea of a heavenly life.
Puerilities of fancy and monstrosities of passion arbitrarily
connected with principles claiming to be eternal truths should be
carefully separated, and not the whole be despised and trodden on
together. From lack of this analysis and discrimination, in the
presence of abnormal excrescences and offensive secretions dislike
and disbelief have often flourished where, if judicial thought and
conscience had cut off the imposed deformities

5 Plutarch, De Superstition. The reality of the popular credulity
and terror in later Rome clearly appears from the fact that Marcus
Aurelius had a law passed condemning to banishment "those who do
any thing through which men's excitable minds are alarmed by a
superstitious fear of the Deity." Nero, after murdering his
mother, haunted by her ghost and tortured by the Furies, attempted
by magical rites to bring up her shade from below, and soften her
vindictive wrath Suetonius, Vita Neronis, cap. xxxiv.

6 Epigram. XIV.


and dispelled the discoloring vengeance, faith and love would have
been confirmed in contemplating the pure and harmonious form of
doctrine left exposed in the beauty of benignant truth. The aim
ostensibly proposed by Lucretius, in his elaborate and masterly
exposition of the Epicurean philosophy, is to free men from their
absurd belief in childish legends and their painful fears of death
and hell. As far as merely this purpose is concerned, he might
have accomplished it as effectually, perhaps, and more directly,
by exposing the adventitious errors without assailing the great
doctrine around which they had been gathered. Bion the
Borysthenite is reported by Diogenes Laertius to have said, with a
sharp humor, that the souls below would be more punished by
carrying water in whole buckets than in such as had been bored! A
soul may pass into the unseen state though there be no Plutonian
wherry, suffer woe though there be no river Pyriphlegethon, enjoy
bliss though there be no cup of nectar borne by Hebe. But to fly
to rash extremes and build positive conclusions on mere ignorance
has always been natural to man, not only as a believer, but also
as an iconoclastic denier.

A third set of disbelievers in a future life consists of those who
advocate the "emancipation of the flesh" and assert the
sufficiency of this life when fully enjoyed. They attack the dogma
of immortality as the essential germ of asceticism, and abjure it
as a protest against that superstitious distrust and gloom which
put a ban on the pleasures of the world. These are the earthlings
who would fain displace the stern law of self denial with the
bland permission of self indulgence, rehabilitate the senses, feed
every appetite full, and, when satiated of the banquet of
existence, fall asleep under the table of the earth. The
countenance of Duty, severe daughter of God, looks commands upon
them to turn from dallying ease and luxury, to sacrifice the
meaner inclinations, to gird themselves for an arduous race
through difficulties, to labor and aspire evermore towards the
highest and the best. They prefer to install in her stead
Aphrodite crowned with Paphian roses, her eyes aglow with the
light of misleading stars, her charms bewitching them with fatal
enchantments and melting them in softest joys. The pale face of
Death, with mournful eyes, lurks at the bottom of every winecup
and looks out from behind every garland; therefore brim the purple
beaker higher and hide the unwelcome intruder under more flowers.
We are a cunning mixture of sense and dust, and life is a fair but
swift opportunity. Make haste to get the utmost pleasure out of it
ere it has gone, scorning every pretended bond by which sour
ascetics would restrain you and turn your days into penitential
scourges. This gospel of the senses had a swarm of apostles in the
last century in France, when the chief gates of the cemetery in
Paris bore the inscription, "Death is an eternal sleep." It has
had more in Germany in this century; and voices of enervating
music are not wanting in our own literature to swell its siren
chorus.7 Perhaps the greatest prophet it has had was Heine, whose
pages reek with a fragrance of pleasure through which sighs, like
a fading wail from the solitary string of a deserted harp struck
by a lonesome breeze, the perpetual refrain of death! death!
death! His motto seems to be, "Quick! let me

7 Pierer, Universal Lexikon, dritte Auflage, Deutsche Literatur,
sect. 42. Schmidt, Geschichte der Deutschen Literatur im
neuntzehnten Jahrhundert, band iii: kap. i.: Das junge
Deutschland.


enjoy what there is; for I must die. Oh, the gusty relish of life!
Oh, the speechless mystery, the infinite reality, of death!" He
says himself, comparing the degradation of his later experience
with the soaring enthusiasm of his youth, "It is as if a star had
fallen from heaven upon a hillock of muck, and swine were gnawing
at it!"

These men think that the doctrine of a future life, like a great
magnet, has drawn the needle of human activity out of its true
direction; that the dominant tendency of the present age is, and
of right ought to be, towards the attainment of material well
being, in a total forgetfulness to lay up treasures in heaven. The
end is enjoyment; the obstacle, asceticism; the means to secure
the end, the destruction of faith in immortality, so that man,
having nothing left but this world, will set himself to improve
and enjoy it. The monkish severity of a morbid and erroneous
theology, darkening the present and prescribing pain in it to
brighten the future and increase its pleasures, legitimates an
earnest reaction. But that reaction should be wise, measured by
truth. It should rectify, not demolish, the prevailing faith. For
the desired end is most likely to be reached by perceiving, not
that all terminates in the grave, but that the greatest enjoyment
flows from a self controlling devotedness to noble ends, that the
claims of another life are in perfect unison with the interests of
this life, that the lawful fruition of every function of human
nature, each lower faculty being subordinated to each higher one,
and the highest always reigning, at once yields the most immediate
pleasure and makes the completest preparation for the hereafter.
In the absence of the all irradiating sun of immortality, these
disbelievers, exulting over the pale taper of sensual pleasure,
remind us of a parcel of apes gathered around a cold glow worm and
rejoicing that they have found a fire in the damp, chilly night.

Besides the freethinkers, who will not yield to authority, but
insist upon standing apart from the crowd, and the satirists, who
level their shafts undiscriminatingly against what they perceive
associated with absurdity, and the worldlings, who prefer the
pleasures of time to the imaginarily contrasted goods of eternity,
there is a fourth class of men who oppose the doctrine of a
personal immortality as a protest against the burdensome miseries
of individuality. The Gipseys exclaimed to Borrow, "What! is it
not enough to have borne the wretchedness of this life, that we
must also endure another?" 8 A feeling of the necessary
limitations and suffering exposures of a finite form of being has
for untold ages harassed the great nations of the East with
painful unrest and wondrous longing. Pantheistic absorption  to
lose all imprisoning bounds, and blend in that ecstatic flood of
Deity which, forever full, never ebbs on any coast has been
equally the metaphysical speculation, the imaginative dream, and
the passionate desire, of the Hindu mind. It is the basis and
motive of the most extensive disbelief of individual immortality
the world has known. "The violence of fruition in these foul
puddles of flesh and blood presently glutteth with satiety," and
the mortal circuits of earth and time are a round of griefs and
pangs from which they would escape into the impersonal Godhead.
Sheerly against this lofty strain of poetic souls is that
grovelling life of ignorance which, dominated by selfish
instincts, crawling on brutish grounds,

8 The Zincali, part ii. ch. i.


cannot awaken the creative force of spiritual wants slumbering
within, nor lift its head high enough out of the dust to see the
stars of a deathless destiny; and a fifth group of disbelievers
deny immortality because their degraded experience does not
prophesy it. Many a man might say, with Autolycus, "For the life
to come, I sleep out the thought of it." A mind holy and loving,
communing with God and an ideal world, "lighted up as a spar grot"
with pure feelings and divine truths, is mirrored full of
incorporeal shapes of angels, and aware of their immaterial
disentanglement and eternity. A brain surcharged with fires of
hatred, drowsed with filthy drugs, and drenched with drunkenness,
will teem, on the contrary, with vermin writhing in the meshes of
decaying matter. Cleaving to evanescent things, men feel that they
are passing away like leaves on waves; filled with convictions
rooted and breathing in eternity, they feel that they shall abide
in serene survival, like stars above tempests. Turn from every
obscene sight, curb every base propensity, obey every heavenly
vision by assimilation of immortal things, sacred self denials and
toils, disinterested sympathies and hopes, accumulate divine
treasures and kindle the mounting flame of a divine life, and at
the same time consciousness will crave and faith behold an
illimitable destiny. Experiences worthy of being eternal generate
faith in their own eternity. But the ignorant and selfish
sensualist, whose total experience is of the earth earthy, who has
no realization of pure truth, goodness, beauty, is incapable of
sincere faith in immortal life. The dormancy of his higher powers
excludes the necessary conditions of such a faith. His ignoble
bodily life does not furnish the conscious basis and prophecy of a
glorious spiritual life, but shudderingly proclaims the cessation
of all his experience with the destruction of his senses. The
termination of all the functions he knows, what else can it be but
his virtual annihilation? When to the privative degradations of an
uncultivated and earthy experience, naturally accompanied by a
passive unbelief in immortality, are added the positive coarseness
and guilt of a thick insensibility and a wicked life, aggressive
disbelief is quite likely to arise, the essay of an uneasy
conscience to slay what it feels would be a foe, and strangle the
worm that never dies. The denial springing from such sources is
refuted when it is explained. Its motive should never by any man
be yielded to, much less be willingly nourished. It should be
resisted by a devout culture courting the smiles of God, by rising
into the loftier airs of meditation and duty, by imaginative
sentiment and practical philanthropy, until the eternal instinct,
long smothered under sluggish loads of sense and sin, reached by a
soliciting warmth from heaven, stirs with demonstrating vitality.

The last and largest assemblage of dissenters from the prevailing
opinion on this subject comprises those who utter their disbelief
in a future existence out of simple loyalty to seeming truth, as a
protest against what they think a false doctrine, and against the
sophistical and defective arguments by which it has been propped.
It may be granted that the five previously named classes are
equally sincere in their convictions, honest assailants of error
and adherents of truth; but they are actuated by animating motives
of a various moral character. In the present case, the ruling
motive is purely a determination, as Buchner says, to stand by the
facts and to establish the correct doctrine. The directest and
clearest way of giving a descriptive account of the active
philosophical history of this class of disbelievers will be to
follow on the lines of their tracks with statements and criticisms
of their procedures.9 Disbelief in the doctrine of a future life
for man has planted itself upon bold affirmation, and fortified
itself with arguments which may most conveniently be considered
under five distinct heads.

First is the sensational Argument from Appearance. In death the
visible functions cease, the organism dissolves, the mind
disappears; there is apparently a total scattering and end of the
individual. That these phenomena should suggest the thought of
annihilation is inevitable; to suppose that they prove the fact is
absurd. It is an arrant begging of the question; for the very
problem is, Does not an invisible spiritual entity survive the
visible material disintegration? Among the unsound and
superstitious attempts to prove the fact of a future life is that
founded on narratives of ghosts, appearances and visions of the
dead. Dr. Tafel published at Tubingen in 1853 a volume aiming to
demonstrate the immortality and personal identity of the soul by
citation of ninety cases of supernatural appearances, extending
from the history of the ghost whose address to Curtius Rufus is
recorded by Tacitus, to the wonderful story told by Renatus
Luderitz in 1837. Such efforts are worse than vain. Their data are
so explicable in many cases, and so inconclusive in all, that they
quite naturally provoke deeper disbelief and produce telling
retorts. While here and there a credulous person is convinced of a
future life by the asserted appearance of a spirit, the well
informed psychologist refers the argument to the laws of insanity
and illusions, and the skeptic adds as a finality his belief that
there is no future life, because no ghost has ever come back to
reveal and certify it. The argument on both sides is equally
futile, and removed from the true requisitions of the problem.

To the philosophical thinker a mere appearance is scarcely a
presumption in favor of a conclusion in accordance with it.
Science and experience are full of examples exposing the nullity
or the falsity of appearances. The sun seems to move around the
earth; but truth contradicts it. We seem to discern distances and
the forms of bodies by direct sight; but the truth is we see
nothing but shades and colors: all beyond is inference based on
acquired experience. The first darkness would seem to the
trembling contemplator absolutely to blot out the universe; but in
truth it only prevented him from seeing it. The first thorough
unconscious sleep would seem to be the hopeless destruction of the
soul in its perfect oblivion. Death is forever for the first time,
shrouded in the misleading obscurities of an unknown novelty.
Appearances are often deceitful, yielding obvious clews only to
mistakes and falsehoods. They are always superficial, furnishing
no reliable evidence of the reality.

"Who could have thought such darkness lay conceal'd
Within thy beams, O Sun! Or who could find,
Whilst fly and leaf and insect stood reveal'd,
That to such countless orbs thou mad'st us blind?
Why then do we shun death with anxious strife?
If light can thus deceive, wherefore not life?"

9 Spazier, Antiphadon, oder Prufung einiger Hauptbeweise fur die
Einfachheit und Unsterblichkeit der menschlichen Seele.


When the body dies, the mind is no longer manifested through it.
That is all we immediately know by perception. The inference that
the mind has therefore ceased to be at all, is a mere supposition.
It may still live and act, independently of the body. An outside
phenomenon can prove nothing here. We must by some psychological
probe pierce to the core of the being and discern, as there
concealed, the central interpretation of truth, or else, in want
of this, turn from these surface shadows and seek the solution in
some other province. Millions of appearances being opposed to the
truth or inadequate to hint it, we must never implicitly trust
their suggestions. What microscope can reveal the organic life in
a kernel of corn, and show that through the decay of that kernel a
stalk will spring up and bear a thousand kernels more? But if a
new mental life emerges from the dying form of man, it lies in a
spiritual realm whereinto we have no instruments to gaze. Every
existent thing has its metes and limits. In fact, the only final
weapon and fort of a thing is its environing limitation. It goes
into nothing if that be taken down, the atheist says; into
infinity, the mystic says. The mistake and difficulty lie in
discerning what the last wall around the essence is. "The universe
is the body of our body." The boundary of our life is boundless
life. Schlegel has somewhere asked the question, "Is life in us,
or are we in life?" Because man appears to be wholly extinguished
in death, we have no right whatever in reason to conclude that he
really is so. The star which seemed to set in the western grave of
aged and benighted time, we, soon coming round east to the true
spirit sky, may discern bright in the morning forehead of
eternity. There can be no safe reasoning from the outmost husk and
phenomenon of a thing to its inmost essence and result. And, in
spite of any possible amount of appearance, man himself may pass
distinct and whole into another sphere of being when his flesh
falls to dust. That science should search in vain with her finest
glasses to discern a royal occupant reigning in the purple
chambered palace of the heart, or to trace any such mysterious
tenant departing in sudden horror from the crushed and bleeding
house of life, belongs to the necessary conditions of the subject;
for spirit can only be spiritually discerned. As well might you
seek to smell a color, or taste a sound, tie a knot of water, or
braid a cord of wind.

Next comes the abstract Argument from Speculative Philosophy.
Under this head are to be included all those theories which deny
the soul to be a spiritual entity, but reduce it to an atomic
arrangement, or a dependent attribute, or a process of action.
Heracleitus held that the soul was fire: of course, when the fuel
was exhausted the fire would go out. Thales taught that it was
water: this might all evaporate away. Anaximenes affirmed that it
was air, of which all things were formed by rarefaction and
condensation: on such a supposition it could have no permanent
personal identity. Critias said it was blood: this might
degenerate and lose its nature, or be poured out on the ground.
Leucippus maintained that it was a peculiar concourse of atoms: as
these came together, so they might fly apart and there be an end
of what they formed. The followers of Aristotle asserted that it
was a fifth unknown substance, with properties of its own, unlike
those of fire, air, water, and earth. This might be mortal or
immortal: there was nothing decisive in the conception or the
defining terms to prove which it was. Accordingly, the Peripatetic
school has always been divided on the question of the immortality
of the soul, from the time of its founder's immediate disciples to
this day. It cannot be clearly shown what the mighty Stagyrite's
own opinion really was.

Speculative conceptions as to the nature of the soul like the
foregoing, when advanced as arguments to establish its proper
mortality, are destitute of force, because they are gratuitous
assumptions. They are not generalizations based on careful
induction of facts; they are only arbitrary hypotheses.
Furthermore, they are inconsistent both with the facts and
phenomena of experience. Mind cannot fairly be brought into the
category of the material elements; for it has properties and
performs functions emphatically distinguishing it from every thing
else, placing it in a rank by itself, with exclusive predicates of
its own. Can fire think? Can water will? Can air feel? Can blood
see? Can a mathematical number tell the difference between good
and evil? Can earth be jealous of a rival and loyal to a duty? Can
a ganglion solve a problem in Euclid or understand the Theodicee
of Leibnitz? It is absurd to confound things so distinct. Mind is
mind, and matter is matter; and though we are now consciously
acquainted with them only in their correlation, yet there is as
much reason for supposing that the former survives the close of
that correlation as for supposing that the latter does. True, we
perceive the material remaining and do not perceive the spirit.
Yes; but the differentiation of the two is exactly this, that one
is appreciable by the senses, while the other transcends and
baffles them. It is absolutely inconceivable in imagination,
wholly incredible to reason, intrinsically nonsensical every way,
that a shifting concourse of atoms, a plastic arrangement of
particles, a regular succession of galvanic shocks, a continuous
series of nervous currents, or any thing of the sort, should
constitute the reality of a human soul, the process of a human
life, the accumulated treasures of a human experience, all
preserved at command and traversed by the moral lines of personal
identity. The things lie in different spheres and are full of
incommunicable contrasts. However numerously and intimately
correlated the physical and psychical constituents of man are,
yet, so far as we can know any thing about them, they are steeply
opposed to each other both in essence and function. Otherwise
consciousness is mendacious and language is unmeaning. A recent
able author speaks of "that congeries of organs whose union forms
the brain and whose action constitutes the mind." 10 The mind,
then, is an action! Can an action love and hate, choose and
resolve, rejoice and grieve, remember, repent, and pray? Is not an
agent necessary for an action? All such speculative conceptions as
to the nature of soul as make it purely phenomenal are to be
offset, if they can be, by the view which exhibits the personal
ego or conscious selfhood of the soul, not as an empty spot in
which a swarm of relations centre as their goal point, but as an
indestructible monad, the innermost and substantial essence and
cause of the organization, the self apprehending and unchangeable
axis of all thinking and acting. Some of the most free, acute,
learned, wise, and powerful thinkers of the world have been
champions of this doctrine; especially among the moderns may be
named Leibnitz, Herbart, Goethe, and Hartenstein. Jacobi most
earnestly maintained it both against Mendelssohn and against
Fichte.

10 Bucknill and Tuke, Psychological Medicine, p. 371.


That the mind is a substantial entity, and therefore may be
conceived as immortal, that it is not a mere functional operation
accompanying the organic life, a phantom procession of conscious
states filing off on the stage of the cerebrum "in a dead march of
mere effects,"  that it is not, as old Aristoxenus dreamed, merely
a harmony resulting from the form and nature of the body in the
same way that a tune springs from the consenting motions of a
musical instrument, seems to be shown by facts of which we have
direct knowledge in consciousness. We think that the mind is an
independent force, dealing with intellectual products, weighing
opposing motives, estimating moral qualities, resisting some
tendencies, strengthening others, forming resolves, deciding upon
its own course of action and carrying out its chosen designs
accordingly. If the soul were a mere process, it could not pause
in mid career, select from the mass of possible considerations
those adapted to suppress a base passion or to kindle a generous
sentiment, deliberately balance rival solicitations, and, when
fully satisfied, proceed. Yet all this it is constantly doing. So,
if the soul were but a harmony, it would give no sounds contrary
to the affections of the lyre it comes from. But actually it
resists the parts of the instrument from which they say it
subsists, exercising dominion over them, punishing some,
persuading others, and ruling the desires, angers, and fears, as
if itself of a different nature.11 Until an organ is seen to blow
its own bellows, mend its shattered keys, move its pedals, and
play, with no foreign aid, "I know that my Redeemer liveth," or a
violin tunes up its discordant strings and wields its bow in a
spontaneous performance of the Carnival, showing us every Cremona
as its own Paganini, we may, despite the conceits of speculative
disbelief, hold that the mind is a dynamic personal entity. That
thought is the very "latch string of a new world's wicket."

Thirdly, we have the fanciful Argument from Analogy. The keen
champions of disbelief, with their athletic agility of dialectics,
have made terrible havoc among the troops of poetic arguments from
resemblance, drawn up to sustain the doctrine of immortality. They
have exposed the feebleness of the argument for our immortality
from the wonderful workmanship and costliness of human nature, on
the ground that what requires the most pains and displays the most
skill and genius in its production is the most lovingly preserved.
For God organizes the mind of a man just as easily as he
constructs the geometry of a diamond. His omnipotent attributes
are no more enlisted in the creation of the intelligence of an
elephant or the gratitude of a soul than they are in the
fabrication of the wing of a gnat or the fragrance of a flower.
Infinite wisdom and power are equally implied in each and in all.
They have shown the gross defectiveness of the comparison of the
butterfly and psyche. The butterfly, lying in the caterpillar
neatly folded up like a flower in the bud, in due time comes
forth. It is a material development, open to the senses, a common
demonstration tosensible experience. The disengagement of a spirit
from a fleshly encasement, on the other hand, is a pure hypothesis
wholly removed from sensible apprehension. There is no parallel in
the cases. So the ridiculousness has been made evident of Plato's
famous analogical argument that by a general law of nature all
things are produced contraries from contraries; warmth dies into
the

11 Plato, Phado, 98.


life of cold, and lives out of the death of cold; night is born
from the death of day, and day is born from the death of night;
and thus everywhere death springs from life, and life from
death.12 The whole comparison, considered as evidence of human
immortality, is baseless and full of astonishing sophistry. When
one hemisphere of the earth is turned away from the sun, it is
night there; when it is turned towards the sun, it is day again.
To this state of facts this revolving succession there is
obviously no parallelism whatever in the two phenomenal phases of
man, life and death, whereof one finishes its course and then the
other seems fixed forever. In like manner, when Jeremy Taylor,13
after the example of many others, especially of old Licetus,
argues soberly, as he does in a letter to Evelyn, for the
immortality of the soul from the analogy of lamps burning in tombs
for centuries with no waste of matter, there is no apposite and
valid similarity, even if the instances were not a childish fable.
An equally baseless argument for the existence of an independent
spiritual body within the material body, to be extricated from the
flesh at death and to survive in the same form and dimensions, we
recollect having seen in a work by a Swedenborgian author.14 He
reasons that when a person who has suffered amputation feels the
lost limb as vividly as ever before, the phenomenon is palpable
proof of a spirit limb remaining while the fleshly one is gone! Of
course, the simple physiological explanation is that the mind
instinctively refers the sensations brought in by the severed
nerves to the points where, by inveterate custom, it has hitherto
learned to trace their origination. The report being the same, it
is naturally attributed to the same source.

But those skeptics who have mercilessly exposed these fallacious
arguments from analogy have themselves reasoned in the same way as
fallaciously and as often. When individual life leaves the
physical man, say they, cosmical life immediately enters the
corpse and restores it to the general stock of nature; so when
personal consciousness deserts the psychical man, the universal
spirit resumes the dissolving soul. When certain conditions meet,
a human soul is formed, a gyrating current of thought, or a vortex
of force: soon some accident or a spent impulse breaks the eddy,
and the individual subsides like a whirl in the air or a water
spout in the sea. When the spirit fuel of life is exhausted, man
goes out as an extinguished candle. He ceases like a tone from a
broken harp string. All these analogies are vitiated by radical
unlikeness between the things compared. As arguments they are
perfectly worthless, being spoiled by essential differences in the
cases. Wherein there is a similarity it falls short of the vital
point. There is no justice in the conception of man as a momentary
gyre of individual consciousness drawn from the universal sea by a
sun burst of the Spirit. He is a self ruling intelligence, using a
dependent organism for his own ends, comprehending his own
destiny, successively developing its conditions and acquiring the
materials for occupying and improving them, with a prevision of
eternity. A flower may just as well perish as live, a musical
sound cease as continue, a lamp be put out as burn on: they know
not the difference. Not so with the soul of man. We here overpass
a discrete degree and enter upon a subject

12 Crawford, On the Phadon of Plato.

13 Heber's Life and Works of Jeremy Taylor, vol. i. p. 69.

14 Dee Guays, True System of Religious Philosophy, Letter V.


within another circle of categories. Let the rash reasoner who
madly tries conclusions on a matter of such infinite pith and
moment, with data so inapt and poor, pause in sacred horror
before, having first "Put out the light, he then puts out
THE LIGHT!"

There are peculiarities in the soul removing it out of the range
of physical combinations and making a distinct destiny fairly
predicable of it. When we reflect on the nature of a self
contained will, intelligent of immaterial verities and perhaps
transcendent of space and time, how burlesque is the terror of the
ancient corpuscular theorists lest the feebly cohering soul, on
leaving the body, especially if death happened during a storm,
would be blown in pieces all abroad! Socrates, in the Phado, has a
hearty laugh over this; but Lucretius seriously urges it.15 The
answer to the skeptical reasoning from analogy is double. First,
the lines of partial correspondence which visibly terminate within
our tangible reach can teach nothing as to the termination of
other lines which lead out of sight and disappear in a spiritual
region. An organized material form for instance, a tree is fatally
limited: else it would finally fill and exhaust the earth. But no
such limiting necessity can be predicated of mind. Secondly, as
far as there is genuine analogy, its implications are much
stronger in favor of immortality than against it. Matter, whose
essence is materiality, survives all apprehensible changes;
spirit, whose essence is spirituality, should do the same.

Another attack on the doctrine of a future life is masked in the
negative Argument from Ignorance. We do not know how we shall live
again; we are unable to construct the conditions and explain the
details of a spiritual state of existence; and therefore, it is
said, we should of right conclude that there is no such thing. The
proposition is not usually stated so blankly; but it really
amounts to that. The Epicureans say, as a tree cannot exist in the
sky, nor clouds in the ocean, nor fishes in the meadow, nor water
in stone, thus the mind cannot exist apart from the nerves and the
blood. This style of reasoning is a bold begging of the question.
Our present experience is vacant of any specific knowledge of the
conditions, methods, and contents of a life it has not yet
experienced: therefore there is no such life. Innumerable millions
of facts beyond our present knowledge unquestionably exist. It is
not in any way difficult to conceive that innumerable millions of
experiences and problems now defying and eluding our utmost powers
may hereafter fall within our comprehension and be easily solved.
Will you accept the horizon of your mind as the limit of the
universe? In the present, experience must be confined within its
own boundaries by the necessity of the case. If an embryo were
endowed with a developed reasoning consciousness, it could not
construct any intelligible theory of the world and life into which
it was destined soon to emerge. But it would surely be bad logic
to infer, because the embryo could not, from want of materials
within its experience, ascertain the how, the when, the where, and
the what, of the life awaiting it, that there was no other life
reserved for it. An acorn buried and sprouting in the dark mould,
if endowed with intelligent consciousness, could not know any
definite particulars of its maturer life yet to be in the upper
light and air, with cattle in its shade and

15 Lib. iii. ll. 503-508.


singing birds in its branches. Ignorance is not a ground of
argument, only of modest suspense. We can only reason from what we
know. And the wondrous mysteries or natural miracles with which
science abounds, myriads of truths transcending all fictions, melt
and remove from the path of faith every supposed difficulty. Any
quantity of facts have been scientifically established as real
which are intrinsically far more strange and baffling to belief
than the assertion of our immortality is. Indeed, "there is no
more mystery in the mind living forever in the future than in its
having been kept out of life through a past eternity. The
authentic wonder is the fact of the transition having been made
from the one to the other; and it is far more incredible that,
from not having been, we are, than that, from actual being, we
shall continue to be." 16

The unbounded possibilities of life suggested by science and open
to imagination furnish sufficient reply to the objection that we
cannot conceive the precise causes and modes of a future state.
Had one little partitular been different in the structure of the
eye, or in the radiation and media of light, we should never have
seen the stars! We should have supposed this globe the whole of
creation. So some slightest integument or hindering condition may
now be hiding from us the sublime reality and arrangements of
immortality which in death's disenveloping hour are to burst into
our vision as the stellar hemisphere through the night. Shut up
now to one form of being and one method of experience, how can we
expect an exhaustive knowledge of other and future forms and
methods of being and experience? It is a contradiction to ask it.
But the soul is warranted in having faith, like a buried mustard
seed which shall yet mount into its future life. A sevenfold
denser mystery and a seven times narrower ignorance would bring no
real argument against the survival of the soul. For in an
omnipotent infinitude of possibilities one line of ignorance
cannot exhaust the avenues and capacities of being. Escaping the
flesh, we may soar into heaven

"Upon ethereal wings, whose way
Lies through an element so fraught
With living Mind that, as they play,
Their every movement is a thought."

Ignorance of the scientific method avails nothing against moral
proofs of the fact. The physiologist studying the coats of the
stomach, the anatomist dissecting the convolutions of the brain,
could never tell that man is capable of sentiment, faith, and
logic. No stethoscope can discern the sound of an expectation, and
no scalpel can lay bare a dream; yet there are expectations and
dreams. No metaphysical glass can detect, no prognosis foresee,
the death of the soul with the dissolution of its organs: on
empirical grounds, the assertion of it is therefore unwarranted.
But though no amount of obscurity enveloping the subject, no
extent of ignorance disabling us now to grasp the secret, is a
legitimate basis of disbelief, yet actually, there can be no
doubt, in multitudes of instances, the effectual cause of
disbelief in immortality is the impossibility of vividly
conceiving its conditions and scenery; "for," as one of the
subtlest of thinkers has remarked, "however far faith may go
beyond experience, it

16 Martineau, Sermon on Immortality, in Endeavors after the
Christian Life.


must always be chained down by it at a distance." But if there are
good grounds for anticipating another life, then man should
confide in it, no matter how incompetent he is to construct its
theatre and foresee its career. A hundred years ago, one might
have scouted the statement that the most fearful surgical
operations would be performed without inflicting pain, because it
was impossible to see how it could be done. Or if a person had
been informed that two men, one in Europe and one in America,
should converse in lightning athwart the bed of the Atlantic, he
might have rejected it as an absurdity, because he could not
conceive the mode. If destined to a future life, all we could
reasonably expect to know of it now would be through hinting germs
and mystic presentiments of it. And there we do experience to the
fullest extent: their ceaseless prophecies are everywhere with us,

"Blank misgivings of a creature Moving about in worlds not
realized."

The last weapon of disbelief in a future life is the Scientific
Argument from Materialism. Lucretius says, "There is nothing in
the universe but bodies and the properties of bodies." This is a
characteristic example of the method of the materialists: to
assume, as an unquestionable postulate, the very point in debate,
and that, too, in defiance of the intelligent instincts of
consciousness which compel every unsophisticated person to
acknowledge the simultaneous existence of mind and matter as two
correlated yet distinct realities. The better statement would be,
There is nothing in the universe but forces and the relations of
forces. For, while we know ourselves in immediate self
consciousness, as personal intelligences perceiving, willing, and
acting, all we know of an outward world is the effects produced on
us by its forces. Certainly the powers of the universe can never
be lost from the universe. Therefore if our souls are, as
consciousness declares, causes, and not mere phenomena, they are
immortal. To ignore either factor in the problem of life, the
material substratum or the dynamic agent, is mere narrowness and
blindness.

But the unbelieving naturalist argues that the total man is a
product of organization, and therefore that with the dissolution
of the living combination of organs all is over. Matter is the
marriage bed and grave of soul. Priestley says, "The principle of
thought no more belongs to substance distinct from body than the
principle of sound belongs to substance distinct from bell." There
is no relevancy in the comparison, because the things are wholly
unlike. Thought is not, as Hartley's theory avowed it was, a
vibration of a cerebral nerve, as sound is a vibration of a
sonorous body; for how could these vibrations be accumulated in
memory as our mental experiences are? When a material vibration
ends, it has gone forever; but thoughts are stored up and
preserved. A hypothetical simile, like that just cited from
Priestley, is not a cogent argument. It is false science thus to
limit the modes of being to what lies within our present empirical
knowledge. Is it not pure presumptuousness to affirm that the
creative power of Almighty God is shut up so that intelligent
creatures can only exist in forms of flesh? When a recent
materialist makes the assertion, "The thinking man is the sum of
his senses," it is manifest that he goes beyond the data, assuming
what should be proved, and confounding the instruments and
material with the workman. It is as if one should say, "A working
cotton manufactory is the sum of its machines," excluding the
persons by whose guiding oversight all is done. Plainly, it may be
granted that all which man knows is brought in through the door of
the senses, without allowing the same of all that man is. We have
no warrant for pronouncing the identical coextensiveness of what
man learns to know and what he is created to be. The very
proposition, man knows something, presupposes three things, a
subject, an act, and an object. Whether the three exist and perish
together or not is matter for discussion, and not fairly to be
settled by forcibly lumping the heterogeneous three into
homogeneous unity.

In the present state of science it must be confessed that all
kinds of physical force  whether mechanical, chemical, vital, or
nervous are drawn more or less directly from the sun, the material
reservoir of power for our solar system. This must be admitted,
although some recent materialists have pushed the doctrine so far
that they may be called the Parsees of the West. Whenever the
proper conditions for an animate being are furnished, a force
derived from the sun lifts matter from its stable equilibrium to
the level of organic existence. In due season, from its wavering
life struggle there, it decays back to the deep rest of insensate
earth.17 This is a truth throughout the organic realm, from the
bulb of a sea weed to the brain of a Casar. So much cannot be
denied. Every organism constantly receives from the universe food
and force, and as constantly restores in other forms the material
and dynamical equivalents of what it receives, and finally itself
goes to the sources whence it came. But the affirmation of this
for all within the physical realm is not the admission of it for
what subsists in an immeasurably higher rank and totally different
realm. Entering the psychical sphere, where we deal with a new,
distinct order of realities, not impenetrability, weight,
extension, but thought, affection, will, why may not this province
contain eternities, even though the other holds only mortalities?
It is a question to be examined on its own grounds, not to be put
aside with a foregone conclusion. In nature the cause endures
under all evanescent changes, and survives all phenomenal
beginnings and endings: so in spirit the causal personality, if
there be one, may outlast all the shifting currents of the outward
phenomena in endless persistence. Of course, the manifestation of
the mind through the senses must cease when the senses no longer
remain. The essence of the controversy, then, is exactly this: Is
the mind an entity? or is it a collection of functions? If the
soul be a substantial force, it is immortal. If it be a phenomenal
resultant, it ceases at death.

A reductio ad absurdum immediately occurs. If the psychical
totality of man consists of states of feeling, modes of volition,
and powers of thought, not necessitating any spiritual entity in
which they inhere, then, by parity of reasoning, the physical
totality of man consists of states of nutrition, modes of
absorption, and powers of change, implying no body in which these
processes are effectuated! Qualities cannot exist without a
subject: and just as physical attributes involve a body, spiritual
attributes involve a mind. And, if a mental entity be admitted,
its death or cessation with that of its outer dress or case is not
a fair inference, but needs appropriate evidence.

The soul of a man has been defined as the sum of his ideas, an
idea being a state of the consciousness. But the essence of mind
must be the common ground and element of all

17 Moleschott, Licht and Leben.


different states of consciousness. What is that common ground and
element but the presence of a percipient volitional force, whether
manifested or unmanifested, still there? That is the germinal core
of our mental being, integrating and holding in continuous
identity all the phenomenal fluctuations of consciousness. It is
clear that any other representation seems inconsistent with the
most central and vivid facts of our knowledge. In illustration of
this, let us see how every materialistic exposition omits utterly,
or fails to account for, the most essential element, the solitary
and crowning peculiarity, of the case. For example, it is said
that thought or consciousness is a phenomenal process of changes
sustained in the brain by a correlation of forces, just as the
rainbow appears, but has no ontological subsistence of its own:
the continuous spectrum hangs steady on the ceaselessly renewed
substratum of the moving mist rack and the falling rain. But the
comparison is absolutely inapplicable, because the deepest ground
principle of the mind is wanting in the rainbow, namely, conscious
and continuous identity holding in each present moment all the
changes of the past moments. If the rainbow were gifted with
consciousness, it could not preserve its personal identity, but
merely its phenomenal identity, for any two successive moments,
since its whole being would consist of an untied succession of
states.

Traversing the body from its extreme tissues to the gray vesicular
substance composing the spinal cord and covering the surface and
convolutions of the brain, are two sets of white, fibrous nerves.
One set, the afferents, bring in sensation, all kinds of tidings,
from the out world of matter. The other set, the efferents, carry
out volition, all kinds of decrees, from the in world of mind.
Without an afferent nerve no influence of the world can reach the
mind; and without an efferent nerve no conclusion of the mind can
reach the world. As we are now constituted, this machinery is
necessary for the intercommunication of the mind and the material
universe. But if there be something in the case besides live
machinery and crossing telegrams, if there be a monarch mind
inaccessible to the vulgar crowd of things and only conversing
with them through the internuncial nerves, that spirit entity may
itself be capable of existing forever in an ideal universe and of
communing there face to face with its own kingly lineage and
brood. And we maintain that the account of the phenomena is
grossly defective, and that the phenomena themselves are palpably
inexplicable, except upon the supposition of such an entity, which
uses the organism but is not the organism itself nor a function of
it. "Ideas," one materialist teaches, "are transformed
sensations." Yes; but that does not supersede a transforming mind.
There must be a force to produce the transformations. "The
phenomena of mind," says another, "consist in a succession of
states of consciousness." Yes; but what is it that presides over,
takes up, and preserves this succession? The phenomena of the mind
are not the mind itself. "The actions of the mind are the
functions of the cerebrum," adds a third. Yes; but the inquiry is,
what is the mind itself? not, what are its acts? The admission of
the gray nerve cells of the brain, as the material substratum
through which sensations are received and volitions returned, does
not exclude the necessity of a dynamical cause for the
metamorphosing phenomenon. That cause must be free and
intelligent, because the products of its action, as well as its
accompanying consciousness, are marked by freedom and intelligence.
For example, when a cylindrical and

fibrous porter deposits his sensitive burden in the vesicular and
cineritious substance, something examines it, tests its import,
reflects on what shall be done, forms an intelligent resolution,
and commands another porter to bear the dynamic load forth. The
reflective and determining something that does this is the mind.
Thus, by the fact of an indissoluble dynamic will, is the broad
lineal experience of man grasped and kept from dissipating into
crumbled psychical states, as when the dead kings of ancient India
were burned their corpses were wrapped in asbestos shrouds to hold
the ashes together.

The flame of a burnt out candle twinkling in the socket is not
numerically the same with that which appeared when it was first
lighted; nor is a river at any two periods numerically the same.
Different particles constantly feed an ever renewed flame or
stream, just like the former but never the same. A totally new
element appears when we contemplate mind. Here, although the whole
molecular substance of the visible organism is in perpetual flux,
the same conscious personality persists through all, growing ever
richer in an accumulating possession of past experiences still
held in living command. The Arethusa of identity threads the
blending states of consciousness, and, passing the ocean bed of
death, may emerge in some morning fount of immortality. A
photographic image impressed on suitable paper and then
obliterated is restored by exposure to the fumes of mercury. But
if an indefinite number of impressions were superimposed on the
same paper, could the fumes of mercury restore any one called for
at random? Yet man's memory is a plate with a hundred millions of
impressions all cleanly preserved, and he can at will select and
evoke the one he wants. No conceivable relationship of
materialistic forces can account for the facts of this miraculous
daguerreotype plate of experience, and the power of the mind to
call out into solitary conspicuousness a desired picture which has
forty nine million nine hundred and ninety nine thousand nine
hundred and ninety nine latent pictures lying above it, and fifty
millions below it. It has been said that "the impressions on the
brain, whether perceptions or intellections, are fixed and
retained through the exactness of assimilation. As the mind took
cognizance of the change made by the first impression of an object
acting on the brain through the sense organs, so afterwards it
recognises the likeness of that change in the parts inserted by
the nutritive process.18 This passage implies that the mind is an
agent, not a phenomenon; and it describes some of the machinery
with which the mind works, not the essence of the mind itself. Its
doctrine does not destroy nor explain the presiding and elective
power which interprets these assimilated and preserved changes,
choosing out such of them as it pleases, that unavoided and
incomprehensible power, the hiding place of volition and eternity,
whose startling call has often been known, in some dread crisis,
to effect an instantaneous restoration of the entire bygone life,
making all past events troop through the memory, a swiftly awful
cavalcade marching along the fibrous pavement of the brain, while
each terrified thought rushes to its ashy window to behold. We
here leave the material realm behind and enter a spiritual
province where other predicates and laws hold, and where,
"delivered over to a night of pure light, in which no unpurged
sight is sharp enough to penetrate the mysterious essence that
sprouteth into different persons," we kneel in most pious awe, and
cry, with Sir

18 Paget. Surgical Pathology, Lecture II.


Thomas Browne, "There is surely a piece of divinity in us,
something that was before the elements and owes no homage unto the
sun!"

The fatal and invariable mistake of materialism is that it
confounds means and steps with causes, processes with sources,
organs with ends, predicates with subject.19 Alexander Bain denies
that there is any cerebral closet or receptacle of sensation and
imagery where impressions are stored to be reproduced at pleasure.
He says, the revival of a past impression, instead of being an
evocation of it from an inner chamber, is a setting on anew of the
current which originally produced it, now to produce it again.20
But this theory does not alter the fact that all past impressions
are remembered and can be revived at will by an internal
efficiency. The miracle, and the necessity of an unchanging
conscious entity to explain it, are implied just as they were on
the old theory. "The organs of sense," Sir Isaac Newton writes,
"are not for enabling the soul to perceive the species of things
in its sensorium, but for conveying them there." 21 Now, as we
cannot suppose that God has a brain or needs any material organs,
but rather that all infinitude is his Sensorium, so spirits may
perceive spiritual realities without any mediating organism. Our
physical experience in the present is no limit to the spiritual
possibilities of the future. The materialistic argument against
immortality fails, because it excludes essential facts. As
anterior to our experience in the present state there was a power
to organize experiences and to become what we are, so none of the
superficial reasonings of a mere earth science can show that there
is not now a power to organize experiences in a future state and
to become what our faith anticipates we shall be. And this
suggests to speculative curiosity the query, Shall we commence our
future life, a psychical cell, as we commenced our present life, a
physical cell?

It will be well, perhaps, to reply next to some of the aggressive
sophistries of disbelief. The following lines by Dr. Beddoes are
striking, but, considered as a symbol of life, seem almost
wilfully defective:

"The body is but an engine Which draws a mighty stream of
spiritual power Out of the world's own soul, and makes it play A
while in visible motion."

Man is that miraculous engine which includes not only all the
needful machinery, but also fuel, fire, steam, and speed, and
then, in climacteric addition to these, an engineer! Does the
engineer die when the fire goes out and the locomotive stops? When
the engine madly plunges off the embankment or bridge of life,
does the engineer perish in the ruin, or nimbly leap off and
immortally escape? The theory of despair has no greater
plausibility than that of faith.

Feuerbach teaches that the memento mori of reason meets us
everywhere in the spiritual God's acre of literature. A book is a
grave, which buries not the dead remains, but the quick

19 Frauenstadt, Per Materialismus, seine Wahrheit und sein
Irrthum, s. 169.

20 The Senses and the Intellect, p. 61.

21 Brodie, Psychological Inquiries, p. 41, 3d edition.


man, not his corpse, but his soul. And so we live on the psychical
deposits of our ancestry. Our souls consist of that material which
once constituted other souls, as our bodies consist of the
material which once constituted other bodies. A thought, it is to
be replied, is never excreted from the mind and left behind. Only
its existence is indicated by symbols, while itself is added to
the eternal stock of the deathless mind. A thought is a spiritual
product in the mind from an affection of the cerebral substance. A
sentence is a symbol of a thought adapted to create in the
contemplator just such a cerebral affection as that from which it
sprang, and to deposit in his mind just such a spiritual product
as that which it now denotes. Thus are we stimulated and
instructed by the transmitted symbols of our ancestors'
experiences, but not literally nourished by assimilation of their
very psychical substance, as this remorseless prophet of death's
ghastly idealism would have us believe. Still, in whatever aspect
we regard it, one cannot but shudder before that terrible
cineritious substance whose dynamic inhabitants are generated in
the meeting of matter's messages with mind's forces, and sent
forth in emblems to shake the souls of millions, revolutionize
empires, and refashion the world.

Strauss employs an ingenious argument against the belief in a
future life, an argument as harmless in reality as it is novel and
formidable in appearance. "Whether the nerve spirit be considered
as a dependent product, or as the producing principle of the
organism, it ends at death: for, in the former case, it can no
longer be produced when the organism perishes; in the latter case,
that it ceases to sustain the organism is a proof that it has
itself decayed."22 In this specious bit of special pleading,
unwarranted postulates are assumed and much confusion of thought
is displayed. It is covertly taken for granted that every thing
seen in a given phenomenon is either product or producer; but
something may be an accompanying part, involved in the conditions
of the phenomenon, yet not in any way essentially dependent on it,
and in fact surviving it. What does Strauss mean by "the nerve
spirit"? Is there no mind behind it and above it, making use of it
as a servant? Our present life is the result of an actual and
regulated harmony of forces. Surely that harmony may end without
implying the decay of any of its initial components, without
implying the destruction of the central constituent of its
intelligence. It is illegitimate logic, passing from pure
ignorance to positive affirmation; a saltation of sophistry from a
negative premise of blindness to all behind the organic life, to a
dogmatic conclusion of denial that there is any thing behind the
organic life.

A subtle and vigorous disbeliever has said, "The belief in
immortality is not a correct expression of human nature, but rests
solely on a misunderstanding of it. The real opinion of human
nature is expressed in the universal sorrow and wailing over
death." It is obvious to answer that both these expressions are
true utterances of human nature. It grieves over the sadness of
parting, the appalling change and decay, the close locked mystery
of the unseen state. It rejoices in the solace and cheer of a
sublime hope springing out of the manifold powerful promises
within and without. Instead of contemning the idea of a heavenly
futurity as an idle dream image of human longing, it were both
devouter and more reasonable, from

22 Charakteristiken und Kritiken, s. 394.


that very causal basis of it, to revere it and confide in it as
divinely pledged. All the thwarted powers and preparations and
affections, too grand, too fine, too sacred, to meet their fit
fulfilment here, are a claim for some holier and vaster sphere, a
prophecy of a more exalted and serene existence, elsewhere. The
unsatisfied and longing soul has created the doctrine of a future
life, has it? Very good. If the soul has builded a house in
heaven, flown up and made a nest in the breezy boughs of
immortality, that house must have tenants, that nest must be
occupied. The divinely implanted instincts do not provide and
build for naught.

Certain considerations based on the resemblances of men and
beasts, their asserted community of origin and fundamental unity
of nature, have had great influence in leading to the denial of
the immortality of the human soul. It is taken for granted that
animals are totally mortal; and then, from the apparent
correspondences of phenomena and fate between them and us, the
inference is drawn that the cases are parallel throughout, and
that our destiny, too, is annihilation. The course of thought on
this subject has been extremely curious, illustrating, on the one
hand, that "where our egotism begins, there the laws of logic
break," and, on the other hand, that often when fancy gets scent
of a theory the voice and lash of reason are futile to restrain it
until the theory is run into the ground. Des Cartes, and after him
Malebranche and a few other writers, gave no slight currency to
the notion that brutes are mere machines, moved by prearranged
influences and utterly destitute of intelligence, will, or
consciousness. This scheme gave rise to many controversies, but
has now passed into complete neglect.23 Of late years the tendency
has been to assimilate instead of separating man and beast.
Touching the outer sphere, we have Oken's homologies of the
cranial vertebra. In regard to the inner sphere, we have a score
of treatises, like Vogt's Pictures from Brute Life, affirming that
there is no qualitative, but merely a quantitative, distinction
between the human soul and the brute soul.24 Over this point the
conflict is still thick and hot. But, however much of truth there
may be in the doctrine of the ground identity of the soul of a man
and the soul of a dog, the conclusion that man therefore perishes
is a pure piece of sophistry. Such a monstrous assassination of
the souls of the human race with the jaw bone of an ass may be
legitimately avoided in either of two ways. It is as fair to argue
the immortality of animals from their likeness to us, as our
annihilation from our likeness to them. The psychological realm
has been as much deepened in them by the researches of modern
science as the physiological domain has been widened in us. As
Agassiz says, we must not lose sight of the mental individuality
of animals in an exclusive attention to the bodily side of their
nature.25 A multitude of able thinkers have held the faith that
animals have immaterial and deathless souls. Rightly considered,
there is nothing in such a

23 Darmanson, La bete transformee en machine. Ditton, Appendix to
Discourse on Resurrection of Christ, showing that brutes are not
mere machines, but have immortal souls. Orphal, Sind die Thiere
blos sinnliche Geschopfe? Thomasius, De Anima Brutorum, quo
asseritur, eam non esse Materialem, contra Cartesianam Opinionem.
Winkler, Philosophische Untersuchungen von dem Seyn and Wesen der
Seelen der Thiere, von einzelnen Liebhabern der Weltweisheit.

24 Buchner, Kraft und Stoff, kap. 19: Die Thierseele.

25 Essay on Classification, p. 64.


doctrine which a keen reasoner may not credit and a person of the
most refined feelings find pleasure in embracing. In their serene
catholicity and divine sympathy, science and religion exclude
pride and contempt.

But admitting that there is no surviving psychical entity in the
brute, that is in no way a clear postulate for proving that the
same fact holds of man. The lower endowments and provinces of
man's nature and experience may correspond ever so closely with
the being and life of brutes whose existence absolutely ceases at
death, and yet he may be immortal. The higher range of his
spiritual faculties may elevate him into a realm of universal and
eternal principles, extricating his soul from the meshes of decay.
He may come into contact with a sphere of truths, grasp and rise
into a region of realities, conferring the prerogative of
deathlessness, not to be reached by natures gifted in a much lower
degree, although of the same kind. Such a distinction is made
between men themselves by Spinoza.26 His doctrine of immortality
depicts the stupendous boon as contingent, to be acquired by
observance of conditions. If the ideas of the soul represent
perishable objects, it is itself mortal; if imperishable, it is
immortal. Now, brutes, it is probable, never rise to the
apprehension of pure and eternal truths; but men do. It was a mean
prejudice, founded on selfish ignorance and pride, which first
assumed the total destruction of brutes in death, and afterwards,
by the grovelling range of considerations in which it fastened and
the reaction it naturally provoked, involved man and all his
imperial hopes in the same fate. A firm logical discrimination
disentangles the human mind from this beastly snarl.27 The
difference in data warrants a difference in result. The argument
for the immortality of brutes and that for the immortality of men
are, in some respects, parallel lines, but they are not
coextensive. Beginning together, the latter far outreaches the
former. Man, like the animals, eats, drinks, sleeps, builds;
unlike them, he adorns an ideal world of the eternal future, lays
up treasures in its heavenly kingdom, and waits to migrate into
it.

There are two distinct methods of escaping the fatal inference of
disbelief usually drawn by materialists. First, by the denial of
their philosophical postulates, by the predication of immaterial
substance, affirming the soul to be a spaceless point, its life an
indivisible moment. The reasonings in behalf of this conception
have been manifold, and cogent enough to convince a multitude of
accomplished and vigorous thinkers.28 In Herbart's system the soul
is an immaterial monad, or real, capable of the permanent
formation of states in its interior. Its life consists of a
quenchless series of self preservations. These reals, with their
relations and aggregations, constitute at once the varying
phenomena and the causal substrata of the universe. Mamertius
Claudianus, a philosophical priest of Southern Gaul in the fifth
century, wrote a treatise "On the Nature of the Soul." He says,
"When the soul wills, it is all will; when it recollects or feels,
it is all recollection or feeling. Now, will, recollection, and
feeling, are not bodies. Therefore the soul is incorporeal." This
makes the conscious man an

26 Jouffroy, Introduction to Ethics: Channing's trans., vol. ii.
pp. 189-191.

27 Schaller, Leib und Seele, kap. 13: Der Psychische Unterschied
des Menschen vom Thiere.

28 Crombie, Natural Theology, vol. ii.: Essay on the Immortality
of the Soul. Brougham, Discourse of Nat. Theol., sect. 5.


imperishable substantial activity. An old English writer, with
quaint eloquence, declares, "There is a proportion between an atom
and the universe, because both are quantitative. All this excesse
vanisheth into nothing as soon as the lowest substance shineth out
of that orbe where they reside that scorn divisibility."

From this brief statement of the position of the immaterialists,
without arguing it, we pass to note, in the second place, that
nearly all the postulates ordinarily claimed by the materialist
may be granted without by any means proving the justice of their
disbelief of a future life.29 Admit that there can be no sensation
without a nerve, no thought without a brain, no phenomenal
manifestation without an organ. Such an admission legitimates the
conclusion, on empirical grounds, that our present mode of life
must cease with the dissolution of our organism. It does not even
empirically prove that we may not survive in some other mode of
being, passing perhaps to an inconceivably higher stage and more
blessed kind of life. After the entire disintegration of our
material organs, we may, by some now unknown means, possess in a
refined form the equivalents of what those organs gave us. There
may be, interfused throughout the gross mortal body, an immortal
body of exquisitely delicate structure invisibly extricating
itself from the carious ruins at death. Plattner develops and
defends this hypothesis with plausible skill and power.30 The
Hindus conceived the soul to be concealed within several
successive sheaths, the innermost of which accompanied it through
all its transmigrations.31 "The subtile person extends to a small
distance over the skull, like the flame of a lamp above its wick."
32 The later Pythagoreans and Platonists seem to have believed
that the same numerical ethereal body with which the soul was at
first created adhered to it inseparably during all its descents
into grosser bodies, a lucid and wingy vehicle, which, purged by
diet and catharms, ascends again, bearing the soul to its native
seat.33 The doctrine of Swedenborg asserts man to be interiorly an
organized form pervading the physical body, an eternal receptacle
of life from God. In his terminology, "constant influx of life"
supersedes the popular idea of a self contained spiritual
existence. But this influx is conditioned by its receiving organ,
the undecaying inner body.34 However boldly it may be assailed and
rejected as a baseless theory, no materialistic logic can disprove
the existence of an ethereal form contained in, animating, and
surviving, the visible organism. It is a possibility; although,
even if it be a fact, science, by the very conditions of the case,
can never unveil or demonstrate it.

When subjected to a certain mode of thought developed recently by
Faraday, Drossbach, and others, materialism itself brightens and
dissolves into a species of idealism, the universe becomes a
glittering congeries of indestructible points of power, and the
immortality of the soul is established as a mathematical
certainty.35 All bodies, all entities, are but forms of

This has been ably shown by Spiers in his treatise, Ueber das
korperliche Bedingtsein der Seelenthatigkeiten.

30 Spes immortalitatis animorum per rationes physiologicas
confirmata.

31 Dabistan, vol. ii. p. 177.

32 Colebrooke, Essays, vol. i. p. 246.

33 Cudworth, Int. Sys., vol. ii. pp. 218-230, Am. ed.

34 On the Intercourse between the Soul and the Body, sect. 9.

35 Lott, Herbarti de animi immortalitate doctrina.


force.36 Gravity, cohesion, bitterness, thought, love,
recollection, are manifestations of force peculiarly conditioned.
Our perceptions are a series of states of consciousness. An
attribute or property of a thing is an exercise of force or mode
of activity producing a certain state of consciousness in us. The
sum of its attributes or properties constitutes the totality of
the thing, and is not adventitiously laid upon the thing: you can
separate the parts of a thing; but you cannot take away its forces
from any part, because they are its essence. Matter is not a
limitation or neutralization, but a state and expression, of
force. Force itself is not multiplex, but one, all qualities and
directions of it lying potentially in each entity, the kinds and
amounts which shall be actually manifested depending in each case
on the conditions environing it. All matter, all being, therefore,
consists of ultimate atoms or monads, each one of which is an
inseparable solidarity of activities. The universe is an eternal
society of eternal force individuals, all of which are capable of
constant changes in groupings, aggregations, developments,
relations, but absolutely incapable of annihilation. Every atom
possesses potential reason, and comes to self apprehension
whenever the appropriate conditions meet. All differences
originate from conditions and exist not in essentialities.

According to this theory, the eternity of the soul is sure, but
that eternity must be an endless series of mutual transitions
between consciousness and unconsciousness, life and death.37 Since
all cannot be men at once, they must take their turns. Carus says,
a soul enclosing in itself an independent consciousness is
inconceivable. When the organism by which consciousness is
conditioned and revealed is destroyed in death, consciousness
disappears as certainly as the gleaming height of a dome falls in
when its foundation is removed. And Drossbach adds, death is the
shade side of life. Without shade, light would not be perceptible,
nor life without death; for only contrast leads to knowledge. The
consciousness of life is realized by interchange with the
unconsciousness of death. Mortality is the inevitable attribute of
a self conscious being. The immortality of such a being can be
nothing else than an everlasting mortality. In this restless
alternation between the opposite states of life and death, being
holds continuous endurance, but consciousness is successively
extinguished and revived, while memory is each time hopelessly
lost. Widenmann holds that the periods of death are momentary, the
soul being at once born again, retaining no vestiges of its
past.38 Drossbach, on the contrary, believes that memory is an
indefeasible quality of the soul atom, the reason why we do not
remember previous lives being that the present is our first
experiment. When all atoms destined to become men have once run
the human career, the earliest ones will begin to reappear with
full memory of their preceding course. It matters not how long it
requires for one circuit of the whole series of souls; for the
infinite future is before us, and, as we are unconscious in death,
the lapse of ages is nothing. We lie down to sleep, and instantly
rise up to a new life.

36 Hickok, Rational Cosmology, ch. ii. sect. 1: Matter is force.

37 Drossbach, Die personliche Unsterblichkeit als Folge der
atomistischen Verfaasung der Natur, abschn. iv. kap. ii. sect. 5,
6.

38 Gedanken uber die Unsterblichkeit als Wiederholung des
Erdenlebens.


"Death gives to life all its relish, as hunger is the true sauce
of food. Death first makes us precious and dear to ourselves.
Since it lies in the nature of change that no condition is
endless, but morning ever follows night, death cannot be endless.
Be unconcerned; thy being shall as little be lost as the grain of
dust at thy foot! Because in death thou dost not know that thou
art, therefore fearest thou that thou shalt be no more? O
pusillanimous! the great events of nature are too vast for thy
weak heart. A whole eternity thou hast not been conscious that
thou art, and yet thou hast become conscious of it. Every night
thou losest thy consciousness, yet art thou conscious again, and
shalt be. The loss of consciousness is not necessarily the loss of
self. The knowledge of my being is not my being itself, but a
peculiar force thereof, which, entering into reciprocal action
with other forces, is subject to change. It is its essence to act,
and thus to change, yet without surrendering its essence. Goethe's
words may be applied to the soul: 'It is; therefore eternally it
is.'

Not in cold motionlessness consists eternal life, but in eternal
movement, in eternal alteration, in incessant change. These are
warranties that no state endures forever, not even the
unconscious, death." 39

In this unfolding of the theory there are many arbitrary and
fanciful conceptions which may easily be dispensed with. The
interspersion of the bright life of the human monads with blank
epochs of oblivious darkness, and the confinement of their destiny
to an endless repetition of their life course on this globe, are
not necessary. In the will of God the free range of the boundless
universe may lie open to them and an incessant career in forever
novel circumstances await them. It is also conceivable that human
souls, leading still recurrent lives on earth with total
forgetfulness, may at last acquire sufficient power, in some happy
concurrence or sublime exigency, to summon back and retain all
their foregone states. But, leaving aside all such incidental
speculations, the chief interest of the dynamic atomistic or monad
theory, as affording a solid basis for immortality, is in relation
to the arrogance of a shallow and conceited materialism. Says the
materialist, "Show me a spirit, and I will believe in your
heaven." Replies the idealist, "Show me your matter, however small
a piece, and I will yield to your argument." Spirit is no
phenomenon to be shown, and matter is an inference from thought:
thus the counter statements of physical science and ideal
philosophy fairly offset each other, and throw their respective
advocates back upon the natural ground of unsophisticated faith
and observation. Standing there unperverted, man has an invincible
reliance on the veracity of his faculties and the normal reports
of nature. Through immediate apprehension of his own conscious
will and the posited experience of his senses, he has knowledge
both of causal forms of being, or free productive force, and of
resultant processes and phenomena. And surely sound logic teaches
that the latter may alter or disappear without implying the
annihilation of the former. If all material substance, so called,
were destroyed, not only would space remain as an infinite
indivisible unity, but the equivalents

39 Drossbach, Die individuelle Unsterblichkeit vom monadistisch
metaphysischen Standpunkte betrachtet.


of what had been destroyed must remain in some form or other. Who
shall say that these equivalents would not be intelligent points
of power, capable of organizing aggregate bodies and of
reconstituting the universe in the will of God, or of forming from
period to period, in endless succession, new kinds of universes,
each abounding in hitherto unimagined modes of life and degrees of
bliss? To our present faculties, with only our present
opportunities and data, the final problem of being is insoluble.
We resolve the properties of matter into methods of activity,
manifestations of force. But there, covered with alluring awe, a
wall of impenetrable mystery confronts us with its baffling "Thus
far, and no farther, shall thine explicating gaze read the secrets
of destiny." We cannot tell what force is. We can conceive neither
its genesis nor its extinction. Over that obscure environment,
into the immense empire of possibilities, we must bravely fling
the treasures of our love and the colors of our hope, and with a
divine impulse in the moment of death leap after, trusting not to
sink as nothing into the abyss of nowhere, but, landing safe in
some elysium better than we know, to find ourselves still in God.

In dealing with moral problems in the realm of the higher reason,
intuitions, mysterious hints, prophetic feelings, instinctive
apprehensions of fitness and harmony, may be of more convincing
validity than all the formal arguments logic can build.40
"Sentiment," Ancillon says, as quoted by Lewes, "goes further than
knowledge: beyond demonstrative proofs there is natural evidence;
beyond analysis, inspiration; beyond words, ideas; beyond ideas,
emotions; and the sense of the infinite is a primitive fact of the
soul." In transcendental mathematics, problems otherwise
unapproachable are solved by operating with emblems of the
relations of purely imaginary quantities to the facts of the
problems. The process is sound and the result valid, notwithstanding
the hypothetical and imaginary character of the aids in reaching it.

When for mastering the dim momentous problems of our destiny
the given quantities and relations of science are inadequate,
the helpful supposititious conditions furnished by faith may
equally lead over their airy ways to conclusions of eternal truth.

The disbelievers of a future life have in their investigations
applied methods not justly applicable to the subject, and
demanded a species of proof impossible for the subject to yield:
as if one should use his ear to listen to the symmetries of beauty,
and his eye to gaze upon the undulations of music.

It is therefore that the terribly logical onslaughts of
Feuerbach are harmless upon most persons. The glittering scimetar
of this Saracenic metaphysician flashes swift and sharp, but he
fights the air with weapons of air. No blood flows from the
severed emptiness of space; no clash of the blows is heard any
more than bell strokes would be heard in an exhausted receiver.
One may justifiably accept propositions which strict science
cannot establish and believe in the existence of a thing which
science cannot reveal, as Jacobi has abundantly shown41 and as
Wagner has with less ability tried to illustrate.42 The utmost
possible achievement of a negative criticism is to show the
invalidity of the physiological,

40 Abel, Disquisitio omnium tam pro immortalitate quam pro
mortalitate argumentandi generum.

41 Von den goutlichen Dingen and ibrer Offenbarung. Wissen und
Glauben mit besonderer Beziehung zur Zukunft der Seelen:
Fortsetzung der Betrachtungen uber Menschenschopfung und
Seelensubstanz.


analogical, and metaphysical arguments to furnish positive proof
of a future life for us. But this negation fully admitted is no
evidence of our total mortality. Science is impotent to give any
proof reaching to such a conclusion. However badly the archery of
the sharp eyed and strong armed critics of disbelief has riddled
the outer works of ordinary argument, it has not slain the
garrison. Scientific criticism therefore leaves us at this point:
there may be an immortal soul in us. Then the question whether
there actually is an immortal soul in us, rests entirely on moral
facts and considerations. Allowing their native force to these
moral facts and considerations, the healthy ethical thinker,
recognising in himself an innermost self conscious ego which knows
itself persistent and identical amidst the multiplex vicissitude
of transient conditions, lies down to die expecting immediately to
continue his being's journey elsewhere, in some other guise.
Leaving out of view these moral facts and considerations, the
materialistic naturalist thinker, recognising his consciousness as
only a phantom procession of states across the cerebral stage hung
in ashy livery and afloat on blood, lies down to expire expecting
immediately to be turned into nobody forever. Misinterpreting and
undervaluing these moral facts and considerations, the anchorless
speculative thinker, recognising his organism as an eye through
which the World Spirit beholds itself, or a momentary pulse in
which the All feels itself, his consciousness as a part of the
infinite Thought, lies down on his death couch expecting
immediately to be turned into everybody, eternity, instead of
greeting him with an individual kiss, wrapping him in a monistic
embrace. The broad drift of human conviction leads to the first
conclusion, a persistent personality. The greatest philosophers,
from Plato to Pascal, deny the second view, a blotting extinction
of the soul, declaring it false in science and incredible in
presentation. The third theory a pantheistic absorption  the
irresistible common sense of mankind repudiates as a morbid dream.
Man naturally believes himself immortal but not infinite. Monism
is a doctrine utterly foreign to undiseased thinking. Although it
be a Fichte, a Schelling, or a Hegel, who says that the soul is a
circumscribed yet omnipotent ego, which first radiates the
universe, and afterwards beholds it in the mirror of itself, and
at length breaks into dead universality, the conception is, to the
average apprehension of humanity, as overweening a piece of wild
fancy as ever rose in a madman's reveries.43

The ordinary contemplator of the phenomena of the world and the
sequel of human life from the materialistic point of view feels
disgust and terror at the prospect. The scene seems to him
degrading and the fate fearful. The loathing and dismay vulgarly
experienced thus, it is true, arise from an exaggerated
misapprehension of the basis and meaning of the facts: rightly
appreciated, all is rulingly alive, aspirant, beautiful, and
benignant. The ceaseless transformations filling the heights and
depths of the creation are pervaded with joy and

42 A full discussion of the pantheistic doctrine of immortality
will be found in the following works. Richmann, Gemsinfassl.
Darstellung und Wurdigung aller gehaltreichen Beweisarten fur Gott
und fur Unsterblichkeit der Seele. Unius, Unsterblichkeit.
Blanche, Philosophische Unsterblichkeitlehre.

43 Weisse, Die philosophische Geheimlehre von der Unsterblichkeit
des menschlichen Individuums. Goschel, Von den Beweisen fur die
Unsterblichkeit der menschlichen Seele im Lichte der speculativen
Philosophie. Morell, Historical and Critical View of the
Speculative Philosophy of Europe in the 19th Century, part ii. ch.
v. sect. 2: The German School of the 19th Century. Buchanan,
Modern Atheism.


clothed with a noble poetry. There is no real death: what seems so
is but a "return or falling home of the fundamental phenomenon to
the phenomenal foundation, a dissolution through which nature
seeks her ground and strives to renew herself in her principles."
Still, in spite of this more profound and genial interpretation of
the shifting metamorphoses of nature, the fear of there being no
conscious future life for man produces, when first entertained, a
horrid constriction around the heart, felt like the ice cold coils
of a serpent. The thought of tumbling hopelessly into "The blind
cave of eternal night" naturally oppresses the heart of man with
sadness and with alarm. To escape the unhappiness thus inflicted,
recourse has been had to expedients. Four artificial substitutes
for immortality have been devised. Fondly fixing attention upon
these, men have tried to find comfort and to absorb their thoughts
from the dreaded spectre and the long oblivion. The first is the
sentimental phantasm of posthumous fame. The Latin bard, ancient
Ennius, sings,

"Nemo me lacrymis decoret, nec funera fletu Faxit. Cur? volito
vivu' per ora virum." 44

Shakspeare likewise often expresses the same thought:

"When all the breathers of this world are dead, You still shall
live (such virtue hath my pen) Where breath most breathes, even in
the mouths of men."

And again in similar strain:

"My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, Since, spite of
him, I'll live in this poor rhyme, While he insults o'er dull and
speechless tribes."

Napoleon is reported to have said, "My soul will pass into history
and the deathless memories of mankind; and thus in glory shall I
be immortal." This characteristically French notion forms the
essence of Comte's "positivist" doctrine of a future life. Those
deemed worthy after their death to be incorporated, by vote of the
people, in the Supreme Being, the Grand Etre, a fictitious product
of a poetic personification, through the perpetual fame and
influence thus secured have an immortal life in the thoughts and
feelings of a grateful posterity. Comte says, "Positivism greatly
improves immortality and places it on a firmer foundation, by
changing it from objective to subjective." Great and eternal
Humanity is God. The dead who are meritorious are alone
remembered, and, thus incorporated into the Divinity, they have a
"subjective immortality in the brains of the living." 45 It is a
poor shadow of the sublime truth which the soul craves. Leopardi,
in his Bruto Minore, expresses this "poor hope of being in the
future's breath:"

44 Cicero, Tusc. Quast., lib. i. cap. xv.

45 Catechism of Positive Religion, Conversation III.


"dell' atra morte ultima raggio Conscia future eta." That proud
and gifted natures should have seriously stooped to such a toy, to
solace themselves with it, is a fact strange and pathetic. With
reverential tenderness of sympathy must we yearn towards those
whose loving natures, baffled of any solid resource, turn
appealingly, ere they fade away, to clasp this substanceless image
of an image.

Another scheme is what may be called the "lampada tradunt" 46
theory of a future life. Generations succeed each other, and the
course is always full. Eternal life takes up new subjects as fast
as its exhausted receptacles perish. Men are the mortal cells of
immortal humanity. The individual must comfort himself with the
sympathetic reflection that his extinction destroys nothing, since
all the elements of his being will be manipulated into the forms
of his successors.

Life is a constant renovation, and its sum is forever full and
equal on the globe. The only genuine resurrection unto eternal
life is an unending re creation of organisms from the same
materials to repeat the same physiological and psychological
processes.47 There is a gleam of cheer and of nobleness in this
representation; but, upon the whole, it is perhaps as ineffectual
as the former. It is a vapid consolation, in view of our own
annihilation, to think that others will then live and also be
annihilated in their turn. It is pleasant to believe that the
earth will forever be peopled with throngs of men; but though such
a belief might help to reconcile us to our fate, it could not
alter the intrinsic sadness of that fate.

A third substitute for the common view of immortality is a
scientific perception of the fact that the peculiar force which
each man is, the sum of his character and life, is a cause
indestructibly mixed with the course of subsequent history, an
objective personal immortality, though not a conscious one. What
he was, remains and acts forever in the world.

The fourth substitute is an identification of self with the
integral scheme of things. I am an inseparable portion of the
totality of being, to move eternally in its eternal motion.

"If death seem hanging o'er thy separate soul, Discern thyself a
part of life's great whole."

Lose the thought of thy particular evanescence in the thought of
the universal permanence. The inverted torch denotes death to a
mere inhabitant of the earth: to a citizen of the universe,
downward and upward are the same. Perhaps one who rejects the
ordinary doctrine of a future life can be solaced and edified by
these substitutes in proportion to his fineness, greatness, and
nobleness. But to most persons no substitute can atone for the
withdrawn truth of immortality itself.

In regard to the eternal preservation of personal consciousness,
it were bigoted blindness to deny that there is room for doubts
and fears. While the monad soul so to call it lies here beneath
the weak glimmer of suns so far off that they are forceless to
develop it to a

46 Lucretius, De Nat. Rerum, lib. ii. 1. 78.

47 Schultz Schultzenstein, Die Bildung des menschlichen Geistes
durch Kultur der Verjungung seines Lebens, ss. 834-847: Die
Unsterblichkeitsbegriffe.


victorious assurance, we cannot but sometimes feel misgivings and
be depressed by skeptical surmises. Accordingly, while belief has
generally prevailed, disbelief has in every age had its
representatives. The ancients had their Dicaarchus, Protagoras,
Panatius, Lucan, Epicurus, Casar, Horace, and a long list besides.
The moderns have had their Gassendi, Diderot, Condillac, Hobbes,
Hume, Paine, Leopardi, Shelley, and now have their Feuerbach,
Vogt, Moleschott, and scores of others needless to be named. And
although in any argument from authority the company of the great
believers would incomparably outshine and a thousand times
outweigh the array of deniers, this does not alter the obvious
fact that there are certain phenomena which are natural
provocatives of doubt and whose troubling influence scarcely any
one can always escape. Homer, in giving expression to Hector's
confidence of victory over the Greeks, makes him wish that he were
but as sure of entering the state of the immortal gods.48 When
some one asked Dr. Johnson, "Have we not proof enough of the
immortality of the soul?" he replied, "I want more." Davenant of
whom Southey says, "I know no other author who has so often
expressed his doubts respecting a future state and how burdensome
he felt them" writes,  "But ask not bodies doom'd to die,
To what abode they go: Since knowledge is but sorrow's spy,
It is not safe to know."

Charles Lamb writes, "If men would honestly confess their
misgivings, (which few men will,) there are times when the
strongest Christian of us has reeled under questionings of such
staggering obscurity." Many a man, seeing nature hang her veil of
shifting glories above the silent tombs of vanished generations,
voiceless now forever, entertaining innumerable contradictory
queries amidst feelings of decay and sights of corruption, before
the darkness of unknown futurity might piteously exclaim, without
deserving blame,

"I run the gauntlet of a file of doubts, Each one of which down
hurls me to the ground."

Who that has reached maturity of reflection cannot appreciate and
sympathize somewhat with these lines of Byron, when he stands
before a lifeless form of humanity?

"I gazed, as oft I have gazed the same, To try if I could wrench
aught out of death Which should confirm, or shake, or make, a
faith; But it was all a mystery. Here we are, And there we go: but
where? Five bits of lead, Or three, or two, or one, send very far!
And is this blood, then, form'd but to be shed? Can every element
our elements mar? Can air, earth, water, fire, live and we dead?
We, whose minds comprehend all things? No more."

48 Iliad, lib, viii. Il. 538-540.


Doubt is not sin, but rather a misfortune; for it is to adopt a
suggestion from Schaller a cleft in the soul through which thought
steals away what the heart desires. The guilt or innocence of
doubting depends on the spirit in which it is done. There are two
attitudes of mind and moods of feeling before propositions and
evidence. One is, "I will not believe unless I see the prints of
the nails and lay my finger in the marks of the wounds." The other
is, "Lord, I believe: help thou mine unbelief." In abstract logic
or rigid science the former may be appropriate and right. The
latter alone can be justifiable in moral and religious things. If
a man sorrowfully and humbly doubts, because he cannot help it, he
shall not be condemned. When he is proud of his doubts,
complacently swells with fancied superiority, plays the fanfaron
with his pretentious arguments, and sets up as a propagandist of
disbelief, being all the while in reality "Most ignorant of what
he is most assured,  His glassy essence," his conduct is offensive
to every good man, and his spirit must receive the condemnation of
God. A missionary of atheism and death, horridly eager to destroy
those lofty thoughts which so much help to make us men, is a
shocking spectacle. Yet a few such there are, who seem delighted
as by their dismal theory they bury mankind in an iron tomb of
materialism and inscribe on the irrevocable door the solitary
words, Fate and Silence.

The more attentively one dwells on the perishable physical side of
life, the more prone he will be to believe in an absolute death;
the more prevailingly he ponders the incorruptible psychical side,
the more prepared he will be to credit immortality. The chemist
who confines his studies exclusively within his own province, when
he reflects on the probable sequence of life, will speculatively
see himself vanish in his blowpipes and retorts. Whoso devotedly
dabbles in organisms, nerves, and bloods may easily become
skeptical of spirit; for it everywhere balks his analysis and
eludes his search. The objects he deals with are things. They
belong to change and dissolution. Mind and its proper home belong
to a different category of being. Because no heaven appears at the
end of the telescope, and no soul is seen on the edge of the
dissecting knife, and no mind is found at the bottom of the
crucible, to infer that therefore there is neither heaven, nor
soul, nor mind, is as monstrous a non sequitur as it would be to
infer the non existence of gravity because it cannot be distilled
in any alembic nor discerned with any glass. The man who goes into
the dark crimson dripping halls of physiology seeking proofs of
immortality, and, failing to find them, abandons his faith in it,
is like that hapless traveller who, groping in the catacombs under
Rome, was buried by the caving in of the sepulchral roof, and thus
lost his life, while all the time, above, the great vault of
heaven was stretching, blue and breezy, filled with sunshine and
sentient joy!

When we contemplate men in a mass, like a swarm of bees or a hive
of ants, we find ourselves doubting their immortality. They melt
away, in swiftly confused heaps and generations, into the bosom of
nature. On the other hand, when we think of individuals, an almost
unavoidable thought of personal identity makes us spontaneously
conclude them immortal. It rather requires the effort then to
think them otherwise. But obviously the real problem is never of
the multitudinous throng, but always of the solitary person. In
reference

to this question it is sophistry to fix our thoughts on a Chinese
city as crowded with nameless and indistinguishable human
inhabitants as a decayed cheese is with vermin. Fairness requires
that our imaginations and reasonings upon the subject fasten upon
an individual, set apart and uplifted, like a king, in the
incommunicable distinctness and grandeur of selfhood and
responsibility.

From looking about this grave paved star, from painful and
degrading contemplations of dead bodies, "the snuff and loathed
part of nature which burns itself out," let a man turn away, and
send his interior kingly glance aloft into ideal realms, let him
summon up the glorious sentiments of freedom, duty, admiration,
the noble experiences of self sacrifice, love, and joy, and his
soul will extricate itself from the filthy net of material decay,
and feel the divine exemption of its own clean prerogatives,
dazzling types of eternity, and fragments of blessedness that
"Promise, on our Maker's truth, Long morrow to this mortal youth."
Martyrdom is demonstration of immortality; for self preservation
is the innermost, indestructible instinct of every conscious
being. When the soul, in a sacred cause, enthusiastically rushes
upon death, or in calm composure awaits death, it is irresistibly
convinced that it cannot be hurt, but will be blessed, by the
crisis. It knows that in an inexpressibly profound sense whosoever
would ignobly save his life loses it, but whosoever would nobly
lose his life saves it. Martyrdom demonstrates immortality.

"Life embark'd out at sea, 'mid the wave tumbling roar, The poor
ship of my body went down to the floor; But I broke, at the bottom
of death, through a door, And, from sinking, began forever to
soar."

The most lamentable and pertinacious doubts of immortality
sometimes arise from the survey of instances of gross wickedness,
sluggishness, and imbecility forced on our attention. But, as
these undeniably are palpable violations of the creative
intention, it is not just to reason from them. In fairness the
argument demands that we select the noblest, healthiest specimens
of completed humanity to reason from. Should we not take a case in
which God's will is so far plainly fulfilled, in order to trace
that will farther and even to its finality? And regarding on his
death bed a Newton, a Fenelon, a Washington, is it difficult to
conceive him surviving the climax and catastrophe of his somatic
cell basis and soaring to a more august range of existence?
Remembering that such as these have lived and died, ay, and even
the godlike Nazarene, can we believe that man is merely a white
interrogation point lifted on the black margin of matter to ask
the answerless secret of the universe and be erased?

Such a conclusion charges God with the transcendent crime of
infanticide perpetrated in the most deliberate manner and on the
most gigantic scale. Who can bear, by thus quenching the hope of
another life, to add death to death, and overcast, to every
thoughtful eye, the whole sunny field of life with the melancholy
shadow of a bier? There is a noble strength and confidence,
cheering to the reader, in these words of one of the wisest and
boldest of thinkers: "I should be the very last man to be willing
to dispense with the faith in a future life: nay, I would say,
with Lorenzo de'Medici, that all those are dead, even for the
present life, who do not hope for another. I have the firm
conviction that our soul is an existence of indestructible nature,
whose working is from eternity to eternity. It is like the sun,
that seems indeed to set, but really never sets, shining on in
unchangeable splendor." 49 Such a view of our destiny incomparably
inspires and ennobles us. Man, discovering under all the poor,
wretched accidents of earth and sense and hard fortune the
immortality of his soul, feels as that king's son who, lost in
infancy, and growing up under the care of a forest hind, supposed
himself to belong to the rude class among whom he lived; but one
day, learning his true parentage, he knew beneath his mean
disguise that he was a prince, and immediately claimed his
kingdom. These facts of experience show clearly how much it
behooves us to cultivate by every honest method this cardinal
tenet of religion, how much wiser faith is in listening to the
lucid echoes of the sky than despair in listening to the muffled
reverberations of the grave. All noble and sweet beliefs grow with
the growing nobleness and tenderness of characters sensitive to
those fine revealings which pachydermatous souls can never know.
In the upper hall of reason, before the high shrine of faith, burn
the base doubts begotten in the cellars of sense; and they may
serve as tapers to light your tentative way to conviction. If the
floating al Sirat between physiology and psychology, earth and
heaven, is too slippery and perilous for your footing, where heavy
limbed science cannot tread, nerve the wings of faith for a free
flight. Or, if every effort to fasten a definite theory on some
solid support on the other side of the gulf fails, venture forth
on the naked line of limitless desire, as the spider escapes from
an unwelcome position by flinging out an exceedingly long and fine
thread and going forth upon it sustained by the air.50 Whoever
preserves the full intensity of the affections is little likely to
lose his trust in God and a future life, even when exposed to
lowering and chilling influences from material science and
speculative philosophy: the glowing of the heart, as Jean Paul
says, relights the extinguished torch in the night of the
intellect, as a beast stunned by an electric shock in the head is
restored by an electric shock in the breast. Daniel Webster says,
in an expression of his faith in Christianity written shortly
before his death, "Philosophical argument, especially that drawn
from the vastness of the universe in comparison with the apparent
insignificance of this globe, has sometimes shaken my reason for
the faith which is in me; but my heart has always assured and
reassured me."51 Contemplating the stable permanence of nature as
it swallows our fleet generations, we may feel that we vanish like
sparks in the night; but when we think of the persistent identity
of the soul, and of its immeasurable superiority to the brute mass
of matter, the aspect of the case changes and the moral inference
is reversed. Does not the simple truth of love conquer and trample
the world's aggregated lie? The man who, with assiduous toil and
earnest faith, develops his forces, and disciplines his faculties,
and cherishes his aspirations, and accumulates virtue and wisdom,
is thus preparing the auspicious stores and conditions of another
existence. As he slowly journeys over the mountains of life, aware
that there can be

49 Eckermann's Conversations with Goethe.

50 Greenough, An Artist's Creed.

51 Memorial of Daniel Webster from the City of Boston, p. 16.


no returning, he gathers and carries with him materials to build a
ship when he reaches the strand of death. Upon the mist veiled
ocean launching then, he will sail where? Whither God orders. Must
not that be to the right port?

We remember an old Brahmanic poem brought from the East by Ruckert
and sweetly resung in the speech of the West full of encouragement
to those who shall die.52 A man wrapped in slumber calmly reclines
on the deck of a ship stranded and parting in the breakers. The
plank on which he sleeps is borne by a huge wave upon a bank of
roses, and he awakes amidst a jubilee of music and a chorus of
friendly voices bidding him welcome. So, perhaps, when the body is
shattered on the death ledge, the soul will be tossed into the
fragrant lap of eternal life on the self identified and dynamic
plank of personality.

52 Brahmanische Erzahlungen, s. 5.


