
                             _The ETHICS of_
                                Rhetoric




                             _The ETHICS of_
                                Rhetoric

                         _By_ RICHARD M. WEAVER

                    ὥστε συμβαίνει τὴν ρητορικὴν οἶον
                  παραφυές τι τῆς διαλεκτικῆς εἶναι καὶ
                       τῆς περὶ τὰ ἤθη πραγματείας

              Thus it happens that rhetoric is an offshoot
                of dialectic and also of ethical studies.

                         —ARISTOTLE, _Rhetoric_

                             [Illustration]

                Chicago · HENRY REGNERY COMPANY · _1953_

        Copyright 1953 by Henry Regnery Company. Copyright under
        International Copyright Union. Manufactured in the United
       States of America. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number:
                                53-8796.

                     Second Printing, December, 1963




Table of Contents


                                                                      PAGE

       I. THE PHAEDRUS AND THE NATURE OF RHETORIC                        3

      II. DIALECTIC AND RHETORIC AT DAYTON, TENNESSEE                   27

     III. EDMUND BURKE AND THE ARGUMENT FROM CIRCUMSTANCE               55

      IV. ABRAHAM LINCOLN AND THE ARGUMENT FROM DEFINITION              85

       V. SOME RHETORICAL ASPECTS OF GRAMMATICAL CATEGORIES            115

      VI. MILTON’S HEROIC PROSE                                        143

     VII. THE SPACIOUSNESS OF OLD RHETORIC                             164

    VIII. THE RHETORIC OF SOCIAL SCIENCE                               186

      IX. ULTIMATE TERMS IN CONTEMPORARY RHETORIC                      211

          INDEX                                                        233




Acknowledgments


Acknowledgments with thanks are due the following: Charles Scribner’s
Sons for the passage from Allen Tate’s “The Subway,” from _Poems
1922-1947_; Karl Shapiro and Random House, Inc., for the passage from
_Essay on Rime_; and the Viking Press, Inc., for the passage from
Sherwood Anderson’s _A Story Teller’s Story_.




                             _The ETHICS of_
                                Rhetoric




Chapter I

THE _PHAEDRUS_ AND THE NATURE OF RHETORIC


Our subject begins with the threshold difficulty of defining the question
which Plato’s _Phaedrus_ was meant to answer. Students of this justly
celebrated dialogue have felt uncertain of its unity of theme, and the
tendency has been to designate it broadly as a discussion of the ethical
and the beautiful. The explicit topics of the dialogue are, in order:
love, the soul, speechmaking, and the spoken and written word, or what
is generally termed by us “composition.” The development looks random,
and some of the most interesting passages appear _jeux d’esprit_. The
richness of the literary art diverts attention from the substance of the
argument.

But a work of art which touches on many profound problems justifies
more than one kind of reading. Our difficulty with the _Phaedrus_ may
be that our interpretation has been too literal and too topical. If we
will bring to the reading of it even a portion of that imagination which
Plato habitually exercised, we should perceive surely enough that it is
consistently, and from beginning to end, about one thing, which is the
nature of rhetoric.[1] Again, that point may have been missed because
most readers conceive rhetoric to be a system of artifice rather than an
idea,[2] and the _Phaedrus_, for all its apparent divagation, keeps very
close to a single idea. A study of its rhetorical structure, especially,
may give us the insight which has been withheld, while making us feel
anew that Plato possessed the deepest divining rod among the ancients.

For the imaginative interpretation which we shall now undertake, we have
both general and specific warrant. First, it scarcely needs pointing
out that a Socratic dialogue is in itself an example of transcendence.
Beginning with something simple and topical, it passes to more general
levels of application; and not infrequently, it must make the leap into
allegory for the final utterance. This means, of course, that a Socratic
dialogue may be about its subject implicitly as well as explicitly. The
implicit rendering is usually through some kind of figuration because
it is the nature of this meaning to be ineffable in any other way. It
is necessary, therefore, to be alert for what takes place through the
analogical mode.

Second, it is a matter of curious interest that a warning against
literal reading occurs at an early stage of the _Phaedrus_. Here in the
opening pages, appearing as if to set the key of the theme, comes an
allusion to the myth of Boreas and Oreithyia. On the very spot where the
dialogue begins, Boreas is said to have carried off the maiden. Does
Socrates believe that this tale is really true? Or is he in favor of a
scientific explanation of what the myth alleges? Athens had scientific
experts, and the scientific explanation was that the north wind had
pushed her off some rocks where she was playing with a companion. In this
way the poetical story is provided with a factual basis. The answer of
Socrates is that many tales are open to this kind of rationalization,
but that the result is tedious and actually irrelevant. It is irrelevant
because our chief concern is with the nature of the man, and it is
beside the point to probe into such matters while we are yet ignorant
of ourselves. The scientific criticism of Greek mythology, which may
be likened to the scientific criticism of the myths of the Bible in
our own day, produces at best “a boorish sort of wisdom (ἀγροίκῳ τινὶ
σοφίᾳ).” It is a limitation to suppose that the truth of the story
lies in its historicity. The “boorish sort of wisdom” seeks to supplant
poetic allegation with fact, just as an archaeologist might look for the
foundations of the Garden of Eden. But while this sort of search goes
on the truth flies off, on wings of imagination, and is not recoverable
until the searcher attains a higher level of pursuit. Socrates is
satisfied with the parable, and we infer from numerous other passages
that he believed that some things are best told by parable and some
perhaps discoverable only by parable. Real investigation goes forward
with the help of analogy. “Freud without Sophocles is unthinkable,” a
modern writer has said.[3]

With these precepts in mind, we turn to that part of the _Phaedrus_
which has proved most puzzling: why is so much said about the absurd
relationship of the lover and the non-lover? Socrates encounters Phaedrus
outside the city wall. The latter has just come from hearing a discourse
by Lysias which enchanted him with its eloquence. He is prevailed upon to
repeat this discourse, and the two seek out a shady spot on the banks of
the Ilissus. Now the discourse is remarkable because although it was “in
a way, a love speech,” its argument was that people should grant favors
to non-lovers rather than to lovers. “This is just the clever thing
about it,” Phaedrus remarks. People are in the habit of preferring their
lovers, but it is much more intelligent, as the argument of Lysias runs,
to prefer a non-lover. Accordingly, the first major topic of the dialogue
is a eulogy of the non-lover. The speech provides good subject matter
for jesting on the part of Socrates, and looks like another exhibition
of the childlike ingeniousness which gives the Greeks their charm. Is it
merely a piece of literary trifling? Rather, it is Plato’s dramatistic
presentation of a major thesis. Beneath the surface of repartee and
mock seriousness, he is asking whether we ought to prefer a neuter form
of speech to the kind which is ever getting us aroused over things and
provoking an expense of spirit.

Sophistications of theory cannot obscure the truth that there are but
three ways for language to affect us. It can move us toward what is good;
it can move us toward what is evil; or it can, in hypothetical third
place, fail to move us at all.[4] Of course there are numberless degrees
of effect under the first two heads, and the third, as will be shown, is
an approximate rather than an absolute zero of effect. But any utterance
is a major assumption of responsibility, and the assumption that one can
avoid that responsibility by doing something to language itself is one of
the chief considerations of the _Phaedrus_, just as it is of contemporary
semantic theory. What Plato has succeeded in doing in this dialogue,
whether by a remarkably effaced design, or unconsciously through the
formal pressure of his conception, is to give us embodiments of the three
types of discourse. These are respectively the non-lover, the evil lover,
and the noble lover. We shall take up these figures in their sequence and
show their relevance to the problem of language.

The eulogy of the non-lover in the speech of Lysias, as we hear it
repeated to Socrates, stresses the fact that the non-lover follows a
policy of enlightened self-interest. First of all, the non-lover does
not neglect his affairs or commit extreme acts under the influence of
passion. Since he acts from calculation, he never has occasion for
remorse. No one ever says of him that he is not in his right mind,
because all of his acts are within prudential bounds. The first point
is, in sum, that the non-lover never sacrifices himself and therefore
never feels the vexation which overtakes lovers when they recover from
their passion and try to balance their pains with their profit. And the
non-lover is constant whereas the lover is inconstant. The first argument
then is that the non-lover demonstrates his superiority through prudence
and objectivity. The second point of superiority found in non-lovers is
that there are many more of them. If one is limited in one’s choice to
one’s lovers, the range is small; but as there are always more non-lovers
than lovers, one has a better chance in choosing among many of finding
something worthy of one’s affection. A third point of superiority is that
association with the non-lover does not excite public comment. If one is
seen going about with the object of one’s love, one is likely to provoke
gossip; but when one is seen conversing with the non-lover, people merely
realize that “everybody must converse with somebody.” Therefore this
kind of relationship does not affect one’s public standing, and one is
not disturbed by what the neighbors are saying. Finally, non-lovers are
not jealous of one’s associates. Accordingly they do not try to keep one
from companions of intellect or wealth for fear that they may be outshone
themselves. The lover, by contrast, tries to draw his beloved away from
such companionship and so deprives him of improving associations. The
argument is concluded with a generalization that one ought to grant
favors not to the needy or the importunate, but to those who are able to
repay. Such is the favorable account of the non-lover given by Lysias.

We must now observe how these points of superiority correspond to those
of “semantically purified” speech. By “semantically purified speech” we
mean the kind of speech approaching pure notation in the respect that
it communicates abstract intelligence without impulsion. It is a simple
instrumentality, showing no affection for the object of its symbolizing
and incapable of inducing bias in the hearer. In its ideal conception,
it would have less power to move than 2 + 2 = 4, since it is generally
admitted that mathematical equations may have the beauty of elegance, and
hence are not above suspicion where beauty is suspect. But this neuter
language will be an unqualified medium of transmission of meanings from
mind to mind, and by virtue of its minds can remain in an unprejudiced
relationship to the world and also to other minds.

Since the characteristic of this language is absence of anything like
affection, it exhibits toward the thing being represented merely a sober
fidelity, like that of the non-lover toward his companion. Instead of
passion, it offers the serviceability of objectivity. Its “enlightened
self-interest” takes the form of an unvarying accuracy and regularity in
its symbolic references, most, if not all of which will be to verifiable
data in the extramental world. Like a thrifty burgher, it has no
romanticism about it; and it distrusts any departure from the literal
and prosaic. The burgher has his feet on the ground; and similarly the
language of pure notation has its point-by-point contact with objective
reality. As Stuart Chase, one of its modern proponents, says in _The
Tyranny of Words_: “_If we wish to understand the world and ourselves,
it follows that we should use a language whose structure corresponds to
physical structure_”[5] (italics his). So this language is married to the
world, and its marital fidelity contrasts with the extravagances of other
languages.

In second place, this language is far more “available.” Whereas
rhetorical language, or language which would persuade, must always be
particularized to suit the occasion, drawing its effectiveness from
many small nuances, a “utility” language is very general and one has
no difficulty putting his meaning into it if he is satisfied with a
paraphrase of that meaning. The 850 words recommended for Basic English,
for example, are highly available in the sense that all native users of
English have them instantly ready and learners of English can quickly
acquire them. It soon becomes apparent, however, that the availability
is a heavy tax upon all other qualities. Most of what we admire as
energy and fullness tends to disappear when mere verbal counters are
used. The conventional or public aspect of language can encroach upon the
suggestive or symbolical aspect, until the naming is vague or blurred. In
proportion as the medium is conventional in the widest sense and avoids
all individualizing, personalizing, and heightening terms, it is common,
and the commonness constitutes the negative virtue ascribed to the
non-lover.

Finally, with reference to the third qualification of the non-lover,
it is true that neuter language does not excite public opinion. This
fact follows from its character outlined above. Rhetorical language on
the other hand, for whatever purpose used, excites interest and with it
either pleasure or alarm. People listen instinctively to the man whose
speech betrays inclination. It does not matter what the inclination is
toward, but we may say that the greater the degree of inclination, the
greater the curiosity or response. Hence a “style” in speech always
causes one to be a marked man, and the public may not be so much
impressed—at least initially—by what the man is for or against as by the
fact that he has a style. The way therefore to avoid public comment is
to avoid the speech of affection and to use that of business, since, to
echo the original proposition of Lysias, everybody knows that one must do
business with others. From another standpoint, then, this is the language
of prudence. These are the features which give neuter discourse an appeal
to those who expect a scientific solution of human problems.

In summing up the trend of meaning, we note that Lysias has been praising
a disinterested kind of relationship which avoids all excesses and
irrationalities, all the dementia of love. It is a circumspect kind of
relationship, which is preferred by all men who wish to do well in the
world and avoid tempestuous courses. We have compared its detachment
with the kind of abstraction to be found in scientific notation. But as
an earnest of what is to come let us note, in taking leave of this part,
that Phaedrus expresses admiration for the eloquence, especially of
diction, with which the suit of the non-lover has been urged. This is our
warning of the dilemma of the non-lover.

Now we turn to the second major speech of the dialogue, which is made
by Socrates. Notwithstanding Phaedrus’ enthusiastic praise, Socrates is
dissatisfied with the speech of the non-lover. He remembers having heard
wiser things on the subject and feels that he can make a speech on the
same theme “different from this and quite as good.” After some playful
exchange, Socrates launches upon his own abuse of love, which centers
on the point that the lover is an exploiter. Love (ἔρως) is defined as
the kind of desire which overcomes rational opinion and moves toward
the enjoyment of personal or bodily beauty. The lover wishes to make
the object of his passion as pleasing to himself as possible; but to
those possessed by this frenzy, only that which is subject to their will
is pleasant. Accordingly, everything which is opposed, or is equal or
better, the lover views with hostility. He naturally therefore tries to
make the beloved inferior to himself in every respect. He is pleased if
the beloved has intellectual limitations because they have the effect of
making him manageable. For a similar reason he tries to keep him away
from all influences which might “make a man of him,” and of course the
greatest of these is divine philosophy. While he is working to keep him
intellectually immature, he works also to keep him weak and effeminate,
with such harmful result that the beloved is unable to play a man’s part
in crises. The lover is, moreover, jealous of the possession of property
because this gives the beloved an independence which he does not wish
him to have. Thus the lover in exercising an unremitting compulsion over
the beloved deprives him of all praiseworthy qualities, and this is the
price the beloved pays for accepting a lover who is “necessarily without
reason.” In brief, the lover is not motivated by benevolence toward the
beloved, but by selfish appetite; and Socrates can aptly close with the
quotation: “As wolves love lambs, so lovers love their loves.” The speech
is on the single theme of exploitation. It is important for us to keep
in mind the object of love as here described, because another kind of
love with a different object is later introduced into the dialogue, and
we shall discuss the counterpart of each.

As we look now for the parallel in language, we find ourselves
confronting the second of the three alternatives: speech which influences
us in the direction of what is evil. This we shall call base rhetoric
because its end is the exploitation which Socrates has been condemning.
We find that base rhetoric hates that which is opposed, or is equal
or better because all such things are impediments to its will, and
in the last analysis it knows only its will. Truth is the stubborn,
objective restraint which this will endeavors to overcome. Base rhetoric
is therefore always trying to keep its objects from the support which
personal courage, noble associations, and divine philosophy provide a man.

The base rhetorician, we may say, is a man who has yielded to the wrong
aspects of existence. He has allowed himself to succumb to the sights
and shows, to the physical pleasures which conspire against noble life.
He knows that the only way he can get a following in his pursuits (and
a following seems necessary to maximum enjoyment of the pursuits) is to
work against the true understanding of his followers. Consequently the
things which would elevate he keeps out of sight, and the things with
which he surrounds his “beloved” are those which minister immediately to
desire. The beloved is thus emasculated in understanding in order that
the lover may have his way. Or as Socrates expresses it, the selfish
lover contrives things so that the beloved will be “most agreeable to him
and most harmful to himself.”

Examples of this kind of contrivance occur on every hand in the
impassioned language of journalism and political pleading. In the
world of affairs which these seek to influence, the many are kept in a
state of pupillage so that they will be most docile to their “lovers.”
The techniques of the base lover, especially as exemplified in modern
journalism, would make a long catalogue, but in general it is accurate
to say that he seeks to keep the understanding in a passive state by
never permitting an honest examination of alternatives. Nothing is more
feared by him than a true dialectic, for this not only endangers his
favored alternative, but also gives the “beloved”—how clearly here are
these the “lambs” of Socrates’ figure—some training in intellectual
independence. What he does therefore is dress up one alternative in all
the cheap finery of immediate hopes and fears, knowing that if he can
thus prevent a masculine exercise of imagination and will, he can have
his way. By discussing only one side of an issue, by mentioning cause
without consequence or consequence without cause, acts without agents or
agents without agency,[6] he often successfully blocks definition and
cause-and-effect reasoning. In this way his choices are arrayed in such
meretricious images that one can quickly infer the juvenile mind which
they would attract. Of course the base rhetorician today, with his vastly
augmented power of propagation, has means of deluding which no ancient
rhetor in forum or market place could have imagined.

Because Socrates has now made a speech against love, representing it
as an evil, the non-lover seems to survive in estimation. We observe,
however, that the non-lover, instead of being celebrated, is disposed of
dialectically. “So, in a word, I say that the non-lover possesses all the
advantages that are opposed to the disadvantages we found in the lover.”
This is not without bearing upon the subject matter of the important
third speech, to which we now turn.

At this point in the dialogue, Socrates is warned by his monitory spirit
that he has been engaging in a defamation of love despite the fact that
love is a divinity. “If love is, as indeed he is, a god or something
divine, he can be nothing evil; but the two speeches just now said that
he was evil.” These discourses were then an impiety—one representing
non-love as admirable and the other attacking love as base. Socrates
resolves to make amends, and the recantation which follows is one of the
most elaborate developments in the Platonic system. The account of love
which emerges from this new position may be summarized as follows.

Love is often censured as a form of madness, yet not all madness is evil.
There is a madness which is simple degeneracy, but on the other hand
there are kinds of madness which are really forms of inspiration, from
which come the greatest gifts conferred on man. Prophecy is a kind of
madness, and so too is poetry. “The poetry of the sane man vanishes into
nothingness before that of the inspired madman.” Mere sanity, which is
of human origin, is inferior to that madness which is inspired by the
gods and which is a condition for the highest kind of achievement. In
this category goes the madness of the true lover. His is a generous state
which confers blessings to the ignoring of self, whereas the conduct of
the non-lover displays all the selfishness of business: “the affection of
the non-lover, which is alloyed with mortal prudence and follows mortal
and parsimonious rules of conduct will beget in the beloved soul the
narrowness which common folk praise as virtue; it will cause the soul to
be a wanderer upon the earth for nine thousand years and a fool below the
earth at last.” It is the vulgar who do not realize that the madness of
the noble lover is an inspired madness because he has his thoughts turned
toward a beauty of divine origin.

Now the attitude of the noble lover toward the beloved is in direct
contrast with that of the evil lover, who, as we have seen, strives
to possess and victimize the object of his affections. For once the
noble lover has mastered the conflict within his own soul by conquering
appetite and fixing his attention upon the intelligible and the divine,
he conceives an exalted attitude toward the beloved. The noble lover now
“follows the beloved in reverence and awe.” So those who are filled with
this kind of love “exhibit no jealousy or meanness toward the loved one,
but endeavor by every means in their power to lead him to the likeness
of the god whom they honor.” Such is the conversion by which love turns
from the exploitative to the creative.

Here it becomes necessary to bring our concepts together and to think
of all speech having persuasive power as a kind of “love.”[7] Thus,
rhetorical speech is madness to the extent that it departs from the
line which mere sanity lays down. There is always in its statement a
kind of excess or deficiency which is immediately discernible when
the test of simple realism is applied. Simple realism operates on a
principle of equation or correspondence; one thing must match another,
or, representation must tally with thing represented, like items in
a tradesman’s account. Any excess or deficiency on the part of the
representation invokes the existence of the world of symbolism, which
simple realism must deny. This explains why there is an immortal feud
between men of business and the users of metaphor and metonymy, the poets
and the rhetoricians.[8] The man of business, the narrow and parsimonious
soul in the allusion of Socrates, desires a world which is a reliable
materiality. But this the poet and rhetorician will never let him have,
for each, with his own purpose, is trying to advance the borders of the
imaginative world. A primrose by the river’s brim will not remain that
in the poet’s account, but is promptly turned into something very much
larger and something highly implicative. He who is accustomed to record
the world with an abacus cannot follow these transfigurations; and
indeed the very occurrence of them subtly undermines the premise of his
business. It is the historic tendency of the tradesman, therefore, to
confine passion to quite narrow channels so that it will not upset the
decent business arrangements of the world. But if the poet, as the chief
transformer of our picture of the world, is the peculiar enemy of this
mentality, the rhetorician is also hostile when practicing the kind of
love proper to him. The “passion” in his speech is revolutionary, and it
has a practical end.

We have now indicated the significance of the three types of lovers; but
the remainder of the _Phaedrus_ has much more to say about the nature
of rhetoric, and we must return to one or more points to place our
subject in a wider context. The problem of rhetoric which occupied Plato
persistently, not only in the _Phaedrus_ but also in other dialogues
where this art is reviewed, may be best stated as a question: if truth
alone is not sufficient to persuade men, what else remains that can be
legitimately added? In one of the exchanges with Phaedrus, Socrates puts
the question in the mouth of a personified Rhetoric: “I do not compel
anyone to learn to speak without knowing the truth, but if my advice is
of any value, he learns that first and then acquires me. So what I claim
is this, that without my help the knowledge of the truth does not give
the art of persuasion.”

Now rhetoric as we have discussed it in relation to the lovers consists
of truth plus its artful presentation, and for this reason it becomes
necessary to say something more about the natural order of dialectic
and rhetoric. In any general characterization rhetoric will include
dialectic,[9] but for the study of method it is necessary to separate
the two. Dialectic is a method of investigation whose object is the
establishment of truth about doubtful propositions. Aristotle in the
_Topics_ gives a concise statement of its nature. “A dialectical problem
is a subject of inquiry that contributes either to choice or avoidance,
or to truth and knowledge, and that either by itself, or as a help to
the solution of some other such problem. It must, moreover, be something
on which either people hold no opinion either way, or the masses hold a
contrary opinion to the philosophers, or the philosophers to the masses,
or each of them among themselves.”[10] Plato is not perfectly clear
about the distinction between positive and dialectical terms. In one
passage[11] he contrasts the “positive” terms “iron” and “silver” with
the “dialectical” terms “justice” and “goodness”; yet in other passages
his “dialectical” terms seem to include categorizations of the external
world. Thus Socrates indicates that distinguishing the horse from the
ass is a dialectical operation;[12] and he tells us later that a good
dialectician is able to divide things by classes “where the natural
joints are” and will avoid breaking any part “after the manner of a bad
carver.”[13] Such, perhaps, is Aristotle’s dialectic which contributes to
truth and knowledge.

But there is a branch of dialectic which contributes to “choice or
avoidance,” and it is with this that rhetoric is regularly found joined.
Generally speaking, this is a rhetoric involving questions of policy, and
the dialectic which precedes it will determine not the application of
positive terms but that of terms which are subject to the contingency of
evaluation. Here dialectical inquiry will concern itself not with what
is “iron” but with what is “good.” It seeks to establish what belongs in
the category of the “just” rather than what belongs in the genus _Canis_.
As a general rule, simple object words such as “iron” and “house” have
no connotations of policy, although it is frequently possible to give
them these through speech situations in which there is added to their
referential function a kind of impulse. We should have to interpret in
this way “Fire!” or “Gold!” because these terms acquire something through
intonation and relationship which places them in the class of evaluative
expressions.

Any piece of persuasion, therefore, will contain as its first process a
dialectic establishing terms which have to do with policy. Now a term of
policy is essentially a term of motion, and here begins the congruence of
rhetoric with the soul which underlies the speculation of the _Phaedrus_.
In his myth of the charioteer, Socrates declares that every soul is
immortal because “that which is ever moving is immortal.” Motion, it
would appear from this definition, is part of the soul’s essence. And
just because the soul is ever tending, positive or indifferent terms
cannot partake of this congruence. But terms of tendency—goodness,
justice, divinity, and the like—are terms of motion and therefore may
be said to comport with the soul’s essence. The soul’s perception of
goodness, justice, and divinity will depend upon its proper tendency,
while at the same time contacts with these in discourse confirm and
direct that tendency. The education of the soul is not a process of
bringing it into correspondence with a physical structure like the
external world, but rather a process of rightly affecting its motion. By
this conception, a soul which is rightly affected calls that good which
is good; but a soul which is wrongly turned calls that good which is
evil. What Plato has prepared us to see is that the virtuous rhetorician,
who is a lover of truth, has a soul of such movement that its dialectical
perceptions are consonant with those of a divine mind. Or, in the
language of more technical philosophy, this soul is aware of axiological
systems which have ontic status. The good soul, consequently, will not
urge a perversion of justice as justice in order to impose upon the
commonwealth. Insofar as the soul has its impulse in the right direction,
its definitions will agree with the true nature of intelligible things.

There is, then, no true rhetoric without dialectic, for the dialectic
provides that basis of “high speculation about nature” without which
rhetoric in the narrower sense has nothing to work upon. Yet, when the
disputed terms have been established, we are at the limit of dialectic.
How does the noble rhetorician proceed from this point on? That the
clearest demonstration in terms of logical inclusion and exclusion often
fails to win assent we hardly need state; therefore, to what does the
rhetorician resort at this critical passage? It is the stage at which
he passes from the logical to the analogical, or it is where figuration
comes into rhetoric.

To look at this for a moment through a practical illustration, let us
suppose that a speaker has convinced his listeners that his position is
“true” as far as dialectical inquiry may be pushed. Now he sets about
moving the listeners toward that position, but there is no way to move
them except through the operation of analogy. The analogy proceeds by
showing that the position being urged resembles or partakes of something
greater and finer. It will be represented, in sum, as one of the steps
leading toward ultimate good. Let us further suppose our speaker to be
arguing for the payment of a just debt. The payment of the just debt is
not itself justice, but the payment of this particular debt is one of the
many things which would have to be done before this could be a completely
just world. It is just, then, because it partakes of the ideal justice,
or it is a small analogue of all justice (in practice it will be found
that the rhetorician makes extensive use of synecdoche, whereby the small
part is used as a vivid suggestion of the grandeur of the whole). It is
by bringing out these resemblances that the good rhetorician leads those
who listen in the direction of what is good. In effect, he performs a
cure of souls by giving impulse, chiefly through figuration, toward an
ideal good.

We now see the true rhetorician as a noble lover of the good, who works
through dialectic and through poetic or analogical association. However
he is compelled to modulate by the peculiar features of an occasion, this
is his method.

It may not be superfluous to draw attention to the fact that what we
have here outlined is the method of the _Phaedrus_ itself. The dialectic
appears in the dispute about love. The current thesis that love is
praiseworthy is countered by the antithesis that love is blameworthy.
This position is fully developed in the speech of Lysias and in the first
speech of Socrates. But this position is countered by a new thesis
that after all love is praiseworthy because it is a divine thing. Of
course, this is love on a higher level, or love re-defined. This is the
regular process of transcendence which we have noted before. Now, having
rescued love from the imputation of evil by excluding certain things
from its definition, what does Socrates do? Quite in accordance with our
analysis, he turns rhetorician. He tries to make this love as attractive
as possible by bringing in the splendid figure of the charioteer.[14] In
the narrower conception of this art, the allegory is the rhetoric, for
it excites and fills us with desire for this kind of love, depicted with
many terms having tendency toward the good. But in the broader conception
the art must include also the dialectic, which succeeded in placing love
in the category of divine things before filling our imaginations with
attributes of divinity.[15] It is so regularly the method of Plato to
follow a subtle analysis with a striking myth that it is not unreasonable
to call him the master rhetorician. This goes far to explain why those
who reject his philosophy sometimes remark his literary art with mingled
admiration and annoyance.

The objection sometimes made that rhetoric cannot be used by a lover
of truth because it indulges in “exaggerations” can be answered as
follows. There is an exaggeration which is mere wantonness, and with
this the true rhetorician has nothing to do. Such exaggeration is purely
impressionistic in aim. Like caricature, whose only object is to amuse,
it seizes upon any trait or aspect which could produce titillation
and exploits this without conscience. If all rhetoric were like this,
we should have to grant that rhetoricians are persons of very low
responsibility and their art a disreputable one. But the rhetorician we
have now defined is not interested in sensationalism.

The exaggeration which this rhetorician employs is not caricature but
prophecy; and it would be a fair formulation to say that true rhetoric is
concerned with the potency of things. The literalist, like the anti-poet
described earlier, is troubled by its failure to conform to a present
reality. What he fails to appreciate is that potentiality is a mode of
existence, and that all prophecy is about the tendency of things. The
discourse of the noble rhetorician, accordingly, will be about real
potentiality or possible actuality, whereas that of the mere exaggerator
is about unreal potentiality. Naturally this distinction rests upon a
supposal that the rhetorician has insight, and we could not defend him
in the absence of that condition. But given insight, he has the duty
to represent to us the as yet unactualized future. It would be, for
example, a misrepresentation of current facts but not of potential ones
to talk about the joys of peace in a time of war. During the Second World
War, at the depth of Britain’s political and military disaster, Winston
Churchill likened the future of Europe to “broad sunlit uplands.” Now if
one had regard only for the hour, this was a piece of mendacity such as
the worst charlatans are found committing; but if one took Churchill’s
premises and then considered the potentiality, the picture was within
bounds of actualization. His “exaggeration” was that the defeat of the
enemy would place Europe in a position for long and peaceful progress.
At the time the surface trends ran the other way; the actuality was a
valley of humiliation. Yet the hope which transfigured this to “broad
sunlit uplands” was not irresponsible, and we conclude by saying that the
rhetorician talks about both what exists simply and what exists by favor
of human imagination and effort.[16]

This interest in actualization is a further distinction between pure
dialectic and rhetoric. With its forecast of the actual possibility,
rhetoric passes from mere scientific demonstration of an idea to
its relation to prudential conduct. A dialectic must take place _in
vacuo_, and the fact alone that it contains contraries leaves it an
intellectual thing. Rhetoric, on the other hand, always espouses one of
the contraries. This espousal is followed by some attempt at impingement
upon actuality. That is why rhetoric, with its passion for the actual, is
more complete than mere dialectic with its dry understanding. It is more
complete on the premise that man is a creature of passion who must live
out that passion in the world. Pure contemplation does not suffice for
this end. As Jacques Maritain has expressed it: “love ... is not directed
at possibilities or pure essences; it is directed at what exists; one
does not love possibilities, one loves that which exists or is destined
to exist.”[17] The complete man, then, is the “lover” added to the
scientist; the rhetorician to the dialectician. Understanding followed by
actualization seems to be the order of creation, and there is no need for
the role of rhetoric to be misconceived.

The pure dialectician is left in the theoretical position of the
non-lover, who can attain understanding but who cannot add impulse to
truth. We are compelled to say “theoretical position” because it is by
no means certain that in the world of actual speech the non-lover has
more than a putative existence. We have seen previously that his speech
would consist of strictly referential words which would serve only as
designata. Now the question arises: at what point is motive to come
into such language? Kenneth Burke in _A Grammar of Motives_ has pointed
to “the pattern of embarrassment behind the contemporary ideal of a
language that will best promote good action by entirely eliminating the
element of exhortation or command. Insofar as such a project succeeded,
its terms would involve a narrowing of circumference to a point where
the principle of personal action is eliminated from language, so that an
act would follow from it only as a non-sequitur, a kind of humanitarian
after-thought.”[18]

The fault of this conception of language is that scientific intention
turns out to be enclosed in artistic intention and not _vice versa_.
Let us test this by taking as an example one of those “fact-finding
committees” so favored by modern representative governments. A language
in which all else is suppressed in favor of nuclear meanings would be
an ideal instrumentality for the report of such a committee. But this
committee, if it lived up to the ideal of its conception, would have
to be followed by an “attitude-finding committee” to tell us what its
explorations really mean. In real practice the fact-finding committee
understands well enough that it is also an attitude-finding committee,
and where it cannot show inclination through language of tendency,
it usually manages to do so through selection and arrangement of the
otherwise inarticulate facts. To recur here to the original situation in
the dialogue, we recall that the eloquent Lysias, posing as a non-lover,
had concealed designs upon Phaedrus, so that his fine speech was really a
sheep’s clothing. Socrates discerned in him a “peculiar craftiness.” One
must suspect the same today of many who ask us to place our faith in the
neutrality of their discourse. We cannot deny that there are degrees of
objectivity in the reference of speech. But this is not the same as an
assurance that a vocabulary of reduced meanings will solve the problems
of mankind. Many of those problems will have to be handled, as Socrates
well knew, by the student of souls, who must primarily make use of the
language of tendency. The soul is impulse, not simply cognition; and
finally one’s interest in rhetoric depends on how much poignancy one
senses in existence.[19]

Rhetoric moves the soul with a movement which cannot finally be justified
logically. It can only be valued analogically with reference to some
supreme image. Therefore when the rhetorician encounters some soul
“sinking beneath the double load of forgetfulness and vice” he seeks
to re-animate it by holding up to its sight the order of presumptive
goods. This order is necessarily a hierarchy leading up to the ultimate
good. All of the terms in a rhetorical vocabulary are like links in a
chain stretching up to some master link which transmits its influence
down through the linkages. It is impossible to talk about rhetoric as
effective expression without having as a term giving intelligibility
to the whole discourse, the Good. Of course, inferior concepts of the
Good may be and often are placed in this ultimate position; and there
is nothing to keep a base lover from inverting the proper order and
saying, “Evil, be thou my good.” Yet the fact remains that in any
piece of rhetorical discourse, one rhetorical term overcomes another
rhetorical term only by being nearer to the term which stands ultimate.
There is some ground for calling a rhetorical education necessarily
an aristocratic education in that the rhetorician has to deal with an
aristocracy of notions, to say nothing of supplementing his logical and
pathetic proofs with an ethical proof.

All things considered, rhetoric, noble or base, is a great power in the
world; and we note accordingly that at the center of the public life of
every people there is a fierce struggle over who shall control the means
of rhetorical propagation. Today we set up “offices of information,”
which like the sly lover in the dialogue, pose as non-lovers while
pushing their suits. But there is no reason to despair over the fact that
men will never give up seeking to influence one another. We would not
desire it to be otherwise; neuter discourse is a false idol, to worship
which is to commit the very offense for which Socrates made expiation in
his second speech.

Since we want not emancipation from impulse but clarification of impulse,
the duty of rhetoric is to bring together action and understanding into
a whole that is greater than scientific perception.[20] The realization
that just as no action is really indifferent, so no utterance is without
its responsibility introduces, it is true, a certain strenuousity into
life, produced by a consciousness that “nothing is lost.” Yet this is
preferable to that desolation which proceeds from an infinite dispersion
or feeling of unaccountability. Even so, the choice between them is
hardly ours to make; we did not create the order of things, but being
accountable for our impulses, we wish these to be just.

Thus when we finally divest rhetoric of all the notions of artifice
which have grown up around it, we are left with something very much
like Spinoza’s “intellectual love of God.” This is its essence and
the _fons et origo_ of its power. It is “intellectual” because, as we
have previously seen, there is no honest rhetoric without a preceding
dialectic. The kind of rhetoric which is justly condemned is utterance
in support of a position before that position has been adjudicated with
reference to the whole universe of discourse[21]—and of such the world
always produces more than enough. It is “love” because it is something in
addition to bare theoretical truth. That element in addition is a desire
to bring truth into a kind of existence, or to give it an actuality
to which theory is indifferent. Now what is to be said about our last
expression, “of God”? Echoes of theological warfare will cause many to
desire a substitute for this, and we should not object. As long as we
have in ultimate place the highest good man can intuit, the relationship
is made perfect. We shall be content with “intellectual love of the
Good.” It is still the intellectual love of good which causes the noble
lover to desire not to devour his beloved but to shape him according to
the gods as far as mortal power allows. So rhetoric at its truest seeks
to perfect men by showing them better versions of themselves, links in
that chain extending up toward the ideal, which only the intellect can
apprehend and only the soul have affection for. This is the justified
affection of which no one can be ashamed, and he who feels no influence
of it is truly outside the communion of minds. Rhetoric appears, finally,
as a means by which the impulse of the soul to be ever moving is redeemed.

It may be granted that in this essay we have gone some distance from
the banks of the Ilissus. What began as a simple account of passion
becomes by transcendence an allegory of all speech. No one would think of
suggesting that Plato had in mind every application which has here been
made, but that need not arise as an issue. The structure of the dialogue,
the way in which the judgments about speech concentre, and especially the
close association of the true, the beautiful, and the good, constitute a
unity of implication. The central idea is that all speech, which is the
means the gods have given man to express his soul, is a form of eros, in
the proper interpretation of the word. With that truth the rhetorician
will always be brought face to face as soon as he ventures beyond the
consideration of mere artifice and device.




