Chapter II

DIALECTIC AND RHETORIC AT DAYTON, TENNESSEE


We have maintained that dialectic and rhetoric are distinguishable
stages of argumentation, although often they are not distinguished by
the professional mind, to say nothing of the popular mind. Dialectic is
that stage which defines the subject satisfactorily with regard to the
_logos_, or the set of propositions making up some coherent universe
of discourse; and we can therefore say that a dialectical position is
established when its relation to an opposite has been made clear and
it is thus rationally rather than empirically sustained. Despite the
inconclusiveness of Plato on this subject, we shall say that facts are
never dialectically determined—although they may be elaborated in a
dialectical system—and that the urgency of facts is never a dialectical
concern. For similar reasons Professor Adler, in his searching study of
dialectic, maintains the position that “Facts, that is non-discursive
elements, are never determinative of dialectic in a logical or
intellectual sense....”[22]

What a successful dialectic secures for any position therefore, as we
noted in the opening chapter, is not actuality but possibility; and what
rhetoric thereafter accomplishes is to take any dialectically secured
position (since positive positions, like the “position” that water
freezes at 32°F., are not matters for rhetorical appeal) and show its
relationship to the world of prudential conduct. This is tantamount to
saying that what the specifically rhetorical plea asks of us is belief,
which is a preliminary to action.

It may be helpful to state this relationship through an example less
complex than that of the Platonic dialogue. The speaker who in a
dialectical contest has taken the position that “magnanimity is a virtue”
has by his process of opposition and exclusion won our intellectual
assent, inasmuch as we see the abstract possibility of this position in
the world of discourse. He has not, however, produced in us a resolve to
practice magnanimity. To accomplish this he must pass from the realm of
possibility to that of actuality; it is not the logical invincibility
of “magnanimity” enclosed in the class “virtue” which wins our assent;
rather it is the contemplation of magnanimity _sub specie_ actuality.
Accordingly when we say that rhetoric instills belief and action, we are
saying that it intersects possibility with the plane of actuality and
hence of the imperative.[23]

A failure to appreciate this distinction is responsible for many lame
performances in our public controversies. The effects are, in outline,
that the dialectician cannot understand why his demonstration does not
win converts; and the rhetorician cannot understand why his appeal is
rejected as specious. The answer, as we have begun to indicate, is that
the dialectic has not made reference to reality, which men confronted
with problems of conduct require; and the rhetorician has not searched
the grounds of the position on which he has perhaps spent much eloquence.
True, the dialectician and the rhetorician are often one man, and the
two processes may not lie apart in his work; but no student of the art
of argumentation can doubt that some extraordinary confusions would
be prevented by a knowledge of the theory of this distinction. Beyond
this, representative government would receive a tonic effect from any
improvement of the ability of an electorate to distinguish logical
positions from the detail of rhetorical amplification. The British,
through their custom of putting questions to public speakers and to
officers of government in Parliament, probably come nearest to getting
some dialectical clarification from their public figures. In the United
States, where there is no such custom, it is up to each disputant
to force the other to reveal his grounds; and this, in the ardor of
shoring up his own position rhetorically, he often fails to do with
any thoroughness. It should therefore be profitable to try the kind of
analysis we have explained upon some celebrated public controversy, with
the object of showing how such grasp of rhetorical theory could have made
the issues clearer.

For this purpose, it would be hard to think of a better example than the
Scopes “evolution” trial of a generation ago. There is no denying that
this trial had many aspects of the farcical, and it might seem at first
glance not serious enough to warrant this type of examination. Yet at the
time it was considered serious enough to draw the most celebrated trial
lawyers of the country, as well as some of the most eminent scientists;
moreover, after one has cut through the sensationalism with which
journalism and a few of the principals clothed the encounter, one finds a
unique alignment of dialectical and rhetorical positions.

The background of the trial can be narrated briefly. On March 21, 1925,
the state of Tennessee passed a law forbidding the teaching of the theory
of evolution in publicly supported schools. The language of the law was
as follows:

    Section 1. Be it enacted by the general assembly of the state
    of Tennessee, that it shall be unlawful for any teacher in
    any of the universities, normals and all other public schools
    of the state, which are supported in whole or in part by the
    public school funds of the state, to teach any theory that
    denies the story of the Divine creation of man as taught in the
    Bible, and to teach instead that man has descended from a lower
    order of animals.

That same spring John T. Scopes, a young instructor in biology in the
high school at Dayton, made an agreement with some local citizens to
teach such a theory and to cause himself to be indicted therefor with
the object of testing the validity of the law. The indictment was duly
returned, and the two sides prepared for the contest. The issue excited
the nation as a whole; and the trial drew as opposing counsel Clarence
Darrow, the celebrated Chicago lawyer, and William Jennings Bryan, the
former political leader and evangelical lecturer.

The remarkable aspect of this trial was that almost from the first the
defense, pleading the cause of science, was forced into the role of
rhetorician; whereas the prosecution, pleading the cause of the state,
clung stubbornly to a dialectical position. This development occurred
because the argument of the defense, once the legal technicalities were
got over, was that evolution is “true.” The argument of the prosecution
was that its teaching was unlawful. These two arguments depend upon
rhetoric and dialectic respectively. Because of this circumstance, the
famous trial turned into an argument about the orders of knowledge,
although this fact was never clearly expressed, if it was ever discerned,
by either side, and that is the main subject of our analysis. But before
going into the matter of the trial, a slight prologue may be in order.

It is only the first step beyond philosophic naïvete to realize that
there are different orders of knowledge, or that not all knowledge is of
the same kind of thing. Adler, whose analysis I am satisfied to accept
to some extent, distinguishes the orders as follows. First there is the
order of facts about existing physical entities. These constitute the
simple data of science. Next come the statements which are statements
about these facts; these are the propositions or theories of science.
Next there come the statements about these statements: “The propositions
which these last statements express form a partial universe of discourse
which is the body of philosophical opinion.”[24]

To illustrate in sequence: the anatomical measurements of
_Pithecanthropus erectus_ would be knowledge of the first order. A
theory based on these measurements which placed him in a certain group
of related organisms would be knowledge of the second order. A statement
about the value or the implications of the theory of this placement would
be knowledge of the third order; it would be the judgment of a scientific
theory from a dialectical position.

It is at once apparent that the Tennessee “anti-evolution” law was a
statement of the third class. That is to say, it was neither a collection
of scientific facts, nor a statement about those facts (_i.e._, a
theory or a generalization); it was a statement about a statement (the
scientists’ statement) purporting to be based on those facts. It was,
to use Adler’s phrase, a philosophical opinion, though expressed in the
language of law. Now since the body of philosophical opinion is on a
level which surmounts the partial universe of science, how is it possible
for the latter ever to refute the former? In short, is there any number
of facts, together with generalizations based on facts, which would be
sufficient to overcome a dialectical position?

Throughout the trial the defense tended to take the view that science
could carry the day just by being scientific. But in doing this, one
assumes that there are no points outside the empirical realm from which
one can form judgments about science. Science, by this conception, must
contain not only its facts, but also the means of its own evaluation, so
that the statements about the statements of science are science too.

The published record of the trial runs to approximately three hundred
pages, and it would obviously be difficult to present a digest of all
that was said. But through a carefully selected series of excerpts, it
may be possible to show how blows were traded back and forth from the
two positions. The following passages, though not continuous, afford the
clearest picture of the dialectical-rhetorical conflict which underlay
the entire trial.

                THE COURT (_in charging the grand jury_)

    You will bear in mind that in this investigation you are not
    interested to inquire into the policy of this legislation.[25]

                              THE DEFENSE

    _Mr. Darrow_: I don’t suppose the court has considered the
    question of competency of evidence. My associates and myself
    have fairly definite ideas as to it, but I don’t know how
    the counsel on the other side feel about it. I think that
    scientists are competent evidence—or competent witnesses here,
    to explain what evolution is, and that they are competent on
    both sides.

                            THE PROSECUTION

    _Attorney-General Stewart_: If the Court please, in this
    case, as Mr. Darrow stated, the defense is going to insist on
    introducing scientists and Bible students to give their ideas
    on certain views of this law, and that, I am frank to state,
    will be resisted by the state as vigorously as we know how to
    resist it. We have had a conference or two about the matter,
    and we think that it isn’t competent evidence; that is, it is
    not competent to bring into this case scientists who testify as
    to what the theory of evolution is or interpret the Bible or
    anything of that sort.

                              THE DEFENSE

    _Mr. Neal_: The defendant moves the court to quash the
    indictment in this case for the following reasons: In
    that it violates Sec. 12, Art. XI, of the Constitution of
    Tennessee: “It shall be the duty of the general assembly in
    all future periods of the government to cherish literature
    and science....” I want to say that our main contention after
    all, may it please your honor, is that this is not a proper
    thing for any legislature, the legislature of Tennessee or
    the legislature of the United States, to attempt to make and
    assign a rule in regard to. In this law there is an attempt to
    pronounce a judgment and a conclusion in the realm of science
    and in the realm of religion.

                            THE PROSECUTION

    _Mr. McKenzie_: Under the law you cannot teach in the common
    schools the Bible. Why should it be improper to provide that
    you cannot teach this other theory?

                              THE DEFENSE

    _Mr. Darrow_: Can a legislative body say, “You cannot read
    a book or take a lesson or make a talk on science until you
    first find out whether you are saying against Genesis”? It can
    unless that constitutional provision protects me. It can. Can
    it say to the astronomer, you cannot turn your telescope upon
    the infinite planets and suns and stars that fill space, lest
    you find that the earth is not the center of the universe and
    that there is not any firmament between us and the heaven? Can
    it? It could—except for the work of Thomas Jefferson, which
    has been woven into every state constitution in the Union, and
    has stayed there like a flaming sword to protect the rights of
    man against ignorance and bigotry, and when it is permitted to
    overwhelm them then we are taken in a sea of blood and ruin
    that all the miseries and tortures and carrion of the middle
    ages would be as nothing.... If today you can take a thing
    like evolution and make it a crime to teach it in the public
    schools, tomorrow you can make it a crime to teach it in the
    private schools, and the next year you can make it a crime to
    teach it to the hustings or in the church. At the next session
    you may ban books and the newspapers.

    _Mr. Dudley Field Malone_: So that there shall be no
    misunderstanding and that no one shall be able to misinterpret
    or misrepresent our position we wish to state at the beginning
    of the case that the defense believes that there is a direct
    conflict between the theory of evolution and the theories of
    creation as set forth in the Book of Genesis.

    Neither do we believe that the stories of creation as set forth
    in the Bible are reconcilable or scientifically correct.

    _Mr. Arthur Garfield Hays_: Our whole case depends upon proving
    that evolution is a reasonable scientific theory.

                            THE PROSECUTION

    _Mr. William Jennings Bryan, Jr._ (in support of a motion to
    exclude expert testimony): It is, I think, apparent to all that
    we have now reached the heart of this case, upon your honor’s
    ruling, as to whether this expert testimony will be admitted
    largely determines the question of whether this trial from now
    on will be an orderly effort to try the case upon the issues,
    raised by the indictment and by the plea or whether it will
    degenerate into a joint debate upon the merits or demerits
    of someone’s views upon evolution.... To permit an expert to
    testify upon this issue would be to substitute trial by experts
    for trial by jury....

                              THE DEFENSE

    _Mr. Hays_: Are we entitled to show what evolution is? We are
    entitled to show that, if for no other reason than to determine
    whether the title is germane to the act.

                            THE PROSECUTION

    _Mr. William Jennings Bryan_: An expert cannot be permitted
    to come in here and try to defeat the enforcement of a law by
    testifying that it isn’t a bad law and it isn’t—I mean a bad
    doctrine—no matter how these people phrase the doctrine—no
    matter how they eulogize it. This is not the place to prove
    that the law ought never to have been passed. The place to
    prove that, or teach that, was to the state legislature....
    The people of this state passed this law, the people of the
    state knew what they were doing when they passed the law, and
    they knew the dangers of the doctrine—that they did not want it
    taught to their children, and my friends, it isn’t—your honor,
    it isn’t proper to bring experts in here and try to defeat the
    purpose of the people of this state by trying to show that
    this thing they denounce and outlaw is a beautiful thing that
    everybody ought to believe in.... It is this doctrine that
    gives us Nietzsche, the only great author who tried to carry
    this to its logical conclusion, and we have the testimony of
    my distinguished friend from Chicago in his speech in the Loeb
    and Leopold case that 50,000 volumes have been written about
    Nietzsche, and he is the greatest philosopher in the last
    hundred years, and have him pleading that because Leopold read
    Nietzsche and adopted Nietzsche’s philosophy of the super-man,
    that he is not responsible for the taking of human life. We
    have the doctrine—I should not characterize it as I should
    like to characterize it—the doctrine that the universities
    that had it taught, and the professors who taught it, are much
    more responsible for the crime that Leopold committed than
    Leopold himself. That is the doctrine, my friends, that they
    have tried to bring into existence, they commence in the high
    schools with their foundation of evolutionary theory, and we
    have the word of the distinguished lawyer that this is more
    read than any other in a hundred years, and the statement of
    that distinguished man that the teachings of Nietzsche made
    Leopold a murderer.... (_Mr. Bryan reading from a book by
    Darrow_) “I will guarantee that you can go to the University of
    Chicago today—into its big library and find over 1,000 volumes
    of Nietzsche, and I am sure I speak moderately. If this boy
    is to blame for this, where did he get it? Is there any blame
    attached because somebody took Nietzsche’s philosophy seriously
    and fashioned his life on it? And there is no question in
    this case but what it is true. Then who is to blame? The
    university would be more to blame than he is. The scholars of
    the world would be more to blame than he is. The publishers
    of the world—and Nietzsche’s books are published by one of
    the biggest publishers in the world—are more to blame than he
    is. Your honor, it is hardly fair to hang a 19-year-old boy
    for the philosophy that was taught him at the university.”...
    Your honor, we first pointed out that we do not need any
    experts in science. Here is one plain fact, and the statute
    defines itself, and it tells the kind of evolution it does not
    want taught, and the evidence says that this is the kind of
    evolution that was taught, and no number of scientists could
    come in here, my friends, and override that statute or take
    from the jury its right to decide this question, so that all
    the experts they could bring would mean nothing. And when it
    comes to Bible experts, every member of the jury is as good an
    expert on the Bible as any man they could bring, or that we
    could bring.

                              THE DEFENSE

    _Mr. Malone_: Are we to have our children know nothing about
    science except what the church says they shall know? I
    have never seen any harm in learning and understanding, in
    humility and open-mindedness, and I have never seen clearer
    the need of that learning than when I see the attitude of the
    prosecution, who attack and refuse to accept the information
    and intelligence, which expert witnesses will give them.

                            THE PROSECUTION

    _Mr. Stewart_: Now what could these scientists testify to?
    They could only say as an expert, qualified as an expert upon
    this subject, I have made a study of these things and from my
    standpoint as such an expert, I say that this does not deny the
    story of divine creation. That is what they would testify to,
    isn’t it? That is all they could testify about.

    Now, then, I say under the correct construction of the act,
    that they cannot testify as to that. Why? Because in the
    wording of this act the legislature itself construed the
    instrument according to their intention.... What was the
    general purpose of the legislature here? It was to prevent
    teaching in the public schools of any county in Tennessee that
    theory which says that man is descended from a lower order of
    animals. That is the intent and nobody can dispute it under the
    shining sun of this day.

                               THE COURT

    Now upon these issues as brought up it becomes the duty of the
    Court to determine the question of the admissibility of this
    expert testimony offered by the defendant.

    It is not within the province of the Court under these issues
    to decide and determine which is true, the story of divine
    creation as taught in the Bible, or the story of the creation
    of man as taught by evolution.

    If the state is correct in its insistence, it is immaterial,
    so far as the results of this case are concerned, as to
    which theory is true; because it is within the province of
    the legislative branch, and not the judicial branch of the
    government to pass upon the policy of a statute; and the policy
    of this statute having been passed upon by that department of
    the government, this court is not further concerned as to its
    policy; but is interested only in its proper interpretation
    and, if valid, its enforcement.... Therefore the court is
    content to sustain the motion of the attorney-general to
    exclude expert testimony.

                            THE PROSECUTION

    _Mr. Stewart_ (during Mr. Darrow’s cross-examination of Mr.
    Bryan): I want to interpose another objection. What is the
    purpose of this examination?

    _Mr. Bryan_: The purpose is to cast ridicule upon everybody
    who believes in the Bible, and I am perfectly willing that the
    world shall know that these gentlemen have no other purpose
    than ridiculing every Christian who believes in the Bible.

                              THE DEFENSE

    _Mr. Darrow_: We have the purpose of preventing bigots and
    ignoramuses from controlling the education of the United
    States, and you know it, and that is all.

    Statements of Noted Scientists as Filed into Record by Defense
    Counsel

    _Charles H. Judd, Director of School of Education, University
    of Chicago_: It will be impossible, in my judgment, in the
    state university, as well as in the normal schools, to teach
    adequately psychology or the science of education without
    making constant reference to all the facts of mental
    development which are included in the general doctrine of
    evolution.... Whatever may be the constitutional rights of
    legislatures to prescribe the general course of study of public
    schools it will, in my judgment, be a serious national disaster
    if the attempt is successful to determine the details to be
    taught in the schools through the vote of legislatures rather
    than as a result of scientific investigation.

    _Jacob G. Lipman, Dean of the College of Agriculture, State
    University of New Jersey_: With these facts and interpretations
    of organic evolution left out, the agricultural colleges and
    experimental stations could not render effective service to our
    great agricultural industry.

    _Wilbur A. Nelson, State Geologist of Tennessee_: It,
    therefore, appears that it would be impossible to study or
    teach geology in Tennessee or elsewhere, without using the
    theory of evolution.

    _Kirtley F. Mather, Chairman of the Department of Geology,
    Harvard University_: Science has not even a guess as to the
    original source or sources of matter. It deals with immediate
    causes and effects.... Men of science have as their aim the
    discovery of facts. They seek with open eyes, willing to
    recognize it, as Huxley said, even if it “sears the eyeballs.”
    After they have discovered truth, and not till then, do they
    consider what its moral implications may be. Thus far, and
    presumably always, truth when found is also found to be right,
    in the moral sense of the word.... As Henry Ward Beecher said,
    forty years ago, “If to reject God’s revelation in the book is
    infidelity, what is it to reject God’s revelation of himself in
    the structure of the whole globe?”

    _Maynard M. Metcalf, Research Specialist in Zoology, Johns
    Hopkins University_: Intelligent teaching of biology or
    intelligent approach to any biological science is impossible if
    the established fact of evolution is omitted.

    _Horatio Hackett Newman, Professor of Zoology, University
    of Chicago_: Evolution has been tried and tested in every
    conceivable way for considerably over half a century. Vast
    numbers of biological facts have been examined in the light of
    this principle and without a single exception they have been
    entirely compatible with it.... The evolution principle is thus
    a great unifying and integrating scientific conception. Any
    conception that is so far-reaching, so consistent, and that has
    led to so much advance in the understanding of nature, is at
    least an extremely valuable idea and one not lightly to be cast
    aside in case it fails to agree with one’s prejudices.

Thus the two sides lined up as dialectical truth and empirical fact. The
state legislature of Tennessee, acting in its sovereign capacity, had
passed a measure which made it unlawful to teach that man is connatural
with the animals through asserting that he is descended from a “lower
order” of them. (There was some sparring over the meaning of the
technical language of the act, but this was the general consensus.) The
legal question was whether John T. Scopes had violated the measure. The
philosophical question, which was the real focus of interest, was the
right of a state to make this prescription.

We have referred to the kind of truth which can be dialectically
established, and here we must develop further the dialectical nature of
the state’s case. As long as it maintained this dialectical position, it
did not have to go into the “factual” truth of evolution, despite the
outcry from the other side. The following considerations, then, enter
into this “dialectical” prosecution.

By definition the legislature is the supreme arbiter of education within
the state. It is charged with the duty of promoting enlightenment and
morality, and to these ends it may establish common schools, require
attendance, and review curricula either by itself or through its agents.
The state of Tennessee had exercised this kind of authority when it
had forbidden the teaching of the Bible in the public schools. Now if
the legislature could take a position that the publicly subsidized
teaching of the Bible was socially undesirable, it could, from the same
authority, take the same position with regard to a body of science. Some
people might feel that the legislature was morally bound to encourage
the propagation of the Bible, just as some of those participating in
the trial seemed to think that it was morally bound to encourage the
propagation of science. But here again the legislature is the highest
tribunal, and no body of religious or scientific doctrine comes to it
with a compulsive authority. In brief, both the Ten Commandments and the
theory of evolution belonged in the class of things which it could elect
or reject, depending on the systematic import of propositions underlying
the philosophy of the state.

The policy of the anti-evolution law was the same type of policy which
Darrow had by inference commended only a year earlier in the famous trial
of Loeb and Leopold. This clash is perhaps the most direct in the Scopes
case and deserves pointing out here. Darrow had served as defense counsel
for the two brilliant university graduates who had conceived the idea
of committing a murder as a kind of intellectual exploit, to prove that
their powers of foresight and care could prevent detection. The essence
of Darrow’s plea at their trial was that the two young men could not be
held culpable—at least in the degree the state claimed—because of the
influences to which they had been exposed. They had been readers of a
system of philosophy of allegedly anti-social tendency, and they were
not to be blamed if they translated that philosophy into a sanction of
their deed. The effect of this plea obviously was to transfer guilt from
the two young men to society as a whole, acting through its laws, its
schools, its publications, etc.

Now the key thing to be observed in this plea was that Darrow was not
asking the jury to inspect the philosophy of Nietzsche for the purpose
either of passing upon its internal consistency or its contact with
reality. He was asking precisely what Bryan was asking of the jury at
Dayton, namely that they take a strictly dialectical position outside it,
viewing it as a partial universe of discourse with consequences which
could be adjudged good or bad. The point to be especially noted is that
Darrow did not raise the question of whether the philosophy of Nietzsche
expresses necessary truth, or whether, let us say, it is essential to an
understanding of the world. He was satisfied to point out that the state
had not been a sufficiently vigilant guardian of the forces molding the
character of its youth.

But the prosecution at Dayton could use this line of argument without
change. If the philosophy of Nietzsche were sufficient to instigate young
men to criminal actions, it might be claimed with even greater force that
the philosophy of evolution, which in the popular mind equated man with
the animals, would do the same. The state’s dialectic here simply used
one of Darrow’s earlier definitions to place the anti-evolution law in a
favorable or benevolent category. In sum: to Darrow’s previous position
that the doctrine of Nietzsche is capable of immoral influence, Bryan
responded that the doctrine of evolution is likewise capable of immoral
influence, and this of course was the dialectical countering of the
defense’s position in the trial.

There remains yet a third dialectical maneuver for the prosecution. On
the second day of the trial Attorney-General Stewart, in reviewing the
duties of the legislature, posed the following problem: “Supposing then
that there should come within the minds of the people a conflict between
literature and science. Then what would the legislature do? Wouldn’t
they have to interpret?... Wouldn’t they have to interpret their
construction of this conflict which one should be recognized or higher or
more in the public schools?”

This point was not exploited as fully as its importance might seem to
warrant; but what the counsel was here declaring is that the legislature
is necessarily the umpire in all disputes between partial universes.
Therefore if literature and science should fall into a conflict, it would
again be up to the legislature to assign the priority. It is not bound
to recognize the claims of either of these exclusively because, as we
saw earlier, it operates in a universe with reference to which these are
partial bodies of discourse. The legislature is the disposer of partial
universes. Accordingly when the Attorney-General took this stand, he came
the nearest of any of the participants in the trial to clarifying the
state’s position, and by this we mean to showing that for the state it
was a matter of legal dialectic.

There is little evidence to indicate that the defense understood the
kind of case it was up against, though naturally this is said in a
philosophical rather than a legal sense. After the questions of law were
settled, its argument assumed the substance of a plea for the truth of
evolution, which subject was not within the scope of the indictment. We
have, for example, the statement of Mr. Hays already cited that the whole
case of the defense depended on proving that evolution is a “reasonable
scientific theory.” Of those who spoke for the defense, Mr. Dudley Field
Malone seems to have had the poorest conception of the nature of the
contest. I must cite further from his plea because it shows most clearly
the trap from which the defense was never able to extricate itself.
On the fifth day of the trial Mr. Malone was chosen to reply to Mr.
Bryan, and in the course of his speech he made the following revealing
utterance: “Your honor, there is a difference between theological and
scientific men. Theology deals with something that is established and
revealed; it seeks to gather material which they claim should not be
changed. It is the Word of God and that cannot be changed; it is
literal, it is not to be interpreted. That is the theological mind. It
deals with theology. The scientific mind is a modern thing, your honor.
I am not sure Galileo was the one who brought relief to the scientific
mind; because, theretofore, Aristotle and Plato had reached their
conclusions and processes, by metaphysical reasoning, because they had no
telescope and no microscope.” The part of this passage which gives his
case away is the distinction made at the end. Mr. Malone was asserting
that Aristotle and Plato got no further than they did because they lacked
the telescope and the microscope. To a slight extent perhaps Aristotle
was what we would today call a “research scientist,” but the conclusions
and processes arrived at by the metaphysical reasoning of the two are
dialectical, and the test of a dialectical position is logic and not
ocular visibility. At the risk of making Mr. Malone a scapegoat we must
say that this is an abysmal confusion of two different kinds of inquiry
which the Greeks were well cognizant of. But the same confusion, if it
did not produce this trial, certainly helped to draw it out to its length
of eight days. It is the assumption that human laws stand in wait upon
what the scientists see in their telescopes and microscopes. But harking
back to Professor Adler: facts are never determinative of dialectic in
the sense presumed by this counsel.

Exactly the same confusion appeared in a rhetorical plea for truth which
Mr. Malone made shortly later in the same speech. Then he said: “There is
never a duel with truth. The truth always wins and we are not afraid of
it. The truth is no coward. The truth does not need the law. The truth
does not need the forces of government. The truth does not need Mr.
Bryan. The truth is imperishable, eternal and immortal and needs no human
agency to support it. We are ready to tell the truth as we understand it
and we do not fear all the truth that they can present as facts.” It is
instantly apparent that this presents truth in an ambiguous sense. Malone
begins with the simplistic assumption that there is a “standard” truth,
a kind of universal, objective, operative truth which it is heinous to
oppose. That might be well enough if the meaning were highly generic,
but before he is through this short passage he has equated truth with
facts—the identical confusion which we noted in his utterance about Plato
and Aristotle. Now since the truth which dialectic arrives at is not a
truth of facts, this peroration either becomes irrelevant, or it lends
itself to the other side, where, minus the concluding phrase, it could
serve as a eulogium of dialectical truth.

Such was the dilemma by which the defense was impaled from the beginning.
To some extent it appears even in the expert testimony. On the day
preceding this speech by Malone, Professor Maynard Metcalf had presented
testimony in court regarding the theory of evolution (this was on the
fourth day of the trial; Judge Raulston did not make his ruling excluding
such testimony until the sixth day) in which he made some statements
which could have been of curious interest to the prosecution. They are
effectually summarized in the following excerpt: “Evolution and the
theories of evolution are fundamentally different things. The fact of
evolution is a thing that is perfectly and absolutely clear.... The
series of evidences is so convincing that I think it would be entirely
impossible for any normal human being who was conversant with the
phenomena to have even for a moment the least doubt even for the fact of
evolution, but he might have tremendous doubts as to the truth of any
hypothesis....”

We first notice here a clear recognition of the kinds of truth
distinguished by Adler, with the “fact” of evolution belonging to the
first order and theories of evolution belonging to the second. The
second, which is referred to by the term “hypothesis,” consists of facts
in an elaboration. We note furthermore that this scientist has called
them fundamentally different things—so different that one is entitled
to have not merely doubts but “tremendous doubts” about the second.
Now let us imagine the dialecticians of the opposite side approaching
him with the following. You have said, Professor Metcalf, that the
fact of evolution and the various theories of evolution are two quite
different things. You have also said that the theories of evolution are
so debatable or questionable that you can conceive of much difference
of opinion about them. Now if there is an order of knowledge above this
order of theories, which order you admit to be somewhat speculative,
a further order of knowledge which is philosophical or evaluative, is
it not likely that there would be in this realm still more alternative
positions, still more room for doubt or difference of opinion? And if all
this is so, would you expect people to assent to a proposition of this
order in the same way you expect them to assent to, say, the proposition
that a monkey has vertebrae? And if you do make these admissions, can
you any longer maintain that people of opposite views on the teaching of
evolution are simply defiers of the truth? This is how the argument might
have progressed had some Greek Darwin thrown Athens into an uproar; but
this argument was, after all, in an American court of law.

It should now be apparent from these analyses that the defense was
never able to meet the state’s case on dialectical grounds. Even if it
had boldly accepted the contest on this level, it is difficult to see
how it could have won, for the dialectic must probably have followed
this course: First Proposition, All teaching of evolution is harmful.
Counter Proposition, No teaching of evolution is harmful. Resolution,
Some teaching of evolution is harmful. Now the resolution was exactly
the position taken by the law, which was that some teaching of evolution
(i.e., the teaching of it in state-supported schools) was an anti-social
measure. Logically speaking, the proposition that “Some teaching of
evolution is harmful,” does not exclude the proposition that “Some
teaching of evolution is not harmful,” but there was the fact that the
law permitted some teaching of evolution (e.g., the teaching of it in
schools not supported by the public funds). In this situation there
seemed nothing for the defense to do but stick by the second proposition
and plead for that proposition rhetorically. So science entered the
juridical arena and argued for the value of science. In this argument the
chief topic was consequence. There was Malone’s statement that without
the theory of evolution Burbank would not have been able to produce his
results. There was Lipman’s statement that without an understanding of
the theory of evolution the agricultural colleges could not carry on
their work. There were the statements of Judd and Nelson that large
areas of education depended upon a knowledge of evolution. There was
the argument brought out by Professor Mather of Harvard: “When men are
offered their choice between science, with its confident and unanimous
acceptance of the evolutionary principle, on the one hand, and religion,
with its necessary appeal to things unseen and improvable, on the other,
they are much more likely to abandon religion than to abandon science.
If such a choice is forced upon us, the churches will lose many of their
best educated young people, the very ones upon whom they must depend for
leadership in coming years.”

We noted at the beginning of this chapter that rhetoric deals with
subjects at the point where they touch upon actuality or prudential
conduct. Here the defense looks at the policy of teaching evolution and
points to beneficial results. The argument then becomes: these important
benefits imply an important beneficial cause. This is why we can say that
the pleaders for science were forced into the non-scientific role of the
rhetorician.

The prosecution incidentally also had an argument from consequences,
although it was never employed directly. When Bryan maintained that the
philosophy of evolution might lead to the same results as the philosophy
of Nietzsche had led with Loeb and Leopold, he was opening a subject
which could have supplied such an argument, say in the form of a concrete
instance of moral beliefs weakened by someone’s having been indoctrinated
with evolution. But there was really no need: as we have sought to show
all along, the state had an immense strategic advantage in the fact that
laws belong to the category of dialectical determinations, and it clung
firmly to this advantage.

An irascible exchange which Darrow had with the judge gives an idea of
the frustration which the defense felt at this stage. There had been an
argument about the propriety of a cross-examination.

    _The Court_: Colonel [Darrow], what is the purpose of
    cross-examination?

    _Mr. Darrow_: The purpose of cross-examination is to be used on
    trial.

    _The Court_: Well, isn’t that an effort to ascertain the truth?

    _Mr. Darrow_: No, it is an effort to show prejudice. Nothing
    else. Has there been any effort to ascertain the truth in this
    case? Why not bring in the jury and let us prove it?

The truth referred to by the judge was whether the action of Scopes
fell within the definition of the law; the truth referred to by Darrow
was the facts of evolution (not submitted to the jury as evidence);
and “prejudice” was a crystallized opinion of the theory of evolution,
expressed now as law.

If we have appeared here to assign too complete a forensic victory to the
prosecution, let us return, by way of recapitulating the issues, to the
relationship between positive science and dialectic. Many people, perhaps
a majority in this country, have felt that the position of the State
of Tennessee was absurd because they are unable to see how a logical
position can be taken without reference to empirical situations. But it
is just the nature of logic and dialectic to be a science without any
content as it is the nature of biology or any positive science to be a
science of empirical content.

We see the nature of this distinction when we realize that there is never
an argument, in the true sense of the term, about facts. When facts are
disputed, the argument must be suspended until the facts are settled.
Not until then may it be resumed, for all true argument is about the
meaning of established or admitted facts. And since this meaning is
always expressed in propositions, we can say further that all argument
is about the systematic import of propositions. While that remains so,
the truth of the theory of evolution or of any scientific theory can
never be settled in a court of law. The court could admit the facts into
the record, but the process of legal determination would deal with the
meaning of the facts, and it could not go beyond saying that the facts
comport, or do not comport, with the meanings of other propositions.
Thus its task is to determine their place in a system of discourse and
if possible to effect a resolution in accordance with the movement of
dialectic. It is necessary that logic in its position as ultimate arbiter
preserve this indifference toward that actuality which is the touchstone
of scientific fact.

It is plain that those who either expected or hoped that science would
win a sweeping victory in the Tennessee courtroom were the same people
who believe that science can take the place of speculative wisdom.
The only consolation they had in the course of the trial was the
embarrassment to which Darrow brought Bryan in questioning him about the
Bible and the theory of evolution (during which Darrow did lead Bryan
into some dialectical traps). But in strict consideration all of this
was outside the bounds of the case because both the facts of evolution
and the facts of the Bible were “items not in discourse,” to borrow a
phrase employed by Professor Adler. That is to say, their correctness had
to be determined by scientific means of investigation, if at all; but
the relationship between the law and theories of man’s origin could be
determined only by legal casuistry, in the non-pejorative sense of that
phrase.

As we intimated at the beginning, a sufficient grasp of what the case
was about would have resulted in there being no case, or in there being
quite a different case. As the events turned out science received, in
the popular estimation, a check in the trial but a moral victory, and
this only led to more misunderstanding of the province of science in
human affairs. The law of the State of Tennessee won a victory which was
regarded as pyrrhic because it was generally felt to have made the law
and the lawmakers look foolish. This also was a disservice to the common
weal. Both of these results could have been prevented if it had been
understood that science is one thing and law another. An understanding of
that truth would seem to require some general dissemination throughout
our educated classes of a _Summa Dialectica_. This means that the
educated people of our country would have to be so trained that they
could see the dialectical possibility of the opposites of the beliefs
they possess. And that is a very large order for education in any age.




