CHAPTER II.


In order to lay this matter with full satisfaction before the reader, I
shall collect into one point of view, and state as shortly and as
clearly as I am able, the purport of these laws, according to the
objects which they affect, without making at present any further
observation upon them, but just what shall be necessary to render the
drift; and intention of the legislature and the tendency and operation
of the laws the more distinct and evident.

I shall begin with those which relate to the possession and inheritance
of landed property in Popish hands. The first operation of those acts
upon this object was wholly to change the course of descent by the
Common Law, to take away the right of primogeniture, and, in lieu
thereof, to substitute and establish a new species of Statute Gavelkind.
By this law, on the death of a Papist possessed of an estate in fee
simple or in fee tail, the land is to be divided by equal portions
between all the male children; and those portions are likewise to be
parcelled out, share and share alike, amongst the descendants of each
son, and so to proceed in a similar distribution _ad infinitum_. From
this regulation it was proposed that some important consequences should
follow. First, by taking away the right of primogeniture, perhaps in the
very first generation, certainly in the second, the families of Papists,
however respectable, and their fortunes, however considerable, would be
wholly dissipated, and reduced to obscurity and indigence, without any
possibility that they should repair them by their industry or
abilities,--being, as we shall see anon, disabled from every species of
permanent acquisition. Secondly, by this law the right of testamentation
is taken away, which the inferior tenures had always enjoyed, and all
tenures from the 27th Hen. VIII; Thirdly, the right of settlement was
taken away, that no such persons should, from the moment the act passed,
be enabled to advance themselves in fortune or connection by marriage,
being disabled from making any disposition, in consideration of such
marriage, but what the law had previously regulated: the reputable
establishment of the eldest son, as representative of the family, or to
settle a jointure, being commonly the great object in such settlements,
which was the very power which the law had absolutely taken away.

The operation of this law, however certain, might be too slow. The
present possessors might happen to be long-lived. The legislature knew
the natural impatience of expectants, and upon this principle they gave
encouragement to children to anticipate the inheritance. For it is
provided, that the eldest son of any Papist shall, immediately on his
conformity, change entirely the nature and properties of his father's
legal estate: if he before held in fee simple, or, in other words, had
the entire and absolute dominion over the land, he is reduced to an
estate for his life only, with all the consequences of the natural
debility of that estate, by which he becomes disqualified to sell,
mortgage, charge, (except for his life,) or in any wise to do any act by
which he may raise money for relief in his most urgent necessities. The
eldest son, so conforming, immediately acquires, and in the lifetime of
his father, the permanent part, what our law calls the reversion and
inheritance of the estate; and he discharges it by retrospect, and
annuls every sort of voluntary settlement made by the father ever so
long before his conversion. This he may sell or dispose of immediately,
and alienate it from the family forever.

Having thus reduced his father's estate, he may also bring his father
into the Court of Chancery, where he may compel him to swear to the
value of his estate, and to allow him out of that possession (which had
been before reduced to an estate for life) such an immediate annual
allowance as the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper shall judge suitable to
his ago and quality.

This indulgence is not confined to the eldest son. The other children
likewise, by conformity, may acquire the same privileges, and in the
same manner force from their father an immediate and independent
maintenance. It is very well worth remarking, that the statutes have
avoided to fix any determinate age for these emancipating conversions;
so that the children, at any age, however incapable of choice in other
respects, however immature or even infantile, are yet considered
sufficiently capable to disinherit their parents, and totally to
subtract themselves from their direction and control, either at their
own option, or by the instigation of others. By this law the tenure and
value of a Roman Catholic in his real property is not only rendered
extremely limited and altogether precarious, but the paternal power is
in all such families so enervated that it may well be considered as
entirely taken away; even the principle upon which it is founded seems
to be directly reversed. However, the legislature feared that enough was
not yet done upon this head. The Roman Catholic parent, by selling his
real estate, might in some sort preserve the dominion over his substance
and his family, and thereby evade the operation of these laws, which
intended to take away both. Besides, frequent revolutions and many
conversions had so broken the landed property of Papists in that
kingdom, that it was apprehended that this law could have in a short
time but a few objects upon which it would be capable of operating.

To obviate these inconveniences another law was made, by which the
dominion of children over their parents was extended universally
throughout the whole Popish part of the nation, and every child of every
Popish parent was encouraged to come into what is called a court of
equity, to prefer a bill against his father, and compel him to confess,
upon oath, the quantity and value of his substance, personal as well as
real, of what nature soever, or howsoever it might be employed; upon
which discovery, the court is empowered to seize upon and allocate, for
the immediate maintenance of such child or children, any sum not
exceeding a third of the whole fortune: and as to their future
establishment on the death of the father, no limits are assigned; the
Chancery may, if it thinks fit, take the whole property, personal as
well as real, money, stock in trade, &c, out of the power of the
possessor, and secure it in any manner they judge expedient for that
purpose; for the act has not assigned any sort of limit with regard to
the quantity which is to be charged, or given any direction concerning
the means of charging and securing it: a law which supersedes all
observation.

But the law is still more extensive in its provision. Because there was
a possibility that the parent, though sworn, might by false
representations evade the discovery of the ultimate value of his estate,
a new bill may be at any time brought, by one, any, or all of the
children, for a further discovery; his effects are to undergo a fresh
scrutiny, and a now distribution is to be made in consequence of it. So
that the parent has no security against perpetual inquietude, and the
reiteration of Chancery suits, but by (what is somewhat difficult for
human nature to comply with) fully, and without reserve, abandoning his
whole property to the discretion of the court, to be disposed of in
favor of such children.

But is this enough, and has the parent purchased his repose by such a
surrender? Very far from it. The law expressly, and very carefully,
provides that he shall not: before he can be secure from the persecution
of his children, it requires another and a much more extraordinary
condition: the children are authorized, if they can find that their
parent has by his industry, or otherwise, increased the value of his
property since their first bill, to bring another, compelling a new
account of the value of his estate, in order to a new distribution
proportioned to the value of the estate at the time of the new bill
preferred. They may bring such bills, _toties quoties_, upon every
improvement of his fortune, without any sort of limitation of time, or
regard to the frequency of such bills, or to the quantity of the
increase of the estate, which shall justify the bringing them. This act
expressly provides that he shall have no respite from the persecution of
his children, but by totally abandoning all thoughts of improvement and
acquisition.

This is going a great way, surely: but the laws in question have gone
much further. Not satisfied with calling upon children to revolt against
their parents, and to possess themselves of their substance, there are
cases where the withdrawing of the child from his father's obedience is
not left to the option of the child himself: for, if the wife of a Roman
Catholic should choose to change her religion, from that moment she
deprives her husband of all management and direction of his children,
and even of all the tender satisfaction which a parent can feel in their
society, and which is the only indemnification he can have for all his
cares and sorrows; and they are to be torn forever, at the earliest age,
from his house and family: for the Lord Chancellor is not only
authorized, but he is strongly required, to take away all his children
from such Popish parent, to appoint where, in what manner, and by whom
they are to be educated; and the father is compelled to pay, not for the
ransom, but for the deprivation of his children, and to furnish such a
sum as the Chancellor thinks proper to appoint for their education to
the age of eighteen years. The case is the same, if the husband should
be the conformist; though how the law is to operate in this case I do
not see: for the act expressly says, that the child shall be taken from
such Popish parent; and whilst such husband and wife cohabit, it will be
impossible to put it into execution without taking the child from one as
well as from the other; and then the effect of the law will be, that, if
either husband or wife becomes Protestant, both are to be deprived of
their children.

The paternal power thus being wholly abrogated, it is evident that by
the last regulation the power of an husband over his wife is also
considerably impaired; because, if it be in her power, whenever she
pleases, to subtract the children from his protection and obedience, she
herself by that hold inevitably acquires a power and superiority over
her husband.

But she is not left dependent upon this oblique influence: for, if in
any marriage settlement the husband has reserved to him a power of
making a jointure, and he dies without settling any, her conformity
executes his powers, and executes them in as large extent as the
Chancellor thinks fit. The husband is deprived of that coercive power
over his wife which he had in his hands by the use he might make of the
discretionary power reserved in the settlement.

But if no such power had been reserved, and no such settlement existed,
yet, if the husband dies, leaving his conforming wife without a filed
provision by some settlement on his real estate, his wife may apply to
Chancery, where she shall be allotted a portion from his leases, and
other personal estate, not exceeding one third of his whole clear
substance. The laws in this instance, as well as in the former, have
presumed that the husband has omitted to make all the provision which he
might have done, for no other reason than that of her religion. If,
therefore, she chooses to balance any domestic misdemeanors to her
husband by the public merit of conformity to the Protestant religion,
the law will suffer no plea of such misdemeanors to be urged on the
husband's part, nor proof of that kind to be entered into. She acquires
a provision totally independent of his favor, and deprives him of that
source of domestic authority which the Common Law had left to him, that
of rewarding or punishing, by a voluntary distribution of his effects,
what in his opinion was the good or ill behavior of his wife.

Thus the laws stand with regard to the property already acquired, to its
mode of descent, and to family powers. Now as to the new acquisition of
real property, and both to the acquisition and security of personal, the
law stands thus:--

All persons of that persuasion are disabled from taking or purchasing,
directly or by a trust, any lands, any mortgage upon land, any rents or
profits from land, any lease, interest, or term of any land, any
annuity for life or lives or years, or any estate whatsoever, chargeable
upon, or which may in any manner affect, any lands.

One exception, and one only, is admitted by the statutes to the
universality of this exclusion, viz., a lease for a term not exceeding
thirty-one years. But even this privilege is charged with a prior
qualification. This remnant of a right is doubly curtailed: 1st, that on
such a short lease a rent not less than two thirds of the full improved
yearly value, at the time of the making it, shall be reserved during the
whole continuance of the term; and, 2ndly, it does not extend to the
whole kingdom. This lease must also be in possession, and not in
reversion. If any lease is made, exceeding either in duration or value,
and in the smallest degree, the above limits, the whole interest is
forfeited, and vested _ipso facto_ in the first Protestant discoverer or
informer. This discoverer, thus invested with the property, is enabled
to sue for it as his own right. The courts of law are not alone open to
him; he may (and this is the usual method) enter into either of the
courts of equity, and call upon the parties, and those whom he suspects
to be their trustees, upon oath, and under the penalties of perjury, to
discover against themselves the exact nature and value of their estates
in every particular, in order to induce their forfeiture on the
discovery. In such suits the informer is not liable to those delays
which the ordinary procedure of those courts throws into the way of the
justest claimant; nor has the Papist the indulgence which he [it?]
allows to the most fraudulent defendant, that of plea and demurrer; but
the defendant is obliged to answer the whole directly upon oath. The
rule of _favores ampliandi,_ &c., is reversed by this act, lest any
favor should be shown, or the force and operation of the law in any part
of its progress be enervated. All issues to be tried on this act are to
be tried by none but known Protestants.

It is here necessary to state as a part of this law what has been for
some time generally understood as a certain consequence of it. The act
had expressly provided that a Papist could possess no sort of estate
which might affect land (except as before excepted). On this a
difficulty did, not unnaturally, arise. It is generally known, a
judgment being obtained or acknowledged for any debt, since the statute
of Westm. 2, 13 Ed. I. c. 18, one half of the debtor's land is to be
delivered unto the creditor until the obligation is satisfied, under a
writ called _Elegit_, and this writ has been ever since the ordinary
assurance of the land, and the great foundation of general credit in the
nation. Although the species of holding under this writ is not specified
in the statute, the received opinion, though not juridically delivered,
has been, that, if they attempt to avail themselves of that security,
because it may create an estate, however precarious, in land, their
whole debt or charge is forfeited, and becomes the property of the
Protestant informer. Thus you observe, first, that by the express words
of the law all possibility of acquiring any species of valuable
property, in any sort connected with land, is taken away; and, secondly,
by the construction all security for money is also cut off. No security
is left, except what is merely personal, and which, therefore, most
people who lend money would, I believe, consider as none at all.

Under this head of the acquisition of property, the law meets them in
every road of industry, and in its direct and consequential provisions
throws almost all sorts of obstacles in their way. For they are not only
excluded from all offices in Church and State, which, though a just and
necessary provision, is yet no small restraint in the acquisition, but
they are interdicted from the army, and the law, in all its branches.
This point is carried to so scrupulous a severity, that chamber
practice, and even private conveyancing, the most voluntary agency, are
prohibited to them under the severest penalties and the most rigid modes
of inquisition. They have gone beyond even this: for every barrister,
six clerk, attorney, or solicitor, is obliged to take a solemn oath not
to employ persons of that persuasion,--no, not as hackney clerks, at the
miserable salary of seven shillings a week. No tradesman of that
persuasion is capable by any service or settlement to obtain his freedom
in any town corporate; so that they trade and work in their own native
towns as aliens, paying, as such, quarterage, and other charges and
impositions. They are expressly forbidden, in whatever employment, to
take more than two apprentices, except in the linen manufacture only.

       *       *       *       *       *

In every state, next to the care of the life and properties of the
subject, the education of their youth has been a subject of attention.
In the Irish laws this point has not been neglected. Those who are
acquainted with the constitution of our universities need not be
informed that none but those who conform to the Established Church can
be at all admitted to study there, and that none can obtain degrees in
them who do not previously take all the tests, oaths, and declarations.
Lest they should be enabled to supply this defect by private academies
and schools of their own, the law has armed itself with all its terrors
against such a practice. Popish schoolmasters of every species are
proscribed by those acts, and it is made felony to teach even in a
private family. So that Papists are entirely excluded from an education
in any of our authorized establishments for learning at home. In order
to shut up every avenue to instruction, the act of King William in
Ireland has added to this restraint by precluding them from all foreign
education.

This act is worthy of attention on account of the singularity of some of
its provisions. Being sent for education to any Popish school or college
abroad, upon conviction, incurs (if the party sent has any estate of
inheritance) a kind of unalterable and perpetual outlawry. The tender
and incapable age of such a person, his natural subjection to the will
of others, his necessary, unavoidable ignorance of the laws, stands for
nothing in his favor. He is disabled to sue in law or equity; to be
guardian, executor, or administrator; he is rendered incapable of any
legacy or deed of gift; he forfeits all his goods and chattels forever;
and he forfeits for his life all his lands, hereditaments, offices, and
estate of freehold, and all trusts, powers, or interests therein. All
persons concerned in sending them or maintaining them abroad, by the
least assistance of money or otherwise, are involved in the same
disabilities, and subjected to the same penalties.

The mode of conviction is as extraordinary as the penal sanctions of
this act. A justice of peace, upon information that any child is sent
away, may require to be brought before him all persons charged or even
suspected of sending or assisting, and examine them and other persons
on oath concerning the fact. If on this examination he finds it
_probable_ that the party was sent contrary to this act, he is then, to
bind over the parties and witnesses in any sum he thinks fit, but not
less than two hundred pounds, to appear and take their trial at the next
quarter sessions. Here the justices are to reexamine evidence, until
they arrive, as before, to what shall appear to them a probability. For
the rest they resort to the accused: if they can prove that any person,
or any money, or any bill of exchange, has been sent abroad by the party
accused, they throw the proof upon him to show for what innocent
purposes it was sent; and on failure of such proof, he is subjected to
all the above-mentioned penalties. Half the forfeiture is given to the
crown; the other half goes to the informer.

It ought here to be remarked, that this mode of conviction not only
concludes the party has failed in his expurgatory proof, but it is
sufficient also to subject to the penalties and incapacities of the law
the infant upon whose account the person has been so convicted. It must
be confessed that the law has not left him without some species of
remedy in this case apparently of much hardship, where one man is
convicted upon evidence given against another, if he has the good
fortune to live; for, within a twelvemonth after his return, or his age
of twenty-one, he has a, right to call for a new trial, in which he also
is to undertake the negative proof, and to show by sufficient evidence
that he has not been sent abroad against the intention of the act. If he
succeeds in this difficult exculpation, and demonstrates his innocence
to the satisfaction of the court, he forfeits all his goods and
chattels, and all the profits of his lands incurred and received before
such acquittal; but he is freed from all other forfeitures, and from all
subsequent incapacities. There is also another method allowed by the law
in favor of persons under such unfortunate circumstances, as in the
former case for their innocence, in this upon account of their
expiation: if within six months after their return, with the punctilious
observation of many ceremonies, they conform to the Established Church,
and take all the oaths and subscriptions, the legislature, in
consideration of the incapable age in which they were sent abroad, of
the merit of their early conformity, and to encourage conversions, only
confiscates, as in the former case, the whole personal estate, and the
profits of the real; in all other respects, restoring and rehabilitating
the party.

       *       *       *       *       *

So far as to property and education. There remain some other heads upon
which the acts have changed the course of the Common Law; and first,
with regard to the right of self-defence, which consists in the use of
arms. This, though one of the rights by the law of Nature, yet is so
capable of abuses that it may not be unwise to make some regulations
concerning them; and many wise nations have thought proper to set
several restrictions on this right, especially temporary ones, with
regard to suspected persons, and on occasion of some imminent danger to
the public from foreign invasion or domestic commotions.

But provisions in time of trouble proper, and perhaps necessary, may
become in time of profound peace a scheme of tyranny. The method which
the statute law of Ireland has taken upon this delicate article is, to
get rid of all difficulties at once by an universal prohibition to all
persons, at all times, and under all circumstances, who are not
Protestants, of using or keeping any kind of weapons whatsoever. In
order to enforce this regulation, the whole spirit of the Common Law is
changed, very severe penalties are enjoined, the largest powers are
vested in the lowest magistrates. Any two justices of peace, or
magistrates of a town, with or without information, at their pleasure,
by themselves or their warrant, are empowered to enter and search the
house of any Papist, or even of any other person, whom they suspect to
keep such arms in trust for them. The only limitation to the extent of
this power is, that the search is to be made between the rising and
setting of the sun: but even this qualification extends no further than
to the execution of the act in the open country; for in all cities and
their suburbs, in towns corporate and market-towns, they may at their
discretion, and without information, break open houses and institute
such search at any hour of the day or night. This, I say, they may do at
their discretion; and it seems a pretty ample power in the hands of such
magistrates. However, the matter does by no means totally rest on their
discretion. Besides the discretionary and occasional search, the statute
has prescribed one that is general and periodical. It is to be made
annually, by the warrant of the justices at their midsummer quarter
sessions, by the high and petty constables, or any others whom they may
authorize, and by all corporate magistrates, in all houses of Papists,
and every other where they suspect arms for the use of such persons to
be concealed, with the same powers, in all respects, which attend the
occasional search. The whole of this regulation, concerning both the
general and particular search, seems to have been made by a legislature
which was not at all extravagantly jealous of personal liberty. Not
trusting, however, to the activity of the magistrate acting officially,
the law has invited all voluntary informers by considerable rewards, and
even pressed involuntary informers into this service by the dread of
heavy penalties. With regard to the latter method, two justices of
peace, or the magistrate of any corporation, are empowered to summon
before them any persons whatsoever, to tender them an oath by which they
oblige them to discover all persons who have any arms concealed contrary
to law. Their refusal or declining to appear, or, appearing, their
refusal to inform, subjects them to the severest penalties. If peers or
peeresses are summoned (for they may be summoned by the bailiff of a
corporation of six cottages) to perform this honorable service, and
refuse to inform, the first offence is three hundred pounds penalty; the
second is _praemunire_,--that is to say, imprisonment for life, and
forfeiture of all their goods. Persons of an inferior order are, for the
first offence, fined thirty pounds; for the second, they, too, are
subjected to _praemunire_. So far as to involuntary;--now as to voluntary
informers: the law entitles them to half the penalty incurred by
carrying or keeping arms; for, on conviction of this offence, the
penalty upon persons, of whatever substance, is the sum of fifty pounds
and a year's imprisonment, which cannot be remitted even by the crown.

The only exception to this law is a license from the Lord Lieutenant and
Council to carry arms, which, by its nature, is extremely limited, and I
do not suppose that there are six persons now in the kingdom who have
been fortunate enough to obtain it.

       *       *       *       *       *

There remains, after this system concerning property and defence, to say
something concerning the exercise of religion, winch is carried on in
all persuasions, but especially in the Romish, by persons appointed for
that purpose. The law of King William and Queen Anne ordered all Popish
parsons exercising ecclesiastical jurisdiction, all orders of monks and
friars, and all priests, not then actually in parishes, and to be
registered, to be banished the kingdom; and if they should return from
exile, to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. Twenty pounds reward is given
for apprehending them. Penalty on harboring and concealing.

As all the priests then in being and registered are long since dead, and
as these laws are made perpetual, every Popish priest is liable to the
law.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reader has now before him a tolerably complete view of the Popery
laws relative to property by descent or acquisition, to education, to
defence, and to the free exercise of religion, which may be necessary to
enable him to form some judgment of the spirit of the whole system, and
of the subsequent reflections that are to be made upon it.




