Chapter 15


It had rained all the rest of the day.  Baartock had a great time up at
his bridge.  The water was racing under the bridge, making a wonderful
gurgling sound.  It made hiding under the arch like being in one of the
stories his father told.  The only thing missing was someone walking
over the bridge.  He would come out from under the bridge screaming his
loudest and run up the side of the stream bed. He could just see them
running away.

Right then it really didn't matter that there wasn't anyone crossing
his bridge.  Baartock now knew so many humans and so much about them,
that was easy to pretend who was walking up to cross the bridge.  There
was Mr. Fennis, of course.  He had run away so wonderfully.  Then there
was Ms. Laurence.  Baartock could scare her easily.  He didn't pretend
to scare Mrs. Jackson or Mrs. Stogbuchner.
 Somehow they didn't seem like people to scare.  But that girl in his
class, Janice, Baartock scared her again and again.  And some of the
other children in the class.  They were all so easy to scare.  He was
having a great time.

He even pretended that Jason was helping him scare people. Not that
Jason was anything like a troll, but Baartock liked him and he thought
Jason would have fun scaring people.

After a while, when it started to get dark, Baartock went back home in
the rain.  He was glad that his father had known it was going to rain.
They had gathered in extra firewood.  Even though it wasn't cold, the
fire warmed the cave and helped him to dry off.

Though it had been raining all day, his mother had fixed an extra good
meal.  Baartock really liked the cricket and green bean salad.  Later
they all sat around the fire and his mother patched his pants and sewed
on the new winter coat she was making, and his father told stories.  He
stayed up late, and it was still raining hard when he finally went to
bed.

The next morning it was still raining, and his mother told him to go
wait for the bus, but if it didn't come when it should, to come back
home.  And his father surprised him by saying he would be staying home
if it kept on raining. The room he was working on in the cavern would
probably be flooded, and he wouldn't be able to work.

So, while it was still raining quite hard, Baartock went down to stand
by the side of the road and wait for the school bus. Actually, he
wasn't waiting right beside the road in the rain, but back a little
way, under some trees that still had lots of leaves. He thought he
could see the bus in time to come out and catch it.  He waited and
waited, but he didn't see a bus or a car or anything coming down the
road.  He went over to look at the culvert.  Rain water was coming
roaring down the stream bed right at the culvert, but there was so much
that it couldn't all get through.  There were branches and rocks that
had come down with the water that were blocking the opening.  It was
beginning to make a pool on that side of the road.  On the other side,
it was shooting out of the culvert, but it was beginning to make a pool
there too.

When Baartock felt he had waited long enough, he went back home.  His
father was carving out some extra shelves in the kitchen. He went to
watch his father work, and started handing him tools. They worked most
of the morning.  His mother came back home and saw the mess they were
making, and started making some sandwiches.  They all finished about
the same time, and his mother chased them both out of the cave so she
could clean up.  There were rock chips all over the kitchen.

Then Baartock and his father went up and sat under his bridge and ate
their sandwiches.  For a while, his father told stories, about when he
had been a young troll, before he'd earned his name.  Then they looked
at some places that Baartock had had trouble with building his bridge.
They stood in the stream and the pouring rain, and his father showed
him some better ways to do the stone-work.  They even took a few of the
stones out, and his father worked on them, then they put them back.
Baartock was much happier about the way the bridge looked now.  Then
his father showed him places where the water might weaken the bridge if
they weren't fixed, not today, but later when the rain stopped and the
water went down.

While they were working the rain eased up as if it were going to stop,
then it started coming down again as hard as before. They had quite a
busy afternoon, and his father said that it was time to go home, even
if there was still a mess in the kitchen for them to clean up.

It rained all the next day, too.  Not as hard as before, just a steady
rain that went on and on.  Baartock went down in the morning to see if
the bus would come, but it didn't.  He waited a long time, playing
beside the stream, but nothing came along the road.

The culvert that he had hidden in was completely blocked now, with
branches and rocks.  The water had made a big pool, and it was flowing
over the road.  He went up the hill a little way and sat there,
dropping small branches into the stream, and watching them float down,
across the pool and across the road.

After a while, he went back home.  It was such fun to splash his way up
the stream.  He got thoroughly soaked. When he got home and dry, he
helped his father make one of the closets larger.  His father chipped
and dug at the rock wall, and Baartock swept and picked-up, and carried
all of the trash outside in a bucket.  They worked most of the
afternoon.  Dinner was a simple meal.  It had been too wet to go get
anything, so it was mostly left-overs.

The rain stopped just after dinnertime, and Baartock went out to look
around.  It was getting dark, but he walked up to his bridge.  He was
worried about the spots his father had pointed out. When he got there,
his bridge was all right.  An opossum was hiding under the arch, trying
to stay dry, and it growled at him.  It wanted to be left alone and
Baartock was able to see what he wanted to, without chasing it off.

Going home in the dark, he slipped and fell into the stream a couple of
times.  He was glad to sit by the fire and get dry, now that he knew
that his bridge was safe.

The nest morning it wasn't raining, though there were still a lot of
clouds overhead.  But they were blowing away, and it might be sunny
later.  Baartock walked down to wait for the bus.  He went down the
path beside the stream.  Even though the rain had stopped the night
before, the stream was just as full as it had been when it was raining.
It was still rushing and splashing its way down the hill.

Baartock couldn't get all the way to the road.  The water had risen
even higher.  It wasn't a pool, it was a lake.  The road was completely
under water.  It was almost as deep as he was tall. During the night,
two of the trees beside the stream had fallen over, and were lying
across the road.  The holes, where the roots had been were filled with
water.  And there was still more water coming down the stream.  He
walked along the edge of water for a long way. Finally, near the
driveway to the 'old Howard house', there was no more water covering
the road.

Baartock played by the side of this new lake for a while, skipping
stones.  When he grew tired of that, he went up the driveway, and home.
He left his lunch bag, and went up to check on his bridge again.  The
opossum was gone, but there was still too much water for him to work on
his bridge, and he went back home.

His father had decided that he couldn't go to work again, so he was
sleeping late.  His mother was busy in the kitchen, so Baartock got out
his pencil box and some worksheets he had brought home from school and
sat near the mouth of the cave and did them again.




