Chapter 16


The sun started to come through the clouds, and Baartock moved his
stool outside the cave.  He was just about to get back to work, when he
heard someone coming up the hill.  He put his pencil box and worksheets
on the stool and went inside to tell his mother. They were just coming
out of the cave when Mrs. Jackson and Mrs. Stogbuchner came into the
clearing.

"Hello, Mrs. Slinurp.  Hello, Baartock," called Mrs. Jackson.  To
Baartock's mother, she said, "This is Baartock's teacher, Mrs.
Stogbuchner."

"I'm pleased to meet you," said Mrs. Stogbuchner.  "I told Baartock
that I wanted to meet you this week."

No-one asked if Baartock had remembered to tell his mother, but the way
she looked at him said that he had forgotten.

"I hope we're not coming at a bad time," Mrs. Jackson said.
   "No," said his mother.  "You want to talk?"

"Baartock, I see you've been doing some school work.  I think that's a
very good," said Mrs. Stogbuchner, looking at the worksheets.  Then she
followed his mother and Mrs. Jackson into the cave.

Baartock thought about checking his bridge again, but it was nearly
lunch time, and after lunch maybe his father could help him work on it.
So he sat back down in the sun, and kept working on the papers.  He
could hear the adults' voices, but he couldn't hear what they were
saying.

After a while he decided he was hungry and went to look for his lunch
bag.  He remembered putting it in the kitchen, so he went to get it.
The adults were still talking, and he didn't think they had even
noticed him, until Mrs. Jackson said, "Baartock, something happened to
the bridge we looked at."

Suddenly, there was a booming voice, coming from the back of the cave.
"What happen bridge?"  Baartock's father was awake, and coming out of
the bedroom.  The word 'bridge' would wake most trolls from a sound
sleep.

Meeting just one adult troll for the first time had been a surprise for
Mrs. Stogbuchner, and even Mrs. Jackson hadn't met his father.  And
Baartock's father was bigger and angrier looking than most trolls, even
though he wasn't any meaner than Baartock's mother.
 But they didn't know whether to stay or run.  Before they could
decide, Baartock's father was in the living room saying, "What happen
bridge?" again.

His mother saw just how scared the humans were, and said, "Wait.  She
tell."

"There was just too much water," began Mrs. Jackson, not sure what he
wanted to know.  "It collapsed.  It fell down.  There's no more bridge
in town."

Baartock had told his father about the bridge, of course. And what he
had thought of a human-built bridge. He wasn't really surprised that it
had fallen down.

"Where bridge?" asked his father.

Baartock was just about to tell him, when Mrs. Jackson asked, "You want
to see the bridge?"

"You show me bridge," replied his father.  "You show me bridge now?"

Just as suddenly as his father had appeared, they were going out of the
cave.  Baartock grabbed his lunch bag and followed them out.  They went
down the hill toward the 'old Howard house'.

"We'll have to go the long way around," said Mrs. Jackson. "Your road
is flooded too."

That didn't matter to his father and they kept walking down the hill.
When they got to the car, there was a problem trying to figure out
where they were all to sit. Mrs. Jackson had to slide the front seat
up, so the three trolls could sit in the back.  If they hadn't been
trolls, they wouldn't have been able to squeeze in.  But trolls can
bend to fit into tight places.  Soon they were all inside and Mrs.
Jackson was driving.

Baartock opened his lunch bag to get something to eat. His father had
some too, but his mother said she wasn't hungry.  Neither Mrs. Jackson
or Mrs. Stogbuchner wanted any either.

Riding in a car for the first time didn't seem to bother Baartock's
father.  Maybe it was because he was going to see the bridge, or maybe
it just didn't bother him.

They did have to go the long way around, but eventually they got to
where the bridge had been.  There were lots of kids standing around and
some adults too.  There were big orange painted barrels blocking the
road, so people wouldn't drive their cars too close. Mrs. Jackson had
to park her car down the block.  They got out of the car and went over
to look.  Baartock thought he saw Jason, but he wasn't sure. Besides,
seeing the bridge was more important, right then.

The water hadn't really gotten that high, though the stream was moving
very quickly.  It was easy to see what had happened.  The water had
washed away the dirt around the supports, and then the supports had
started to move, and the span had fallen down.  It was lying, broken
and twisted, in the rushing water.

Baartock's mother was interested, but she could see what she wanted
from where she was standing.  Baartock and his father walked right to
the edge to examine the wreckage.

"Don't get so close to the edge!" a man in uniform shouted at them.  He
started to come over to tell them to move back.

"I look at bridge," Baartock's father growled at the man.

"Yes sir," said the man, backing away.  Most of the other humans nearby
backed away also.

His father looked at the way the bridge had been built from where he
was standing, then suddenly, he jumped into the stream.

"Hey!  Help him!  Get a rope, somebody!" the man in uniform was
shouting.  He came rushing to the edge to find Baartock's father
standing, quite calmly, waist deep in the rushing water, examining
where the supports had been.

"Hey! Catch this," the man shouted, starting to throw the rope.

"Stop!"  Baartock's mother had come over.  "He working. You stop or he
get angry."

"But he's going to . . ." the man started to say, looking up at her.

"You stop," his mother said again.

"Yes ma'am," the man said, and he took the rope and went back where he
had been standing.  He just stood there watching, and not knowing what
to do.

Mrs. Jackson went over to talk to him.  Soon the man walked over to his
car and got out a blanket and gave it to Mrs. Jackson.

When he had seen enough, Baartock's father climbed up on the broken
bridge span and calmly stepped up onto the road.  Several people in the
crowd cheered when he came up, but he didn't seem to notice.

"Where she?" he asked.

Baartock pointed out Mrs. Jackson, still standing next to the man in
uniform.  They all walked over to her.  Mrs. Jackson handed him the
blanket, and he used it to dry off.

"Can fix," his father said.  "Build right this time. Not fall down
again."

"You can build a new bridge?" asked Mrs. Jackson.

Baartock thought that was a silly question.  He had been sure that he
could have built a better bridge, and he wasn't even old enough to have
a name.   "Hey!  Baartock!" came a shout from the crowd.  Jason was
standing there waving at him.

Baartock waved back.  The adults were talking about things that didn't
seem to have anything to do with building bridges, so he went over to
talk to Jason.

"Isn't this really something.  Are those your folks? Everybody was sure
surprised when your dad jumped in like that," Jason just went on in a
rush.  "Your dad knows about bridges?"

"Can build better bridge," Baartock answered.

Soon, Baartock's mother called him over and they got back in the car
and went home.




