Chapter 14


It was raining harder than ever when they went to lunch. Looking out
the classroom windows, Baartock couldn't see the trees or the houses
across the wide grass strip next to the school.  He couldn't see the
street.  He could just barely see the grass outside the window.  It was
a blowing, dark gray rainstorm.  At times, the wind would blow the
raindrops right at the windows.  Just a little while later, the rain
was pouring straight down.  Everybody seemed to be thinking of other
things.  Even Mrs. Stogbuchner kept losing her place in the story she
was reading, whenever the rain would come crashing against the windows.
Finally it was lunchtime.

Baartock bought milk in the lunch line, but the fruit they had were
some long yellow things that he hadn't seen before, so he didn't get
any.  When he sat at the table across from Jason, the red-haired boy
asked, "Why do you call that a fire drill?"
      "Drill.  Make holes same way," Baartock answered, and made a
back and forth motion with his hand.

"I guess you could get through wood.  But it must take a long time."

"Wood.  Stone too," replied Baartock.

"You can drill through stone like that?"

"Use many shafts," said Baartock, making an up and down motion, meaning
the straight stick he had used.  "Make hole."

Jason was about to say something when there was a sudden flash of light
and a tremendous thunderblast right outside the cafeteria.  The people
sitting by the windows jumped up, and someone knocked a lunch tray onto
the floor. One of the women who worked in the cafeteria brought over a
mop to clean up the spilled food, and everybody who had been sitting
next to the windows moved to different seats.  The rain was now
squirting against the windows, and some water was coming in under the
door to the playground.  The woman with the mop went over to clean that
up too.

Everybody ate very quietly, as if they were waiting for the next
thunderbolt to strike.  While they were eating a man came in with a mop
and a bucket and some tools to try to stop the leak around the door.
Baartock was watching the man working, when Jason said, "Let's go back
to the classroom."

"Not go outside?" asked Baartock.

"They wouldn't let us.  Not in this much rain.  Who'd want to go out in
this anyway?"

Baartock had been thinking about going out.  It was only rain.
Instead, when he finished his lunch, he went with Jason back to the
classroom.

Some others were already back in the classroom, in groups talking, or
just staring out the windows at the rain. Mrs. Stogbuchner was sitting
at her desk, with a lunch tray from the cafeteria, eating, when they
got there.

"Mrs. Stogbuchner, can we get out the games?" asked Jason.

"All right.  But you'll have to put them away when lunch time is over."

"All right!" Jason whooped.  "Come on, Baartock."

"And please be quiet," she said, as she went back to her lunch.

"Yes, Mrs. Stogbuchner," Jason said.

They went into the back of the classroom, and near the cubbies was a
shelf with some large flat boxes and some smaller ones.

"You want to play checkers?" asked Jason.

"Don't know checkers.  Show me," said Baartock.

They sat in the back of the classroom, and Jason taught him how to play
checkers.  When some other children saw them playing, they got out
other games, and soon there were lots of people playing all kinds of
games.

It kept on raining very hard, and there were occasional lightning
flashes and crashes of thunder.

Lunch time seemed to be going on longer than usual. Baartock had just
lost another game of checkers, and he let Jerry play.  He didn't like
checkers very much.  None of the other games seemed too interesting
either, so he walked over and looked out the window at the rain.  He
saw Ms. Laurence hurry in and go over to talk to Mrs. Stogbuchner.

"Children."  Ms. Laurence had hurried out again and Mrs. Stogbuchner
was walking to the middle of the classroom. "Quiet please."

There was a lot of stirring around by the children to listen to her.

"They are going to close school early today, because of all this rain."
She held up her hand for quiet.  Some children had started to cheer and
talk as soon as they heard the news.

"They say that this could be a bad storm, and there could be some
flooding.  Since so many of you live on small roads, they decided you
should go home very soon.  They're trying to reach the bus drivers now.
If it keeps raining like this, there might not be school tomorrow."

The children were still quiet, but they were all smiling and poking at
each other.

"You may go on with your recess now, and I'll have you straighten up
the games just before the busses get here. Now please be very quiet,
while I go to the office."  She turned and went out the door.

Suddenly, none of the children were interested in the games.
 They all wanted to talk about getting out of school early, and no
school tomorrow, and what they were going to do.  They started talking
quietly, but soon the talk got louder.  Then, one of the boys threw a
ball of paper at another boy.  There was a lot of loud talking, and
throwing things, and running around, when Mrs. Stogbuchner came back
into the room.

"Get in your seats!  Right now!"  She was standing just inside the
door, glaring at the class.

The children hurried to their chairs and sat down.

"I told you to be quiet while I went to the office."

The children looked at each other, as if to find out who had been
making all the noise. "Barbara, Norma, Robert, and Jason, go back and
straighten up the games and put them away.  Do it quietly and quickly.
Timmy, hand out these worksheets.  Since you don't want recess now, I
have some other work you can do, until the busses get here."

Timmy walked around the room with the stack of papers she gave him,
putting four worksheets on each table.

Mrs. Stogbuchner walked to the back of the classroom to watch the
straightening up.  The room was very quiet, except for the noises from
the back of the room.

Baartock started working, and soon Jason sat down and started working
too.

Mrs. Stogbuchner walked around the room for a while, then she went over
and stood in the doorway, looking down the hall.  Soon she said, "Put
your things away now.  If you brought raincoats, or have anything else
to take home, get it, then line up."

Baartock hadn't brought a raincoat, but he went to his cubby to get the
fire drill and his lunchbag.  He decided to take his pencil box home,
too.

The class was all lined up, waiting for the bell.  Mrs. Stogbuchner
said, "If it keeps raining like this, watch the news on TV to see if
we're having school tomorrow." Then the bell did ring, and they were
all hurrying to get to the school busses.

"See you," called Jason, as they went down the hall. They got to the
front door and the wind was blowing the rain right in at them.  The
floor was wet and someone had put down rubber mats so they wouldn't
slip or fall.

When they went outside, everybody ran to the busses. Baartock was
soaked as he got on Mr. Barnes's bus, from just that short run.  There
were lights on the front of each bus, and there were sticks wiping back
and forth to get the rain off the front windows.  But Mr. Barnes still
drove very slowly to the high school. He wasn't talking all the time,
this afternoon.

When Baartock got off the bus, he ran to his path to get home.  The
creekbed was filled with water rushing and splashing down hill.  There
was a lot of water going through the culvert.  Baartock hurried up the
hill, next to the stream.  He wanted to see what it was like at his
bridge.




