Chapter 17


The next day was Friday, but there wasn't any school. Mrs. Stogbuchner
had said that a lot of the roads were under water, just like the road
near Baartock's home.  But even though there wasn't any school, the
next morning Baartock was going to town.

Early in the morning, his father got him up, and they had something to
eat.  Baartock got the big lunch bag and his father picked up his bag
of tools and they left and walked down to the 'old Howard house' and
waited.  The sun wasn't up very high when Mrs. Jackson came driving up
the hill.

"Good morning," she called, as she stopped the car.

"Go bridge now," said his father.

Mrs. Jackson had decided that was just the way trolls were. With
bridges, they were all business.

"Good morning," said Baartock.  He thought any morning he could go help
work on a bridge was a good morning.

They got into the car.  Baartock sat in the front and put on the seat
belt.  His father stretched out along the back seat.  He wasn't
squeezed into the back, like he had been the day before.  They still
had to drive the long way around, but it wasn't too long before Mrs.
Jackson was parking the car.

There wasn't a crowd at the bridge, it was too early in the morning.
The man in uniform was there again.  He didn't say anything to
Baartock's father, but he did wave to Mrs. Jackson, and she waved back.

His father didn't want to waste any time getting started replacing the
old bridge.  As soon as they got there, he climbed out of the car and
carrying his bag of tools, went to the edge of the road.  He jumped
down into the water, and Baartock started handing him hammers and
chisels, as he called for them.  He would dry and put away the ones
that his father was finished with and threw back to him.

While they were working, people came to watch, but the man in uniform
kept them back.  Jason came down too, but the man wouldn't let him come
over.

At lunch time, his father climbed back up and dried himself off with
the blanket, and they sat under a tree to eat.  Baartock was hungry,
but his father ate four sandwiches to his one.  Lunch was quickly over,
and they were ready to go back to work.

This time, after his father jumped down, he told Baartock to hand him
the bag of tools.  Then he walked carefully through the rushing stream,
across the wrecked bridge to the other side and tossed the bag up on
the road. Then he came back and told Baartock to climb onto his
shoulders.  He crossed the stream again, and Baartock scrambled up the
other side.  Then just as before, he handed down tools or put them away.

During the afternoon, a man came to talk to Baartock's father. He was
on the other side, and Baartock couldn't hear what they were talking
about.  After a while, the man left and his father came back to work.

"Stone," his father said.  That was enough. Baartock knew they had been
talking about how much stone would be needed to rebuild the bridge.
His father was going to rebuild the bridge the right way, the troll
way, with stone and not concrete.

It wasn't dark when Baartock was carried back across the stream.  They
were finished for the day.

The next day, Mrs. Jackson couldn't come to get them. When they got
down to the house, Mr. Fennis was waiting for them.  He didn't say a
word, but he stared at Baartock's father.  He looked as if his eyes
were going to pop out.

There were a few people already there, when they got to the bridge.
And the man in uniform was there too.

The water had gone down a lot, and they worked on something new.  This
time, they didn't work where the supports had been, but spent the day
breaking up the old bridge.  Some pieces his father piled up, to keep
the stream from washing away his new supports.  The rest of the pieces
he tossed up to Baartock, who piled them beside the road. It was a long
hard day, and Baartock fell asleep in the car on the way home.

The next day, both of Baartock's parents went off with Mrs. Jackson to
look at the stone they were going to build with.  Baartock didn't go
along.  He wanted to work on his bridge.  Now that the stream had gone
down, he could fix it the way he wanted to.  It was fun, but now that
he was working on a real bridge, his own seemed very small.

He went to school the next morning, but after school, instead of riding
home on Mr. Barnes' bus, he went to help his parents work on the new
bridge.  He spent the rest of the afternoon helping pile up the broken
pieces of the old bridge.

For the rest of that week and for several weeks after, Baartock spent
his days in school and his afternoons and weekends working on the
bridge.  For a while, trucks came, bringing blocks of stone, and big
timbers they would use for supports, building the bridge.  They brought
enough stone to make a hill of stone, until his father said that was
enough.

In those weeks, the crowd that came to watch the bridge being built
grew bigger, and there were more men in uniform to keep them back.  The
pile of stone got smaller and the bridge got closer to being finished.
Somehow, word had gotten out that trolls were building a bridge.  A lot
of people didn't believe it, and others didn't care.  Other people
heard that a man, a woman, and a boy were building a bridge by
themselves, and came to watch.  A few people tried to push their way
past the men in uniform to talk to Baartock's parents while they were
working.

Then one afternoon, right after lunch, Mrs. Jackson came to get
Baartock from class.  He was surprised when she said that they were
going to the bridge.  He usually didn't go until school was over.  As
they went out to the parking lot, they went past several school busses
parked in front of the school.  He thought one of the busses was Mr.
Barnes's, but they didn't go to it.  They went to her car and drove to
the bridge.

When they got there, there was a big crowd just standing around one end
of the bridge.  Baartock's parents were standing in the middle of the
bridge, but they weren't working.  Baartock looked at the bridge.  It
looked finished, but as he walked over, he saw that there was one block
missing from one side, and that block was lying on the sidewalk.

He walked over to his parents to find out why they hadn't finished the
bridge.  His mother just said, "wait," and kept watching Mrs. Jackson.
Soon the school busses drove up and a lot of kids got out. There was
all of Mrs. Stogbuchner's class, and a lot of other kids besides. They
came over to the bridge, but they didn't come across it, they just
stood there with the rest of the crowd.  They were all talking quietly,
and watching Baartock and his parents.  After a while a man got up on a
little wooden platform and started talking.  He talked for a long time,
but Baartock wasn't listening to him.  He had gotten an idea.  A
wonderful idea.

Baartock's mother had been watching the man on the platform.  When he
finished taking, she said, "Put stone in."

Baartock went over and picked up the last stone to put in the wall.  He
slid it into place, and the crowd started to cheer.  When he stepped
back, he saw the writing on the block.  It was his special mark, and
the letters 'BAARTOCK'S BRIDGE'.

The crowd kept on cheering, and Baartock felt embarrassed. Then he
looked at his father.  And his father looked at him.  His father must
have had the same idea, for suddenly they both started yelling at the
top of their lungs, screaming, bellowing as loud as they could, as they
ran at the crowd standing at the end of the bridge.

 At the first sound, the crowd was frozen in place, and as
Baartock and his father kept yelling and running at them, the crowd
turned and ran away from the bridge as fast as they could.  All the
humans kept on running until they were out of sight. Baartock and his
father stopped at the end of the bridge and they turned and walked
back, laughing, to his mother in the middle of the bridge.  She looked
at them.

"Good bridge," she said.  "Good troll bridge."





Here is a short message from the author of Baartock:

This book is directed at children, up to about third grade, though it
should be read to them by an adult.





End of Baartock, by Lewis Roth  (C)1989







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Baartock, by Lewis Roth

