Chapter 6


The next morning, after his father had gone off, Baartock and his
mother left the cave.  They went through the woods toward the old empty
house, the one Mr. Fennis had called the 'old Howard house'.

They were crossing the stream bed when Baartock saw a muddy pool he
could splash in.  He was just about to dive into it when his mother
said "No!"  When he caught up with her all she said was "Not today."
It was puzzling to him. She always let him get muddy.

When they got to the empty house, there was a car in the driveway, and
Mrs. Jackson was standing beside it.

"Good morning," she said.  "Are you ready to go to school, Baartock?"

Baartock wasn't sure about that, so he didn't say anything. He had
almost forgotten about school.  That was part of his first day, but not
the important part.  He had forgotten about Mrs. Jackson saying she
would see them in the morning.

Mrs. Jackson opened the car doors, and when Baartock and his mother got
in, she showed them how to fasten their seat belts.  Mrs. Jackson
explained that while she was a good driver, some other drivers weren't,
and that they were probably safer wearing the seat belts.  His mother
listened carefully to what Mrs. Jackson was saying.  She didn't seem to
mind being in a car, until Mrs. Jackson started the engine.  Whinnurf
Slinurp was a troll, so she wasn't about to get scared, but she did
grip the edge of the seat very firmly.  When Mrs. Jackson asked if she
was all right, she just closed her eyes tightly and said "Go."  But as
they drove toward town, Baartock's mother finally opened her eyes to
see where they were going.

This time Baartock watched out the window as they drove into town.
There were lots of buildings like the old empty house that he knew.
There were humans walking and lots of cars, and some big cars called
trucks.  Some of them came right at them, but they always just missed
Mrs. Jackson's car.

He was learning a lot about humans.  Mrs. Jackson had been talking
almost all the time while she had been driving. He learned about
streets, and blocks, which were between streets, and about houses and
stores.  Only he hadn't seen a single bridge.  Suddenly he said,
"School that way," and pointed.

"Yes, you're right, Baartock.  The school is that way. You certainly do
know just where you are.  But we've got to go some place else first.
We're almost there."

In just a few blocks, Mrs. Jackson turned the car into a driveway and
parked in a space in front of a brick building.  She showed them how to
unbuckle the seat belts.  Baartock practiced putting his on and taking
it off, while she walked around to open the doors.  There was a sign on
the front of the building, 'Public Health Services', but that didn't
mean much to Baartock.  As they walked to the house, he asked about it.

"I'll tell you about it in just a minute," Mrs. Jackson said.

Baartock didn't know what a minute was, but he decided to wait and see
what this house was.  And if there were any children here.  He had been
thinking about Jason, and wanted to race him again.  He was sure that
he could run faster, even though Jason was a little bigger.

Inside there was a woman at a desk, who looked up as they came in.  She
seemed surprised when she looked up at Baartock's mother, but she
didn't look scared.  "Nurse Dodge is expecting you, Mrs. Jackson," she
said.  "You can go right in."

"Thank you," said Mrs. Jackson, and she led them down a hallway.  There
were several doors, and she knocked on one and was opening it when a
voice said, "Come in."

There were chairs and a desk in this room, as well as a woman dressed
all in white clothes, who stood up and came around her desk as they
went in. "Norma, thank you for seeing us so early," said Mrs. Jackson.
"Mrs. Slinurp, this is Nurse Norma Dodge.  And this is Baartock."

"I'm glad to meet you," said Nurse Dodge in a cheerful voice.  "Please
come in and sit down."  After she shut the door and went back behind
her desk, she said, "I understand Baartock is to start going to our
school."

Baartock didn't know anything about that, but his mother said, "Yes."

"Let me tell you about what I do here," said Nurse Dodge.

"I explained about medical records and shots," said Mrs. Jackson.

"I'm sure that you did, but I would like telling about it anyway," said
Nurse Dodge.  To Baartock's mother she said, "I see most of the school
children here and many of the adults too, and I try to keep them
healthy.  I give the shots that will keep them from getting sick.  But
I understand that Baartock has never been sick." "Yes," said his mother
proudly.  "Baartock never sick. Little trolls never get sick.  Big
trolls not get sick, too."

That wasn't really quite true.  Many young trolls get sore throats when
they first start to practice their screaming.  That was because they
would shriek instead of yelling or screaming.  Their mothers would make
them gargle with warm salty water and that would usually make them
better right away.  But other than that, young trolls never got colds
or fevers or were ever sick.

"But if you never get sick," asked the nurse, "how do you know about
being sick?"

"I see humans sick before," answered his mother.  "Not same for trolls.
Maybe break arm, break leg same as humans. There are troll ways to fix
trolls.  Trolls never get human sick."

Baartock didn't like to remember about breaking things. During the
summer, when he was building his bridge, an arch stone had fallen on
his hand and it broke two of his fingers.  It had really hurt.  His
mother had put some salve on his fingers so they wouldn't hurt and
would heal faster, then she had straightened them and wrapped them.
When she unwrapped them two days later, they weren't broken any more,
and he went back and finished his bridge.  But he remembered how much
it hurt, and he was more careful after that.

He stopped listening to what the adults were saying. He was getting
tired of just sitting.  There wasn't anything in the room to interest
him, but there was an open door to another room, so he got up to look
at it.

There wasn't much in that room either.  Just a little bed and a lot of
little doors under a counter.  They were too small for an adult to go
through, but he thought that he might fit through some of them.  He was
just about to go look behind those doors when his mother said,
"Baartock sit!"

Baartock went back and sat down and waited some more. He waited for
what he thought was quite a long time.  The adults just kept talking.
Talking about him.  He knew that they would keep on talking and then
either he would have to do something now, or else he couldn't do
something until he was bigger.  And he was right.  After all the
talking, they agreed that he had to have a shot.  Nurse Dodge went in
the other room and came back with a tiny bottle and something she
called a 'needle'.  Baartock's mother did a lot of sewing, but this
wasn't like any needle that Baartock had ever seen before.  She put
something from the bottle into the needle, then came over to Baartock.
He was watching her carefully.

"This may hurt a little, Baartock," she said.  "You might want to look
over at your mother."  Then she wiped his arm with something that
smelled awful and made his arm wet, and she stuck the needle in his
arm.  It did hurt, a little like getting stuck by a thorn on a bush in
the woods.  Then she pulled the needle out and said, "That wasn't too
bad, was it?"

"Not hurt," said Baartock, though it did hurt some.

Nurse Dodge put the needle in a metal trash can and put the little
bottle back in the other room.  Then she went back behind her desk and
wrote something on a piece of paper.  "The school needs this to show
that Baartock has had his required shots," she said, "and I'll keep a
copy here."

"Well, Baartock," said Mrs. Jackson, "shall we go to school now?"

"Go see Mississtog-Buchnersklass?  Go see Jason?" asked Baartock.

"Yes.  We should hurry, so we'll be there before lunch."

They left the house and got back in the car.  Mrs. Jackson let Baartock
put on his seat belt himself, but she checked to make sure it was
fastened.




