Chapter 8


It wasn't quite time for lunch, when Mrs. Jackson and Baartock got to
his classroom.  Mrs. Stogbuchner was in the back of the room, reading
to the class from a big storybook. The children had gathered their
chairs in a circle around her, and had been listening to the story,
until Baartock came in.  Then there was a flurry of activity.  Jason
jumped up and brought a chair over, right next to his, for Baartock to
sit on.  Several of the children started talking and some more had to
move their chairs around.  Jason had to ask Baartock where he had been
and then started to tell him about the story they were listening to.
It was a few minutes before the class was all settled again and ready
to get back to the story.

The rest of the story didn't make much sense to Baartock, and he was
tired of listening to grown-ups talk. He'd been listening to talking
all morning.  He was hungry and wanted something to eat. Finally the
story was over and Mrs. Stogbuchner had them put their chairs back at
the tables and then line up to go to lunch.  As soon as they were
waiting quietly, she opened the door and led her class down the hall to
the cafeteria.  This was a big room that Baartock hadn't seen before.
There were lots of tables and chairs and all along one side there were
humans fixing food. The smell of food made him even hungrier.  Baartock
wanted to rush over and get something, but he had to stay in line. He
had time to look around.  He saw Mrs. Jackson talking to some other
adults sitting at a table in the back of the room.

"All right, dear, here's your tray."

One of the women handed him a big flat thing.  Then Baartock saw that
all the children in front of him were sliding their trays along, and
adults were putting plates of food on the trays.  So he slid his along
too.  One woman handed him a plate of food.  Another gave him a little
dish with some yellow pieces that smelled a little like fruit. Jason
stopped him and gave him a funny shaped box with something cold inside.

"If you don't want your milk, I'll drink it," he said grinning.

As they got to the end of the line, Baartock was just about to take his
tray to a table just as everyone else had.

"Where's your lunch money, dear?" asked the woman at the end of the
line.

"What's money?"

"Come on Baartock, give her your lunch money."  Jason reached over and
gave the woman some metal pieces. Then Baartock remembered.  His mother
had given him some metal pieces, telling him that humans used them.  He
reached in his pocket and gave some of them to the woman.  He picked up
his tray and followed Jason to a table.

"You're supposed to get a fork and spoon when you get your tray," Jason
said, looking at Baartock's tray as he opened his milk carton.  "You
can use my spoon."

He took the spoon from Jason, and started to eat.  The food was awful.

"What's this?" he asked Jason with his mouth full.  He pointed at the
brown stuff on his plate.

"Meatloaf," Jason answered, putting another forkful in his mouth.

Baartock tried the white lumpy stuff that had something brown poured
over it.  It tasted so bad that he wanted to spit it out, but he was so
hungry that he swallowed it instead.  The slice of bread he recognized,
and it wasn't too bad.  At least he could eat it, anyway.  He tried a
little bit of the yellow fruit.  It tasted as though it had been
soaking in honey, it was that sweet.  It didn't even really taste like
fruit.  Baartock looked over across the table.
 Jason's plate was empty already.  He looked around the cafeteria.
All the children were eating the food.  The others at their table were
eating it.

"Don't you like it?" Jason asked.

Baartock couldn't think of anything to say.  It was that awful.  He
just shook his head 'no'.  Didn't humans eat anything that he could
eat?  He was still very hungry.

"If you're not going to eat it, can I have it?"  Jason was just about
to take Baartock's plate, when he saw Mrs. Jackson walking right toward
their table.  Instead, he said, "I'll meet you out on the playground,"
and picked up his tray and got up.  Baartock saw the empty trays were
being taken over to a window in the wall, and were left there.  He was
about to get up and follow Jason, when Mrs. Jackson called to him.
"Baartock, did you give these to the cashier?"  She was holding the
metal pieces he had given the woman.

He nodded.  "Mother give me."

"Well, you can't pay for your lunch with them," she told him.  "They're
much too valuable.  These are gold coins."  She held out the smallest
yellow metal one.  "This is worth more than the price of a whole year
of school lunches.  Do your mother give you any other coins?"

He reached into his pocket and got out the rest of the coins and handed
them to Mrs. Jackson.

"These are all old coins," she said, examining them. "Most of these
coins are made of silver.  There isn't a new coin here." She reached
into her pocket and pulled out a coin to show him.

"These are the new coins," she said, showing him the ones she had.
"Yours might look the same, but they're much older and worth much more.
I'll have to talk to your mother about these.  You really shouldn't
bring something so valuable to school.  You might lose them."

Baartock didn't know what 'valuable' was, and was going to tell her
that his mother had a jar full of these coins, but Mrs. Jackson noticed
his plate still full of food.

"I thought you were hungry."    "Am hungry," he said, then pointed at
the plate.  He remembered the word that meant just how awful the food
was. "Terrible," he said.

"You don't like it?  I thought our lunch was pretty good today."

"Terrible," he said again.  "Can't eat."

Mrs. Jackson thought for a moment.  "There's no reason you can't bring
your lunch to school, instead of buying it," she said. "and I want to
talk to your mother about these coins.  I'll drive you home after
school, so I can talk to her.  May I keep these coins to give back to
her?"

"Yes," Baartock said

Mrs. Jackson walked away, thinking about how little she really knew
about trolls.

Baartock got up from the table and took his tray over to the window in
the wall.  Looking inside, he saw that there was someone to take the
trays and wash the plates and forks and spoons.  Leaving his tray, he
went out the door to the playground to find Jason.




