Chapter 13


Monday morning, Baartock was down by the side of the road, waiting
anxiously for the school bus to arrive.  When he had asked his mother
what 'weekend' and 'Monday' were, she had explained that many people
didn't work everyday, and took two days every week to do other things.
While trolls like to work everyday until the job is done and then rest;
humans like to take little rests every week, she told him. He would
have to wait two extra days, until Monday, for school and showandtell.
She decided that he would need to know, so she taught him the human
names for the days of the week.

There were dark clouds overhead when Baartock went down the hill to
wait for the bus, but it wasn't raining yet.  It had gotten really
cloudy the day before.  Baartock remembered the human name for that day
was Sunday.  His father had said that they were going to have a lot of
rain. Baartock liked it when there was a lot of rain, like there had
been during the summer.  Then there were lots of pools and mud to go
splashing in, and there was water running down hill under his bridge.
He liked to hide under it then, because it was even more like a real
troll bridge.

He was happy to see the school bus drive up.  He wanted to get to
school for showandtell.  He climbed into the school bus and sat on the
front seat.

"Hey, Baartock.  Do you know where the high school is? From right
here?" Mr. Barnes asked, looking at him.

Baartock just pointed and said "That way."

Mr. Barnes stopped to think about it, then he said, "You're right.  How
about to your school?"

Baartock pointed again, in a different direction.
       "You know, you're a regular little compass," Mr. Barnes said as
he started to drive off.

Baartock didn't know what a compass was, but any troll could give
directions.  It was easy.

They got to school earlier than they had on Friday, and Baartock went
around to the playground.  Jason wasn't there, so Baartock went over to
the swings to wait for him.  Soon both Jason and Jerry were coming
around the corner of the school to the playground. They were talking
about what they had done over the weekend.  Jerry said that he had been
to see a movie.  That didn't sound very exciting to Baartock, though he
wasn't sure what a 'movie' was. Jason seemed interested though and
asked all about it.

Soon the first bell rang and Baartock went into the classroom.  He
wanted to get ready for showandtell.  Mrs. Stogbuchner was at her desk
and she called him over.

"I had a talk with Mrs. Jackson, and I think I should go talk to your
mother," she said.  "Maybe you could bring something a little less
trollish for lunch."

Baartock didn't understand what she wanted to talk to his mother about,
but he said, "Mother home now."

"I can't go right now," said Mrs. Stogbuchner, "but maybe sometime
later this week.  Did you bring something for show-and-tell?"

"Yes," said Baartock.

"Will you tell me what you brought?"

Baartock had wanted it to be a surprise, but he told her. Mrs.
Stogbuchner listened carefully as Baartock explained.  Finally she
asked, "Do you know how to use it?"

Baartock nodded.

Then she said, "I'll have to ask Mrs. Jackson if it's all right.  You
put your things away and I'll go talk to her about it now."  She got up
from her desk and went out the door.

All the children had come in when the second bell rang. Mrs.
Stogbuchner came hurrying into the classroom.

"All right.  Take your seats and settle down," she said to the class.
She came over to Baartock.  "Mrs. Jackson said that you could show it
to the class, but it has to be outside on the playground. And she wants
to be there."

The morning went by so slowly for Baartock.  He couldn't keep his
thoughts on what they were doing.  He wanted it to be time for
showandtell.  Finally, Mrs. Jackson came into the classroom.

"Class," Mrs. Stogbuchner said, "It's time for show-and-tell.  Baartock
has brought something that I think you'll all want to see, but he will
have to show you outside.  Since it looks like rain, I think he should
be first.  Everybody please line up by the door and we'll go out and
see what Baartock brought."

Mrs. Jackson came over to Baartock and said, "I've never seen this.
Can you really make it work?"

Baartock nodded, and went over to his cubby to get his bag with his
surprise for showandtell.

When they were all outside gathered around Mrs. Stogbuchner on part of
the playground where there wasn't any grass, she said, "Baartock, show
the class what you brought and tell them about it."

He came into the middle of the class.  "You show me fire drill," he
said.  "But no fire.  I show you fire drill that make fire."  He held
out a little bow, a straight stick, and two small blocks of wood.

"Will you show the class how it works?" asked Mrs. Jackson.

Baartock knelt down and put one of the blocks on the ground and put
some tree bark next to it.  Then he put the straight stick in a small
hole in that block, wrapped the bowstring around the stick, and holding
the second block in his hand put it on top of the stick. Then he
started to work the bow back and forth.

"This fire drill make fire," he said again.

"Does this really work?" somebody asked.

"We were supposed to learn how to use these in scouts," said Mrs.
Stogbuchner, as Baartock worked the bow back and forth.  "But none of
us could make them work."

Before she could say anything else, the bark that Baartock had put next
to the block was starting to smoke. Then it was smoking a lot, and
Baartock dropped the fire drill and picked up the bark and started to
blow on it.  And it burst into flame.

He dropped the burning bark on the ground, and picked up the bow and
stick.  "Fire drill," he said.

"But how does it work?" somebody wanted to know.

"Wood get hot.  Make fire," Baartock explained.  He held out the bottom
wood block, which was still hot.  The class gathered in closely to feel
how hot it was.  Mrs. Jackson was making sure that the burning bark was
all put out.

Just then it started to rain, big heavy drops.

"Everybody back inside," called Mrs. Stogbuchner. "Don't line up.  Just
get inside quickly."

Everybody ran for the classroom door.  Baartock quickly gathered up his
fire drill and he and Mrs. Jackson hurried after the class.

When they were all settled in the classroom again, Mrs. Stogbuchner
said, "Thank you Baartock, for showing us another kind of fire drill.
Now, does anyone else have anything for show-and-tell?"




