Chapter 2


It was only a short drive, though it felt very long to both Baartock
and Mr. Fennis.  When Mr. Fennis finally parked the car at Marvis T.
Johnson Elementary School, he got out and helped Baartock out of the
back seat.

"I'm sorry I yelled at you, Baartock," apologized  Mr. Fennis, helping
him out.  "You almost made us crash when you grabbed the steering
wheel.  You don't do that in your folks car, do you?"

"Don't like!" said Baartock angrily, as he kicked at the side of the
car.

"Don't do that!  It's my car.  It may not look pretty, but it's paid
for and takes me where I want to go."

"Go home," said Baartock and he started to walk off the way
 they had come.  Like all trolls, he had an almost perfect sense of
direction and couldn't get lost. This place wasn't at all like the
woods and he didn't like it.  It was all new and frightening to him.
Since he was a troll, he wasn't going to be scared, or not much anyway.
He was supposed to do the scaring.

"Come on, Baartock.  Let's go on into school."  Mr. Fennis grabbed
Baartock's hand.

"Don't want school!  Want to go home!"

So, with Mr. Fennis pulling one way and Baartock pulling the other,
they went into school.  As soon as they got inside, Baartock stopped
wanting to go home and started looking at this new kind of cave he was
in.  There were big boards fastened to the walls, covered with lots of
colored papers.  There were cases with glass frames with more colored
papers behind them.  The walls were a bright yellow, and there were
lights overhead.  Even the floor was smooth and shiny. There were a lot
of new things for him to see. He was still looking around when they got
to the school office.

"Ms. Laurence, Baartock seems to have missed the bus this morning,"
said Mr. Fennis to the woman sitting at a desk, behind the counter.
Ms. Laurence was the school secretary.  "I found him still waiting by
the road."

"Baartock? I don't know any Baartock."

"Well, he's seven, so he must be in Mrs. Stogbuchner's class.  Could
you get him down there?  I've really got to get back to my class.
Good-by, Baartock."  With that, Mr. Fennis hurried out of the office
and down the hall, leaving Baartock in the office.

Baartock looked at Ms. Laurence.  Then he looked all around the room.
When he had seen enough he said,  "Not Mississtog-Buchnersklass.  Go
home!  Now!"  Baartock thought it might be fun to meet someone with a
wonderfully scary name like Mississtog-Buchnersklass, but he was tired
and wanted to go home.  He was just out the door, leaving Ms. Laurence
calling "Baartock! Stop!" when he crashed right into Mrs. Jackson, the
principal.

Mr. Fennis told Mrs. Jackson about Baartock just as soon as he had
gotten into his classroom and she came running to the office. Mrs.
Jackson had been a school teacher for many years and principal for a
few more, but she wasn't sure that she had ever seen a child quite like
the dirty, wild, little one, who was trying to pull away from her.
"Stop right now!"  Mrs. Jackson's voice echoed up and down the hall.
Baartock stopped squirming and stood, wide-eyed, staring at her.  He
didn't know humans could sound like that.  Down the hall, classroom
doors opened and several teachers looked out.  Mrs. Jackson ignored
them as she pushed Baartock back into the office and closed the door.

"Please tell me your name."  Before he could say that he wasn't old
enough to have a name, Ms. Laurence answered "Baartock."

"Baartock," said Mrs. Jackson as she brought him over to a bench, "sit
down.  Tell me how you got so dirty."

"Rolled in mud.  Want to go home."

"You certainly must have rolled in the mud.  I understand you missed
your bus this morning."

"Mrs. Jackson," said Ms. Laurence, who had stopped watching them and
was busily looking through some papers, "We don't have any student
named Baartock."  School had just started the week before, but Ms.
Laurence was sure that she knew the names of all the new students.  And
where to find their records.

"Is today your first day?" asked Mrs. Jackson.  "Yes!  First day!
First day!" Baartock answered right away.  Finally he had found someone
who understood that today was his first day to go scare people by all
himself.

"But, Mrs. Jackson, I don't have his registration forms, medical
records, or anything."  Ms. Laurence was now going through file drawers.

"I'm sure you'll find them.  Baartock and I will just go down to Mrs.
Stogbuchner's class, then I'll be back to help you look," said Mrs.
Jackson as she opened the door. "Baartock, let's go meet your teacher.
I'm sure you'll be very happy in her class."

"Want to go home!" repeated Baartock rather loudly as they walked down
the hall.

"Please don't shout, Baartock.  We don't want to disturb the other
classes.  I'm sure you would like to go home.  I would like to go home,
too, but we're  supposed to be here.  And we'll get everything
straightened out about your bus schedule, so you won't miss your bus
tomorrow. I'll make sure that you get home after school is over. Just
behave yourself and do what Mrs. Stogbuchner tells you."




