Chapter 3


"Now, let's get you into class," said Mrs. Jackson. They went to the
last door on the right side of the hall, and Mrs. Jackson looked
through a little window in the door.

"Is it recess time already?  The class must be outside." She opened the
door and they went into the classroom.  It was a bright cheerful room,
with windows all along one wall and chairs pulled up around low tables.

"This will be your classroom," Mrs. Jackson said.  They walked to a
door in the back of the classroom and went outside.

"Let's see if we can find them.  They should be on the playground.
That's around this way."  Hand in hand, they went around to the back of
the school building.

There was the playground.  And the class.  So many humans. Baartock had
never seen that many humans.  They were swinging, racing around,
climbing, playing, and just standing.  They were laughing and yelling
and screaming. They were all having fun.  Baartock was so interested,
that he didn't see the woman coming over to them.

"Baartock, this is your teacher, Mrs. Stogbuchner," said Mrs. Jackson.
"Mrs. Stogbuchner, this is Baartock. This is his first day, isn't it
Baartock?"

"First day," said Baartock, still looking at the children.

"Nice to have you in my class, Baartock," said Mrs. Stogbuchner.  "I'm
sure you will enjoy it here."

"I'll come see that you get on the right bus to get home, Baartock,"
said Mrs. Jackson.  "Why don't you go play. But, please behave
yourself.  I want to talk to Mrs. Stogbuchner for a moment."

Baartock started walking over to where the children were playing.  He
was thinking so many different things. It was his first day and he
should be scaring people, and here were humans to scare. But there were
just so many of them, all running and laughing and playing.  Nobody was
paying any attention to him.  They weren't even looking at him.
Baartock couldn't think of any way to scare anybody. This was all so
new, and not the way it was supposed to be. He was suddenly scared.  He
didn't know what to do.

Baartock had been slowly walking by the fence that went around the
playground.  When he got to the jungle gym, he stopped and watched the
three boys who were climbing on it. He wasn't quite sure why they were
climbing and chasing each other, but they seemed to be having fun.
Suddenly, Baartock jumped up on the bars and climbed up to the top.  It
was like climbing a tree, but it was different, too. He was just
sitting there, looking around, when one of the boys, the one with red
hair, climbed up beside him.

"Hi.  I'm Jason.  Are you new?"

"No, I'm Baartock," he said.  He wouldn't want a dumb name like 'New'.

All the other children were about the same size as Baartock, but Jason
was even bigger.  He was trying to think what to say to this red haired
boy.

Then Jason started to climb down again.  When he was just a little way
down, he called, "Try to catch me, Baartock!"

Baartock knew what to do.  He started climbing down, chasing Jason as
fast as he could.  By now, Jason was on the ground, running past the
swings.  When Baartock got down, he started running.  He ran past the
swings, past the slide. He was catching up to Jason, he had almost
caught him, when a there was a whistle and Jason stopped. Baartock
crashed into him and they both fell down.  Jason got on his feet right
away.

"We've got to go in now," he said as he pulled Baartock to his feet.
"We have to go line up.  Come on."

Baartock didn't understand what they were going to do, but he walked
along with Jason.  As they walked over to where Mrs. Stogbuchner was
standing, Baartock said, "I caught you."

"I can run faster," answered Jason.  "Next time you won't."

Mrs. Stogbuchner again blew her whistle.  "Recess is over. Time to go
inside," she called.  Then she saw Baartock and Jason. "Making friends
already, Baartock? Jason, please let Baartock sit next to you and help
him along today."

"Yes, Mrs. Stogbuchner," said Jason.

"Everybody settle down," called Mrs. Stogbuchner as she walked past the
children, who were lining up.

"I'm supposed to be first today, right, Mrs. Stogbuchner?" called a boy
from the front of the line.

"All right, Jimmy," she answered.

"There.  I told you so," Jimmy said loudly to the girl standing next to
him.

"Don't start a fight about it, Jimmy," said Mrs. Stogbuchner, who was
now at the back of the line.  "Let's walk inside quietly.  No running!"
she called, as Jimmy started rushing off.

In just a few minutes, Baartock found himself sitting right next to
Jason, at one of the low tables in the classroom.  Mrs. Stogbuchner,
standing in front of the classroom was saying, "We have someone new in
class." Everybody was looking around.  "Baartock, please stand up. This
is his first day."

Baartock stood up, but he was embarrassed.  Now everybody knew this was
his first day, he'd never be able to scare anybody.  He was still
standing, when Mrs. Stogbuchner said, "You may sit down now, Baartock."

Jason reached up and pulled Baartock back onto his chair.  A couple of
children at the next table were giggling, and several others were
whispering something and pointing at him.  Baartock felt uncomfortable.
He wasn't really too interested in the papers that were passed around.
But he got interested in making the marks on the paper, when Jason
helped him color the worksheet.  There were so many bright colors.  He
got so interested in coloring that he didn't pay any attention to
anything else.  It didn't seem very long before Mrs. Stogbuchner said,
"It's time to get everything put away now."

Jason whispered to him, "Where do you live?"

"That way," said Baartock, pointing.  That was the way a troll would
give directions.  Just point in the direction you were supposed to go,
and then walk until you got there. In spite of everything that had
happened today, he knew just exactly where his home was.  He had been
so busy, he hadn't thought about it until now.
 "Want to go home," he said.

"We all get to go home in just a few minutes, Baartock," said Mrs.
Stogbuchner, who had been walking around making sure that everything
was put away.  "Everybody sits down quietly and waits for the bell."

Baartock started to ask Jason, "What's bell?"  But he only got to say
"What's . . .."

Mrs. Stogbuchner was still standing behind him. "Baartock, in this
classroom, 'wait quietly' means 'no talking'."

Mrs. Jackson came into the classroom and walked over to them.  "Mrs.
Stogbuchner, if you're finished with Baartock for today, I'd like him
to come to the office now."

"Yes.  We're all through.  Baartock, please go with Mrs. Jackson, and
we'll see you tomorrow."

When they got into the hall, Mrs. Jackson said, "Baartock, we couldn't
find your file, and I do need to talk to your mother. Instead of riding
on the school bus, I'm going to drive you home."

"Go home now?" asked Baartock quietly.  He remembered how angry this
person could sound.

"Yes.  I'm going to drive you home."    Just then the bell rang, and
Baartock jumped three feet in the air.




