
                          [Picture: Book cover]

 [Picture: “Buffalo Bill took me on Soldier Boy to Thunder-Bird’s Camp”]





                              A Horse’s Tale


                                    BY
                                Mark Twain

                              ILLUSTRATED BY
                             LUCIUS HITCHCOCK

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                           LONDON AND NEW YORK
                            HARPER & BROTHERS
                           PUBLISHERS .. MCMVII

                                * * * * *

                Copyright, 1906, by Harper & Brothers.

                               * * * * *

                         _All rights reserved_

                       Published October, 1907.

                  _Printed in United States of America_.

                                * * * * *




Contents

CHAP.                                                             PAGE
       I.  SOLDIER BOY—PRIVATELY TO HIMSELF                          1
      II.  LETTER FROM ROUEN—TO GENERAL ALISON                      12
     III.  GENERAL ALISON TO HIS MOTHER                             19
      IV.  CATHY TO HER AUNT MERCEDES                               25
       V.  GENERAL ALISON TO MERCEDES                               33
      VI.  SOLDIER BOY AND THE MEXICAN PLUG                         56
     VII.  SOLDIER BOY AND SHEKELS                                  82
    VIII.  THE SCOUT-START.  BB AND LIEUTENANT-GENERAL              88
           ALISON
      IX.  SOLDIER BOY AND SHEKELS AGAIN                            90
       X.  GENERAL ALISON AND DORCAS                               100
      XI.  SEVERAL MONTHS LATER.  ANTONIO AND THORNDIKE            116
     XII.  MONGREL AND THE OTHER HORSE                             129
    XIII.  GENERAL ALISON TO HIS MOTHER                            133
     XIV.  SOLDIER BOY—TO HIMSELF                                  145
      XV.  GENERAL ALISON TO MRS. DRAKE, THE COLONEL’S WIFE        149




Illustrations

“Buffalo Bill took me on Soldier Boy to                 _Frontispiece_
Thunder-Bird’s Camp”
“Look at that file of cats in your chair”                        p. 48
“Every morning they go clattering down into the                     66
plain”
“There was nothing to do but stand by”                              92
“His strength failed and he fell at her feet”                      150




Acknowledgements


Although I have had several opportunities to see a bull-fight, I have
never seen one; but I needed a bull-fight in this book, and a trustworthy
one will be found in it.  I got it out of John Hay’s _Castilian Days_,
reducing and condensing it to fit the requirements of this small story.
Mr. Hay and I were friends from early times, and if he were still with us
he would not rebuke me for the liberty I have taken.

The knowledge of military minutiæ exhibited in this book will be found to
be correct, but it is not mine; I took it from _Army Regulations_, ed.
1904; _Hardy’s Tactics_—_Cavalry_, revised ed., 1861; and _Jomini’s
Handbook of Military Etiquette_, West Point ed., 1905.

It would not be honest in me to encourage by silence the inference that I
composed the Horse’s private bugle-call, for I did not.  I lifted it, as
Aristotle says.  It is the opening strain in _The Pizzicato_ in _Sylvia_,
by Delibes.  When that master was composing it he did not know it was a
bugle-call, it was I that found it out.

Along through the book I have distributed a few anachronisms and unborn
historical incidents and such things, so as to help the tale over the
difficult places.  This idea is not original with me; I got it out of
Herodotus.  Herodotus says, “Very few things happen at the right time,
and the rest do not happen at all: the conscientious historian will
correct these defects.”

The cats in the chair do not belong to me, but to another.

These are all the exceptions.  What is left of the book is mine.

                                                               MARK TWAIN.

LONE TREE HILL, DUBLIN,
NEW HAMPSHIRE, _October_, 1905.




Part I


I
SOLDIER BOY—PRIVATELY TO HIMSELF


I AM Buffalo Bill’s horse.  I have spent my life under his saddle—with
him in it, too, and he is good for two hundred pounds, without his
clothes; and there is no telling how much he does weigh when he is out on
the war-path and has his batteries belted on.  He is over six feet, is
young, hasn’t an ounce of waste flesh, is straight, graceful, springy in
his motions, quick as a cat, and has a handsome face, and black hair
dangling down on his shoulders, and is beautiful to look at; and nobody
is braver than he is, and nobody is stronger, except myself.  Yes, a
person that doubts that he is fine to see should see him in his beaded
buck-skins, on my back and his rifle peeping above his shoulder, chasing
a hostile trail, with me going like the wind and his hair streaming out
behind from the shelter of his broad slouch.  Yes, he is a sight to look
at then—and I’m part of it myself.

I am his favorite horse, out of dozens.  Big as he is, I have carried him
eighty-one miles between nightfall and sunrise on the scout; and I am
good for fifty, day in and day out, and all the time.  I am not large,
but I am built on a business basis.  I have carried him thousands and
thousands of miles on scout duty for the army, and there’s not a gorge,
nor a pass, nor a valley, nor a fort, nor a trading post, nor a
buffalo-range in the whole sweep of the Rocky Mountains and the Great
Plains that we don’t know as well as we know the bugle-calls.  He is
Chief of Scouts to the Army of the Frontier, and it makes us very
important.  In such a position as I hold in the military service one
needs to be of good family and possess an education much above the common
to be worthy of the place.  I am the best-educated horse outside of the
hippodrome, everybody says, and the best-mannered.  It may be so, it is
not for me to say; modesty is the best policy, I think.  Buffalo Bill
taught me the most of what I know, my mother taught me much, and I taught
myself the rest.  Lay a row of moccasins before me—Pawnee, Sioux,
Shoshone, Cheyenne, Blackfoot, and as many other tribes as you please—and
I can name the tribe every moccasin belongs to by the make of it.  Name
it in horse-talk, and could do it in American if I had speech.

I know some of the Indian signs—the signs they make with their hands, and
by signal-fires at night and columns of smoke by day.  Buffalo Bill
taught me how to drag wounded soldiers out of the line of fire with my
teeth; and I’ve done it, too; at least I’ve dragged _him_ out of the
battle when he was wounded.  And not just once, but twice.  Yes, I know a
lot of things.  I remember forms, and gaits, and faces; and you can’t
disguise a person that’s done me a kindness so that I won’t know him
thereafter wherever I find him.  I know the art of searching for a trail,
and I know the stale track from the fresh.  I can keep a trail all by
myself, with Buffalo Bill asleep in the saddle; ask him—he will tell you
so.  Many a time, when he has ridden all night, he has said to me at
dawn, “Take the watch, Boy; if the trail freshens, call me.”  Then he
goes to sleep.  He knows he can trust me, because I have a reputation.  A
scout horse that has a reputation does not play with it.

My mother was all American—no alkali-spider about _her_, I can tell you;
she was of the best blood of Kentucky, the bluest Blue-grass aristocracy,
very proud and acrimonious—or maybe it is ceremonious.  I don’t know
which it is.  But it is no matter; size is the main thing about a word,
and that one’s up to standard.  She spent her military life as colonel of
the Tenth Dragoons, and saw a deal of rough service—distinguished service
it was, too.  I mean, she _carried_ the Colonel; but it’s all the same.
Where would he be without his horse?  He wouldn’t arrive.  It takes two
to make a colonel of dragoons.  She was a fine dragoon horse, but never
got above that.  She was strong enough for the scout service, and had the
endurance, too, but she couldn’t quite come up to the speed required; a
scout horse has to have steel in his muscle and lightning in his blood.

My father was a bronco.  Nothing as to lineage—that is, nothing as to
recent lineage—but plenty good enough when you go a good way back.  When
Professor Marsh was out here hunting bones for the chapel of Yale
University he found skeletons of horses no bigger than a fox, bedded in
the rocks, and he said they were ancestors of my father.  My mother heard
him say it; and he said those skeletons were two million years old, which
astonished her and made her Kentucky pretensions look small and pretty
antiphonal, not to say oblique.  Let me see. . . . I used to know the
meaning of those words, but . . . well, it was years ago, and ’tisn’t as
vivid now as it was when they were fresh.  That sort of words doesn’t
keep, in the kind of climate we have out here.  Professor Marsh said
those skeletons were fossils.  So that makes me part blue grass and part
fossil; if there is any older or better stock, you will have to look for
it among the Four Hundred, I reckon.  I am satisfied with it.  And am a
happy horse, too, though born out of wedlock.

And now we are back at Fort Paxton once more, after a forty-day scout,
away up as far as the Big Horn.  Everything quiet.  Crows and Blackfeet
squabbling—as usual—but no outbreaks, and settlers feeling fairly easy.

The Seventh Cavalry still in garrison, here; also the Ninth Dragoons, two
artillery companies, and some infantry.  All glad to see me, including
General Alison, commandant.  The officers’ ladies and children well, and
called upon me—with sugar.  Colonel Drake, Seventh Cavalry, said some
pleasant things; Mrs. Drake was very complimentary; also Captain and Mrs.
Marsh, Company B, Seventh Cavalry; also the Chaplain, who is always kind
and pleasant to me, because I kicked the lungs out of a trader once.  It
was Tommy Drake and Fanny Marsh that furnished the sugar—nice children,
the nicest at the post, I think.

That poor orphan child is on her way from France—everybody is full of the
subject.  Her father was General Alison’s brother; married a beautiful
young Spanish lady ten years ago, and has never been in America since.
They lived in Spain a year or two, then went to France.  Both died some
months ago.  This little girl that is coming is the only child.  General
Alison is glad to have her.  He has never seen her.  He is a very nice
old bachelor, but is an old bachelor just the same and isn’t more than
about a year this side of retirement by age limit; and so what does he
know about taking care of a little maid nine years old?  If I could have
her it would be another matter, for I know all about children, and they
adore me.  Buffalo Bill will tell you so himself.

I have some of this news from over-hearing the garrison-gossip, the rest
of it I got from Potter, the General’s dog.  Potter is the great Dane.
He is privileged, all over the post, like Shekels, the Seventh Cavalry’s
dog, and visits everybody’s quarters and picks up everything that is
going, in the way of news.  Potter has no imagination, and no great deal
of culture, perhaps, but he has a historical mind and a good memory, and
so he is the person I depend upon mainly to post me up when I get back
from a scout.  That is, if Shekels is out on depredation and I can’t get
hold of him.



