XIV
SOLDIER BOY—TO HIMSELF


IT is five months.  Or is it six?  My troubles have clouded my memory.  I
have been all over this land, from end to end, and now I am back again
since day before yesterday, to that city which we passed through, that
last day of our long journey, and which is near her country home.  I am a
tottering ruin and my eyes are dim, but I recognized it.  If she could
see me she would know me and sound my call.  I wish I could hear it once
more; it would revive me, it would bring back her face and the mountains
and the free life, and I would come—if I were dying I would come!  She
would not know _me_, looking as I do, but she would know me by my star.
But she will never see me, for they do not let me out of this shabby
stable—a foul and miserable place, with most two wrecks like myself for
company.

How many times have I changed hands?  I think it is twelve times—I cannot
remember; and each time it was down a step lower, and each time I got a
harder master.  They have been cruel, every one; they have worked me
night and day in degraded employments, and beaten me; they have fed me
ill, and some days not at all.  And so I am but bones, now, with a rough
and frowsy skin humped and cornered upon my shrunken body—that skin which
was once so glossy, that skin which she loved to stroke with her hand.  I
was the pride of the mountains and the Great Plains; now I am a scarecrow
and despised.  These piteous wrecks that are my comrades here say we have
reached the bottom of the scale, the final humiliation; they say that
when a horse is no longer worth the weeds and discarded rubbish they feed
to him, they sell him to the bull-ring for a glass of brandy, to make
sport for the people and perish for their pleasure.

To die—that does not disturb me; we of the service never care for death.
But if I could see her once more! if I could hear her bugle sing again
and say, “It is I, Soldier—come!”



XV
GENERAL ALISON TO MRS. DRAKE, THE COLONEL’S WIFE


TO return, now, to where I was, and tell you the rest.  We shall never
know how she came to be there; there is no way to account for it.  She
was always watching for black and shiny and spirited horses—watching,
hoping, despairing, hoping again; always giving chase and sounding her
call, upon the meagrest chance of a response, and breaking her heart over
the disappointment; always inquiring, always interested in sales-stables
and horse accumulations in general.  How she got there must remain a
mystery.

At the point which I had reached in a preceding paragraph of this
account, the situation was as follows: two horses lay dying; the bull had
scattered his persecutors for the moment, and stood raging, panting,
pawing the dust in clouds over his back, when the man that had been
wounded returned to the ring on a remount, a poor blindfolded wreck that
yet had something ironically military about his bearing—and the next
moment the bull had ripped him open and his bowls were dragging upon the
ground: and the bull was charging his swarm of pests again.  Then came
pealing through the air a bugle-call that froze my blood—“_It is I_,
_Soldier—come_!”  I turned; Cathy was flying down through the massed
people; she cleared the parapet at a bound, and sped towards that
riderless horse, who staggered forward towards the remembered sound; but
his strength failed, and he fell at her feet, she lavishing kisses upon
him and sobbing, the house rising with one impulse, and white with
horror!  Before help could reach her the bull was back again—

         [Picture: His strength failed, and he fell at her feet]

She was never conscious again in life.  We bore her home, all mangled and
drenched in blood, and knelt by her and listened to her broken and
wandering words, and prayed for her passing spirit, and there was no
comfort—nor ever will be, I think.  But she was happy, for she was far
away under another sky, and comrading again with her Rangers, and her
animal friends, and the soldiers.  Their names fell softly and
caressingly from her lips, one by one, with pauses between.  She was not
in pain, but lay with closed eyes, vacantly murmuring, as one who dreams.
Sometimes she smiled, saying nothing; sometimes she smiled when she
uttered a name—such as Shekels, or BB, or Potter.  Sometimes she was at
her fort, issuing commands; sometimes she was careering over the plain at
the head of her men; sometimes she was training her horse; once she said,
reprovingly, “You are giving me the wrong foot; give me the left—don’t
you know it is good-bye?”

After this, she lay silent some time; the end was near.  By-and-by she
murmured, “Tired . . . sleepy . . . take Cathy, mamma.”  Then, “Kiss me,
Soldier.”  For a little time, she lay so still that we were doubtful if
she breathed.  Then she put out her hand and began to feel gropingly
about; then said, “I cannot find it; blow ‘taps.’”  It was the end.

                      [Picture: Taps [music score]]




FOOTNOTES


{80}  At West Point the bugle is supposed to be saying:

    “I can’t get ’em up,
    I can’t get ’em up,
    I can’t get ’em up in the morning!”

