IV
CATHY TO HER AUNT MERCEDES


OH, it is wonderful here, aunty dear, just paradise!  Oh, if you could
only see it! everything so wild and lovely; such grand plains, stretching
such miles and miles and miles, all the most delicious velvety sand and
sage-brush, and rabbits as big as a dog, and such tall and noble
jackassful ears that that is what they name them by; and such vast
mountains, and so rugged and craggy and lofty, with cloud-shawls wrapped
around their shoulders, and looking so solemn and awful and satisfied;
and the charming Indians, oh, how you would dote on them, aunty dear, and
they would on you, too, and they would let you hold their babies, the way
they do me, and they _are_ the fattest, and brownest, and sweetest little
things, and never cry, and wouldn’t if they had pins sticking in them,
which they haven’t, because they are poor and can’t afford it; and the
horses and mules and cattle and dogs—hundreds and hundreds and hundreds,
and not an animal that you can’t do what you please with, except uncle
Thomas, but _I_ don’t mind him, he’s lovely; and oh, if you could hear
the bugles: _too—too—too-too—too—too_, and so on—perfectly beautiful!  Do
you recognize that one?  It’s the first toots of the _reveille_; it goes,
dear me, _so_ early in the morning!—then I and every other soldier on the
whole place are up and out in a minute, except uncle Thomas, who is most
unaccountably lazy, I don’t know why, but I have talked to him about it,
and I reckon it will be better, now.  He hasn’t any faults much, and is
charming and sweet, like Buffalo Bill, and Thunder-Bird, and Mammy
Dorcas, and Soldier Boy, and Shekels, and Potter, and Sour-Mash,
and—well, they’re _all_ that, just angels, as you may say.

The very first day I came, I don’t know how long ago it was, Buffalo Bill
took me on Soldier Boy to Thunder-Bird’s camp, not the big one which is
out on the plain, which is White Cloud’s, he took me to _that_ one next
day, but this one is four or five miles up in the hills and crags, where
there is a great shut-in meadow, full of Indian lodges and dogs and
squaws and everything that is interesting, and a brook of the clearest
water running through it, with white pebbles on the bottom and trees all
along the banks cool and shady and good to wade in, and as the sun goes
down it is dimmish in there, but away up against the sky you see the big
peaks towering up and shining bright and vivid in the sun, and sometimes
an eagle sailing by them, not flapping a wing, the same as if he was
asleep; and young Indians and girls romping and laughing and carrying on,
around the spring and the pool, and not much clothes on except the girls,
and dogs fighting, and the squaws busy at work, and the bucks busy
resting, and the old men sitting in a bunch smoking, and passing the pipe
not to the left but to the right, which means there’s been a row in the
camp and they are settling it if they can, and children playing _just_
the same as any other children, and little boys shooting at a mark with
bows, and I cuffed one of them because he hit a dog with a club that
wasn’t doing anything, and he resented it but before long he wished he
hadn’t: but this sentence is getting too long and I will start another.
Thunder-Bird put on his Sunday-best war outfit to let me see him, and he
was splendid to look at, with his face painted red and bright and intense
like a fire-coal and a valance of eagle feathers from the top of his head
all down his back, and he had his tomahawk, too, and his pipe, which has
a stem which is longer than my arm, and I never had such a good time in
an Indian camp in my life, and I learned a lot of words of the language,
and next day BB took me to the camp out on the Plains, four miles, and I
had another good time and got acquainted with some more Indians and dogs;
and the big chief, by the name of White Cloud, gave me a pretty little
bow and arrows and I gave him my red sash-ribbon, and in four days I
could shoot very well with it and beat any white boy of my size at the
post; and I have been to those camps plenty of times since; and I have
learned to ride, too, BB taught me, and every day he practises me and
praises me, and every time I do better than ever he lets me have a
scamper on Soldier Boy, and _that’s_ the last agony of pleasure! for he
is the charmingest horse, and so beautiful and shiny and black, and
hasn’t another color on him anywhere, except a white star in his
forehead, not just an imitation star, but a real one, with four points,
shaped exactly like a star that’s hand-made, and if you should cover him
all up but his star you would know him anywhere, even in Jerusalem or
Australia, by that.  And I got acquainted with a good many of the Seventh
Cavalry, and the dragoons, and officers, and families, and horses, in the
first few days, and some more in the next few and the next few and the
next few, and now I know more soldiers and horses than you can think, no
matter how hard you try.  I am keeping up my studies every now and then,
but there isn’t much time for it.  I love you so! and I send you a hug
and a kiss.

                                                                    CATHY.

P.S.—I belong to the Seventh Cavalry and Ninth Dragoons, I am an officer,
too, and do not have to work on account of not getting any wages.



V
GENERAL ALISON TO MERCEDES


SHE has been with us a good nice long time, now.  You are troubled about
your sprite because this is such a wild frontier, hundreds of miles from
civilization, and peopled only by wandering tribes of savages?  You fear
for her safety?  Give yourself no uneasiness about her.  Dear me, she’s
in a nursery! and she’s got more than eighteen hundred nurses.  It would
distress the garrison to suspect that you think they can’t take care of
her.  They think they can.  They would tell you so themselves.  You see,
the Seventh Cavalry has never had a child of its very own before, and
neither has the Ninth Dragoons; and so they are like all new mothers,
they think there is no other child like theirs, no other child so
wonderful, none that is so worthy to be faithfully and tenderly looked
after and protected.  These bronzed veterans of mine are very good
mothers, I think, and wiser than some other mothers; for they let her
take lots of risks, and it is a good education for her; and the more
risks she takes and comes successfully out of, the prouder they are of
her.  They adopted her, with grave and formal military ceremonies of
their own invention—solemnities is the truer word; solemnities that were
so profoundly solemn and earnest, that the spectacle would have been
comical if it hadn’t been so touching.  It was a good show, and as
stately and complex as guard-mount and the trooping of the colors; and it
had its own special music, composed for the occasion by the bandmaster of
the Seventh; and the child was as serious as the most serious war-worn
soldier of them all; and finally when they throned her upon the shoulder
of the oldest veteran, and pronounced her “well and truly adopted,” and
the bands struck up and all saluted and she saluted in return, it was
better and more moving than any kindred thing I have seen on the stage,
because stage things are make-believe, but this was real and the players’
hearts were in it.

It happened several weeks ago, and was followed by some additional
solemnities.  The men created a couple of new ranks, thitherto unknown to
the army regulations, and conferred them upon Cathy, with ceremonies
suitable to a duke.  So now she is Corporal-General of the Seventh
Cavalry, and Flag-Lieutenant of the Ninth Dragoons, with the privilege
(decreed by the men) of writing U.S.A. after her name!  Also, they
presented her a pair of shoulder-straps—both dark blue, the one with F.
L. on it, the other with C. G.  Also, a sword.  She wears them.  Finally,
they granted her the _salute_.  I am witness that that ceremony is
faithfully observed by both parties—and most gravely and decorously, too.
I have never seen a soldier smile yet, while delivering it, nor Cathy in
returning it.

Ostensibly I was not present at these proceedings, and am ignorant of
them; but I was where I could see.  I was afraid of one thing—the
jealousy of the other children of the post; but there is nothing of that,
I am glad to say.  On the contrary, they are proud of their comrade and
her honors.  It is a surprising thing, but it is true.  The children are
devoted to Cathy, for she has turned their dull frontier life into a sort
of continuous festival; also they know her for a stanch and steady
friend, a friend who can always be depended upon, and does not change
with the weather.

She has become a rather extraordinary rider, under the tutorship of a
more than extraordinary teacher—BB, which is her pet name for Buffalo
Bill.  She pronounces it _beeby_.  He has not only taught her seventeen
ways of breaking her neck, but twenty-two ways of avoiding it.  He has
infused into her the best and surest protection of a
horseman—_confidence_.  He did it gradually, systematically, little by
little, a step at a time, and each step made sure before the next was
essayed.  And so he inched her along up through terrors that had been
discounted by training before she reached them, and therefore were not
recognizable as terrors when she got to them.  Well, she is a daring
little rider, now, and is perfect in what she knows of horsemanship.
By-and-by she will know the art like a West Point cadet, and will
exercise it as fearlessly.  She doesn’t know anything about side-saddles.
Does that distress you?  And she is a fine performer, without any saddle
at all.  Does that discomfort you?  Do not let it; she is not in any
danger, I give you my word.

You said that if my heart was old and tired she would refresh it, and you
said truly.  I do not know how I got along without her, before.  I was a
forlorn old tree, but now that this blossoming vine has wound itself
about me and become the life of my life, it is very different.  As a
furnisher of business for me and for Mammy Dorcas she is exhaustlessly
competent, but I like my share of it and of course Dorcas likes hers, for
Dorcas “raised” George, and Cathy is George over again in so many ways
that she brings back Dorcas’s youth and the joys of that long-vanished
time.  My father tried to set Dorcas free twenty years ago, when we still
lived in Virginia, but without success; she considered herself a member
of the family, and wouldn’t go.  And so, a member of the family she
remained, and has held that position unchallenged ever since, and holds
it now; for when my mother sent her here from San Bernardino when we
learned that Cathy was coming, she only changed from one division of the
family to the other.  She has the warm heart of her race, and its lavish
affections, and when Cathy arrived the pair were mother and child in five
minutes, and that is what they are to date and will continue.  Dorcas
really thinks she raised George, and that is one of her prides, but
perhaps it was a mutual raising, for their ages were the same—thirteen
years short of mine.  But they were playmates, at any rate; as regards
that, there is no room for dispute.

Cathy thinks Dorcas is the best Catholic in America except herself.  She
could not pay any one a higher compliment than that, and Dorcas could not
receive one that would please her better.  Dorcas is satisfied that there
has never been a more wonderful child than Cathy.  She has conceived the
curious idea that Cathy is _twins_, and that one of them is a boy-twin
and failed to get segregated—got submerged, is the idea.  To argue with
her that this is nonsense is a waste of breath—her mind is made up, and
arguments do not affect it.  She says:

“Look at her; she loves dolls, and girl-plays, and everything a girl
loves, and she’s gentle and sweet, and ain’t cruel to dumb brutes—now
that’s the girl-twin, but she loves boy-plays, and drums and fifes and
soldiering, and rough-riding, and ain’t afraid of anybody or anything—and
that’s the boy-twin; ’deed you needn’t tell _me_ she’s only _one_ child;
no, sir, she’s twins, and one of them got shet up out of sight.  Out of
sight, but that don’t make any difference, that boy is in there, and you
can see him look out of her eyes when her temper is up.”

Then Dorcas went on, in her simple and earnest way, to furnish
illustrations.

“Look at that raven, Marse Tom.  Would anybody befriend a raven but that
child?  Of course they wouldn’t; it ain’t natural.  Well, the Injun boy
had the raven tied up, and was all the time plaguing it and starving it,
and she pitied the po’ thing, and tried to buy it from the boy, and the
tears was in her eyes.  That was the girl-twin, you see.  She offered him
her thimble, and he flung it down; she offered him all the doughnuts she
had, which was two, and he flung them down; she offered him half a paper
of pins, worth forty ravens, and he made a mouth at her and jabbed one of
them in the raven’s back.  That was the limit, you know.  It called for
the other twin.  Her eyes blazed up, and she jumped for him like a
wild-cat, and when she was done with him she was rags and he wasn’t
anything but an allegory.  That was most undoubtedly the other twin, you
see, coming to the front.  No, sir; don’t tell _me_ he ain’t in there.
I’ve seen him with my own eyes—and plenty of times, at that.”

“Allegory?  What is an allegory?”

“I don’t know, Marse Tom, it’s one of her words; she loves the big ones,
you know, and I pick them up from her; they sound good and I can’t help
it.”

“What happened after she had converted the boy into an allegory?”

“Why, she untied the raven and confiscated him by force and fetched him
home, and left the doughnuts and things on the ground.  Petted him, of
course, like she does with every creature.  In two days she had him so
stuck after her that she—well, _you_ know how he follows her everywhere,
and sets on her shoulder often when she rides her breakneck rampages—all
of which is the girl-twin to the front, you see—and he does what he
pleases, and is up to all kinds of devilment, and is a perfect nuisance
in the kitchen.  Well, they all stand it, but they wouldn’t if it was
another person’s bird.”

Here she began to chuckle comfortably, and presently she said:

“Well, you know, she’s a nuisance herself, Miss Cathy is, she _is_ so
busy, and into everything, like that bird.  It’s all just as innocent,
you know, and she don’t mean any harm, and is so good and dear; and it
ain’t her fault, it’s her nature; her interest is always a-working and
always red-hot, and she can’t keep quiet.  Well, yesterday it was
‘Please, Miss Cathy, don’t do that’; and, ‘Please, Miss Cathy, let that
alone’; and, ‘Please, Miss Cathy, don’t make so much noise’; and so on
and so on, till I reckon I had found fault fourteen times in fifteen
minutes; then she looked up at me with her big brown eyes that can plead
so, and said in that odd little foreign way that goes to your heart,

“’Please, mammy, make me a compliment.”

“And of course you did it, you old fool?”

“Marse Tom, I just grabbed her up to my breast and says, ‘Oh, you po’
dear little motherless thing, you ain’t got a fault in the world, and you
can do anything you want to, and tear the house down, and yo’ old black
mammy won’t say a word!’”

“Why, of course, of course—_I_ knew you’d spoil the child.”

She brushed away her tears, and said with dignity:

“Spoil the child? spoil _that_ child, Marse Tom?  There can’t _anybody_
spoil her.  She’s the king bee of this post, and everybody pets her and
is her slave, and yet, as you know, your own self, she ain’t the least
little bit spoiled.”  Then she eased her mind with this retort: “Marse
Tom, she makes you do anything she wants to, and you can’t deny it; so if
she could be spoilt, she’d been spoilt long ago, because you are the very
_worst_!  Look at that pile of cats in your chair, and you sitting on a
candle-box, just as patient; it’s because they’re her cats.”

          [Picture: “‘Look at that pile of cats in your chair’”]

If Dorcas were a soldier, I could punish her for such large frankness as
that.  I changed the subject, and made her resume her illustrations.  She
had scored against me fairly, and I wasn’t going to cheapen her victory
by disputing it.  She proceeded to offer this incident in evidence on her
twin theory:

“Two weeks ago when she got her finger mashed open, she turned pretty
pale with the pain, but she never said a word.  I took her in my lap, and
the surgeon sponged off the blood and took a needle and thread and began
to sew it up; it had to have a lot of stitches, and each one made her
scrunch a little, but she never let go a sound.  At last the surgeon was
so full of admiration that he said, ‘Well, you _are_ a brave little
thing!’ and she said, just as ca’m and simple as if she was talking about
the weather, ‘There isn’t anybody braver but the Cid!’  You see? it was
the boy-twin that the surgeon was a-dealing with.

“Who is the Cid?”

“I don’t know, sir—at least only what she says.  She’s always talking
about him, and says he was the bravest hero Spain ever had, or any other
country.  They have it up and down, the children do, she standing up for
the Cid, and they working George Washington for all he is worth.”

“Do they quarrel?”

“No; it’s only disputing, and bragging, the way children do.  They want
her to be an American, but she can’t be anything but a Spaniard, she
says.  You see, her mother was always longing for home, po’ thing! and
thinking about it, and so the child is just as much a Spaniard as if
she’d always lived there.  She thinks she remembers how Spain looked, but
I reckon she don’t, because she was only a baby when they moved to
France.  She is very proud to be a Spaniard.”

Does that please you, Mercedes?  Very well, be content; your niece is
loyal to her allegiance: her mother laid deep the foundations of her love
for Spain, and she will go back to you as good a Spaniard as you are
yourself.  She has made me promise to take her to you for a long visit
when the War Office retires me.

I attend to her studies myself; has she told you that?  Yes, I am her
school-master, and she makes pretty good progress, I think, everything
considered.  Everything considered—being translated—means holidays.  But
the fact is, she was not born for study, and it comes hard.  Hard for me,
too; it hurts me like a physical pain to see that free spirit of the air
and the sunshine laboring and grieving over a book; and sometimes when I
find her gazing far away towards the plain and the blue mountains with
the longing in her eyes, I have to throw open the prison doors; I can’t
help it.  A quaint little scholar she is, and makes plenty of blunders.
Once I put the question:

“What does the Czar govern?”

She rested her elbow on her knee and her chin on her hand and took that
problem under deep consideration.  Presently she looked up and answered,
with a rising inflection implying a shade of uncertainty,

“The dative case?”

Here are a couple of her expositions which were delivered with tranquil
confidence:

“_Chaplain_, diminutive of chap.  _Lass_ is masculine, _lassie_ is
feminine.”

She is not a genius, you see, but just a normal child; they all make
mistakes of that sort.  There is a glad light in her eye which is pretty
to see when she finds herself able to answer a question promptly and
accurately, without any hesitation; as, for instance, this morning:

“Cathy dear, what is a cube?”

“Why, a native of Cuba.”

She still drops a foreign word into her talk now and then, and there is
still a subtle foreign flavor or fragrance about even her exactest
English—and long may this abide! for it has for me a charm that is very
pleasant.  Sometimes her English is daintily prim and bookish and
captivating.  She has a child’s sweet tooth, but for her health’s sake I
try to keep its inspirations under check.  She is obedient—as is proper
for a titled and recognized military personage, which she is—but the
chain presses sometimes.  For instance, we were out for a walk, and
passed by some bushes that were freighted with wild goose-berries.  Her
face brightened and she put her hands together and delivered herself of
this speech, most feelingly:

“Oh, if I was permitted a vice it would be the _gourmandise_!”

Could I resist that?  No.  I gave her a gooseberry.

You ask about her languages.  They take care of themselves; they will not
get rusty here; our regiments are not made up of natives alone—far from
it.  And she is picking up Indian tongues diligently.



