IX
SOLDIER BOY AND SHEKELS AGAIN


“WELL, this is the way it happened.  We did the escort duty; then we came
back and struck for the plain and put the Rangers through a rousing
drill—oh, for hours!  Then we sent them home under Brigadier-General
Fanny Marsh; then the Lieutenant-General and I went off on a gallop over
the plains for about three hours, and were lazying along home in the
middle of the afternoon, when we met Jimmy Slade, the drummer-boy, and he
saluted and asked the Lieutenant-General if she had heard the news, and
she said no, and he said:

“‘Buffalo Bill has been ambushed and badly shot this side of Clayton, and
Thorndike the scout, too; Bill couldn’t travel, but Thorndike could, and
he brought the news, and Sergeant Wilkes and six men of Company B are
gone, two hours ago, hotfoot, to get Bill.  And they say—’

“‘_Go_!’ she shouts to me—and I went.”

“Fast?”

“Don’t ask foolish questions.  It was an awful pace.  For four hours
nothing happened, and not a word said, except that now and then she said,
‘Keep it up, Boy, keep it up, sweetheart; we’ll save him!’  I kept it up.
Well, when the dark shut down, in the rugged hills, that poor little chap
had been tearing around in the saddle all day, and I noticed by the slack
knee-pressure that she was tired and tottery, and I got dreadfully
afraid; but every time I tried to slow down and let her go to sleep, so I
could stop, she hurried me up again; and so, sure enough, at last over
she went!

            [Picture: “There was nothing to do but stand by”]

“Ah, that was a fix to be in I for she lay there and didn’t stir, and
what was I to do?  I couldn’t leave her to fetch help, on account of the
wolves.  There was nothing to do but stand by.  It was dreadful.  I was
afraid she was killed, poor little thing!  But she wasn’t.  She came to,
by-and-by, and said, ‘Kiss me, Soldier,’ and those were blessed words.  I
kissed her—often; I am used to that, and we like it.  But she didn’t get
up, and I was worried.  She fondled my nose with her hand, and talked to
me, and called me endearing names—which is her way—but she caressed with
the same hand all the time.  The other arm was broken, you see, but I
didn’t know it, and she didn’t mention it.  She didn’t want to distress
me, you know.

“Soon the big gray wolves came, and hung around, and you could hear them
snarl, and snap at each other, but you couldn’t see anything of them
except their eyes, which shone in the dark like sparks and stars.  The
Lieutenant-General said, ‘If I had the Rocky Mountain Rangers here, we
would make those creatures climb a tree.’  Then she made believe that the
Rangers were in hearing, and put up her bugle and blew the ‘assembly’;
and then, ‘boots and saddles’; then the ‘trot’; ‘gallop’; ‘charge!’  Then
she blew the ‘retreat,’ and said, ‘That’s for you, you rebels; the
Rangers don’t ever retreat!’

“The music frightened them away, but they were hungry, and kept coming
back.  And of course they got bolder and bolder, which is their way.  It
went on for an hour, then the tired child went to sleep, and it was
pitiful to hear her moan and nestle, and I couldn’t do anything for her.
All the time I was laying for the wolves.  They are in my line; I have
had experience.  At last the boldest one ventured within my lines, and I
landed him among his friends with some of his skull still on him, and
they did the rest.  In the next hour I got a couple more, and they went
the way of the first one, down the throats of the detachment.  That
satisfied the survivors, and they went away and left us in peace.

“We hadn’t any more adventures, though I kept awake all night and was
ready.  From midnight on the child got very restless, and out of her
head, and moaned, and said, ‘Water, water—thirsty’; and now and then,
‘Kiss me, Soldier’; and sometimes she was in her fort and giving orders
to her garrison; and once she was in Spain, and thought her mother was
with her.  People say a horse can’t cry; but they don’t know, because we
cry inside.

“It was an hour after sunup that I heard the boys coming, and recognized
the hoof-beats of Pomp and Cæsar and Jerry, old mates of mine; and a
welcomer sound there couldn’t ever be.

Buffalo Bill was in a horse-litter, with his leg broken by a bullet, and
Mongrel and Blake Haskins’s horse were doing the work.  Buffalo Bill and
Thorndike had lolled both of those toughs.

“When they got to us, and Buffalo Bill saw the child lying there so
white, he said, ‘My God!’ and the sound of his voice brought her to
herself, and she gave a little cry of pleasure and struggled to get up,
but couldn’t, and the soldiers gathered her up like the tenderest women,
and their eyes were wet and they were not ashamed, when they saw her arm
dangling; and so were Buffalo Bill’s, and when they laid her in his arms
he said, ‘My darling, how does this come?’ and she said, ‘We came to save
you, but I was tired, and couldn’t keep awake, and fell off and hurt
myself, and couldn’t get on again.’  ‘You came to save me, you dear
little rat?  It was too lovely of you!’  ‘Yes, and Soldier stood by me,
which you know he would, and protected me from the wolves; and if he got
a chance he kicked the life out of some of them—for you know he would,
BB.’  The sergeant said, ‘He laid out three of them, sir, and here’s the
bones to show for it.’  ‘He’s a grand horse,’ said BB; ‘he’s the grandest
horse that ever was! and has saved your life, Lieutenant-General Alison,
and shall protect it the rest of his life—he’s yours for a kiss!’  He got
it, along with a passion of delight, and he said, ‘You are feeling better
now, little Spaniard—do you think you could blow the advance?’  She put
up the bugle to do it, but he said wait a minute first.  Then he and the
sergeant set her arm and put it in splints, she wincing but not
whimpering; then we took up the march for home, and that’s the end of the
tale; and I’m her horse.  Isn’t she a brick, Shekels?

“Brick?  She’s more than a brick, more than a thousand bricks—she’s a
reptile!”

“It’s a compliment out of your heart, Shekels.  God bless you for it!”



