VII
SOLDIER BOY AND SHEKELS


“DID you do as I told you?  Did you look up the Mexican Plug?”

“Yes, I made his acquaintance before night and got his friendship.”

“I liked him.  Did you?”

“Not at first.  He took me for a reptile, and it troubled me, because I
didn’t know whether it was a compliment or not.  I couldn’t ask him,
because it would look ignorant.  So I didn’t say anything, and soon liked
him very well indeed.  Was it a compliment, do you think?”

“Yes, that is what it was.  They are very rare, the reptiles; very few
left, now-a-days.”

“Is that so?  What is a reptile?”

“It is a plantigrade circumflex vertebrate bacterium that hasn’t any
wings and is uncertain.”

“Well, it—it sounds fine, it surely does.”

“And it _is_ fine.  You may be thankful you are one.”

“I am.  It seems wonderfully grand and elegant for a person that is so
humble as I am; but I am thankful, I am indeed, and will try to live up
to it.  It is hard to remember.  Will you say it again, please, and say
it slow?”

“Plantigrade circumflex vertebrate bacterium that hasn’t any wings and is
uncertain.”

“It is beautiful, anybody must grant it; beautiful, and of a noble sound.
I hope it will not make me proud and stuck-up—I should not like to be
that.  It is much more distinguished and honorable to be a reptile than a
dog, don’t you think, Soldier?”

“Why, there’s no comparison.  It is awfully aristocratic.  Often a duke
is called a reptile; it is set down so, in history.”

“Isn’t that grand!  Potter wouldn’t ever associate with me, but I reckon
he’ll be glad to when he finds out what I am.”

“You can depend upon it.”

“I will thank Mongrel for this. He is a very good sort, for a Mexican
Plug.  Don’t you think he is?”

“It is my opinion of him; and as for his birth, he cannot help that.  We
cannot all be reptiles, we cannot all be fossils; we have to take what
comes and be thankful it is no worse.  It is the true philosophy.”

“For those others?”

“Stick to the subject, please.  Did it turn out that my suspicions were
right?”

“Yes, perfectly right.  Mongrel has heard them planning.  They are after
BB’s life, for running them out of Medicine Bow and taking their stolen
horses away from them.”

“Well, they’ll get him yet, for sure.”

“Not if he keeps a sharp look-out.”

“_He_ keep a sharp lookout!  He never does; he despises them, and all
their kind.  His life is always being threatened, and so it has come to
be monotonous.”

“Does he know they are here?”

“Oh yes, he knows it.  He is always the earliest to know who comes and
who goes.  But he cares nothing for them and their threats; he only
laughs when people warn him.  They’ll shoot him from behind a tree the
first he knows.  Did Mongrel tell you their plans?”

“Yes.  They have found out that he starts for Fort Clayton day after
to-morrow, with one of his scouts; so they will leave to-morrow, letting
on to go south, but they will fetch around north all in good time.”

“Shekels, I don’t like the look of it.”



VIII
THE SCOUT-START.  BB AND LIEUTENANT-GENERAL ALISON


BB (_saluting_).  “Good! handsomely done!  The Seventh couldn’t beat it!
You do certainly handle your Rangers like an expert, General.  And where
are you bound?”

“Four miles on the trail to Fort Clayton.”

“Glad am I, dear!  What’s the idea of it?”

“Guard of honor for you and Thorndike.”

“Bless—your—_heart_!  I’d rather have it from you than from the
Commander-in-Chief of the armies of the United States, you incomparable
little soldier!—and I don’t need to take any oath to that, for you to
believe it.”

“I _thought_ you’d like it, BB.”

“_Like_ it?  Well, I should say so!  Now then—all ready—sound the
advance, and away we go!”



