XI
SEVERAL MONTHS LATER.  ANTONIO AND THORNDIKE


“THORNDIKE, isn’t that Plug you’re riding an asset of the scrap you and
Buffalo Bill had with the late Blake Haskins and his pal a few months
back?”

“Yes, this is Mongrel—and not a half-bad horse, either.”

“I’ve noticed he keeps up his lick first-rate.  Say—isn’t it a gaudy
morning?”

“Right you are!”

“Thorndike, it’s Andalusian! and when that’s said, all’s said.”

“Andalusian _and_ Oregonian, Antonio!  Put it that way, and you have my
vote.  Being a native up there, I know.  You being Andalusian-born—”

“Can speak with authority for that patch of paradise?  Well, I can.  Like
the Don! like Sancho!  This is the correct Andalusian dawn now—crisp,
fresh, dewy, fragrant, pungent—”

    “‘What though the spicy breezes
    Blow soft o’er Ceylon’s isle—’

—_git_ up, you old cow! stumbling like that when we’ve just been praising
you! out on a scout and can’t live up to the honor any better than that?
Antonio, how long have you been out here in the Plains and the Rockies?”

“More than thirteen years.”

“It’s a long time.  Don’t you ever get homesick?”

“Not till now.”

“Why _now_?—after such a long cure.”

“These preparations of the retiring commandant’s have started it up.”

“Of course.  It’s natural.”

“It keeps me thinking about Spain.  I know the region where the Seventh’s
child’s aunt lives; I know all the lovely country for miles around; I’ll
bet I’ve seen her aunt’s villa many a time; I’ll bet I’ve been in it in
those pleasant old times when I was a Spanish gentleman.”

“They say the child is wild to see Spain.”

“It’s so; I know it from what I hear.”

“Haven’t you talked with her about it?”

“No.  I’ve avoided it.  I should soon be as wild as she is.  That would
not be comfortable.”

“I wish I was going, Antonio.  There’s two things I’d give a lot to see.
One’s a railroad.”

“She’ll see one when she strikes Missouri.”

“The other’s a bull-fight.”

“I’ve seen lots of them; I wish I could see another.”

“I don’t know anything about it, except in a mixed-up, foggy way,
Antonio, but I know enough to know it’s grand sport.”

“The grandest in the world!  There’s no other sport that begins with it.
I’ll tell you what I’ve seen, then you can judge.  It was my first, and
it’s as vivid to me now as it was when I saw it.  It was a Sunday
afternoon, and beautiful weather, and my uncle, the priest, took me as a
reward for being a good boy and because of my own accord and without
anybody asking me I had bankrupted my savings-box and given the money to
a mission that was civilizing the Chinese and sweetening their lives and
softening their hearts with the gentle teachings of our religion, and I
wish you could have seen what we saw that day, Thorndike.

“The amphitheatre was packed, from the bull-ring to the highest
row—twelve thousand people in one circling mass, one slanting, solid
mass—royalties, nobles, clergy, ladies, gentlemen, state officials,
generals, admirals, soldiers, sailors, lawyers, thieves, merchants,
brokers, cooks, housemaids, scullery-maids, doubtful women, dudes,
gamblers, beggars, loafers, tramps, American ladies, gentlemen,
preachers, English ladies, gentlemen, preachers, German ditto, French
ditto, and so on and so on, all the world represented: Spaniards to
admire and praise, foreigners to enjoy and go home and find fault—there
they were, one solid, sloping, circling sweep of rippling and flashing
color under the downpour of the summer sun—just a garden, a gaudy,
gorgeous flower-garden!  Children munching oranges, six thousand fans
fluttering and glimmering, everybody happy, everybody chatting gayly with
their intimates, lovely girl-faces smiling recognition and salutation to
other lovely girl-faces, gray old ladies and gentlemen dealing in the
like exchanges with each other—ah, such a picture of cheery contentment
and glad anticipation! not a mean spirit, nor a sordid soul, nor a sad
heart there—ah, Thorndike, I wish I could see it again.

“Suddenly, the martial note of a bugle cleaves the hum and murmur—clear
the ring!

“They clear it.  The great gate is flung open, and the procession marches
in, splendidly costumed and glittering: the marshals of the day, then the
picadores on horseback, then the matadores on foot, each surrounded by
his quadrille of _chulos_.  They march to the box of the city fathers,
and formally salute.  The key is thrown, the bull-gate is unlocked.
Another bugle blast—the gate flies open, the bull plunges in, furious,
trembling, blinking in the blinding light, and stands there, a
magnificent creature, centre of those multitudinous and admiring eyes,
brave, ready for battle, his attitude a challenge.  He sees his enemy:
horsemen sitting motionless, with long spears in rest, upon blindfolded
broken-down nags, lean and starved, fit only for sport and sacrifice,
then the carrion-heap.

“The bull makes a rush, with murder in his eye, but a picador meets him
with a spear-thrust in the shoulder.  He flinches with the pain, and the
picador skips out of danger.  A burst of applause for the picador, hisses
for the bull.  Some shout ‘Cow!’ at the bull, and call him offensive
names.  But he is not listening to them, he is there for business; he is
not minding the cloak-bearers that come fluttering around to confuse him;
he chases this way, he chases that way, and hither and yon, scattering
the nimble banderillos in every direction like a spray, and receiving
their maddening darts in his neck as they dodge and fly—oh, but it’s a
lively spectacle, and brings down the house!  Ah, you should hear the
thundering roar that goes up when the game is at its wildest and
brilliant things are done!

“Oh, that first bull, that day, was great!  From the moment the spirit of
war rose to flood-tide in him and he got down to his work, he began to do
wonders.  He tore his way through his persecutors, flinging one of them
clear over the parapet; he bowled a horse and his rider down, and plunged
straight for the next, got home with his horns, wounding both horse and
man; on again, here and there and this way and that; and one after
another he tore the bowels out of two horses so that they gushed to the
ground, and ripped a third one so badly that although they rushed him to
cover and shoved his bowels back and stuffed the rents with tow and rode
him against the bull again, he couldn’t make the trip; he tried to
gallop, under the spur, but soon reeled and tottered and fell, all in a
heap.  For a while, that bull-ring was the most thrilling and glorious
and inspiring sight that ever was seen.  The bull absolutely cleared it,
and stood there alone! monarch of the place.  The people went mad for
pride in him, and joy and delight, and you couldn’t hear yourself think,
for the roar and boom and crash of applause.”

“Antonio, it carries me clear out of myself just to hear you tell it; it
must have been perfectly splendid.  If I live, I’ll see a bull-fight yet
before I die.  Did they kill him?”

“Oh yes; that is what the bull is for.  They tired him out, and got him
at last.  He kept rushing the matador, who always slipped smartly and
gracefully aside in time, waiting for a sure chance; and at last it came;
the bull made a deadly plunge for him—was avoided neatly, and as he sped
by, the long sword glided silently into him, between left shoulder and
spine—in and in, to the hilt.  He crumpled down, dying.”

“Ah, Antonio, it _is_ the noblest sport that ever was.  I would give a
year of my life to see it.  Is the bull always killed?”

“Yes.  Sometimes a bull is timid, finding himself in so strange a place,
and he stands trembling, or tries to retreat.  Then everybody despises
him for his cowardice and wants him punished and made ridiculous; so they
hough him from behind, and it is the funniest thing in the world to see
him hobbling around on his severed legs; the whole vast house goes into
hurricanes of laughter over it; I have laughed till the tears ran down my
cheeks to see it.  When he has furnished all the sport he can, he is not
any longer useful, and is killed.”

“Well, it is perfectly grand, Antonio, perfectly beautiful.  Burning a
nigger don’t begin.”



