II
LETTER FROM ROUEN—TO GENERAL ALISON


_MY dear Brother-in-Law_,—Please let me write again in Spanish, I cannot
trust my English, and I am aware, from what your brother used to say,
that army officers educated at the Military Academy of the United States
are taught our tongue.  It is as I told you in my other letter: both my
poor sister and her husband, when they found they could not recover,
expressed the wish that you should have their little Catherine—as knowing
that you would presently be retired from the army—rather than that she
should remain with me, who am broken in health, or go to your mother in
California, whose health is also frail.

You do not know the child, therefore I must tell you something about her.
You will not be ashamed of her looks, for she is a copy in little of her
beautiful mother—and it is that Andalusian beauty which is not
surpassable, even in your country.  She has her mother’s charm and grace
and good heart and sense of justice, and she has her father’s vivacity
and cheerfulness and pluck and spirit of enterprise, with the
affectionate disposition and sincerity of both parents.

My sister pined for her Spanish home all these years of exile; she was
always talking of Spain to the child, and tending and nourishing the love
of Spain in the little thing’s heart as a precious flower; and she died
happy in the knowledge that the fruitage of her patriotic labors was as
rich as even she could desire.

Cathy is a sufficiently good little scholar, for her nine years; her
mother taught her Spanish herself, and kept it always fresh upon her ear
and her tongue by hardly ever speaking with her in any other tongue; her
father was her English teacher, and talked with her in that language
almost exclusively; French has been her everyday speech for more than
seven years among her playmates here; she has a good working use of
governess—German and Italian.  It is true that there is always a faint
foreign fragrance about her speech, no matter what language she is
talking, but it is only just noticeable, nothing more, and is rather a
charm than a mar, I think.  In the ordinary child-studies Cathy is
neither before nor behind the average child of nine, I should say.  But I
can say this for her: in love for her friends and in high-mindedness and
good-heartedness she has not many equals, and in my opinion no superiors.
And I beg of you, let her have her way with the dumb animals—they are her
worship.  It is an inheritance from her mother.  She knows but little of
cruelties and oppressions—keep them from her sight if you can.  She would
flare up at them and make trouble, in her small but quite decided and
resolute way; for she has a character of her own, and lacks neither
promptness nor initiative.  Sometimes her judgment is at fault, but I
think her intentions are always right.  Once when she was a little
creature of three or four years she suddenly brought her tiny foot down
upon the floor in an apparent outbreak of indignation, then fetched it a
backward wipe, and stooped down to examine the result.  Her mother said:

“Why, what is it, child?  What has stirred you so?”

“Mamma, the big ant was trying to kill the little one.”

“And so you protected the little one.”

“Yes, mamma, because he had no friend, and I wouldn’t let the big one
kill him.”

“But you have killed them both.”

Cathy was distressed, and her lip trembled.  She picked up the remains
and laid them upon her palm, and said:

“Poor little anty, I’m so sorry; and I didn’t mean to kill you, but there
wasn’t any other way to save you, it was such a hurry.”

She is a dear and sweet little lady, and when she goes it will give me a
sore heart.  But she will be happy with you, and if your heart is old and
tired, give it into her keeping; she will make it young again, she will
refresh it, she will make it sing.  Be good to her, for all our sakes!

My exile will soon be over now.  As soon as I am a little stronger I
shall see my Spain again; and that will make me young again!

                                                                 MERCEDES.



III
GENERAL ALISON TO HIS MOTHER


I AM glad to know that you are all well, in San Bernardino.

. . . That grandchild of yours has been here—well, I do not quite know
how many days it is; nobody can keep account of days or anything else
where she is!  Mother, she did what the Indians were never able to do.
She took the Fort—took it the first day!  Took me, too; took the
colonels, the captains, the women, the children, and the dumb brutes;
took Buffalo Bill, and all his scouts; took the garrison—to the last man;
and in forty-eight hours the Indian encampment was hers, illustrious old
Thunder-Bird and all.  Do I seem to have lost my solemnity, my gravity,
my poise, my dignity?  You would lose your own, in my circumstances.
Mother, you never saw such a winning little devil.  She is all energy,
and spirit, and sunshine, and interest in everybody and everything, and
pours out her prodigal love upon every creature that will take it, high
or low, Christian or pagan, feathered or furred; and none has declined it
to date, and none ever will, I think.  But she has a temper, and
sometimes it catches fire and flames up, and is likely to burn whatever
is near it; but it is soon over, the passion goes as quickly as it comes.
Of course she has an Indian name already; Indians always rechristen a
stranger early.  Thunder-Bird attended to her case.  He gave her the
Indian equivalent for firebug, or fire-fly.  He said:

“’Times, ver’ quiet, ver’ soft, like summer night, but when she mad she
blaze.”

Isn’t it good?  Can’t you see the flare?  She’s beautiful, mother,
beautiful as a picture; and there is a touch of you in her face, and of
her father—poor George! and in her unresting activities, and her fearless
ways, and her sunbursts and cloudbursts, she is always bringing George
back to me.  These impulsive natures are dramatic.  George was dramatic,
so is this Lightning-Bug, so is Buffalo Bill.  When Cathy first
arrived—it was in the forenoon—Buffalo Bill was away, carrying orders to
Major Fuller, at Five Forks, up in the Clayton Hills.  At mid-afternoon I
was at my desk, trying to work, and this sprite had been making it
impossible for half an hour.  At last I said:

“Oh, you bewitching little scamp, _can’t_ you be quiet just a minute or
two, and let your poor old uncle attend to a part of his duties?”

“I’ll try, uncle; I will, indeed,” she said.

“Well, then, that’s a good child—kiss me.  Now, then, sit up in that
chair, and set your eye on that clock.  There—that’s right.  If you
stir—if you so much as wink—for four whole minutes, I’ll bite you!”

It was very sweet and humble and obedient she looked, sitting there,
still as a mouse; I could hardly keep from setting her free and telling
her to make as much racket as she wanted to.  During as much as two
minutes there was a most unnatural and heavenly quiet and repose, then
Buffalo Bill came thundering up to the door in all his scout finery,
flung himself out of the saddle, said to his horse, “Wait for me, Boy,”
and stepped in, and stopped dead in his tracks—gazing at the child.  She
forgot orders, and was on the floor in a moment, saying:

“Oh, you are so beautiful!  Do you like me?”

“No, I don’t, I love you!” and he gathered her up with a hug, and then
set her on his shoulder—apparently nine feet from the floor.

She was at home.  She played with his long hair, and admired his big
hands and his clothes and his carbine, and asked question after question,
as fast as he could answer, until I excused them both for half an hour,
in order to have a chance to finish my work.  Then I heard Cathy
exclaiming over Soldier Boy; and he was worthy of her raptures, for he is
a wonder of a horse, and has a reputation which is as shining as his own
silken hide.



