CHAPTER XV.

GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE FURTHERING OF THE SALVATION OF OTHERS.


The great means which we must use for the salvation of our neighbours
are,

_Direct._ I. Sound doctrine: let those who are their instructors,
inculcate the wholesome principles of godliness; which are,
self-denial, mortification, the love of God and man, the hopes of
heaven, universal, absolute obedience to God; and all this by faith in
Jesus Christ, according to the holy Scriptures. Instead of novelties,
or vain janglings, and perverse disputings, teach them these
principles here briefly named, over and over a hundred times; open
these plainly, till they are well understood. There are the necessary,
saving things; this is the doctrine which is according to godliness,
which will make sound christians, of sound judgments, sound hearts,
sound conversations, and sound consciences! God sanctifieth his chosen
ones by these truths.

_Direct._ II. Therefore do your best to help others to the benefit of
able and faithful pastors and instructors. A fruitful soil is not
better for your seed, nor a good pasture for your horse or cattle, nor
wholesome diet for yourselves, than such instructors are for your
neighbours' souls. If you love them, you should be more desirous to
help them to good teachers, or plant them under a sound and powerful
ministry, than to procure them any worldly benefits. One time or other
the word may prevail with them. It is hopeful to be still in mercy's
way.

_Direct._ III. The concord of their teachers among themselves, is
a great help to the saving of the flock. "That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us;
that the world may believe that thou hast sent me," John xvii. 21, 25.
Concord much furthereth reverence and belief; and consequently men's
salvation (so it be a holy concord).

_Direct._ IV. The concord also of godly, private christians hath
the same effect. When the ignorant see here a sect and there a sect,
and hear them condemning one another, it teacheth them to contemn them
all, and think contemptibly of piety itself; but concord layeth an awe
upon them.

_Direct._ V. The blameless, humble, loving, heavenly lives of
christians, is a powerful means of winning souls. Preach therefore
every one of you, by such a conversation to all your neighbours, whom
you desire to save.

_Direct._ VI. Keep those whom you would save in a humble,
patient, learning posture; and keep them from proud wranglings, and
running after novelties and sects. The humble learner takes root
downward, and silently groweth up to wisdom; but if once they grow
self-conceited, they turn to wranglings, and place their religion in
espoused, singular opinions, and in being on this or that side or
church; and fall into divided congregations, where the business is to
build up souls by destroying charity, and teaching sectaries to
overvalue themselves, and despise dissenters; till at last they run
themselves out of breath, and perhaps fall out with all true religion.

_Direct._ VII. Do what you can to place them in good families,
and when they are to be married, to join them to such as are fit to be
their helpers. In families and relations of that sort, people are so
near together, and in such constant converse, that it will be very
much of the help or hinderance of their salvation.

_Direct._ VIII. Keep them also as much as is possible in good company,
and out of bad, seducing company; especially those that are to be
their familiars. The world's experience telleth us what power company
hath, to make men better or worse: and what a great advantage it is to
work any thing on men's minds, to have interest in them, and intimacy
with them; especially with those that are yet to receive their deepest
impressions.

_Direct._ IX. Keep them from the most dangerous baits, opportunities,
and temptations to sensuality. Withdraw the tinder and gunpowder from
the fire. There is no curing a drunkard ordinarily in an alehouse or
tavern, nor a fornicator while he is near the objects of his lust, nor
a glutton at a full, enticing table. Set them at a farther distance
from the danger, if you would have them safe. _Nemo diu tutus periculo
proximus._ Senec.

_Direct. X._ Take the advantage of their personal afflictions, or
any other notable warnings that are near them. Keep them oft in the
house of mourning, where death may be as in their sight; and keep them
out of the house of foolish mirth. The time of sickness is an
awakening time, and powerfully openeth the ear to counsel. The sight
of the dead or dying persons, the hearing of sick men's wishes and
complaints, the sight of graves and dead men's bones, (if not too oft
to make it customary,) doth often force the most foolish and obstinate
to some man-like, profitable thoughts; when the noise of foolish mirth
and sports, at rabble-meetings, stage-plays, and May-games, riotings,
or immoderate, rude, or tempting plays, do kill all sober, saving
motions, and undispose the mind to all that is good. Though seasonable
and useful delights are lawful, yet such as are unseasonable,
immoderate, insnaring, scandalous, or unprofitable, are pernicious and
poison to the soul.

_Direct._ XI. Engage them in the reading of the holy Scriptures,
and of such books of practical divinity, as do at once most plainly
acquaint them with the principles of religion, and piercingly set them
home upon the conscience; that judgment and affection, head and heart,
may be edified at once. Such suitable books may be daily their
companions; and it is a great advantage to them, that they may have a
powerful sermon when they please, and read over the same things as oft
as the frailty of their memories do require. Such private, innocent
companions have saved many a soul.

_Direct._ XII. Engage them in a constant course of prayer
(whether it be with a book, or form, or without, according to the
parts and condition of the person). For the often approaching to God
in so holy a work, will affright or shame a man from sin, and stir him
up to serious thoughts of his salvation, and engage him to a godly
life.

_Direct._ XIII. If you would have all these means effectual to
men's conversion and salvation, show them all hearty love and
kindness, and do them all the good you can. Men are naturally more
easily sensible of the good of their bodies, than of their souls; and
a kindness to the body is thankfully received, and may prepare them to
receive a greater benefit. What you are unable to do for them
yourselves, solicit those that are able to do; or, if you cannot do
that neither, at least show your pity and good-will. Love is the most
powerful preacher in the world.

_Direct._ XIV. Be sure that you have no fallings out or quarrels
with any that you would do good upon. And to that end, usually it is
the best way, to have as little to do with them in buying and selling,
or any worldly matters, where mine and thine may come in competition,
as possibly you can: or, if you cannot avoid it, you must be content
to part with somewhat of your right, and suffer some wrongs, for fear
of hurt to your neighbour's soul. Even godly persons, yea, parents and
children, brethren and sisters, usually fall out about mine and thine.
And when self-interest hath bred the quarrel, they usually think ill
of the person who is supposed to injure them; and then they are made
uncapable of receiving any spiritual good by him, and if he seem
religious they are oft alienated from religion for his sake. And all
unconverted persons are selfish, and usually look that you should
fulfil their desires, and suit yourselves to their interest, without
respect to right or wrong, or to your own sufferings! Yet such as
these must be pitied and helped; and therefore it is usually best to
avoid all chaffering or worldly dealings with them, lest you lose
them. And when that cannot be, you must judge a little departing from
your own right, to be a very cheap price to procure the good of a
neighbour's soul.

_Direct._ XV. See that in matters of religion you neither run too
far from such men in things lawful, nor yet do any thing sinful in
compliance with them. By concurring with them in any sin, you will
harden them, and hinder their conversion; and so you will by singular
or violent opposition in things indifferent. Those persons are quite
mistaken, who think that godly men must go as far from the ungodly as
ever they can, in lawful things; and say, The ungodly do thus, and
therefore we must do otherwise. Paul was of another mind and practice,
when he circumcised Timothy, and "became all things to all men, to
save some." To place religion in things indifferent, and to cry out
against lawful things as sinful, or to fly from others by needless
singularities, is a great cause of the hardening and perdition of
multitudes, turning their hearts against religion, and making them
think that it is but unnecessary scruple, and that religious persons
are but self-conceited, brain-sick people, that make to themselves a
duty of their superstition, and condemn all that be not as humorous as
they. Lay not such stumblingblocks before any whose souls you desire
to save.




