CHAPTER XXXIV.

CASES AND DIRECTIONS ABOUT SELF-JUDGING.


_Tit. 1. Cases of Conscience about Self-judging._

Because I have said so much of this subject in the third part of my
"Saints' Rest," and in a "Treatise of Self-acquaintance," and in my
"Directions for Peace of Conscience," and before in this book, I shall
be here the briefer in it.

_Quest._ I. What are the uses and reasons of self-judging, which
should move us to it?

_Answ._ In the three foresaid treatises I have opened them at
large. In a word, without it we shall be strangers to ourselves; we
can have no well-grounded comfort, no true repentance and humiliation,
no just estimation of Christ and grace, no just observance of the
motions of God's Spirit, no true application of the promises or
threatenings of the Scripture, yea, we shall pervert them all to our
own destruction; no true understanding of the providence of God, in
prosperity or adversity; no just acquaintance with our duty: a man
that knoweth not himself, can know neither God, nor any thing aright,
nor do any thing aright; he can neither live reasonably, honestly,
safely, nor comfortably, nor suffer or die with solid peace.

_Quest._ II. What should ignorant persons do, whose natural
capacity will not reach to so high a work, as to try and judge
themselves in matters so sublime?

_Answ._ 1. There is no one who hath reason and arts sufficient to
love God, and hate sin, and live a holy life, and believe in Christ,
but he hath reason and parts sufficient to know (by the use of just
means) whether he do these things indeed or not. 2. He that cannot
reach assurance, must take up with the lower degrees of comfort, of
which I shall speak in the directions.

_Quest._ III. How far may a weak christian take the judgment of
others, whether his pastor, or judicious acquaintance, about his
justification and sincerity?

_Answ._ 1. No man's judgment must be taken as infallible about
the sincerity of another; nor must it be so far rested on, as to
neglect your fullest search yourself; and for the matter of fact, what
you have done, or what is in you, no man can be so well acquainted
with it as yourselves. 2. But in judging whether those acts of grace
which you describe, be such as God hath promised salvation to, and in
directing you in your self-judging, and in conjecturing at your
sincerity by your expressions and your lives, a faithful friend or
pastor may do that, which may much support you, and relieve you
against inordinate doubts and fears, and show you that your sincerity
is very probable. Especially if you are assured that you tell him
nothing but the truth yourselves; and if he be one that is acquainted
with you and your life, and hath known you in temptations, and one
that is skilful in the matters of God and conscience, and one that is
truly judicious, experienced, and faithful, and is not biassed by
interest or affection; and especially when he is not singular in his
judgment, but the generality of judicious persons who know you are of
the same mind; in this case you may take much comfort in his judgment
of your justification, though it cannot give you any proper certainty,
nor is to be absolutely rested in.


_Tit. 2. Directions for Self-judging as to our Actions._

_Direct._ I. Let watchfulness over your hearts and lives be your
continual work. Never grow careless or neglectful of yourselves: keep
your hearts with all diligence. As an unfaithful servant may deceive
you, if you look after him but now and then; so may a deceitful heart.
Let it be continually under your eye.

_Object._ Then I must neglect my calling, and do nothing else.

_Answ._ It need not be any hinderance to you at all. As every man
that followeth his trade and labour, doth still take heed that he do
all things right, and every traveller taketh heed of falling, and he
that eateth taketh heed of poisoning or choking himself, without any
hinderance, but to the furtherance of that which he is about; so is it
with a christian about his heart: vigilant heedfulness must never be
laid by, whatever you are doing.

_Direct._ II. Live in the light as much as is possible. I mean
under a judicious, faithful pastor, and amongst understanding,
exemplary christians; for they will be still acquainting you with what
you should be and do; and your errors will be easily detected, and in
the light you are not so like to be deceived.

_Direct._ III. Discourage not those that would admonish or
reprove you, nor neglect their opinion of you. No, not the railings of
an enemy; for they may tell you that in anger (much more in fidelity)
which it may concern you much to hear, and think of, and may give you
some light in judging of yourselves.

_Direct._ IV. If you have so happy an opportunity, engage some
faithful bosom friend to watch over you, and tell you plainly of all
that they see amiss in you. But deal not so hypocritically as to do
this in the general, and then be angry when he performeth his trust,
and discourage him by your pride and impatience.

_Direct._ V. Put yourselves in another's case, and be impartial.
When you cannot easily see the faults of others, inquire then whether
your own be not as visible, if you were as ready to observe and
aggravate them. And surely none more concern you than your own, nor
should be so odious and grievous to you; nor are so, if you are truly
penitent.

_Direct._ VI. Understand your natural temper and inclination, and
suspect those sins which you are naturally most inclined to, and there
keep up the strictest watch.

_Direct._ VII. Understand what temptations your place, and
calling, and relations, and company do most subject you to; and there
be most suspicious of yourselves.

_Direct._ VIII. Mark yourselves well in the hour of temptation:
for then it is that the vices will appear, which before lay covered
and unknown.

_Direct._ IX. Suspect yourselves most heedfully of the most
common and most dangerous sins. Especially unbelief and want of love
to God, and a secret preferring of earthly hopes before the hopes of
the life to come; and selfishness, and pride, and sensual pleasing of
the fleshly appetite and fancy: these are the most common, radical,
and most mortal, damning sins.

_Direct._ X. Take certain times to call yourselves to a special
strict account. As, 1. At your preparation for the Lord's day at the
end of every week. 2. In your preparation for the sacrament of
Christ's body and blood. 3. And before a day of humiliation. 4. In a
time of sickness or other affliction. 5. Yea, every night review the
actions of the foregoing day. He that useth to call his conscience
seriously to account, is likest to keep his accounts in order, and to
be ready to give them up to Christ.

_Direct._ XI. Make not light of any sin which you discover in
your self-examination. But humble yourselves for it before the Lord,
and be affected according to its importance, both in its guilt and
evil signification.

_Direct._ XII. And let the end of all be the renewed exercise of
faith and thankfulness, and resolutions for better obedience
hereafter. That you may see more of the need and use of a Saviour, and
may thankfully magnify that grace which doth abound where sin
abounded; and may walk the more watchfully and holily for the time to
come.


_Tit. 3. Directions for Self-judging as to our Estates, to know
whether we are in a Regenerate and Justified State, or not._

_Direct._ I. If you would so judge of the state of your souls, as
not to be deceived, come not to the trial with an over-confident
prejudice or conceit of your own condition, either as good or bad. He
that is already so prepossessed as to resolve what to judge before he
trieth, doth make his trial but a means to confirm him in his conceit.

_Direct._ II. Let not self-love, partiality, or pride, on the one
side, or fear on the other side, pervert your judgment in the trial,
and hinder you from the discerning of the truth. Some men cannot see
the clearest evidences of their unsanctified hearts, because self-love
will give them leave to believe nothing of themselves which is bad or
sad. They will believe that which is good and pleasant, be it never so
evidently false. As if a thief could be saved from the gallows, by a
strong conceit that he is a true man; or the conceit that one is
learned, would make him learned. Others through timorousness can
believe nothing that is good or comfortable of themselves: like a man
on the top of a steeple, who though he know that he standeth fast and
safe, yet trembleth when he looketh down, and can scarce believe his
own understanding. Silence all the objections of an over-timorous
mind, and it will doubt and tremble still.

_Direct._ III. Surprise not yourselves on the sudden and
unprepared, with the question, whether you are justified or not; but
set about it as the most serious business of your life. A great and
difficult question must have a well-studied answer, and not be
answered hastily and rashly. If one should meet you in the street, and
demand some great and long account of you, you would desire him to
stay till you review your memorials, or have time to cast it up. Take
some appointed time to do this, when you have no intruding thoughts to
hinder you; and think not that it must be resolved easily or quickly
upon the first inquiry, but by the most sober and judicious
consideration, and patient attendance till it be done.

_Direct._ IV. Understand the tenor of the covenant of grace,
which is the law that you must judge of your estates by: for if you
mistake that, you will err in the conclusion. He is an unfit judge,
who is ignorant of the law.

_Direct._ V. Mistake not the nature of true faith in Christ.
Those that think it is a believing that they are actually pardoned,
and shall be saved, do some of them presume or believe it when it is
false, and some of them despair, because they cannot believe it. And
those that think that faith is such a recumbency on Christ as always
quieteth the mind, do think they have no faith when they have no such
quietness. And those that think it is only the resting on the blood of
Christ for pardon, do take up with that which is no true faith. But he
that knoweth that faith in Christ, is nothing else but christianity,
or consenting to the christian covenant, may know that he consenteth,
even when he findeth much timorousness and trouble, and taketh not up
with a deceitful faith.

_Direct._ VI. Remember in your self-judging, that the will is the
man, and what you truly would be, that you are, in the sense of the
covenant of grace.

_Direct._ VII. But remember also that your endeavours must prove
the truth of your desires, and that idle wishes are not the
denominating acts of the will.

_Direct._ VIII. Also your successes must be the proof of the
sincerity of your endeavours: for such striving against sin as endeth
in yielding to it, and not in victory, is no proof of the uprightness
of your hearts.

_Direct._ IX. Mark what you are in the day of trial; for at other
times it is more easy to be deceived: and record what you then
discover in yourself: what a man is in trial, that he is indeed.

_Direct._ X. Especially try yourselves in the great point of
forsaking all for Christ, and for the hopes of the fruition of God in
glory. Know once whether God or the creature can do more with you, and
whether heaven or earth be dearer to you, and most esteemed, and
practically preferred, and then you may judge infallibly of your
state.

_Direct._ XI. Remember that in melancholy and weakness of
understanding, you are not fit for the casting up of so great
accounts; but must take up with the remembrance of former discoveries,
and with the judgment of the judicious, and be patient till a fitter
season, before you can expect to see in yourselves the clear evidence
of your state.

_Direct._ XII. Neither forget what former discoveries you have made,
nor yet wholly rest in them, without renewing your self-examination.
They that have found their sincerity, and think that the next time
they are in doubt, they should fetch no comfort from what is past, do
deprive themselves of much of the means of their peace. And those
that trust all to the former discoveries of their good estate, do
proceed upon unsafe and negligent principles; and will find that such
slothful and venturous courses will not serve turn.

_Direct._ XIII. Judge not of yourselves by that which is unusual
and extraordinary with you, but by the tenor and drift of your hearts
and lives. A bad man may seem good in some good mood; and a good man
may seem bad in some extraordinary fall. To judge of a bad man by his
best hours, and of a good man by his worst, is the way to be deceived
in them both.

_Direct._ XIV. Look not unequally at the good or evil that is in
you; but consider them both impartially as they are. If you observe
all the good only that is in you, and overlook the bad; or search
after nothing but your faults, and overlook your graces; neither of
these ways will bring you to true acquaintance with yourselves.

_Direct._ XV. Look not so much either at what you should be, or
at what others are, as to forget what you are yourselves. Some look so
much at the glory of that full perfection which they want, as that
their present grace seemeth nothing to them; like a candle to one that
hath been gazing on the sun. And some look so much at the debauchery
of the worst, that they think their lesser wickedness to be holiness.

_Direct._ XVI. Suffer not your minds to wander in confusion, when
you set yourselves to so great a work: but keep it close to the matter
in hand, and drive it on till it have come to some satisfaction and
conclusion.

_Direct._ XVII. If you are not able by meditation to do it of
yourselves, get the help of some able friend or pastor, and do it in a
way of conference with him: for conference will hold your own thoughts
to their task; and your pastor may guide them, and tell you in what
order to proceed, and confute your mistakes, besides confirming you by
his judgment of your case.

_Direct._ XVIII. If you cannot have such help at hand, write down
the signs by which you judge either well or ill of yourself; and send
them to some judicious divine for his judgment and counsel thereupon.

_Direct._ XIX. Expect not that your assurance should be perfect
in this life; for till all grace be perfect, that cannot be perfect.
Unjust expectations disappointed are the cause of much disquietment.

_Direct._ XX. Distinguish between the knowledge of your
justification, and the comfort of it. Many a one may see and be
convinced that he is sincere, and yet have little comfort in it,
through a sad or distempered state of mind or body, and unpreparedness
for joy; or through some expectations of enthusiastic comforts.

_Direct._ XXI. Exercise grace whenever you would see it: idle
habits are not perceived. Believe and repent till you feel that you do
believe and repent, and love God till you feel that you love him.

_Direct._ XXII. Labour to increase your grace if you would be
sure of it. For a little grace is hardly perceived; when strong and
great degrees do easily manifest themselves.

_Direct._ XXIII. Record what sure discoveries you have made of
your estate upon the best inquiry, that it may stand you in stead at a
time of further need; for though it will not warrant you to search no
more, it will be very useful to you in your after-doubtings.

_Direct._ XXIV. What you can do at one time, follow on again and
again till you have finished. A business of that consequence is not to
be laid down through weariness or discouragement. Happy is he that in
all his life hath got assurance of life everlasting.

_Direct._ XXV. Let all your discoveries lead you up to further
duty. If you find any cause of doubt, let it quicken you to diligence
in removing it. If you find sincerity, turn it into joyful thanks to
your Regenerator; and stop not in the bare discovery of your present
state, as if you had no more to do.

_Direct._ XXVI. Conclude not worse of the effects of a discovery
of your bad condition, than there is cause. Remember that if you
should find that you are unjustified, it followeth not that you must
continue so: you search not after your disease or misery as uncurable,
but as one that hath a sufficient remedy at hand, even brought to your
doors, and cometh a begging for your acceptance, and is freely offered
and urged on you; and therefore if you find that you are unregenerate,
thank God that hath showed you your case; for if you had not seen it,
you had perished in it: and presently give up yourselves to God in
Jesus Christ, and then you may boldly judge better of yourselves: it
is not for despair, but for recovery, that you are called to try and
judge. Nay, if you do but find it too hard a question for you, whether
you have all this while been sincere or not, turn from it, and
resolvedly give up yourselves to God by Christ, and place your hopes
in the life to come, and turn from this deceitful world and flesh, and
then the case will be plain for the time to come. If you doubt of your
former repentance, repent now, and put it out of doubt from this time
forward,

_Direct._ XXVII. When you cannot at the present reach assurance,
undervalue not a true probability or hope of your sincerity: and still
adhere to universal grace, which is the foundation of your special
grace and comfort. I mean, 1. The infinite goodness of God, and his
mercifulness to man. 2. The sufficiency of Jesus Christ our Mediator.
3. The universal gift of pardon and salvation, which is conditionally
made to all men, in the gospel. Remember that the gospel is glad
tidings even to those that are unconverted. Rejoice in this universal
mercy which is offered you, and that you are not as the devils, shut
up in despair; and much more rejoice if you have any probability that
you are truly penitent and justified by faith: let this support you
till you can see more.

_Direct._ XXVIII. Spend much more time in doing your duty, than
in trying your estate. Be not so much in asking, How shall I know that
I shall be saved? as in asking, What shall I do to be saved? Study the
duty of this day of your visitation, and set yourselves to it with all
your might. Seek first the things that are above, and mortify your
fleshly lusts; give up yourselves to a holy, heavenly life, and do all
the good that you are able in the world: seek after God as revealed in
and by our Redeemer: and in thus doing, 1. Grace will become more
notable and discernible. 2. Conscience will be less accusing and
condemning, and will easilier believe the reconciledness of God. 3.
You may be sure that such labour shall never be lost; and in
well-doing you may trust your souls with God. 4. Thus those that are
not able in an argumentative way to try their state to any full
satisfaction, may get that comfort by feeling and experience, which
others get by ratiocination. For the very exercise of love to God and
man, and of a heavenly mind and holy life, hath a sensible pleasure in
itself, and delighteth the person who is so employed: as if a man were
to take the comfort of his learning or wisdom, one way is by the
discerning his learning and wisdom, and thence inferring his own
felicity; but another way is by exercising that learning and wisdom
which he hath, in reading and meditating on some excellent books, and
making discoveries of some mysterious excellencies in arts and
sciences, which delight him more by the very acting, than a bare
conclusion of his own learning in the general would do. What delight
had the inventors of the sea-chart and magnetic attraction, and of
printing, and of guns, in their inventions! What pleasure had Galileo
in his telescopes, in finding out the inequalities and shady parts of
the moon, the Medicean planets, the adjuncts of Saturn, the changes of
Venus, the stars of the _via lactea_, &c.! Even so a serious, holy
person, hath more sensible pleasures in the right exercise of faith,
and love, and holiness, in prayer, and meditation, and converse with
God, and with the heavenly hosts, than the bare discerning of
sincerity can afford. Therefore though it be a great, important duty
to examine ourselves, and judge ourselves before God judge us, and
keep close aquaintance with our own hearts and affairs, yet is it the
addition of the daily practice of a heavenly life, which must be our
chiefest business and delight. And he that is faithful in them both,
shall know by experience the excellences of christianity and holiness,
and in his way on earth, have both a prospect of heaven, and a
foretaste of the everlasting rest and pleasures.




A MORAL PROGNOSTICATION,

FIRST, WHAT SHALL BEFALL THE CHURCHES ON EARTH, TILL THEIR CONCORD, BY
THE RESTITUTION OF THEIR PRIMITIVE PURITY, SIMPLICITY, AND CHARITY:

SECONDLY, HOW THAT RESTITUTION IS LIKELY TO BE MADE, (IF EVER,) AND
WHAT SHALL BEFALL THEM THENCEFORTH UNTO THE END, IN THAT GOLDEN AGE OF
LOVE.

WRITTEN BY RICHARD BAXTER; WHEN BY THE KING'S COMMISSION, WE (IN VAIN)
TREATED FOR CONCORD, 1661.

AND NOW PUBLISHED, NOT TO INSTRUCT THE PROUD THAT SCORN TO LEARN; NOR
TO MAKE THEM WISE, WHO WILL NOT BE MADE WISE: BUT TO INSTRUCT THE SONS
OF LOVE AND PEACE, IN THEIR DUTIES AND EXPECTATIONS.

TO TELL POSTERITY, THAT THE THINGS WHICH BEFALL THEM WERE FORETOLD;
AND THAT THE EVIL MIGHT HAVE BEEN PREVENTED, AND BLESSED PEACE ON
EARTH ATTAINED, IF MEN HAD BEEN BUT WILLING; AND HAD NOT SHUT THEIR
EYES AND HARDENED THEIR HEARTS AGAINST THE BEAMS OF LIGHT AND LOVE.


TO THE READER.

READER,

It is many years since this Prognostication was written (1661, except
the thirteen last lines); but it was cast by, lest it should offend
the guilty. But the author now thinketh, that the monitory usefulness
may overweigh the inconveniences of men's displeasure; at least, to
posterity, if not for the present age; of which he is taking his
farewell. His suppositions are such as cannot be denied: viz.

1. Eccles. i. 9, "The thing that hath been, is that which shall be;
and that which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no
new thing under the sun."

2. The same causes, with the same circumstances, will have the same
effects on recipients, equally disposed.

3. _Operari sequitur esse_: as natures are, so they act; except
where overpowered.

4. The appetite, sensitive and rational, is the principle of motion;
and what any love they will desire and seek.

5. Therefore, interest will turn the affairs of the world; and he that
can best understand all interests, will be the best moral prognosticator;
so far men are causes of the events.

6. The pleasing of God, and the happiness of their own and others'
souls, being the interest of true believers; and temporal life,
pleasure, and prosperity, being the seeming and esteemed interest of
unbelievers' cross interests, will carry them contrary ways.

7. Contraries, when near and militant, will be troublesome to each
other, and seek each other's destruction or debilitation.

8. The senses and experience of all men, in all ages, are to be
believed about their proper objects.

9. Men of activity, power, and great numbers, will have advantage for
observance and success, above those that are modest, obscure, and few.

10. Yet men will still be men; and the rational nature will yield some
friendly aspect towards the truth.

11. Those that are ignorant, and misled by passion, and carried down
the stream, by men of malignity or faction, may come to themselves,
when affliction, experience, and considerateness have had time to
work; and may repent, and undo somewhat that they have done.

12. As sense will be sense, when faith hath done its best; so faith
will be faith, when flesh or sense hath done its worst.

13. Men that fix on a heavenly, everlasting interest, will not be
temporizers, and changed by the worldly men's wills or cruelties.

14. When all men have tired themselves with their contrivances and
stirs, moderation and peace must be the quiet state.

15. When all worldly wisdom hath done its utmost, and men's endeavours
are winged with the greatest expectations, God will be God, and blast
what he nilleth; and will overrule all things, to the accomplishment
of his most blessed will. Amen.

On these suppositions it is, that the following Prognostications are
founded; which I must admonish the reader, not to mistake for
historical narratives: but I exhort him to know _what hath been_,
and _what is_, if he would know _what will be_; and to make
sure of everlasting rest with Christ, when he must leave a sinful,
restless world.


A MORAL PROGNOSTICATION

OF WHAT MUST BE EXPECTED

IN THE CHURCHES OF CHRISTENDOM,

TILL THE GOLDEN AGE RETURNS,

OR TILL THE TIME OF TRUE REFORMATION AND UNITY.

1. Mankind will be born in a state of infancy and nescience, that is,
without actual knowledge.

2. Yea, with a nature that hath the innate dispositions to sloth, and
to diverting pleasures and business; and more than so, to an
averseness from those principles which are needful to sanctification
and heavenly wisdom. The carnal mind will have an enmity against God,
and will not mind the things of the Spirit, nor be subject to God's
law, Rom. viii. 5-8.

3. Sound learning, or wisdom, in things of so high a nature as are the
matters of salvation, will not be attained without hard study, earnest
prayer, and humble submission to instructions; and all this a long
time patiently endured, or rather willingly and delightfully
performed.

4. And if the seeds of wisdom be not born with us, in a capacious
disposition of understanding; but contrarily a natural unapprehensiveness
blocks up the way; even time and labour will never (without a miracle)
bring any to any great eminency of understanding.

5. And they that have both capacity, and an industrious disposition,
must have also sound, and able, and diligent teachers; or at least
escape the hands of seducers, and of partial, factious guides.

6. There are few born with good natural capacities, much less with a
special dispositive acuteness; and few that will be at the pains and
patience, which the getting of wisdom doth require; and few that will
have the happiness of sound and diligent teachers; but fewest of all
that will have a concurrence of all these three.

7. Therefore there will be but few very wise men in the world;
ignorance will he common, wisdom will be rare.

8. Therefore error or false opinions will be common. For unless men
never think of the things of which they are ignorant, or judge nothing
of them one way or other, they are sure to err, so far as they judge
in ignorance. But when things of greatest moment are represented as
true or false, to be believed or rejected, the most ignorant mind is
naturally inclined to pass its judgment or opinion of them one way or
other; and to apprehend them according to the light he standeth in,
and to think of them as he is disposed. So that ignorance and error
will concur.

9. He that erreth, doth think that he is in the right, and erreth not:
for to err, and to know that he erreth in judgment, is a contradiction,
and impossible. (However in words and deeds a man may err, and know
that he erreth.)

10. He that knoweth not, and that erreth, perceiveth not that evidence
of truth which should make him receive it, and which maketh other men
receive it; and therefore knoweth not that indeed another is in the
right, or seeth any more than he.

11. Especially when every man is a stranger to another's mind and
soul, as to any immediate inspection; and therefore knoweth not
another's knowledge, nor the convincing reasons of his judgment.

12. As no man is moved against his own errors, by the reasons which he
knoweth not; so pride, self-love, and partiality thence arising,
incline all men naturally to be overvaluers of their own understandings,
and so over-confident of all their own conceptions, and over-stiff in
defending all their errors. As pride and selfishness are the
firstborn of Satan, and the root of all positive evil in man's soul;
so a man is more naturally proud of that which is the honour of a man,
which is his understanding and goodness, than of that which is common
to a beast, as strength, beauty, ornaments, &c. Therefore pride of
understanding and goodness oft live, when sordid apparel telleth you
that childish pride of ornaments is dead. And this pride maketh it
very difficult, to the most ignorant and erroneous, to know their
ignorance and error, or so much as to suspect their own
understandings.

13. He that seeth but few things, seeth not much to make him doubt,
and seeth not the difficulties which should check his confidence and
stiffness in his way.

14. He that seeth many things, and that clearly knoweth much;
especially, if he see them in their order, and respects to one
another, and leaveth out no one substantial part which is needful to
open the signification of the rest.

15. He that seeth many things disorderly and confusedly, and not in
due method, and leaveth out some substantial parts, and hath not a
digested knowledge, doth know much, and err much, and may make a
bustle in the world of ignorants, as if he were an excellent, learned
man; but hath little of the inward delight, or of the power and
benefits of knowledge.

16. He that seeth many things but darkly, confusedly, and not in the
true place and method, cannot reconcile truths among themselves; but
is like a boy with a pair of tarrying irons, or like one that hath his
clock or watch all in pieces, and knoweth not how to set them
together. And therefore is inclined to be a sceptic.

17. This sort of sceptics differ much from humble christians; and have
oft as high thoughts of their understandings as any others: for they
lay the cause upon the difficulties in the objects, rather than on
themselves: unless when they incline to brutishness or Sadducism, and
take man's understanding to be incapable of true knowledge, and so lay
the blame on human nature as such, that is, on the Creator.

18. Few hope so much as to see the difficulty of things, and make them
doubt, or sceptical. But far fewer know, so much as to resolve their
doubts and difficulties: therefore, though (as Bishop Jewel saith of
faithful pastors) I say not that there will be few cardinals, few
bishops, few doctors, few deans, few Jesuits, few friars, (there will
be enow of these,) yet there will be few wise, judicious divines and
pastors, even in the best and happiest countries.

19. Seeing he that knoweth not, or that erreth, knoweth not that
another knoweth, or is in the right, when he is in the wrong;
therefore he knoweth not whose judgment to honour and submit to, if he
should suspect or be driven from his own: and therefore is not so
happy, as to be able to choose the fittest teacher for himself.

20. In this darkness therefore he either carnally casteth himself on
the highest and most honoured in the world, where he hath the most
advantages for worldly ends; or he followeth the fame of the time and
country where he is, or he falleth in with the major vote of that
party, whatsoever it be, which his understanding doth most esteem and
honour; or else with some person that hath most advantage on him.

21. If any of these happen to be in the right, he will be also in the
right materially, and may seem an orthodox, peaceable, and
praiseworthy man; but where they are in the wrong, he is contented
with the _reputation_ of being in the right, and of the good
opinion of those whom he concurreth with; who flatter and applaud each
other in the dark.

22. When wise men are but few, they can be but in few places; and
therefore will be absent from most of the people, high or low, that
need instruction. Besides, that their studiousness inclineth them,
like Jerome, to be more retired than others, that know less.

23. This confidence in an erring mind, is not only the case of the
teachers, as well as of the flocks; but is usually more fortified in
them than in others: for they think that the honour of learning and
wisdom is due to their place, and calling, and name, and standing in
the universities; how empty soever they be themselves. And they take
it for a double dishonour (as it is) for a teacher to be accounted
ignorant; and an injury to their work and office, and to the people's
souls, that must by their honour be prepared to profit by them; and
therefore they smart more impatiently under any detection of their
ignorance, than the common people do.

24. It is not mere honesty and godliness, that will suffice to save
ministers or people from this ignorance, injudiciousness, and error;
there having ever been among the very godly ministers, a few judicious
men, that are fit to investigate a difficult truth, or to defend it
against a subtle adversary, or to see the system of theological
verities in their proper method, harmony, and beauty.

25. Morality hath innumerable difficulties, as well as school
divinity; because that moral good and evil are ordinarily such by
preponderating accidents (actions as actions, being neither; but only
of physical consideration). And the work of a true casuist is to
compare so many accidents, and to discern in the comparison which
preponderateth, that it requireth both an acute and a large,
capacious, farseeing wit, to make a man a true resolver of cases of
conscience. And consequently to be a judicious pastor, that shall not
lead the people into errors.

26. As few teachers have natural capacity for exactness, and a
willingness and patience for long, laborious studies; so many by their
pastoral oversight of souls, and many by the wants of their families,
(especially in times of persecution, when all their public maintenance
is gone, and they must live, with their families, on the charity of
people, perhaps poor and persecuted as well as they,) are hindered
from those studies, which else they would undergo.

27. It is few that grow to much exactness of judgment without much
_writing_ (for themselves or others); for study which is to be
exactly ordered and expressed by the pen, is usually (at last) the
exactest study: as the Lord Bacon saith, "Much reading maketh a man
full; much conference maketh a man ready; and much writing maketh a
man exact." There are few Cameros, men of clear judgment, and
abhorring to write. And there are few divines comparatively that have
opportunity to write much.

28. They that err in divinity, do think _their falsehoods_ to be
_God's truth_; and so will honour that which he hates, with the
pretence of his authority and name.

29. Therefore they will call up their own and other men's zeal, to
defend those falsehoods as for God, and think that in so doing they do
God service.

30. And the interest of their own place, and honour, and ends, will
secretly insinuate when they discern it not, and will increase their
zeal against opposers.

31. Therefore, seeing they are usually many, and wise men but few,
they will expect that number should give the precedency to their
opinions, and will call those proud, or heretical, that gainsay them,
and labour to defame them, as self-conceited, opinionative men.

32. Therefore too many godly ministers will be great opposers of many
of those truths of God, which they know not, and which they err about,
and will help on the service of Satan in the world; and will be the
authors of factions and contentions in the churches; whilst too many
are "proud, knowing nothing," (in those matters when they think they
are most orthodox,) "but doting about questions and strifes of words,
whereof cometh envy, strife, railing, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, (in this,) and destitute of the
truth," 1 Tim. vi. 4, 5.

33. And if many good men will erroneously stand up against that truth
which any man wiser than themselves maketh known, the worldly and
malicious, that have a manifold enmity against it, will be ready to
strengthen them by their concurrence, and to join in the opposition.

34. Not they that are wisest at a distance, but they that are nearest
the people, and are always with them, are most likely to prevail to
make disciples of them, and bring them to their mind: so great an
advantage it is, to talk daily and confidently to ignorant souls, when
there is none to talk against them, and to make their folly known.

35. Especially if the same men can get interest in their esteem as
well as nearness, and make themselves esteemed the best or wisest men.

36. Therefore Jesuitical, worldly clergymen, will always get about
great men, and insinuate into nobles, and will still defame them that
are wise and good, that they may seem odious, and themselves seem
excellent, and so may carry it by deceitful shows.

37. And they will do their best, to procure all wise and good men,
that are against their interest, to be banished from the palaces of
princes and nobles, where they are; lest their presence should confute
their slanderers, and they should be as "burning and shining lights,"
that carry their witness with them where they come: and also to bring
them under public stigmatizing censures and sufferings; that their
names may be infamous and odious in the world.

38. And heretical pastors will play a lower game, and creep into the
houses of silly people, prepared by ignorance and soul-disturbers to
receive their heresies.

39. Between these two sorts of naughty pastors, (the WORLDLY and the
HERETICAL,) and also the multitude of weak, erroneous, honest teachers,
the soundest and worthiest will be so few, that far most of the people
(high and low) are like to live under the influences and advantages of
erring men; and, therefore, themselves to be an erring people.

40. In that measure that men are carnal, their own carnal interest
will rule them. And both the WORLDLY and HERETICAL clergy, are ruled
by carnal interests, though not the same materially. And the more
honest, erring ministers, are swayed by their interests too much;
insomuch, that on this account, it was no overvaluing of Timothy, or
wrong to the other pastors, that it should plainly be said by Paul,
"For I have no man like-minded, who will naturally care for your
state. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ's," Phil. ii. 20, 21. "Of your ownselves shall men arise, and
speak perverse things, to draw away disciples after them," Acts xx. 30.
Besides the grievous wolves which would not spare the flocks.

41. The interest then of the WORLDLY clergy, will consist in pleasing
the great ones of the world; for lordships, and worldly wealth, and
honour, and to be made the rulers of their brethren, and to have their
wills: and the interest of heretics will be to have many to be of
their own opinion to admire them: and the interest of upright
ministers will be to please God, and propagate the gospel, increase
the church, and save men's souls; yet so that they have a subordinate
interest, for food and raiment, and families, and necessary
reputation, which they are too apt to overvalue.

42. Therefore, it will be the great trade of the WORLDLY clergy, to
please and flatter the rulers of the world, and by all artificial
insinuations, and by their friends, to work themselves into their
favour, and by scorns and calumnies to work out all other that are
against their interest.

43. And it will be the trade of heretics, to insinuate into the more
ductile people, especially as ministers of truth and righteousness,
that have somewhat more excellent in knowledge or holiness, than the
faithful ministers of Christ.

44. And it will be the work of faithful ministers, to save men's
souls. But with such various degrees of self-denial or selfishness, as
they have various degrees of wisdom and holiness.

45. Many great and piously disposed princes, like Constantine, will
think that to honour and advance the clergy, into worldly power and
wealth, is to honour God and the christian religion; and great
munificence is fit for their own greatness.

46. And because such honour and wealth cannot possibly be bestowed on
all, it must make a great disparity, and set some as lords over the
rest.

47. And the unavoidable weakness, passions, and divisions of the
clergy, will make rulers think, that there is a necessity; that
besides the civil government, there should, be some of their own
office, to rule the rest, and to keep them in order, obedience, and
peace.

48. Ambition and covetousness will abuse this munificence of princes:
and whilst that any church preferments are so great (beyond the degree
of a mere encouraging subsistence) as to be a strong bait to tempt the
desires of a proud and worldly mind, the most proud and worldly that
are within the reach of hope, will be the seekers, by themselves, and
by their friends.

49. Mortified, humble, heavenly men, will either never seek them, or
with no great eagerness; their appetite being less, and their
restraints much greater.

50. Therefore they that have the keenest appetites to church grandeur
and preferments, and are the eager seekers, are most likely to find.

51. Therefore the lovers of wealth and honour, are more likely still
to be the lords among the clergy; except in such marvellous happy
times, when wise and pious princes call the more worthy that seek it
not, and reject these thirsty seekers.

52. The greatest lovers of worldly wealth and honour, are the worst
men, 1 John ii. 15; James iv. 4, &c.

53. Therefore, except in such times as aforesaid, the worst men will
be still the rich and powerful in the clergy, for the most part, or at
least, the worldly that are very bad.

54. These carnal minds are enmity to God, and cannot be subject to his
law. And the friendship of the world is enmity to God. And the honour
and wealth of these worldly men, will be taken by them for their
interest; and they will set themselves to defend it, against all that
would endanger it.

55. The doctrine and practice of humility, mortification, contempt of
the world, forsaking all, taking up the cross, &c. is so much of the
christian religion, that however the worldly clergy may formally
preach it, their minds and interests are at enmity to it.

56. Such men will make church canons according to their interests and
minds.

57. And they will judge of ministers and people according to their
interest and mind; who is sound, and who is erroneous; who is honest,
and who is bad; who is worthy of favour, and who is worthy of all the
reproaches that can be devised against him.

58. The humble, mortified ministers and people, that are seriously the
servants of a crucified Christ, and place their hopes and portion in
another world, have a holy disposition, contrary to this worldly,
carnal mind; and their manner of preaching will be of a different
relish, and the tenor of their lives of a contrary course.

59. The generality of the best people in the christian churches will
perceive the difference between the worldly and the heavenly manner of
preaching and of living, and will love and honour the latter far above
the former; because their new nature suiteth with things spiritual,
and fitteth them to relish them.

60. The worst of vicious and worldly men will disrelish the spiritual
manner of preaching and living, and will join with the worldly clergy
against it.

61. The worldly clergy being hypocrites, as to christianity and
godliness, (like Judas that loved the bag better than Christ,) they
will make themselves a religion, consisting of the mere corpse and
dead image of the true religion; of set words, and actions, and
formalities, and orders, which in themselves are (many, at least, if
not all) good; but the life they will not endure.

62. This image of true religion, or corpse of godliness, they will
dress up with many additional flowers out of their own gardens, some
tolerable, and some corrupting: that so they may have something which
both their own consciences and the world may take to be honourable
religion; lest known ungodliness should terrify conscience within, and
shame them in the world without.

63. This image of religion, so dressed up, will suit their carnal
auditors and people too, to the same ends; and therefore will become
their uniting interest.

64. That which is but a weed among these flowers, the more heavenly
ministers and people will dislike, and much more dislike the loathsome
face of death (or lifelessness) in their religion.

65. These differences of mind and practice, will engage both parties
in some kind of opposition to each other. The worldly clergy, or
hypocrites, will have heart-risings against the ministers and people
that think meanly of them, and will take it for their interest to
bring them down: for enmity is hardly restrained from exercise. And
Cain will be wroth that Abel's sacrifice is better accepted than his
own.

66. The better ministers will be apt, through passion, to speak too
dishonourably of the other; and the rash and younger sort, and the
heretical hypocrites that fall in with them, will take it for part of
a godly zeal to speak against them to the people, in such words as
Christ used of the scribes and Pharisees.

67. Hereupon the exasperations of each party will be increased more
and more; and the powerful, worldly clergy will think it their
interest to devise some new impositions, which they know the other
cannot yield to, to work them out.

68. Whether they be _oaths_, _subscriptions_, _words_, or _actions_,
which they believe to be against God's word, the spiritual and upright
part of the clergy and people will not perform them; resolving to obey
God rather than man.

69. Hereupon the worldly part will take the advantage, and call them
disobedient, stubborn, proud, schismatical, self-opinionated,
disturbers of the public peace and order, "pestilent fellows, and
movers of sedition among the people," that will let nothing be quiet,
but "turn the world upside down," Acts xxiv. 5, 6; and will endeavour
to bring them to such sufferings, as men really guilty of such crimes
deserve.

70. And because the suffering and dissenting party of ministers, when
silenced, will leave many vacancies in the churches, they will be fain
to fill them with men, how empty and unworthy soever, that are of
their own spirit, and will be true to their interests.

71. The exasperation of their sufferings will make many, otherwise
sober ministers, too impatient, and to give their tongues leave to
take down the honour of the clergy whom they suffer by, more than
beseemeth men of humility, charity, and patience.

72. When the people, that most esteem their faithful ministers, are
deprived of their labours, by the prohibitions of the rest, and
themselves also afflicted with them; it will stir up in them an
inordinate, unwarrantable, passionate zeal; which will corrupt their
very prayers, and make them speak unseemly things, and pray for the
downfal of that clergy, which they take to be the enemies of God, and
godliness. And they will think that to speak easily or charitably of
such men, as dare forbid Christ's ministers to preach his gospel, and
by notorious sacrilege alienate the persons and gifts that were
consecrated solemnly to God, is but to be lukewarm, and indifferent
between God and the devil.

73. And when they take them as enemies to religion, and to themselves,
the younger and rasher sort of ministers, but much more the people,
will grow into a suspicion of all that they see their afflicters stand
for: they will dislike not only their faults, but many harmless
things, yea, many laudable customs, which they use; and will grow into
some superstition in opposition to them, making new sins in the manner
of worship, which God never forbad or made to be sins; and taking up
new duties, which God never made duties; yea, ready to forsake some
old and wholesome doctrines, because their afflicters own them; and to
take up some new, unsound doctrines, and expositions of God's word,
because they are inclined by opinion and passion conjoined, to go as
far as may be from such men, whom they think so bad of.

74. And the vulgar people that have but little sense of religion,
(that are not by the aforesaid interest united to the afflicting
clergy,) having a reverence to the worth of those that are afflicted,
and an experience of the rawness and differing lives of many that
possess their rooms, will grow to compassionate the afflicted, and to
think that they are injured themselves, and so to think hardly of the
causers of all this.

75. Hereupon the powerful clergy will increase their accusations
against the party that is against them, and declare to the world in
print and from the pulpits, their ignorance, unpeaceableness,
unruliness, giddiness, false opinions and conceits about the manner of
worship, and how unsufferable a sort of men they are.

76. By this time the devil will have done the radical part of his
work; which is to destroy much of christian love to one another, and
make them take each other for unlovely, odious persons: the one part,
for persecuting enemies of godliness, and hypocrites, and Pharisees;
the other for peevish, seditious, turbulent, unruly sectaries. And on
these suppositions, all their after characters, affections, and
practices towards each other will proceed.

77. By this enmity and opposition against each other, both parties
will increase in wrath, and somewhat in numbers. The worldly,
afflicting clergy will multiply not only such as are disaffected to
them, but downright fanatics, and sectaries that will run as far from
them as they can, into contrary extremes. For when they are once
brought into a distaste of the old hive, the bees will hardly gather
into one new one; but will divide into several swarms and hives. As
every man's zeal is more against the afflicting party, so he will go
further from them; some to be separatists, some anabaptists, some
antinomians, some seekers, some quakers, and some to they know not
what themselves.

78. For the women, and apprentices, and novices in christianity, that
have more passion than judgment, will abundance of them quite overrun,
even their own afflicted teachers, and will forsake them, if they will
not overrun their own judgments, in forsaking those that do afflict
them.

79. And many hypocrites that have no sound religion; but ignorance,
pride, and uncharitableness, will thrust in among them, in these
discontents; or spring up in the nurseries of these briers of passion,
and will bring in new doctrines, and new ways of worship, and make
themselves preachers, and the heads of sects; by reason of whom, the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

80. And many unstable persons seeing this, will dread and loathe so
giddy a sort of men, and will turn papists, upon the persuasions of
them that tell them that there is no true unity nor consistency but at
Rome; and that all must thus turn giddy at last, that are not fixed in
the papal head. And thus they that fly too far from the Common Prayer
Book, will drive men to the mass; and the afflicters will make
sectaries, and the sectaries will make papists.

81. When the violent clergy, instead of a fatherly government of the
flocks, have driven the people into passions, distempers, and
uncharitable disaffections to themselves, and have also been the great
cause of multiplied heresies and sects by the same means, instead of
being humbled and penitent for their sin, they will be hardened, and
justify all their violences, by the giddiness and miscarriages of
those sectaries, which they themselves have made.

82. And when they publish the faults of such, for the justification of
their own violence, they will draw thousands into an approbation of
their courses, (to think that such a turbulent people can never be too
hardly called or used,) and consequently into a participation of their
guilt.

83. By all this, the dissenters will be still more alienated from
them; and many will aggravate the crime of the ministers that conform
to their impositions, and obey them: and for the sake of a few that
afflict them, they will condemn many laudable conforming ministers,
that never consented to it, but could heartily wish that it were
otherwise.

84. And the younger, and more indiscreet, passionate sort, will
frequently reproach such, as unconscionable temporizers, that will do
any thing for worldly ends, and that as hypocrites for a fleshly
interest, concur with the corrupters and afflicters of the godly.

85. These censures and reproaches will provoke those conforming
ministers, who are not masters of their passions, nor conquerors of
their pride, to think as badly of the censurers as their afflicters
do, and to join with them in the displaying of all enormities, and
promoting their further sufferings, and publishing the folly and
turbulency of their spirits, with spleen and partiality.

86. By these kind of speeches, preachings, and writings, multitudes
of the debauched will be hardened in their sin against all religion:
for when they observe that it is the same party of men, who are thus
reproached, that are the strictest reprovers of their lewdness, their
fornications, tippling, gaming, luxuries, and ungodliness; they will
think it is no great matter what such a defamed, giddy sort of people
say, and that really they are worse themselves.

87. Each party of these adversaries will characterize the adverse
party as hypocrites: the passionate sufferers will call the afflicters
hypocrites and Pharisees, that have no religion, but a formal show of
outside ceremonies and words, and that tithe mint and cummin, and wash
the outside, while within they are full of persecuting cruelty, and
are wolves in sheep's clothing, loving the uppermost seats, and great
titles, and ceremonious phylacteries, whilst they are enemies to the
preaching of the gospel of Christ, and get revenues to themselves, and
devour not only the houses, but the peace and lives of others, under
pretence of long liturgies; and that devour the living saints, while
they keep holy days and build monuments for the dead ones, whom their
fathers murdered, &c. And the powerful clergy will call the others
hypocrites, and labour to show that the Pharisees' character belongeth
to them, and that their pretences of strictness in religion, and their
long praying and preaching, is but a cloak to cover their
disobedience, and covetousness, and secret sins; and that their hearts
and inside are as bad as others, and that their fervency in devotion
is but a hypocritical, affected whining and canting; and that they are
worse than the lesser religious sort of people, because they are more
unpeaceable, and disobedient, and add hypocrisy to their sin.

88. The ignorant, worldlings, drunkards, and ungodly despisers of
holiness and heaven, being in all countries most contradicted in their
way, by this stricter sort of men, and hearing them in pulpit and
press so branded for hypocrites, will joyfully unite themselves with
the censurers; and so they will make up as one party, in crying down
the precise hypocrites; and usually make some name to call them by, as
their brand of common ignominy: and they will live the more quietly in
all their sins, and think they shall be saved as soon as the
precisest, that make more show, but have no more sincerity, but more
hypocrisy, than themselves.

89. The suffering party, seeing the ungodly and the conforming
afflicters of them thus united, and made one party in opposition to
them, will increase their hard thoughts of the adverse clergy, and
take them for downright profane, and the leading enemies of godliness
in the world, that will be captains in the devil's army, and lead on
all the most ungodly against serious godliness, for their worldly
ends.

90. And the young and indifferent sort of people, in all countries,
that were engaged in neither part, being but strangers to religion,
and to the differences, will be ready to judge of the cause by the
persons: and seeing so many of the dignified, advanced clergy, and the
more sensual sort of the people, on one side, and so many men of
_strict lives_ on the other, that suffer also for their religion, and
hearing too that it is some name of _preciseness_ that they are
reproached by, will think them to be the _better side_; and so the
title of the godly will grow by degrees to be almost appropriated to their
party, and the title of _profane_ and _persecutors_ to the other.

91. All this while the nonconforming ministers will be somewhat
differently affected, according to the different degrees of their
judiciousness, experience, and self-denial.

Some of them will think these passions of the people needful, to check
the fierceness of the afflicters (which doth but exasperate it); and
therefore will let them alone, though they will not encourage them.

Some of the younger or more injudicious, hot-brained sort will put
them on, and make them believe, that all communion with any conforming
ministers or their parish churches is unlawful, and their forms of
worship are sinful and antichristian; and that they are all
temporizers and betrayers of truth and purity, that communicate or
assemble with them.

The judicious, and experienced, and most patient and self-denying
sort, will themselves abstain from all that is sin; and as far as it
is in their choice and power, will join with the churches that worship
God most agreeably to his word and will; but so, as that they will not
be loud in their complaints, nor busy to draw men to their opinions in
controvertible points; nor will unchurch and condemn all the churches
that have something which they dislike as sinful; nor will renounce
communion of all faulty churches, lest they renounce the communion of
all in the world, and teach all others to renounce theirs: but they
will sometimes communicate with the more faulty churches, to show that
they unchurch them not (so they be not forced in it to any sin);
though usually they will prefer the purest: yea, ordinarily they will
join with the more faulty, when they can have no better, or when the
public good requireth it. They will never prefer the interest of their
nonconforming party, before the interest of christianity, or the
public good. They will so defend lesser truths, as not to neglect or
disadvantage the greater, which all are agreed in. They will so
preserve their own innocency, as not to stir up other men's passions,
nor to make factions or divisions by their difference. They will so
dislike the pride and worldliness of others, and their injuries
against God and godliness, as not to speak evil of dignities, nor to
cherish in the people's minds any dishonourable, injurious thoughts of
their kings, or any in authority over them. They will labour to allay
the passions of the people, and to rebuke their censorious and too
sharp language, and to keep up all due charity to those by whom they
suffer; but especially _loyalty_ to their kings and rulers, and
peaceableness as to their countries. They will teach them to
distinguish between the cruel that are masters of the game, and all
the rest that have no hand in it; and at least not to separate from
all the rest for the sake of a few. If they will go as far as Martin
(in Sulpitius Severus) to avoid all communion with Ithacius and
Idacius, and the councils of bishops, that prosecuted the
Priscillianists, to the scandal of godliness itself; yet not for their
sakes to avoid all others, that never consented to it: nor with
Gildas, to say of all the bad ministers, that he was not _eximius
christianus_, that would call them ministers, or pastors, rather
than traitors. They will persuade the people to discern between good
and evil, and not to run into extremes, nor to dislike all that their
afflicters hold or use; nor to call things lawful, by the name of sin,
and anti-christianity; nor to suffer their passions to blind their
judgments, to make superstitiously _new sin_ and _duties_, in
opposition to their adversaries; nor to disgrace their understandings
and the truth, by errors, factions, revilings, or miscarriages; nor to
run into sects; nor to divide Christ's house and kingdom, while they
pretend to be his zealous servants. They will persuade the people to
patience, and moderation, and peace, and to "speak evil of no man,"
nor by word or deed to revenge themselves; much less to resist the
authority that is set over them by God; but to imitate their Saviour,
and quietly suffer, and being reviled not to revile again, but to love
their enemies, and bless their cursers.

92. The more sober sort of the people will be ruled by these counsels,
and will do much to quiet the rest. But the heretical part, with their
own passions, will exasperate many novices and injudicious persons, to
account this course and counsel aforesaid, to be but the effect of
_lukewarmness_ and _carnal compliance_ with sin, and a halting
between two opinions, and a participation in the sin of persecutors
and malignant enemies of godliness: and they will believe that whoever
joineth with the parish churches, in their way, is guilty of
encouraging them in sin, and of false worship.

93. Hereupon they will defame the nonconforming ministers last
described, as men of no zeal, neither flesh nor fish; and perhaps as
men that would save their skin, and shift themselves out of
sufferings, and betray the truth. And when such ministers acquaint
them with their unsound principles and passions, they will say of them
that they speak bitterly of the godly, and join with the persecutors
in reproaching them.

94. And they will carry about among themselves many false reports and
slanders against them; partly because passion taketh off charity and
tenderness of conscience; and partly because an opinionative model,
and siding religiousness, hath ever more followers, and a quicker
zeal, than true holiness; and partly because they will think that
human converse obligeth them to believe the reports which those that
are accounted good men utter; and partly because that they will think,
that the upholding of their cause (which they think is God's) doth
need the suppression of these men's credit and reputation that are
against it.

95. But the greater part of the honest nonconformist ministers will
dislike the headiness and rashness of the novices and the sectaries,
and will approve of the aforesaid moderate ways. But their
opportunities and dispositions of expressing it will be various. Some
of them will do it freely, whatever be thought of it; and some of them
that have impatient auditors, will think that it is no duty to attempt
that which will not be endured, and that it is better to do what good
they can, than none. And some will think, that seeing the worldly
clergy forbid them to preach the gospel of salvation, they are not
bound to keep up any of their reputation or interest, as long as they
have themselves no hand in the extremes and passions of the people.
And some that have wives and children, and nothing but the people's
charity to find them food and raiment, being turned out of all public
maintenance by their afflicters, and prosecuted still with continued
violence, will think that it is not their duty to beg their bread from
door to door; nor to turn their families to be kept on the alms of the
parish, by losing the affection of those people, whose charity only
they can expect relief from: and therefore, they will think that
necessity, and preservation of their families' lives and health, will
better excuse their silence, when they defend not those that would
destroy them, against the over-much opposition of the people; than the
command of their afflicters will excuse their silence, if they neglect
to preach the christian faith. And some will think, that finding
themselves hated and hunted by one party, if they lose the affection
of the other also, they shall have none to do their office with, nor
to do any good to; and that they shall but leave the people whom they
displease, to follow those passionate leaders, that will tempt them
to more dangerous extremities, against the peace of christian
societies.

But the most judicious and resolved ministers, that live not on the
favour or maintenance of the people, or are quite above all worldly
interest, will behave themselves wisely, moderately, and yet
resolvedly; and will do nothing that shall distaste sober and wise
men, nor yet despise the souls of the most impotent or indiscreet: but
by solid principles, endeavour to build them upon solid grounds; and
to use them with the tenderness, as nurses should do their crying
children. But yet they will not cherish their sin, under the pretence
of profiting their souls; nor, by silence, be guilty of their blood;
nor so much as connive at those dangerous extremes, that seem to serve
some present exigence and job; but threaten future ruin to the
churches, and dishonour to the christian cause. And therefore they
resolve not to neglect the duties of charity to the bitterest of their
persecutors; and the rather, because it will prove in the end a
charity to the church, and to the souls of the passionate, whose
charity they labour to keep alive. And silence at sin is contrary to
their trust and office: and they will not be guilty of that carnal
wisdom, which would do evil that good may come by it; or that dare not
seek to cure the principles of uncharitableness, divisions, or
extremities in the people, for fear of losing advantages of doing them
good; or that dare not disown unlawful schisms and separations, for
fear of encouraging those malignants that call lawful practices by
that name. They will do God's work (though with prudence, and not
destructive rashness, yet) with fidelity and self-denial. And they
will lay at Christ's feet, not only their interest in the favour of
superiors; and their peace, and safety, and liberty, and estates, and
lives, which are exposed to malignant cruelty, among the Cainites of
the world; but also all the good thoughts, and words, and favour of
the religious sort of people, yea, and pastors too. And they will look
more to the interest of the whole church, than of a narrow party; and
of posterity, than of the present time; as knowing, that at long
running, it is only truth that will stand uppermost, when malignant
violence, and sectarian passions, are both run out of breath. And
therefore, in simplicity, and godly sincerity, they will have their
conversations in the world; and not in fleshly wisdom, or selfish
blinding passions or factions. Let all men use them how they will, or
judge or call them what they will; they will not therefore be false to
God and to their consciences. And seeing it is their office to govern
and teach the people, they will not be governed by the favour of the
most censorious, ignorant, or proud; but will guide them as faithful
teachers, till they are deserted by them, and disabled. But the sober,
ancient, wise, and experienced, will always cleave to them, and
forsake the giddy and sectarian way.

96. In the heat of these extremities, the most peaceable and sober
part, both of the conformists and nonconformists, will be in best
esteem with the grave and sober people; but in the greatest strait,
with both the extremes.

97. The godly and peaceable conformists, will get the love of the
sober, by their holy doctrine and lives: but they will be despised by
the sectaries, because they conform; and they will be suspected by the
proud and persecuting clergy, as leaning to the dissenters, and
strengthening them by their favour; because these ministers will, in
all their parishes, more love and honour the godly nonconformists,
than the irreligious, ignorant, worldly, dead-hearted multitude, or
the malignant enemies of godliness.

98. Hereupon these conformists being taken for the chief upholders of
the nonconformists, will be under continual jealousies and rebukes.
And perhaps new points of conformity shall be devised, to be imposed
on them, which it is known their consciences are against; that so they
may be forced also to be nonconformists, because secret enemies are
more dangerous than open foes.

99. These conformists being thus troubled, will feel also the stirring
of passion in themselves; and by the injury, will be tempted to think
more hardly of their afflicters than before. And so will part of them
turn downright nonconformists; and the other part will live in
displeasure, till they see an opportunity to show it. And these are
the likeliest to cross and weaken the worldly, persecuting clergy, of
any men.

100. And as for the moderate nonconformists, that understand what they
do, and why, and seek the reconciling of all dissenters; they will
also be loved and honoured by the sober, grave, and experienced
christians: but both extremes will be against them. The sectaries will
say, as before, that they are lukewarm, and carnal, selfish, complying
men. The proud, imposing clergy will say, that it is they that have
drawn the people into these extremes; and then complain of them that
they cannot rule them. And they will tell them, that till they conform
themselves, their moderation doth but strengthen the nonconformists,
and keep up the reputation of sobriety among them. And the nearer they
come to conformity, the more dangerous they are, as being more able to
supplant it. And thus the moderate and reconcilers, will be as the
wedge that is pressed by both sides, in the cleft of church divisions;
and no side liketh them, because they are not given up to the factious
passions or interest of either.

101. Only those will, in all these extremities and divisions, keep
their integrity; who are, 1. Wise. 2. Humble and self-denying. 3.
Charitable, and principled with a spirit of love. 4. And do take the
favour of God and heaven alone for their hope and portion, whatever
becometh of them in the world. But the WORLDLY persecuting, and the
SECTARIAN party, will be both constituted by these contrary
principles: 1. Ignorance and error. 2. Pride of their own
understandings; every one thinking that all are intolerable that are
not of their mind and way. 3. Uncharitableness, malice, or want of
love to others as to themselves. 4. And overvaluing their worldly
accommodations, honours, and estates.

102. Hereupon the instruments of a foolish shepherd, will still be
used to the greater scattering of the flocks. And because none are so
able to dispute against them as the moderate, therefore they will be
taken for their most dangerous adversaries. And when they are greatly
inclined to the healing of these wounds, the violent and lordly will
not suffer them; but will pour oil upon the flames, which moderate men
would quench. And, as if they were blindfolding and scourging Christ
again, they will follow the people with afflicting wounds; and then
charge the moderate ministers with their discontents; and charge them
to reduce them to peace and conformity. And if they cannot get them to
love and honour those that are still scourging them with scorpions,
the scourgers will lay the blame on these ministers, and say, it is
all long of them that the people love not those that wound them. And
they that cry out most for peace will not endure it, nor give the
peace-makers leave to do any thing that will accomplish it; nor will
keep the spur out of the people's sides, whilst they look that others
(spurred more sharply) should hold the reins; which yet at the same
time they take out of their hands, and forbid them to hold, by
forbidding them to preach the gospel. So that it will be the sum of
their expectations, Perform not the office of pastors, nor preach the
gospel of peace and piety to the people any more: but yet, without
preaching to them, see that you teach them all to love and honour us,
while we silence you, and afflict them; or else we will account you
intolerable, seditious schismatics, and use you as such.

103. In some kingdoms or countries, it will be thought, that the
people will be brought to no obedience to the _lordly pastors_, till
their most _able_ or _moderate ministers_ are kept from them, by
banishment, imprisonment, or confinement; which will accordingly be
done.

104. When the ministers are banished or removed, that restrained the
people's passions, the people will make preachers of themselves; even
such as are suited to their minds.

105. Where papists or heretics are shut out by laws, they will
secretly contribute the utmost of their endeavours, to make the
sufferings of _dissenting protestants_ as grievous as possibly they
can; that in despite of them, their own necessities may compel them to
cry out for liberty, till they procure a common toleration for all,
and open the door for _papists_ and _heretics_, as well as for
_themselves_.

106. "Surely oppression will make wise men mad," Eccl. vii. 7.

107. Madmen will speak madly, and do madly.

108. They that speak and do madly, will be thought meetest for Bedlam,
and for chains.

109. When the ministers are banished or removed, and the people left
to their passions, and their own-made guides and teachers; passionate
women and boys, and unsettled novices, will run into unwarrantable
words and deeds; and will think those means lawful, which seem to
promise them deliverance, though they be such as God forbiddeth.

110. The seditions and miscarriages of some few will be imputed to the
innocent.

111. For the sake of such miscarriages, in some kingdoms, the sword
will be drawn against them, and the blood of many will be shed.

112. Hereupon the misguided, passionate youth, being by the proud
clergy deprived of the presence of that ministry that should moderate
them, are likely enough to think rebellion and resisting of authority,
a lawful means for their own preservation; and will plead the law of
nature and necessity for their justification.

113. If any of the sober, wise, experienced pastors be left among
them, that would restrain them from unlawful ways, and persuade them
to patient suffering; they will be taken for complying betrayers of
religion, and of the people's lives; that would have them tamely
surrender their throats to butchery.

       *       *       *       *       *

As in a parenthesis, I will give them some instances for this
prognostic.

(1.) The great Lord Du Plessis (one of the most excellent noblemen
that ever the earth bore, that is known to us by any history) being
against the holding of an assembly of the French churches, against the
king's prohibition, was rejected by the assembly, as complying with
the courtiers (because they said, the king had before promised or
granted them that assembly); but the refusing of his counsel cost the
blood of many thousand protestants, and the loss of all their
garrisons and powers, and that lowness of the protestant interest
there that we see at this day.

(2.) The great divine, Peter De Moulin, was also against the
Rochellers' proceedings against the king's prohibitions (and so were
some chief protestant nobles); but he was rejected by his own party,
who paid for it, by the blood of thousands, and their ruin.

(3.) I lately read of a king of France, that hearing that the
protestants made verses and pasquels against the mass and processions
of the papists, made a severe law to prohibit it. When they durst not
break that law, their indiscreet zeal carried them to make certain
ridiculous pictures of the mass priests and the processions; which
moderate ministers would have dissuaded them from, but were accounted
temporizers and lukewarm: by which the king being exasperated, shut up
the protestant churches, took away their liberties, and it cost many
thousand men their lives. And the question was, Whether God had
commanded such jeers, and scorns, and pictures, to be made at so dear
a rate, as the rooting out of the churches, and religion, and the
people's lives?

(4.) Great Camero (one of the most judicious divines in the world) was
in Montabon, when it stood out in arms against the king (accounted
formerly impregnable). He was against their resistance, and persuaded
them to submit. The people of his own religion reviled him as a
traitor: one of the soldiers threatened to run him through. In a
Scottish passion he unbuttoned his doublet, and cried, _Feri,
miser_, Strike, varlet, or do thy worst; and in the heat, striving
to get his own goods out of the city, fell into a fever and died. The
city was taken, and the rest of the holds through the kingdom after
it, to the great fall of all the protestants, and the loss of many
thousand lives.

       *       *       *       *       *

114. Where the devil can bring differences to extremities of violence,
the issues are not hard to be conjecturally foreseen; but are such as
my prognostics shall no further meddle with, than to foretell you,
that both sides are preparing for the increase of their fury and
extremities, and at last for repentance, or ruinous calamities, if
they do as I have described.

115. Carnal and discontented statesmen and politicians, will set in on
both sides, to blow the coals, and draw on feuds for their own ends,
and head the discontented people to their ruin.

116. But in those countries, where the difference never cometh to such
disorders, there will be a war bred, and kept up in the people's
hearts; and neighbours will be against neighbours, as Guelphs and
Gibellines.

117. When kingdoms are thus weakened by intestine discontents, it will
increase the hopes and plots of foreign enemies, and make them think
that one party (that suffer) will be backward to their own defence, as
thinking they can be no worse (which is the hopes of the Turks in
Hungary).

118. It will be a great injury, and grief, and danger to christian
kings and states, to have their kingdoms and commonwealths thus
weakened, and the cordial love and assistance of their subjects made
so loose and so uncertain.

119. And it will be a continual vexation to wise and peaceable
princes, to govern such divided, discontented people; but to rule a
united, loving, concordant, peaceable people, will be their delight
and joy.

120. A WORLDLY, covetous, proud, domineering, malignant, lazy clergy,
will, in most christian nations, be the great plague of the world, and
troublers of princes, and dividers of churches; who, for the interest
of their grandeur, and their wills, will not give the sober, and
peaceable, and godly ministers, or people, leave to serve God quietly,
and live in peace. And the impatient, self-conceited, sectarian
spirit, which, like gunpowder, takes fire upon such injuries, is the
secondary divider of the churches, and hinderer of christian love and
peace; and by their mutual enmity and abuses, they will drive each
other so far into the extremity of aversion and opposition, that they
will but make each other mad; and then, like madmen, run and quarrel,
while sober men stand by and pity them; but can help neither the one
party nor the other, nor preserve their own or the public peace.

121. The grand endeavour of the worldly clergy, will be (in most
kingdoms of the world) to engage princes on their side, and to borrow
their sword, to do their work with, against gainsayers: for they have
no confidence in the power of the keys; but will despise them secretly
in their hearts, as leaden, uneffectual weapons, while they make it
the glory of their order, that the power of the keys is theirs.

122. If princes suppress disorders by the sword, the said clergy will
ascribe the honour of it to themselves; and say it was _their
order_, that kept up so much order in the churches. And when they
have put princes to that trouble, will assume to themselves the
praise.

123. The devil will set in, and do his utmost, to make both rulers and
people believe, that all this confusion is long of the christian
religion, and the strict principles of the sacred Scriptures; and so
to make men cast off all religion, and take christianity to be
contrary to their natural and civil interests.

124. And the papists will every where persuade high and low, that all
this cometh by meddling so much with the Scriptures, and busying the
common people with religion; and leaving every man to be a discerning
judge of truth and duty, instead of trusting implicitly in the
judgment of their church. And so they would tempt princes tamely to
surrender half their government (that is, in all matters of religion)
to the pope; and persuade the people to resign their reason or
humanity to him; (that he who is so far off may rule it all over the
world, by his missionaries and agents, who must live upon the prey;)
and then he knoweth that he shall have both swords, and be the
universal king.

125. To this end, they will strive to make some rulers as bad as they
would have them, to do their work, and to make the rest thought worse
of than they are, that they may have a fair pretence for their
treasons and usurpations; which was the case of all the writers, that
plead for Pope Gregory the Seventh, against the German emperors; who
took that advantage, to settle the cardinals' power of elections; and,
in a council at Rome, to declare the pope to be above the emperor, and
to have power to depose him: and as bad was done in the general
council, at Lateran, under Innocent the Third. Can. 2, 3.

126. Concerning princes, I shall give you no prognostics but Christ's;
that it will "be as hard for a rich man to enter into heaven, as for a
camel to go through a needle's eye." And therefore, you may know what
men the rich will be, in most countries of the world.

127. And the rich will be the rulers of the world; and it is meet it
should be so: not that men should rule because they are rich, but they
that rule should be rich; and not exposed to contempt, by a vulgar
garb and state.

128. But some wise and good princes and magistrates God will raise up,
to keep the interest of truth and justice from sinking in
barbarousness, and diabolical wickedness.

129. And where princes and magistrates are bad, they will seldom do so
much hurt as good, or prove very cruel, where the worldly and corrupt
clergy do not animate and instigate them; their reason, their
interest, and their experience will lead them, by man-like usage, to
seek the people's love and quietness, and their kingdom's unity and
strength. But bloody persecutions (such as that of the Waldenses,
Piedmont lately, France, Ireland, Queen Mary's, &c.) are ordinarily
the effects of clergy interest and zeal.

130. The grand design of the devil, through the world, will be to
corrupt the two great ordinances of God, _magistracy_ and _ministry_;
and turn them both against Christ, who giveth them their power. The
instances of his success, are most notorious in the Turkish empire,
and the papal kingdom, called by them the catholic church; which
Campanella, de Regno Dei, doth labour to prove, by all the prophecies
cited by the millenarians, or fifth-monarchy men, to be the true
universal kingdom of Christ; in which, by his vicar the pope, he shall
reign over all the kings and kingdoms of the earth.


A PROGNOSTICATION

OF THE CHANGES THAT WILL BE IN CHRISTENDOM IN THE GOLDEN AGE,

AND TIME OF TRUE REFORMATION AND UNITY.

1. Because it is made part of our prayers, "Thy will be done on earth,
as it is in heaven;" and, "we look for a new heaven, and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness." I hope their opinion is not true, who
think that the earth shall still grow more and more like to hell, till
the general conflagration turn it into hell, and make it the proper
seat of the damned. Yet, lest this should prove true, I will place my
chief hopes in heaven; remembering who said, "Sell all, and follow me,
and thou shalt have treasure in heaven" (and not on earth). But
supposing that ever the world will come to full reformation and
concord, (of which I am uncertain, but do not despair of,) I proceed
to my prognostics of the way.

2. God will stir up some happy king, or governor, in some country of
christendom, endowed with wisdom and consideration; who shall discern
the true nature of godliness and christianity, and the necessity and
excellency of serious religion; and shall see what is the corruption
and hinderance of it in the world; and shall place his honour and
felicity in pleasing God, and doing good, and attaining everlasting
happiness; and shall subject all worldly respects unto these high and
glorious ends. And shall know, that wisdom, and godliness, and justice
leave the most precious name on earth, and prepare for the most
glorious reward in heaven: in comparison of which, all fleshly pomp
and pleasure is dross and dung, and worthy of nothing but contempt.

3. This prince shall have a discerning mind, to know wise men from
foolish, good from bad; and among the ministers of Christ, to discern
the judicious, spiritual, heavenly, sober, charitable, and peaceable
sort, from self-seeking, worldly men; that make but a trade of the
ministry, and strive not so much for heaven, and the people's
salvation, as they do for worldly honours, power, and wealth. And he
shall discern how such do trouble the churches and the world, and
cause divisions, and stir up violence, for their own worldly interests
and ends.

4. He will take the counsel neither of worldlings, nor true fanatics,
and dividing persons; but of the learned, godly, self-denying, sober,
peaceable divines; with his grave and reverend senators, judges, and
counsellors; that know what is reason and justice, and what belongeth
to the public good, as well as to the true interest of the church, and
of men's souls.

5. He will know those men, whom he is concerned to use, and to judge
of, as far as may be, by personal acquaintance and observation; and
not by the partial reports of adversaries, behind their backs: and so
he will neither be deceived in his instruments, nor disappointed by
them.

6. He will call together the wise, peace-making persons; and with the
strictest charge, commit to them the endeavours of reconciling and
uniting the several parties; by drawing their differences into the
narrowest compass, and stating them more correctly than passionate men
do; and by persuading them to love and peace, and to all such
abatements and forbearances, as are necessary. And his own prudent
oversight and authority (like Constantine's at Nice) will facilitate
the success.

7. He and his people will inquire, what terms of concord are meet, not
only for some one corner or country, but for all the christian world;
that when he hath found it out, he and his kingdom may be a pattern to
all christendom, and the spring and leaven of a universal concord of
all christians.

8. Therefore, he will inquire of Vincent. Lirinensis, Catholic Terms
of _Quod_, 1. _Ab omnibus._ 2. _Ubique._ 3. _Semper, receptum est._

(1.) What all christians are agreed in, as christians, in the
essentials of their religion.

(2.) What all christians did agree on, in the apostles' time, which
was the time of greatest light, love, and purity.

(3.) What all christians, in all kingdoms of the world, since then, to
this day, in the midst of all their other differences, have been and
still are agreed in, as their religion.

For he will see, that there is no hope of agreeing the disagreeing
world (at least, in many an age) by changing men's judgments from what
they are, and bringing them all in controverted things to the mind of
some party; nor to agree them on any terms, in which they do not
really agree. But that their concord must be founded in that, which
they are indeed all agreed in; leaving the superfluities or additions
of each party, out of the agreement.

9. The peace-makers will then find, that the christian religion is
contained in three forms.

(1.) In the sacramental covenant with God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as the briefest formula.

(2.) In the creed, Lord's prayer, and decalogue; as the summaries of
the _credenda_, _appetenda_, and _agenda_, matters of faith, will,
(or desire,) and practice, as the larger form.

(3.) In that canon of Scripture, which all the churches receive, as
the largest form or continent.

And that he who is understandingly a sacramental covenanter with God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, was ever taken for a visible
christian. And therefore baptism was called our christening; and the
baptized taken for christians, before they knew the controversies of
_this_ church, or _that_: and that the competent, explicit understanding
of the creed, the Lord's prayer, and decalogue, was ever taken for a
competent understanding of the sacramental covenant, and more. And
that he that implicitly receiveth the commonly received canonical
Scripture, as God's word, (though he understand no more than as
followeth,) and that explicitly understandeth the creed, Lord's
prayer, and decalogue, and receiveth them, and consenteth to the
sacramental covenant, always was accounted, and is still to be
accounted, a christian. On these terms, therefore, the peace-makers
will resolve to endeavour the union of the churches.

10. Therefore they will pare off, and cast away, (as the greatest
enemy to unity,) all those unnecessary controversies, or things
doubtful, which christians (yea, or divines) were never agreed in, and
which never were the happy and successful means or terms of any
extensive concord; and which have long been tried to be the great
occasions of all the scruples, and contentions, and divisions, and
woeful consequents in the churches. And they will once more say,
"IT SEEMETH GOOD TO THE HOLY GHOST, AND TO US, TO LAY UPON YOU NO
GREATER BURDEN THAN THESE NECESSARY THINGS," Acts xv. 28. All
christians shall, in general, receive the canonical Scripture as God's
word; and more particularly, the creed, Lord's prayer, and decalogue,
as the summary of necessaries; and shall profess, with competent
understanding of it, their consent to the sacramental covenant; and
vow and devote themselves therein to God. And this shall be all the
title, which they shall be forced to show, for their visible church
communion. And though a higher measure of the understanding of the
same principles and rules, shall be required in teachers, than in the
flock; and accordingly, the ordainers shall try their understandings,
together with their utterance and ministerial readiness of parts; yet
shall the teachers themselves be (ordinarily) forced to no other
subscriptions, professions, or oaths, (besides their civil
allegiance,) than to assent and consent to all aforesaid; and to
promise ministerial fidelity in their places. All councils, called
general or provincial, canons, decretals, articles, formulas, rubrics,
&c. shall be reserved to their proper use; but be no more used for
insnaring and dividing subscriptions, professions, or oaths; or made
the engines to tear the churches.

11. When all those superfluities, and foot-balls of contention, are
cast out of the way, the power of the keys, or pastoral government,
shall come to be better known and exercised, and the primitive
discipline set up; which took place before Cyril of Alexandria took up
the sword, and pride swelled the bishops into a secular state, and way
of rule. Then it shall be church government, to see that the people
be duly taken into the sacramental covenant, and learn the creed,
Lord's prayer, and decalogue; and be instructed in the word of God,
and live together in sobriety, righteousness, and godliness. And the
pastors shall leave secular matters to the magistrates; and be no more
troubled nor corrupted by their use of any forcing power: their
government shall be a paternal, authoritative exercise of instruction,
and of love, and no more; like that of a tutor to his pupils, a
physician in his hospital, a philosopher in his school (supposing a
divine commission and rule). The church itself shall be all their
courts, (supposing the magistrates,) and the people the witnesses; and
the present incumbent pastors be the judges, without excommunicating
and absolving lay-chancellors, surrogates, commissaries, or officials.
And all the materials of contention being now gone, they shall have
nothing to do in these courts, but to try whether the people have
learned and understand their catechisms, and consent to God's
covenant, and communicate in his worship with the church; and when any
are accused of wicked living, contrary to sobriety, righteousness, and
godliness, to try whether these accusations be well proved: and if so,
to persuade the offenders to repent; and by plain Scripture arguments,
to convince them of the sin; and with tears, or fatherly tenderness
and love, to melt them into remorse, and bring them to confess and
forsake the sin. And if this cannot be done at once, to try again and
again, and pray for their repentance. And, when there is no other
remedy, to declare such a one openly incapable of church communion;
and to require the church to avoid communion with him, and him to
forbear intruding into their communion: and to bind him over by a
ministerial denunciation of God's displeasure, (as against the
impenitent,) to answer it at the bar of God himself; as one that is
under his wrath, till he do repent. And this is the utmost of the
pastoral power that shall then be used (supposing private
admonitions): and this only in that church or congregation wherein the
sinner had before his communion; and not at a distance, nor in other
churches, or parts of the world, where the pastor hath no charge. Yea,
this much shall not be exercised irregularly, and at random, to the
injury of the flock; but under the rules and remedies afterward here
expressed.

12. The primitive church form shall be restored: and as (where there
are christians enough) no churches shall be too small, so none shall
be greater for number or distance, than to be one true particular
church; that is, a society of christians united as pastor and people,
for personal communion and assistance in God's public worship, and
holy living: that is, so many as may have this personal communion, if
not all at once, yet _per vices_, as oft as is fit for them to
meet with the church (which all in a family cannot usually do at
once). So that Ignatius's church mark shall be restored, To every
church there is one altar, and one bishop, with his fellow-presbyters
and deacons. And there shall no more be a hundred, or six hundred, or
a thousand altars to one bishop, _primi gradus_, and in one
church of the first form, called a particular church. Nor shall all
the particular churches be unchurched for want of true bishops; nor
all their pastors degraded into a new order of teaching ministers,
that have no power of pastoral government; nor the true discipline of
the churches be made a mere impossible thing, whilst it is to be
exercised by one bishop only over many hundred congregations, which do
every one of them afford full work for a present bishop. Nor shall the
bishop's office be thought so little holy, any more than preaching,
and sacramental administrations, as to be performable by a
lay-delegate, or any one that is not really a bishop. But the people
shall know them that are "over them in the Lord, which labour among
them, and admonish them; and shall esteem them very highly in love for
their work's sake; and shall be at peace among themselves," 1 Thess.
v. 12, 13. Such bishops as Dr. Hammond in his "Annotations"
describeth; that had but one church, and preached, baptized,
catechised, visited the sick, took care of the poor, administered the
Lord's supper, guided every congregation as at present in public
worship, and privately instructed and watched over all the flocks;
shall be in every church that can obtain such.

13. Where the churches are so great as to need, (as most will do,) and
so happy as to obtain, many faithful presbyters or pastors, whether
they shall live together in a single college life, or married, and at
a distance; and whether one as the chief, or bishop, shall be
president, and have a negative voice, or all be equal in a concordant
guidance of the flocks; shall be left to the choice and liberty of the
several churches, by mutual consent of pastors, and people, and
magistrates, to do and vary, as their several states and exigences
shall require: and shall neither be called antichristian or odious
tyranny on the one side, nor made of necessity to the church's
communion or peace on the other, as long as the true pastoral or
episcopal office is exercised in every particular church.

14. Neither magistrates nor other bishops shall make the bishop's or
pastor's sermons and prayers for him; but leave it as the work of the
speaker's office, to word his own sermons and prayers; and to choose a
set form or no set form, the same or various, as the case requireth:
yet so as to be responsible (as after) for all abuses and
mal-administrations, and not suffered to deprave God's worship, by
confusion or hurtful errors, or passionate and perverse expressions;
but to be assisted and directed to use his office in the most edifying
ways, by such kind of helps as his personal weaknesses shall require.
And where set forms are used, none shall quarrel with them as
unlawful.

15. None of the people shall have the high privileges of church
communion and sacraments bestowed on them, against their wills; no
more than a man impenitent and unwilling, shall be ministerially
absolved from the guilt of sin. For every sacramental administration,
whether of baptism, or of the body and blood of Christ, is as full an
act of ministerial absolution as any pastor can perform: and what he
doth to particular persons upon their penitence after a lapse, that
the pastor doth to the whole church at the Lord's supper. And as
consent is made by Christ the condition of pardon and covenant
benefits, which no non-consenter hath a title to; so therefore
professed consent is necessary to the sacramental collation or
investiture: and those that are but constrained by the apparent danger
of a fine or gaols, are not to be accounted voluntary consenters by
the church; when the Lord of the church will account none for
consenters, that will not forsake all, and endure fines and gaols,
rather than to be deprived of the benefits of mystical and visible
church communion. The magistrate therefore will wisely, and
moderately, bring all the people to hear that which is necessary to
their good; but will not by penalties force the unwilling to receive
either absolutions or communion with the church, in its special
privileges. But if the baptized refuse church communion afterwards,
they lamentably punish themselves; and if it be found meet to declare
them excommunicate, it will be a terrible penalty, sufficient to its
proper use.

16. The magistrate will not imprison, harm, confiscate, banish, or
otherwise punish any of his subjects, _eo nomine_, because they
are excommunicate; for that is to punish his body because his soul is
punished. Nor will he hearken to those unbelieving clergymen, that cry
up the power of the keys as their office; and when they have done,
scorn it as an ineffectual shadow of power, which will do nothing
without the magistrate's force. But he will himself hear and judge
before he punish, and not be debased to be the clergy's executioner,
to punish before he have tried the cause; because clergymen's pride
and passions may else engage him to be the instrument of their vices
and revenge. Yea, as he that seeth a man punished in one court, will
be the more dilatory to bring him to punishment in another, for the
same crime; so the magistrate that seeth a man excommunicated for his
fault, will rather delay his civil force against that man, to see what
effect his excommunication will have: because the conjunction of the
sword against the excommunicate as such, doth corrupt Christ's
ordinance, and make the fruit of it utterly undiscernible, so that no
one can see whether ever it did any thing at all, or whether all was
done by the fear of the sword. And verily, a faithful minister, that
seeth a sinner come to confession of his fault, but when he must else
lie in gaol and be undone, will be loth to take that man for a true
penitent. And to force pastors to absolve or give the sacrament to
every one that had rather take it than lie in gaol and be undone, is
to set up such new terms of church communion, which Christ will give
men little thanks for. Church communion is only a privilege due to
volunteers and penitents. But yet the magistrate may punish men with
fines or other penalties for the same faults for which they are
excommunicated, having tried and judged them in his own court; but not
"_quarterus_" excommunicate, but according to the nature of the
crime.

17. The schools of learning, and academies, shall not educate youth
either in idleness, luxury, or hypocritical formality; but under
learned, pious tutors, in learning sobriety and piety; from whence
they shall not over-hastily leap into the pastoral office.

18. None under thirty years of age (at what time Christ himself
entered on his public works) shall take a pastoral charge, except in
case of mere necessity of the church, no, not on pretence of
extraordinary fitness; but till then shall employ themselves as
learners, catechists, schoolmasters, or probationers. Nor shall they
meddle in the pulpits with matters of such controversies as the church
is in danger to be troubled with.

19. Ministers shall all be commanded by the magistrate, and advised by
the neighbour pastors, to forbear all unnecessary controversies in the
pulpits; and to teach the people the foresaid substantials, the
covenant of grace, the creed, Lord's prayer, and decalogue, the duties
of faith, love, repentance, and obedience; and shall reserve their
subtle and curious speculations for schools and theological writings:
and so the christian people shall be bred up in the primitive, plain
simplicity of doctrine and religion; and their brains shall not be
heated and racked with those new-coined phrases and subtleties, which
will but distemper them into a proud, contentious, wrangling disease;
but will not be truly understood by them, when all is done. And so,
when it is the people's work to hear only (usually) the doctrine of
the catechism, and simple old christianity, and to talk of no other;
1. Their time will be employed in promoting faith, repentance, love,
and obedience, which was wont to be spent in vain janglings and strife
of words. And, 2. Religion will be an easier thing; and,
consequently, will be more common (as cheap food and raiment is every
one's pennyworth): and ministers may hope to bring the generality of
their people to be savingly and practically religious: whereas the
fine-spun religion of novelists, and wranglers, that pretend new light
and increase of knowledge, doth not only dwindle into a cobweb of no
use, or life, or power; but must be confined to a few, that can have
leisure to learn to talk in new phrases, and will but become the
matter of ignorant men's pride and ostentation; and make them think,
that they only are the religious people; and all that cannot talk as
they, are profane, and not to be admitted to their communion. Whenas
the apostolic, primitive, plain religion, without the laces, and
whimsies, that dreamers have since introduced, would make men humble,
holy, heavenly, obedient, meek, and patient; and spare men the loss of
a great deal of time.

20. The maintenance of the ministry shall neither be so poor, as to
discourage men from devoting their children to the office, or disable
them from a total addictedness to their proper work, by any
distracting wants or cares; nor yet wholly disable them from works of
charity: nor yet so great, as may be a strong bait to proud, covetous,
worldly-minded men, to intrude into the ministry for fleshly ends. It
shall be so much, as that the burden of their calling may not be
increased by want; but yet not so much, but that self-denial shall be
exercised by all that undertake the ministry; and of the two, the
burden of the ministerial labours, with its proper sufferings, shall
to flesh and blood seem to preponderate the worldly advantage. So
greatly needful is it to the church, that all ministers be
self-denying men; that valuing things spiritually can practise
humility, mortification, and contempt of the world, as well as preach
it.

21. There shall be a treble lock upon the door of the ministry:--

(1.) Whether they are fit to be ministers in general, the ordainers
shall judge.

(2.) Whether they are fit to be the pastors of this or that particular
church, the members of the church shall so far judge, as that none
shall become their pastors without their own consent.

(3.) Whether they be fit for the magistrate's countenance,
maintenance, and protection, the magistrate himself shall judge.

And therefore, all three shall severally try and approve each pastor:
yet so, that the two first only be taken as necessary to the office
itself; and the third only to the maintenance and encouragement or
defence of the officer. And though sometimes this may occasion
disagreements and delays for a time; yet, ordinarily, the securing of
a faithful ministry, and other good effects, will countervail many
such inconveniences.

22. No one church shall have the government of another church; and the
secular differences of metropolitans, patriarchs, &c. which was set up
in one empire, upon secular accounts, and from secular reasons, shall
all cease. And no differences shall be made necessary among them,
which Christ hath not made necessary. But christian princes shall take
warning by the Greek and Latin churches, and by all the calamities and
ruins which have been caused in the christian world, by bishops
striving who should be the greatest, when Christ decided the
controversy long ago, Luke xxii.

23. As christians hold personal, christian communion, in their several
particular churches; so churches hold a communion of churches, by
necessary correspondencies and associations: not making a major vote
of bishops in synods, to have a proper government over the minor
part; but that by counsel and concord, that may help and strengthen
one another, and secure the common interest of christianity. And that
he that is a member of one church, may be received of the rest; and he
that is cast out of one, may not be received by the rest, unless he be
wronged. So that it shall not be one politic church, but a communion
of churches.

24. The means of this communion shall be,

(1.) By messengers.

(2.) By letters and certificates communicatory.

(3.) By synods.

25. These synods shall, as to a few neighbour churches, be ordinary
and stated; and the meetings of ministers in them shall be improved,

(1.) To the directing and counselling of one another, in matters
doubtful; especially of discipline.

(2.) To edify each other by conference, prayer, and disputations.

(3.) That the younger may be educated under the grave advice and
counsels of the elder.

(4.) That the concord of themselves, and the churches under them, may
be preserved.

But if they would grow imperious, tyrannical, heretical, or
contentious, the magistrate shall hinder their stated, ordinary
meetings; that it be not accounted a thing simply necessary, nor used
to the disturbance of the church or state. And all provincial,
national, and larger councils, shall be held by the magistrate's
consent.

26. He that taketh himself to be wrongfully excommunicated in one
church, shall have a treble remedy:

(1.) To have his cause heard by the associated pastors of the
neighbour churches; though not as rulers of the bishop or pastor of
that particular church, yet as counsellors, and such whose judgment
bindeth to concord in lawful things.

(2.) To be admitted by another church, if it appear that he is
wronged. And,

(3.) To appeal to the magistrate, as the preserver of justice and
order in all societies.

27. The magistrate shall appoint some of the most grave, and wise, and
godly, and moderate of the ministers, to have a general inspection
over many churches; and to see that they be well taught and ordered,
and that pastors and people do their duty: who shall therefore oft
visit them, and shall instruct and exhort the younger ministers; and
with the countenance of the magistrate, and their own seniority and
ability, shall rebuke the slothful and faulty ministers; and persuade
them to diligence and fidelity: but shall exercise no outward force by
the sword; nor any excommunication by themselves alone, or otherwise
than in the aforesaid regular way.

28. All ordinations shall be performed, (except in case of necessity,)
either in the assembly of the associated pastors, with their
president; or in the vacant church, by some of them, appointed by the
rest; or by the general visitor, last mentioned, with a competent
number of assistants. But still, an ordination to the ministry in
general, shall not be taken to be formally the same as the affixing
him to this or that church in particular; nor more than the licensing
of a physician is the same with the affixing him to a particular
hospital.

29. A catalogue shall be drawn up of some of the greatest verities,
which are not expressly found in the creed, Lord's prayer, or
decalogue; which, as the articles of confession of the associated
churches of the nation, shall serve for these three uses:--

(1.) To satisfy all foreign churches, against any accusation, that
they are orthodox.

(2.) To examine the knowledge of such as are admitted to the ministry
by (but not to be subscribed, unless only as to a general
acknowledgment of the soundness of their doctrine; without saying
that, There is nothing faulty in them).

(3.) To be a rule of restraint to ministers, in their preaching; that
none be allowed publicly, after admonition, to preach against any
doctrine contained in them.

30. The usurped ecclesiastical power of bishops, and presbyteries, and
councils, (which were coercive, or imitated secular courts, or bound
the magistrate to execute their decrees,) being cast out, and all
pastors restrained from playing the bishops in other churches, out of
their own charge, the magistrate shall exercise all coercive church
government himself; and no more trust the sword directly, or
indirectly, in the hands of the clergy, who have long used it so
unhappily, to the disturbance of the christian world, and the shedding
of so much innocent blood. Where it may be had, there shall be a
church justice, or magistrate, in every considerable parish; who,
being present, shall himself hear how ministers preach, and behave
themselves among their people. And all ministers and churches shall be
responsible to the magistrate, for all abuses, and mal-administration.
If any minister preach or pray seditiously, abusively, factiously,
railingly, against tolerable dissenters, to the destroying of
christian love and unity; or heretically, to the danger of the
people's souls; or shall exercise tyranny over the people, or live a
vicious life; or be negligent in his office of teaching, worship, or
discipline, or otherwise grossly misbehave himself; he shall be
responsible both (as aforesaid) to the associated pastors and visitor,
(or archbishop,) and also to the magistrate; who shall rebuke and
correct him, according to the measure of his offence. And it shall
appear, that the magistrate is sufficient for all coercive church
government, without all the clergy's usurpations; which uphold the
Roman and other tyrannical societies.

31. The question, Who shall be judge of heresy, schism, or church
sins? shall be thus decided.

(1.) The bishops or pastors of the particular churches shall be the
judges, who is to be denied communion in their churches as heretics,
schismatics, &c.

(2.) The associated churches shall be judges, (in their synods, or by
other correspondence,) who is to be commonly denied communion in all
their churches; and what pastors and churches shall have the
_dextram communionis_, and who not.

(3.) The magistrate shall be the only judge, who is to be punished for
heresy or schism, &c. with fines, or any outward, corporal penalty.
And no one shall usurp the other's right.

32. The magistrate shall silence all preachers that, after due
admonition, so grossly misbehave themselves in doctrine, worship, or
conversation, as to be the plagues of the churches, and to do
apparently more hurt than good. But as to all worthy and able
ministers, if they commit any fault, they shall be punished as other
subjects, only with such penalties as shall not, by silencing or
restraint, be a punishment to the innocent people's souls, nor hinder
the preaching of the gospel of salvation: even as if the common
bakers, brewers, butchers, carpenters, perform their work
perniciously, (poisoning their beer, bread, and meat,) they shall be
forbid the trade; but for other faults, they shall be so punished,
that the people be not left without bread, beer, meat, houses, for
their faults.

33. If any heretics (as Arians, Socinians, &c.) would creep into the
ministry, there shall not be new forms of subscription made to keep
them out; (which it is likely, with their vicious consciences, would
be ineffectual, and would open a gap to the old church tyrannies and
divisions;) nor an uncertain evil be ineffectually resisted by a
certain greater mischief. But while he keepeth his error to himself,
he is no heretic as to the church (_non apparere_ being equal to _non
esse_): and when he venteth his heresy, he is responsible all the ways
aforesaid, and may be by the magistrate punished for his crime, and by
the churches be branded as none of their communion; which is the
regular way of reforming crimes, viz. By judgment and execution, and
not by making new rules and laws, as fast as men break the old; as
though laws could be made which no man can break.

34. The magistrate shall countenance or tolerate no sin or error, so
far as he can cure it by just remedies, which will not do more harm
than good: but he shall unwillingly tolerate many tolerable errors and
faults; because it is not in his power to remedy them, but by such
means. But,

(1.) The sound and concordant ministry only shall have his countenance
and maintenance.

(2.) Smaller errors and disorder shall be best cured by gentle
rebukes, and discountenance, and denial of maintenance; together with
the disgrace that will be cast upon them, by the judgment and dissent
of all the united, concordant ministers and churches (which together
will do more and better, than exasperating cruelties will do).

(3.) The publishing of pernicious principles shall be restrained more
severely.

But though men may be restrained from venting pernicious falsehoods,
they cannot be constrained to believe the truth; (we are not so
happy;) nor shall they be constrained to lie, and say that they
believe it when they do not.

35. All matters of quarrels, division, and cruel usage of each other,
being thus cut off and gone, bitterness and revengeful thoughts will
cease, and love will revive in all men's breasts, and unity and peace
will follow of its own accord. And if any heretical or contentious
sect arise, the hearts of all united people will so rise against them,
that desertion and shame will quickly kill them.

36. Then will the hearts of the people cleave to their pastors: and
they will be no more put on the great difficulties of loving the
bishops that hurt them, or of loving them in gaols; but it will be as
easy to love them, when they feel the love to their souls in the
labours and kindness of their pastors, as to love their dearest and
nearest friends. And then love will open the people's ears to the
teacher's doctrine, and it will do them good: and then the labours and
lives of faithful ministers will be sweet and easy, when the love, and
the unity, and faithfulness of the people, is their daily
encouragement. Oh how good, and how happy, will it be for pastors and
people thus to live in love and unity! It will not only remind us of
Aaron's perfume, but of the Spirit of love that dwelt in our Redeemer,
and which he promised should be his seal and mark upon all his true
disciples; yea, and of the celestial society, and life of perfect
love.

37. Then shall neighbours exercise their charity, for the help of the
ignorant about them, without the suspicions of venting heresies, or
sedition, or encroaching on the pastor's office. And neighbours, when
they come together, shall not take praying together, or holy
conference, or singing God's praise, or reading good books, or
repeating their teachers' sermons, or counselling each other, to be a
bad or dangerous work: but the ignorant, that cannot spend the Lord's
day in holy exercises at home, (because they cannot read or remember
much,) shall join with the families of their more understanding
neighbours, who can help them; (as they met, Acts xii. 12, for prayer;
and as neighbour families were to join in eating the passover with the
family that had not enough to eat it;) for love and unity shall end
these jealousies. And all shall be done under the guidance and
oversight of their pastors; and not in enmity of opposition to them,
or to the concordant church assemblies. And oh what helps and comfort
will this be to all faithful pastors, when all the work lieth not on
them alone; but every one sets his hand to build, in his proper place;
and when they that converse together all the week, are seconding that
which he more seldom teacheth them in public!

38. The younger sort of ministers, that are now bred up in Vulcan's
forge, shall be then trained up under grave and peaceable men; where
uniting and peace-making principles shall be the rudiments of their
literature.

39. And the younger sort of the people shall be no more tempted into
envious heats against their afflicters; nor into contentious sects,
because of controversies; but shall be fed with the milk of peaceable
principles, and be educated in the love of love itself. And the names
of sects, and church divisions, and proud pretendings, shall, by use,
be made as disgraceful, as now the names of swearing, drunkenness, and
whoredom are.

40. And oh how dear, how amiable, how honourable will their governors
be, to such a people (especially that blessed prince, that shall first
perform this work)! How heartily will they pray for them, plead for
them, and fight for them! and how freely will they contribute any
thing in their power to their aid! and how impatient will they be
against every word that would dishonour them! How blessed will the
people be under such a prince! and how sweet and easy will the life of
that prince be, that is to govern such a people!

GRANT, O LORD, THAT THIS GREAT HONOUR AND COMFORT MAY FALL INTO THE
HANDS OF THE KING OF ENGLAND, BEFORE ALL OTHERS IN THE WORLD. Kings
will then see, that it is their interest, their honour, and their
greatest happiness on earth, to be the wise, pious, righteous
governors, of a wise, pious, just, united people; that love them so
much, that still they would fain serve them better than they are able.

41. The ignorant, vulgar, and ruder sort, observing this amiable
concord, and all the blessed fruits thereof, will admire religion, and
fall in love with it: and multitudes that shall be saved, will be
daily added to the seriously religious, and the house of Christ will
be filled with guests.

42. Hereupon the scandalous and flagitious lives of common protestants
will be much cured; for the number of the flagitious will grow small,
and crimes will be under common disgrace. Besides that, they will be
punished by the magistrate; so that gross sin will be a marvel.

43. The books of plain doctrine and holy living, with the pacificatory
treatises of reconcilers, will then be most in esteem and use; which
now are so disrelished by turbulent, discontented, siding persons. And
abundance of controversial writings, about church government,
liturgies, ceremonies, and many other matters, will be forgotten and
cast aside as useless things; for the swords shall be made into
plough-shares and pruning-hooks.

44. The happy example of that happy prince and country, that shall
begin and first accomplish this work, will be famous through all the
protestant churches; and will inflame such desires of imitation in
them all, and be such a ready direction in the way, that it will
greatly expedite their answerable reformation. And the famous felicity
of that prince, in the reformation and concord of his subjects, will
kindle in the hearts of other protestant princes and states an earnest
desire of the same felicity. And so, as upon the invention of
printing, and of guns, the world was presently possessed of guns and
of printed books, that never before attained any such thing; so here,
they that see the happiness of one kingdom brought about, and see how
it was done, will have matter enough before their eyes, both to excite
their desires and guide their endeavours in the means to bring all
this to pass.

45. The protestant kingdoms and states, being thus reformed and united
in themselves, will be inflamed with an earnest desire of the good of
all other churches, and of all the world: and therefore, as divines
have held something called general councils for the union of all those
churches; so these princes will by their agents hold assemblies for
maintaining correspondence, to the carrying on of the common good of
the world, by the advantage of their united counsels and strength; and
then no enemy can stand long before them. For they that love and serve
them zealously at home, will venture their lives for them zealously
abroad, if there be cause.

46. The excellent and successful use of the magistrate's government of
the churches in their dominions, will quite shame all the usurping
claims of the pope and general councils, and their mongrel
ecclesiastic courts, and all the train of artifices and offices, by
which their government of the world is managed. And the world, and
especially princes, will plainly see how much they were abused by
their usurpations, and that there is no need of pope or cardinal, nor
any of those officers or acts at all; but that these are the mere
contrivances of carnal policy, to keep up an earthly kingdom under the
name of the catholic church. And also the purity and unity of the
reformed churches, where the vulgar have more religion and union than
their monasteries, will dazzle the eyes of the popish princes, states,
and people; and when they see better, and especially the happiness of
the princes, they will forsake the usurper that had captivated them by
fraud, and will assume their freedom and felicity; and so the Roman
church kingdom will fall.

47. The deluded Mahometans seeing the unity and glory of christendom,
as they were before kept from Christ by the wicked lives and the
divisions of christians (thinking that we are far worse than they); so
now they will be brought to admire and honour the christian name, and
fear the power of the christian princes. And one part of them will
turn christians; and the rest, even the Turkish power, the christian's
force, by the power of God, will easily break. And so the Eastern
churches will be delivered and reformed, and the Mahometans come into
the faith of Christ.

48. The poor scattered Jews also, when they see the glory and concord
of christians, will be convinced that Christ is indeed the true
Messias: and being converted, perhaps, shall by the christian powers
be some of them re-established in their own land; but not to their
ancient peculiarity, or policy and law.

49. And then the christian zeal will work to the conversion of the
poor idolatrous, heathen world; and part of them will yield to reason
and faith, and the rest by just victories be subdued. And so the
kingdoms of the world will become the kingdoms of the Lord and his
Christ; and the gospel shall be preached in all the world.

50. And when the kingdom of grace is perfected, and hath had its time,
the kingdom of glory shall appear, upon the glorious appearing of
Christ our King; and the dead shall arise, and they that have
overcome, shall reign with Christ, and sit with him upon the throne,
even as he overcame, and is set down with the Father on his throne.
Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus.

"Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also, which shall
believe on me through their word; that they all may be one, as thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us,
that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory which
thou gavest me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we
are one. I in them, and thou in me; that they may be made perfect in
one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast
loved them, as thou hast loved me. Father, I will that they also whom
thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou hast given me," John xvii. 20-24.

_Object._ But if this world should ever become so happy, it would
be more amiable, and so be a greater snare to our affections, and make
us willing to stay from heaven.

_Answ._ No amiableness or pleasantness stealeth the heart from
God, or keepeth it from heaven, but that which hideth the glory and
goodness of God and heaven from our minds, or corrupteth and diverteth
the will and affections by some inconsistency or contrariety; but the
spiritual excellency of the reformed concordant church on earth, will
so much more clearly represent heaven to our conceptions, and give our
hearts so pleasant a foretaste of it, that above all things it will
excite our desires of that fuller glory, and call us most powerfully
to a heavenly mind and life: as the first-fruits and earnest do make
us desire the harvest, and the full possession; and as now those that
live in the most heavenly society, and under the most excellent helps
and means, have usually more heavenly minds and lives, than they that
in more tempting and distracting company never enjoy such heavenly
beams.

CONSECTARY.

All the Romish dreams of church union arise from ignorance of the true
state and interest of the church, and the true and necessary terms of
union.

And all the plots also of the moderating papists, that talk of a
political church catholic having a visible constitutive or governing
head; whether monarchical, (the pope,) or aristocratical, or
democratical (the patriarchs, or a general council): and that talk of
universal laws of this church, made by such a universal head, besides
the universal laws of Christ; and falsely feign the councils called
general, in a particular empire, called or ruled by one emperor only,
in his own dominions, to have been universal, as to all the catholic
churches on earth; and that feign these councils to have been
infallible, which so often erred, and crossed each other; and that set
the world upon the undeterminable controversy, Which were true general
councils; and, How many we must receive and conform to: whether only
four, or six, or eight; and till what age. And that would persuade
the christian world, that whatever diversity of canons, customs, or
church laws, or ceremonies, are allowed among them, it must all be
done or held by this same authority of the pope or council, or both:
to which (though foreign) kings and bishops must all be subject; and
from which they must receive their christianity; and by which all
their reformations must be tried: and that none must be taken as
catholics, nor any churches tolerated, that hold not such a factious
union, under such a usurping head, personal or collective: but as
Tertullian speaketh, rather than endure such wiser and better
societies, _Solitudinem facerent, et vocarent pacem_: and as a WORLDLY
CLERGY, whose church and kingdom is only of and in this world, would
banish from it all (save a lifeless image) which hath any kin to
heaven; and suffers none to live in this world among them but
themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

I say, all this is, 1. From ignorance of the true nature of the
christian religion, church state, and terms of unity and concord;
which I have lately opened in a book, entitled, "The True and only
Terms of the Concord of all the Churches."

2. And from contention about ambiguous words, and self-conceitedness
in their controversies, ignorantly thence raised; which I have sought
to end in a book, called, "Catholic Theology."

3. And from vicious passions and partiality; which I have sought to
heal in a book, called, "The Cure of Church Divisions."

All written long since the writing of this foregoing Prognostication.




THE REFORMED LITURGY.


THE ORDINARY PUBLIC WORSHIP ON THE LORD'S DAY.

 _The Congregation being reverently composed, let the Minister first
 crave God's assistance and acceptance of the Worship, to be performed
 in these or the like words._

Eternal, incomprehensible, and invisible God, infinite in power,
wisdom, and goodness, dwelling in the light which no man can approach,
where thousand thousands minister unto thee, and ten thousand times
ten thousand stand before thee, yet dwelling with the humble and
contrite, and taking pleasure in thy people: Thou hast consecrated for
us a new and living way, that with boldness we may enter into the
holiest, by the blood of Jesus, and hast bid us seek thee while thou
mayst be found: We come to thee at thy call, and worship at thy
footstool. Behold us in thy tender mercies. Despise us not, though
unworthy. Thou art greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints,
and to be had in reverence of all that are about thee. Put thy fear
into our hearts, that with reverence we may serve thee; sanctify us,
that thou mayst be sanctified of us, when we draw nigh thee. Give us
the Spirit of grace and supplication to help our infirmities, that our
prayers may be faithful, fervent, and effectual. Let the desire of our
souls be to thee: let us draw near thee with our hearts, and not only
with our lips, and worship thee, who art a Spirit, in spirit and
truth. Let thy word be spoken and heard by us as the word of God. Give
us attentive, hearing ears, and opened, believing, understanding
hearts, that we may no more refuse thy calls, nor disregard thy
merciful, outstretched hand, nor slight thy counsels and reproofs; but
be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools. Put thy
laws into our hearts, and write them in our minds, and let us be all
taught of God. Let thy word be unto us quick and powerful; a discerner
of the thoughts and intents of the heart; mighty to pull down
strong-holds, casting down imaginations and reasonings, and every
high thing that advanceth itself against the knowledge of God; and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. Let
us magnify thee with thanksgiving, and triumph in thy praise. Let us
rejoice in thy salvation, and glory in thy holy name. Open thou our
lips, O Lord, and let our mouths show forth thy praise. And let the
words of our mouths, and the meditation of our hearts, be acceptable
in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Saviour.[176]
Amen.

 _Or thus, when brevity is necessary._

O eternal, almighty, and most gracious God, heaven is thy throne, and
earth is thy footstool, holy and reverend is thy name; thou art
praised by the heavenly hosts, and in the congregation of thy saints
on earth, and wilt be sanctified in all that come nigh unto thee. We
are sinful and unworthy dust, but being invited by thee, are bold,
through our blessed Mediator, to present ourselves and our
supplications before thee. Receive us graciously, help us by thy
Spirit; let thy fear be upon us; let thy word come unto us in power,
and be received in love, with attentive, reverent, and obedient minds.
Make it to us the savour of life unto life. Cause us to be fervent in
prayer, and joyful in thy praises, and to serve thee this day without
distraction, that we may find that a day in thy courts is better than
a thousand, and that it is good for us to draw near to God; through
Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour.[177] Amen.

 _Next, let one of the Creeds be read by the Minister, saying,_

In the profession of this christian faith we are here assembled.

I believe in God the Father, &c.

I believe in one God, &c.

 _And sometimes Athanasius' Creed._

 _The Ten Commandments._

God spake these words, and said, &c.

 _For the right informing and affecting the People, and moving them
 to a penitent, believing Confession, some of these Sentences may be
 read._

God created man in his image.[178]

By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.[179]

For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.[180]

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.[181]

He that believeth on him shall not be condemned: but he that believeth
not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of
the only begotten Son of God.[182]

And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
evil.[183]

For every one that doth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved.[184]

Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us.[185]

Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God.[186]

That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of
the Spirit is spirit.[187]

Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.[188]

Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and
live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O
house of Israel?[189]

I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over
a sinner that repenteth.[190]

I will arise and go to my father, and say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son.[191]

 _The Confession of Sin, and Prayer for Pardon and
 Sanctification._

O Most holy, righteous, and gracious God, who hatest all the workers
of iniquity, and hast appointed death to be the wages of sin, but yet
for the glory of thy mercy hast sent thy Son to be the Saviour of the
world, and hast promised forgiveness of sin through his blood, to all
that believe in him, and by true repentance turn unto thee, and that
whosoever confesseth and forsaketh his sin, shall have mercy; we
confess that we are vile and miserable sinners, being conceived in
sin; by nature children of wrath, and transgressors from the womb. All
we like sheep have gone astray, and turned every one to his own way.
Thou madest us, and not we ourselves. Thou boughtest us with a price,
and we are not our own; therefore we should have wholly given up
ourselves unto thee, and have glorified thee with our souls and bodies
as being thine. Whatever we did should have been done to thy glory,
and to please thee, in the obeying of thy will. But we have displeased
and dishonoured thee, and turned from thee, exalting, seeking, and
pleasing ourselves. Thou art the King of all the world, and thy laws
are holy, just, and good. But we have denied thee our due subjection
and obedience, being unruly and self-willed, minding the things of the
flesh, and making provision for its lusts. We have staggered at thy
word through unbelief, and have not fully placed our trust and hope in
thee. We have rather feared man that is dust, and can but kill the
body, than thee, that canst destroy both soul and body in hell. Thou
art infinitely good, and love itself, yet have we not fully taken thee
for our portion, nor loved thee with all our heart, and soul, and
might, nor made thee our full desire and delight. But we have
inordinately loved ourselves, and the world, and the things of the
world, and lived by sense when we should have lived by faith, and
cared and laboured for the food that perisheth, when we should have
laboured for the one thing needful, and that which endureth to
everlasting life. We have been slothful servants, yielding to
temptations, ashamed of our duty, losing our precious time, when we
should have been fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, cleaving to thee
with full resolution, redeeming the time, and with diligence making
sure our calling and election. We have not with due holiness and
reverence drawn near thee, and used thy holy name, thy worship, and
thy day. We have dishonoured and disobeyed our superiors, and
neglected our inferiors. We have been guilty of not loving our
neighbours as ourselves, and not doing to others as we would they
should do to us; but have sought our own against their welfare, not
forbearing and forgiving, not loving our enemies as we ought, not
following peace, nor studying to do good to all according to our
power. We have sinned secretly and openly, in thought, word, and deed,
ignorantly and presumptuously, in passion and upon deliberation,
against thy precepts, promises, and threats; against thy mercies and
thy judgments, under thy patience and in thy sight; against our
consciences, our purposes, and our covenants. When we were hastening
to death and judgment, for which through all our lives we should have
prepared, thou hast commended thy wonderful love towards us in giving
thy Son to die for sinners, to reconcile us to thee, while we were
enemies; and all things being made ready, thou hast sent thy
messengers to invite us to come in, preaching to us the glad tidings
of salvation, and freely offering us pardon and life in Jesus Christ;
but we have made light of it, and neglected this great salvation, and
made excuses or too long delays; undervaluing our Redeemer, his blood
and merits, his offered grace and endless glory, rejecting his holy
doctrine and example, resisting his Spirit, ministers, and word. We
have sinned, O Lord, against thee, and against our own souls, and are
not worthy to be called thy children. We have deserved everlasting
wrath; to us belongeth confusion, but mercy and forgiveness to thee.
Have mercy upon us, O God, according to the multitude of thy mercies.
Heal our souls that have sinned against thee, and enter not into
judgment with thy servants. Hide thy face from our sins, and blot out
all our iniquities. Cast us not away from thy presence, and avenge not
upon us the quarrel of thy covenant. Wash us in the blood of the Lamb
of God, who taketh away the sin of the world. Accept us in thy beloved
Son, who was made a curse for us, and was wounded for our
transgressions, that we might be healed by his stripes. Turn us, O God
of our salvation, and cause thy face to shine upon us. Give us
repentance unto life: cause us to loathe ourselves for all the evils
that we have committed. Give us that broken, contrite spirit which
thou wilt not despise. Create in us a clean heart, O God, and renew a
right spirit within us. Take out of us the old and stony heart, and
give us a new and tender heart. Give us the Spirit of thy Son, and be
our God, and let us be thy people. Enlighten our understandings to
know the wonderful things of thy law, the dimensions of thy love in
Christ, the mysteries of thy kingdom, and the riches of the glory of
thy inheritance in the saints, and that we may approve the things that
are excellent, and may escape the snares of the devil, and may hate
every false way. Shed abroad thy love in our hearts by thy Holy
Spirit, and cause us so to love thee, that nothing may separate us
from thy love. Put thy fear into our hearts, that we may never depart
from thee. Cause us to seek first thy kingdom, and its righteousness,
and (as those that are risen with Christ) to seek the things that are
above, and to lay up a treasure in heaven, and let our hearts and
conversations be there. Mortify our earthly inclinations and desires.
Crucify the world to us, and us unto the world by the cross of Christ.
Cause us to live by faith, and look at the things that are unseen; and
use the world as not over-using it, seeing the fashion of it passeth
away; striving to enter in at the strait gate, and running so as to
obtain. Let us no longer live the rest of our time to the lust of men,
but the will of God, studying in all things to please thee, and to be
accepted of thee. Let us not seek our own wills, but the will of him
that called us; yea, let us delight to do thy will, O God; let our
delight be in thy law, and let us meditate therein day and night.
Cause us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
and righteously, and godly in this present world, as obedient
children, not fashioning ourselves to the former lusts of our
ignorance; but as he that hath called us is holy, let us be holy in
all manner of conversation. Cause us to love one another with a pure
heart, forbearing and forgiving one another, if any have a quarrel
against another, even as Christ forgave us. Give us the wisdom which
is first pure, and then peaceable. In our eyes let a vile person be
contemned, but let us honour them that fear the Lord. Cause us to walk
circumspectly without offence, and to be zealous of good works; to
love our enemies, and not to give place to wrath; and in patience to
possess our souls. Help us to deny ourselves, and take up our cross,
and follow Christ; esteeming his reproach to be greater riches than
the treasures of the world; that having suffered with him, we may
also be glorified with him. Though we must be tempted, help us to
overcome, and be faithful unto the death; and then let us receive that
crown of life, through the merits and intercession of Christ Jesus our
Lord and only Saviour; in whose comprehensive words we sum up our
requests, saying as he hath taught us, Our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come, &c.[192]

 _Or thus, when brevity is necessary._

O Most great, most just, and gracious God, thou art of purer eyes than
to behold iniquity, thou condemnest the ungodly, impenitent, and
unbelievers; but hast promised mercy through Jesus Christ to all that
repent and believe in him. We confess that we were conceived in sin,
and are by nature children of wrath; and have all sinned and come
short of the glory of God. In our baptism thou tookest us into the
bond of the holy covenant, but we remembered not our Creator in the
days of our youth, with the fear, and love, and obedience which we
owed thee: not pleasing and glorifying thee in all things, nor walking
with thee by faith in a heavenly conversation, nor serving thee
fervently with all our might; but fulfilled the desires of the flesh,
and of the carnal mind. We have neglected and abused thy holy worship,
thy holy name, and thy holy day. We have dishonoured our superiors,
and neglected our inferiors. We have dealt unjustly and uncharitably
with our neighbours, not loving them as ourselves, nor doing to others
as we would they should do to us. We have not sought first thy kingdom
and righteousness, and been contented with our daily bread, but have
been careful and troubled about many things, neglecting the one thing
necessary. Thou hast revealed thy wonderful love to us in Christ, and
offered us pardon and salvation in him; but we made light of it, and
neglected so great salvation, and resisted thy Spirit, word, and
ministers, and turned not at thy reproof. We have run into
temptations; and the sin which we should have hated, we have committed
in thy sight, both secretly and openly, ignorantly and carelessly,
rashly and presumptuously, against thy precepts, thy promises, and
threats, thy mercies and thy judgments. Our transgressions are
multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us. If thou deal
with us as we deserve, thou wilt cast us away from thy presence into
hell, where the worm never dieth, and the fire is not quenched. But in
thy mercy, thy Son, and thy promise, is our hope. Have mercy upon us,
most merciful Father. Be reconciled to us, and let the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanse us from all our sins. Take us for thy children, and
give us the Spirit of thy Son. Sanctify us wholly, shed abroad thy
love in our hearts, and cause us to love thee with all our hearts. O
make thy face to shine upon thy servants; save us from our sins, and
from the wrath to come; make us a peculiar people to thee, zealous of
good works, that we may please thee, and show forth thy praise. Help
us to redeem the time, and give all diligence to make our calling and
election sure. Give us things necessary for thy service, and keep us
from sinful discontent and cares. And seeing all these things must be
dissolved, let us consider what manner of persons we ought to be, in
all holy conversation and godliness. Help us to watch against
temptations, and resist and overcome the flesh, the devil, and the
world; and being delivered out of the hand of all our enemies, let us
serve thee without fear, in holiness and righteousness before thee all
the days of our life. Guide us by thy counsel, and after receive us
into thy glory, through Jesus Christ our only Saviour. Amen.[193]

 [Here use the Lord's Prayer as before.]

 _For the strengthening of Faith, and raising the Penitent, some of
 these Sentences of the Gospel may be here read._

Hear what the Lord saith to the absolution and comfort of penitent
believers.

The Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his
face from you, if ye return unto him.[194]

If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world.[195]

Be it known unto you, men and brethren, that through this man is
preached to you the forgiveness of sins: and by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified
by the law of Moses.[196]

Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: that as sin reigned
unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.[197]

If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from
all sin. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
truth is not in us. If we confess our sin, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sin, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.[198]

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and
lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light.[199]

Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.[200]

All that the Father hath given me shall come to me; and him that
cometh to me I will in nowise cast out.[201]

I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
iniquities I will remember no more.[202]

Hear also what you must be and do for the time to come, if you would
be saved.

Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.[203]

If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed
away; behold, all things are become new.[204]

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For they that are after the
flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the
Spirit the things of the Spirit.[205]

For to be carnally-minded is death, but to be spiritually-minded is
life and peace.[206]

For the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither indeed can be.[207]

So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.[208]

For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if through the
Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.[209]

Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the
which I tell you before, as I have told you in time past, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.[210]

But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there
is no law. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts.[211]

Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness,
not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. But put
ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to
fulfil the lusts thereof.[212]

Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.[213]

Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the
way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat: because strait is the gate, and narrow is the path, that
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.[214]

For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared unto all
men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present
world; looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works.[215]

Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the
scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law
doth he meditate day and night.[216]

The ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous.[217]

Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have
grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear: for our God is a consuming fire.[218]

Seeing then that these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be, in all holy conversation and godliness,
looking for and hasting to the coming of the day of God?[219]

Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your
labour is not in vain in the Lord.[220]

 _Then may be said the ninety-fifth or the hundredth Psalm, or the
 eighty-fourth._

 _And next the Psalms in order for the day; and next shall be read a
 chapter of the Old Testament, such as the Minister findeth most
 seasonable; or with the liberty expressed in the admonition before
 the second book of Homilies._[221]

 _After which may be sung a Psalm, or the Te Deum said; then shall
 be read a chapter of the New Testament, and then the Prayer for the
 King and Magistrates. And after that, the sixty-seventh, or
 ninety-eighth, or some other Psalm, may be sung or said, or the
 Benedictus, or Magnificat. And the same order to be observed at the
 Evening Worship, if time allow it._[222]

 Next after the psalm the minister shall (in the pulpit) first
 reverently, prudently, and fervently pray, according to the state and
 necessities of the church, and those especially that are present, and
 according to the subject that he is to preach on. And after prayer,
 he shall preach upon some text of holy Scripture, suiting his matter
 to the necessities of the hearers, and the manner of delivery to
 their quality and benefit. Always speaking from faith and holy
 experience in himself, with plainness and perspicuity, with reverence
 and gravity, with convincing evidence and authority, with prudence,
 caution, faithfulness, and impartiality, with tender love and melting
 compassion, with fervent zeal and persuading importunity, and with
 frequency and unwearied patience, waiting on God for the success.
 After sermon he shall pray for a blessing on the word of instruction
 and exhortation, which was delivered; and in his prayers (before or
 after sermon) ordinarily he shall pray for the conversion of
 heathens, Jews, and other infidels; the subversion of idolatry,
 infidelity, Mahometanism, heresy, papal tyranny and superstition,
 schism and profaneness, and for the free progress of the gospel, and
 the increase of faith and godliness, the honouring of God's name, the
 enlargement of the kingdom of Christ, and the obedience of his saints
 through the nations of the earth. And in special for these nations;
 for the king's Majesty, and the rest of the royal family; for the
 lords of his Majesty's council, the judges, and other magistrates of
 the land; for the pastors of the church, and all congregations
 committed to their care and government. Always taking heed that no
 mixtures of imprudent, disorderly expressions, of private discontent
 and passion, of unreverent, disobedient, seditious, or factious
 intimations, tending to corrupt, and not to edify, the people's
 minds, do turn either prayer or preaching into sin. And ordinarily in
 church communion, especially on the Lord's day, (which is purposely
 separated for the joyful commemoration of the blessed work of man's
 redemption,) a considerable proportion of the public worship must
 consist of thanksgiving and praises to God, especially for Jesus
 Christ, and his benefits; still leaving it to the minister's
 discretion to abbreviate some parts of worship, when he seeth it
 needful to be longer on some other.[223]

 _The Sermon and Prayer being ended, let the Minister dismiss the
 Congregation with a benediction, in these or the like words._

Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.[224]

The Lord bless you, and keep you: the Lord make his face to shine upon
you, and be gracious unto you: the Lord lift up his countenance upon
you, and give you peace.[225]

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father,
and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.[226]

 _Except there be a Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
 to be celebrated, or any further Worship to be performed, and then
 the Minister may delay the Benediction till the End._

 _And because, when there is leisure, the Prayers of the Church
 should be as full as the Rule and our Necessities require; let the
 following General Prayer be used, when the Minister findeth it
 convenient, instead of the Litany and Collects._

 Here are also adjoined a Thanksgiving for Christ and his benefits,
 and a Hymn to be used at the discretion of the minister, either after
 sermon, or at the communion, or on other days.

 _A Prayer for the King, the Royal Family, and Magistrates._

Almighty God, by whom kings reign, and princes decree justice, who
rulest in all the kingdoms of men, and givest them to whomsoever thou
wilt, who by thy special providence hast set over us thy servant,
Charles, our king; crown him with thy blessings, and satisfy him with
thy goodness. Save him by thy right hand, and defend him against such
as rise up against him; prolong his life in peace and righteousness;
grant him the spirit of wisdom and counsel, the spirit of holiness,
and the fear of the Lord, that he may know how to go in and out before
this great people over whom thou hast set him. Let not thy law depart
out of his mind, or mouth, but let him meditate in it day and night.
Make him as an angel of God to discern between good and evil, that in
his eyes a vile person may be contemned, but he may honour them that
fear the Lord; that his eyes may be upon the faithful of the land,
that they may dwell with him, and they that are perfect in the way
serve him. Remove the wicked from before him, that his throne may be
established in righteousness; and grant that under him we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And when he
hath finished his course on earth, let him inherit a crown of
righteousness, and reign with Christ for ever. Bless the queen mother,
the illustrious prince, James, duke of York, and the rest of the royal
family; endue them with thy Holy Spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly
grace, and make them blessings in their generation. Endue the lords of
his Majesty's council, and all the nobility, the judges, and all the
magistrates of the land, with wisdom from above, that they may rule as
in thy fear, and judge righteous judgment, and may take heed what they
do, as judging not for man, but for the Lord, that justice may run
down as water, and righteousness as a mighty stream. Let all his
Majesty's subjects duly submit to him and obey him, not only for
wrath, but for conscience' sake. Let all his kingdoms be the kingdoms
of the Lord, and of his Son Christ, that God may dwell amongst us, and
that it may be said of them, The Lord bless thee, O habitation of
Justice, and mountain of Holiness: for thine, O Father, with the Son
and Holy Ghost, is the kingdom, and power, and glory for ever.
Amen.[227]

 _The General Prayer._

O most holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, Three Persons and One God, our Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, our Lord, our Governor and Father, hear us, and have mercy
upon us, miserable sinners.

O Lord our Saviour, God and man! who, having assumed our nature, by
thy sufferings, and death, and burial, wast made a ransom to take away
the sins of the world; who being raised from the dead, ascended and
glorified, art made head over all things to the church, which thou
gatherest, justifiest, sanctifiest, rulest, and preservest, and which
at thy coming thou wilt raise and judge to endless glory; we beseech
thee to hear us, miserable sinners: make sure to us our calling and
election, our unfeigned faith and repentance; that being justified,
and made the sons of God, we may have peace with him, as our
reconciled God and Father.[228]

Let thy Holy spirit sanctify us, and dwell in us, and cause us to deny
ourselves, and to give up ourselves entirely to thee, as being not our
own, but thine.

As the world was created for thy glory, let thy name be glorified
throughout the world; let self-love, and pride, and vain-glory be
destroyed; cause us to love thee, fear thee, and trust in thee with
all our hearts, and to live to thee.[229]

Let all the earth subject themselves to thee, their King. Let the
kingdoms of the world become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ. Let the atheists, idolaters, Mahometans, Jews, and other
infidels, and ungodly people, be converted. Send forth meet labourers
into the harvest, and let the gospel be preached throughout all the
world. Preserve and bless them in thy work. Sustain in patience, and
seasonably deliver, the churches that are oppressed by idolaters,
infidels, Mahometans, or other enemies, or by the Roman papal
usurpations.[230]

Unite all christians in Jesus Christ, the true and only universal
Head, in the true christian and catholic faith and love; cast out
heresies and corruptions, heal divisions, let the strong receive the
weak, and bear their infirmities; restrain the spirit of pride and
cruelty, and let nothing be done in strife or vain-glory.[231]

Keep us from atheism, idolatry, and rebellion against thee; from
infidelity, ungodliness, and sensuality; from security, presumption,
and despair. Let us delight to please thee, and let thy word be the
rule of our faith and lives; let us love it, and understand it, and
meditate in it day and night.[232]

Let us not corrupt or neglect thy worship; nor take thy holy name in
vain. Keep us from blasphemy, perjury, profane swearing, lying,
contempt of thy ordinances, and from false, unworthy, and unreverent
thoughts and speeches of God, or holy things; and from the neglect and
profanation of thy holy day.[233]

Put it into the hearts of the kings and rulers of the world to submit
to Christ, and rule for him as nursing-fathers to his church: and save
them from the temptations that would drown them in sensuality; or
would break them upon Christ as a rock of offence, by engaging them
against his holy doctrine, ways, and servants.[234]

Have mercy on thy servant Charles, our king, protect his person,
illuminate and sanctify him by thy Spirit, that above all things he
may seek thine honour, the increase of faith, and holy obedience to
thy laws; and may govern us as thy minister, appointed by thee for the
terror of evil-doers, and the praise of them that do well, that under
him we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty.[235]

Have mercy upon all the royal family, upon the lords of the council,
and all the nobility, the judges, and other magistrates of these
lands. Let them fear thee, and be ensamples of piety and temperance,
haters of injustice, covetousness, and pride, and defenders of the
innocent: in their eyes let a vile person be contemned, but let them
honour them that fear the Lord.[236]

Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, and not resist; let
them obey the king, and all in authority, not only for wrath, but for
conscience' sake.[237]

Give all the churches able, holy, faithful pastors, that may soundly
and diligently preach thy word, and guide the flocks in ways of
holiness and peace; overseeing and ruling them not by constraint, but
willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; not as being
lords over thy heritage, but the servants of all, and ensamples to the
flock; that when the chief Pastor shall appear, they may receive the
crown of glory.[238]

Let the people know those that are over them in the Lord, and labour
among them, preaching to them the word of God; let them highly esteem
them in love for their work's sake, account them worthy of double
honour, and obey them in the Lord.[239]

Let parents bring up their children in holy nurture, that they may
remember their Creator in the days of their youth; and let children
love, honour, and obey them. Let husbands love their wives, and guide
them in knowledge and holiness; and let wives love and obey their
husbands. Let masters rule their servants in thy fear, and servants
obey their masters in the Lord.[240]

Keep us from murders and violence, and injurious passionate words and
actions.[241]

Keep us from fornication and all uncleanness, from chambering and
wantonness, from lustful thoughts and filthy communications, and all
unchaste behaviour.[242]

Keep us from stealing or wronging our neighbour in his property, from
perverting justice, from false witnessing and deceit, from
slandering, backbiting, uncharitable censuring or other wrong to the
reputation of our neighbours.[243]

Keep us from coveting any thing that is our neighbour's. Let us love
our neighbours as ourselves, and do to others as we would they should
do to us.[244]

Cause us to love Christ in his members with a pure and fervent love,
and to love our enemies, and do good to all, as we are able; but
especially to the household of faith.[245]

Give us our necessary sustentation and provision for thy service and
contentedness therewith. Bless our labours, and the fruits of the
earth in their season, and give us such temperate weather as tendeth
hereunto. Deliver us and all thy servants from such sickness, wants,
and other distresses, as may unseasonably take us off thy service.
Keep us from gluttony and drunkenness, slothfulness, unlawful gain,
and from making provision for the flesh to satisfy its lusts.[246]

When we sin, restore us by true repentance and faith in Christ. Let us
loathe ourselves for our transgressions; forgive them all, and accept
us in thy well-beloved Son; save us from the curse and punishment
which they deserve, and teach us heartily to forgive others. Convert
our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and forgive them.[247]

Cause us to watch against temptations, to resist and overcome the
flesh, the devil, and the world; and by no allurements of pleasure,
profit, or honour, to be drawn from thee to sin. Let us patiently
suffer with Christ that we may reign with him.[248]

Deliver us and all thy people from the enmity and rage of Satan, and
all his wicked instruments; and preserve us to thy heavenly
kingdom.[249]

For thou only art the universal King; all power is thine in heaven and
earth: of thee, and through thee, and to thee are all things, and the
glory shall be thine for ever. Amen.[250]

 Concerning the Psalms for public use.

 _We desire that instead of the imperfect version of the Psalms in
 metre now in use, Mr. William Barton's Version, and that perused and
 approved by the Church of Scotland there in use, (being the best that
 we have seen,) may be received and corrected by some skilful men, and
 both allowed (for grateful variety) to be printed together on several
 columns or pages, and publicly used; at least until a better than
 either of them shall be made._

 _A Thanksgiving for Christ, and his gracious Benefits._

Most glorious God, accept, through thy beloved Son, though from the
hands of sinners, of thanksgiving, which thy unspeakable love and
mercies, as well as thy command, do bind us to offer up unto thee.
Thou art the Father of mercies, and the God of all consolation, full
of compassion, gracious, long-suffering, plenteous in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression,
and sin. For thy glory thou didst create us after thine image; thou
madest us a little lower than the angels, and crownedst us with glory
and honour, giving us dominion over the works of thy hands, and
putting all these things under our feet. And when we forsook thee, and
broke thy covenant, and rebelled against thee, and corrupted
ourselves, and turned our glory into shame thou didst not leave us in
the hands of death, nor cast us out into utter desperation; but thou
didst so love the sinful world, as to give thy Son to be our Saviour.
He took not upon him the nature of angels, but of man; the Word was
made flesh and dwelt among us. This is the unsearchable mystery of
love which the angels desire to pry into: he was tempted, that he
might succour them that are tempted, and conquered the tempter, that
had conquered us. He became poor that was Lord of all, to make us
rich. He did not sin, but fulfilled all righteousness, to save us from
our unrighteousness. He made himself of no reputation, but was
reviled, scorned, and spit upon, enduring the cross, and despising the
shame to cover our shame, and to bring us unto glory; thou laidst upon
him the iniquity of us all. He was bruised and wounded for our
transgressions, that we might be healed by his stripes. He gave
himself a ransom for us, and died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification. We thank thee for his death that saveth us from death,
and that he bore the curse to redeem us from the curse, and for his
life which opened to us the way to life. Thou hast given him to be
Head over all things to the church, and hast given the heathen to be
his inheritance, and given him a name above every name, and given all
power and judgment unto him. We thank thee for the new and better
covenant, for thy great and precious promises; that thou hast given us
eternal life in Christ. That we have the clear and sure revelation of
thy will in the holy Scriptures. That thou foundest thy church upon
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head
corner-stone. And hast committed to thy ministers the word of
reconciliation, that as ambassadors speaking in the stead of Christ,
they might beseech us to be reconciled unto thee. We thank thee that
by them thou hast opened our eyes, and turned us from darkness unto
light, and from the power of Satan unto God. We were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures,
taken captive by Satan at his will; but thy mercy saved us by the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Thou mightest
justly have left us to the blindness of our minds, and to the hardness
of our hearts, to seared consciences, to be past feeling, to our own
hearts' lusts, to walk in our own counsels, and to work uncleanness
with greediness, when we so oft refused to come to Christ that we
might have life, and would not have him to reign over us. But thy
patience waited on us in our sin; and all the day long didst thou
stretch forth thy hand to a disobedient and gainsaying people. When we
turned from thee, thou calledst after us, to turn and live. Thou
drewest us to thy Son, and openedst our hearts to attend to thy call.
Thou lovedst us first, and was found of them that sought thee not.
Thou hast pardoned our great and manifold transgressions, and
justified us by faith in Christ, and given us repentance unto life.
Thou hast adopted us to be thy sons, and joint heirs with Christ; and
made us his members, and given us his Spirit: we are no more
strangers, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of thy household.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his
abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for
us. Thou keepest us by thy mighty power through faith unto salvation:
ready at last to be revealed, though (when they are needful) we must
for a season be in heaviness under tribulations. Thou hast promised,
that all things shall work together for our good; in all our straits
thou grantest us access to the throne of grace, bidding us call upon
thee in the time of trouble, and promising to deliver us, that we may
glorify thee: every where we have leave to lift up unto thee holy
hands, especially in the house of prayer, and the assembly of the
saints. Thou hast heard the voice of our supplications when we have
cried unto thee; great is thy mercy towards us. O Lord, thou hast
delivered our souls from the lowest hell; thou hast sent forth from
heaven thy mercy and truth; and saved us from the reproach of him that
would swallow us up. Thou art our hiding-place: in the secrets of thy
presence thou preservest us from trouble, from the pride of men, and
from the strife of tongues. Thou dost compass us about with songs of
deliverance. O love the Lord, all ye his saints! for the Lord
preserveth the faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer. He
dealeth not with us after our sins; his anger is but for a moment, but
in his favour is life. In his wrath he remembereth mercy: all thy
paths, O Lord, are mercy and truth to such as keep thy covenant. We
come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies; O give thanks
unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. Glory
ye in his holy name; let the hearts of them rejoice that seek him.
Blessed are the people that know the joyful sound; they shall walk, O
Lord, in the light of thy countenance. In thy name they shall rejoice
all the day, and in thy righteousness and favour shall they be
exalted. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still
praising thee. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice
and be glad in thee all our days. Guide us by thy counsel, and
afterwards receive us unto thy glory; where with all the blessed host
of heaven, we may behold, admire, and perfectly and joyfully praise
thee, our most glorious Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, for ever
and for ever.[251] Amen.

 _The Hymn._

 The First Part.

Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy
name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, and healeth all thy diseases; who
redeemed thy life from destruction, and crowneth thee with
loving-kindness and tender mercies. As far as the east is from the
west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us. Behold, what
love the Father hath bestowed on us, that we should be called the sons
of God. Because thy loving-kindness is better than life, my lips shall
praise thee. Thus will I bless thee while I live; I will lift up my
hands in thy name. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. Whom have I
in heaven but thee? and there is none on earth that I desire besides
thee. My flesh and my heart faileth, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. For, lo, all that are far from thee
shall perish; but it is good for me to draw near to God. I am
continually with thee: thou hast holden me by my right hand. In the
multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Thou
shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to
glory.[252]

 The Second Part.

How excellent is thy loving-kindness, O God! therefore do the sons of
men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou shalt
make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures: for with thee is the
fountain of life. In thy light we shall see light. Therefore my heart
is glad, and my glory rejoiceth. My flesh also shall rest in hope.
Thou wilt show me the path of life. In thy presence is fulness of joy,
and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. Surely goodness and
mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; and I shall dwell in
the house of the Lord for ever. O continue thy loving-kindness to them
that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. To the
end that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be silent. O Lord
my God, I give thanks to thee for ever.[253]

 The Third Part.

Glory to God in the highest: on earth peace, good will towards men.
Praise ye the Lord: sing to the Lord a new song; his praise is in the
congregation of saints. For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people; he
will beautify the meek with salvation. Let the saints be joyful in
glory. Let the high praises of God be in their mouths. All thy works
praise thee, O Lord, and thy saints shall bless thee. They shall speak
of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power; to make known to
the sons of men thy mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of thy
kingdom. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion is
through all generations. The elders and saints about thy throne, rest
not day nor night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which
was, and is, and is to come. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory, and honour, and power; for thou hast created all things, and
for thy pleasure they are and were created. They sing unto thee the
song of Moses, and of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvellous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of
saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name; for
thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before
thee, for thy judgments are made manifest. Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honour, and glory. For thou hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, and
made us kings and priests to God.[254]

 The Fourth Part.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men! Let them sacrifice the
sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing. Sing
unto the Lord, bless his name; show forth his salvation from day to
day. Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him, all
the earth. Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be glad before the
Lord; for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth. With
righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.
Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his
commandments, hearkening to the voice of his word. Bless ye the Lord,
all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his that do his pleasure. Bless the
Lord, all his works in all places of his dominions. Bless the Lord, O
my soul. My mouth shall speak the praises of the Lord; and let all
flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever. Let every thing that hath
breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.[255]


THE ORDER OF CELEBRATING THE SACRAMENT OF THE BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST.

 _This, or the like Explication of the Nature, Use, and Benefits of
 this Sacrament, may be used at the Discretion of the Minister, when
 he seeth it needful to the Instruction of the Communicants._

That you may discern the Lord's body, and understand the nature, use,
and benefits of this sacrament; you must know that God created man in
his own image, to know, and love, and serve his Maker; that man fell
under the guilt of sin and condemnation, and left his holy fitness for
the work for which he was created. That hereupon the wonderful love
and wisdom of God provided us a remedy in our Redeemer, to the end he
might not lose the glory of his creation, that he might pardon and
save us upon terms; securing the honour of his justice, and attaining
the ends of his law and government, and recover us to his love and
service, by appearing to the world, in the greatest demonstrations of
goodness, love, and mercy. By the greatest miracle of condescension,
he first promised, and then gave his only Son, the Eternal Word, to
take man's nature into personal union with his Godhead; that being God
and man, he might be a fit Mediator between God and man, to restore
us, and reconcile us to himself. Thus Jesus Christ, conceived by the
Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, became the Second Adam, the
Physician and Saviour of undone sinners, the Captain of our salvation,
to be the glorious King and Head of all that are sanctified and saved.
He revealed the holiness, the goodness, and the love of God, by the
perfect holiness, goodness, and love of his blessed person, doctrine,
and conversation, and by suffering for us all the afflictions of this
life, and at last the cursed death of the cross, as a sacrifice and
ransom for us. That all this might be effectual to our recovery, he
made for us a new and better covenant, and preached it himself,
undertaking the pardon, justification, and sanctification of all that
by unfeigned faith do take him for their Saviour, repenting of their
sins, and consenting to be sanctified by his word and Spirit (by which
also he inviteth and draweth men to himself, and giveth them to
believe): into this blessed, pardoning, saving covenant, we are first
solemnly entered by baptism. And when Christ was ready to leave the
world, and to give up himself a sacrifice for us, and intercede and
exercise the fulness of his kingly power, and the church's Head; and
by his grace to draw men to himself, and prepare them for his glory;
he did himself institute this sacrament of his body and blood at his
last supper, to be a continued representation and remembrance of his
death, and therein of his own and his Father's love, until his coming;
appointing his ministers, by the preaching of the gospel, and
administration of these sacraments, to be his agents without, and his
Spirit within, effectually to communicate his grace.

[The Lord's supper, then, is a holy sacrament instituted by Christ,
wherein bread and wine being first by consecration made sacramentally,
or representatively, the body and blood of Christ, are used by
breaking and pouring out to represent, and commemorate, the sacrifice
of Christ's body and blood, upon the cross once offered up to God for
sin; and are given in the name of Christ unto the church, to signify
and solemnize the renewal of his holy covenant with them, and giving
of himself unto them, to expiate their sins by his sacrifice, and
sanctify them further by his Spirit, and confirm their right to
everlasting life: and they are received, eaten, and drunk by the
church, to profess that they willingly receive Christ himself to the
ends aforesaid, (their justification, sanctification, and
glorification,) and to signify and solemnize the renewal of their
covenant with him, and their holy communion with him, and with one
another.]

It being the renewing of a mutual covenant that is here solemnized, as
we commemorate Christ's sacrifice, and receive him and his saving
benefits, so we offer and deliver to him ourselves, as his redeemed,
sanctified people, to be a living acceptable sacrifice, thankfully and
obediently to live unto his praise.

Before the receiving of his holy sacrament, we must examine ourselves,
and come preparedly; in the receiving of it, we must exercise holy
affections suited to the work; and after the receiving of it, we must,
by consideration of it, endeavour to revive the same affections, and
perform our covenant there renewed.

The holy qualifications to be before provided, and in receiving
exercised, and after receiving, are these. 1. A true belief of the
articles of the christian faith concerning Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; the person, offices, works, sufferings, and benefits of Christ.
2. The sense of our sinful and undone condition, as in ourselves, and
of our need of Christ: so as humbly to loathe ourselves for our
transgressions, with the sense of our present weaknesses to be
strengthened, and sins to be forgiven. 3. A true desire after Christ
for pardon, and spiritual nourishment and salvation. 4. A thankful
sense of the wonderful love of God, declared in our redemption, and in
the present offers of Christ, and life. 5. The exercise of holy love
and joy in the sense of this unspeakable love. (If these two be not
felt before we come, yet in and after the sacrament we must strive to
exercise them.) 6. A love to one another, and forgiving wrongs to one
another, with a desire after the communion of saints. 7. The giving up
ourselves in covenant to God, with resolution for renewed obedience.
8. A patient hope for the coming of Christ himself, and of the
everlasting kingdom, where we shall be perfectly united in him, and
glorified with him.

Those only are to be invited to the Lord's table, and to come, that
truly repent and believe, and unfeignedly consent to the terms of the
covenant (though all are not to be invited thus to believe and repent,
and so to come). But those are to be admitted, by the pastors, if they
come, who, having the use of reason to understand what they do, and
examine themselves, have made a personal profession of faith,
repentance, and obedience; and are members of the church, and not
justly for heresy or scandalous sin, removed from its present
communion.

The benefit of the sacrament is not to be judged of only by present
experience and feeling, but by faith. God having appointed us to use
it, and promised his blessing, we may and must believe, that he will
make good his promise; and whatever we feel at present, that we
sincerely wait not on him in vain.

 _The Exhortation._

You are invited hither, dear brethren, to be guests at this holy
table, by the Lord's command, to receive the greatest mercy, and to
perform the greatest duty. On Christ's part, all things are made
ready. The feast is prepared for you, even for you that by sin have
deserved to be cast out of the presence of the Lord; for you that have
so oft neglected and abused mercy. A feast of the body and blood of
Christ, free to you, but dear to him. You were lost, and in the way to
be lost for ever, when by the greatest miracle of condescending love,
he sought and saved you. You were dead in sin, condemned by the law,
the slaves of Satan; there wanted nothing but the executing stroke of
justice to have sent you into endless misery; when our dear Redeemer
pitied you in your blood, and shed his own to wash and heal you. He
suffered that was offended, that the offender might not suffer. He
cried out on the cross, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"
that we who had deserved it, might not be everlastingly forsaken. He
died that we might live. Oh how would the mercy of redemption have
affected you, if you had first lain one year, or month, or day in
hell! Had you but seen your dying Lord, or seen the damned in their
misery, how do you think you should have valued the salvation that is
now revealed and tendered to you? See here Christ dying in this holy
representation. Behold the sacrificed Lamb of God, that taketh away
the sins of the world. It is his will to be thus frequently crucified
before your eyes. Oh how should we be covered with shame, and loathe
ourselves, that have both procured the death of Christ by sin, and
sinned against it! And how should we all be filled with joy, that have
such mysteries of mercy opened, and so great salvation freely offered
to us! O hate sin, O love this Saviour: see that you come not hither
without a desire to be more holy, nor with a purpose to go on in
wilful sin. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; but if you heartily
repent, and consent to the covenant, come and welcome; we have
commission from Christ to tell you, that you are welcome. Let no
trembling, contrite soul draw back, that is willing to be Christ's
upon his covenant terms, but believe that Christ is much more willing
to be yours. He was first willing, and therefore died for you, and
made the covenant of grace, and sent to invite and importune you to
consent, and stayed for you so long, and gave you your repentance,
your willingness, and desire. Question not then his willingness, if
you are willing. It is Satan and unbelief that would have you question
it, to the injury both of Christ and you. Come near, observe, believe,
and wonder at the riches of his love and grace; for he hath himself
invited you to see and taste, that you may wonder. You are sinners,
but he inviteth you to receive a renewed, sealed pardon of your sins,
and to give you more of his Spirit to overcome them. See here his
broken body and his blood, the testimonies of his willingness. Thus
hath he sealed the covenant, which pardoneth all your sins, and
secureth you of your reconciliation with God, and your adoption, and
your right to everlasting blessedness. Deny not your consent, but
heartily give up yourselves to Christ, and then doubt not but your
scarlet, crimson sins shall be made as white as wool or snow. Object
not the number or greatness of them against his grace. There is none
too great for him to pardon to penitent believers. Great sins shall
bring great glory to his blood and grace. But strive you then for
great loathing of your sins, and greater love to such a God, and
greater thanks to such a Saviour. Unfeignedly say, I am willing, Lord,
to be wholly thine, and then believingly take Christ, and pardon, and
life, as given you by his own appointment in the sealed covenant. And
remember that he is coming. He is coming with thousands of his mighty
angels, to execute judgment on the ungodly, but to be glorified in his
saints, and admired in all that do believe. And then we shall have
greater things than these. Then shall you see all the promises
fulfilled, which now are sealed to you, on which he causeth you to
trust. Revive now your love to one another, and forgive those that
have wronged you, and delight in the communion of the saints; and then
you shall be admitted into the church triumphant, where with perfect
saints you shall perfectly rejoice, and love and praise the Lord for
ever. Receive now a crucified Christ here represented, and be
contented to take up your cross, and follow him. And then you shall
reign with a glorified Christ, in the blessed vision and fruition of
that God, to whom by Christ you are now reconciled. Let faith and love
be working upon these things, while you are at this holy table.

 _Then shall the Minister use this or the like Prayer._

Most holy God, we are as stubble before thee, the consuming fire. How
shall we stand before thy holiness, for we are a sinful people, laden
with iniquity, that have gone backward and provoked the Holy One of
Israel. When we were lost, thy Son did seek and save us; when we were
dead in sin, thou madest us alive. Thou sawest us polluted in our
blood, and saidst unto us, Live. In that time of love thou coveredst
our nakedness, and enteredst into a covenant with us, and we became
thine own. Thou didst deliver us from the power of darkness, and
translate us into the kingdom of thy dear Son; and gavest us remission
of sin, through his blood. But we are grievous revolters, we have
forgotten the covenant of the Lord our God. We were engaged to love
thee with all our hearts, and to hate iniquity, and serve thee
diligently, and thankfully to set forth thy praise. But we have
departed from thee, and corrupted ourselves by self-love, and by
loving the world, and the things that are in the world, and have
fulfilled the desires of the flesh, which we should have crucified. We
have neglected our duty to thee, and to our neighbour, and the
necessary care of our own salvation. We have been unprofitable
servants, and have hid thy talents, and have dishonoured thee, whom in
all things we should have pleased and glorified. We have been
negligent in hearing and reading thy holy word, and in meditating and
conferring of it, in public and private prayer, and thanksgiving, and
in our preparation to this holy sacrament, in the examining of
ourselves, and repenting of our sins, and stirring up our hearts to a
believing and thankful receiving of thy grace, and to love and
joyfulness, in our communion with thee and with one another. We have
not duly discerned the Lord's body, but have profaned thy holy name
and ordinance, as if the table of the Lord had been contemptible. And
when thou hast spoken peace to us, we returned again to folly. We have
deserved, O Lord, to be cast out of thy presence, and to be forsaken,
as we have forsaken thee, and to hear our confusion, Depart from me, I
know you not, ye workers of iniquity. Thou mayst justly tell us, thou
hast no pleasure in us, nor wilt receive an offering at our hand. But
with thee there is abundant mercy. And our advocate Jesus Christ the
righteous, is the propitiation for our sins; who bare them in his body
on the cross, and made himself an offering for them, that he might put
them away by the sacrifice of himself: have mercy upon us, and wash us
in his blood, clothe us with his righteousness, take away our
iniquities, and let them not be our ruin; forgive them and remember
them no more. O thou that delightest not in the death of sinners, heal
our backslidings, love us freely, and say unto our souls, that thou
art our salvation. Thou wilt in nowise cast out them that come unto
thee; receive us graciously to the feast thou hast prepared for us;
cause us to hunger and thirst after Christ and his righteousness, that
we may be satisfied. Let his flesh and blood be to us meat and drink
indeed; and his Spirit be in us a well of living water, springing up
to everlasting life. Give us to know thy love in Christ, which passeth
knowledge. Though we have not seen him, let us love him; and though
now we see him not, yet believing let us rejoice with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory. Though we are unworthy of the crumbs that fall from
thy table, yet feed us with the bread of life, and speak and seal up
peace to our sinful, wounded souls. Soften our hearts that are
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin: mortify the flesh, and
strengthen us with might in the inner man; that we may live and
glorify thy grace, though Jesus Christ our only Saviour.[256] Amen.

 _Here let the Bread be brought to the Minister, and received by
 him, and set upon the Table, and then the Wine in like manner, (or if
 they be set there before,) however, let him bless them, praying in
 these or the like words._

Almighty God, thou art the Creator and the Lord of all things. Thou
art the Sovereign Majesty whom we have offended; thou art our most
loving and merciful Father, who hast given thy Son to reconcile us to
thyself, who hath ratified the new testament and the covenant of grace
with his most precious blood; and hath instituted this holy sacrament
to be celebrated in remembrance of him till his coming. Sanctify these
thy creatures of bread and wine, which according to thy institution
and command, we set apart to this holy use, that they may be
sacramentally the body and blood of thy Son Jesus Christ.[257] Amen.

 _Then (or immediately before this Prayer) let the Minister read the
 words of the Institution, saying,_

Hear what the apostle Paul saith: "For I have received of the Lord,
that which also I deliver unto you, That the Lord Jesus, the same
night in which he was betrayed, took bread; and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which is
broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner
also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new
testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come."[258]

 _Then let the Minister say,_

This bread and wine being set apart, and consecrated to this holy use
by God's appointment, are now no common bread and wine, but
sacramentally the body and blood of Christ.

 _Then let him thus pray:_

Most merciful Saviour, as thou hast loved us to the death, and
suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust, and hast instituted
this holy sacrament to be used in remembrance of thee till thy coming;
we beseech thee, by thine intercession with the Father, through the
sacrifice of thy body and blood, give us the pardon of our sins, and
thy quickening Spirit, without which the flesh will profit us nothing.
Reconcile us to the Father; nourish us as thy members to everlasting
life.[259] Amen.

 _Then let the Minister take the Bread, and break it in the sight of
 the people, saying,_

The body of Christ was broken for us, and offered once for all to
sanctify us. Behold the sacrificed Lamb of God, that taketh away the
sins of the world.

 _In like manner let him take the Cup, and pour out the Wine in the
 sight of the Congregation, saying,_

We were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot.

 _Then let him thus pray:_

Most Holy Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the Son, by whom
Christ was conceived, by whom the prophets and apostles were inspired,
and the ministers of Christ are qualified and called, that dwellest
and workest in all the members of Christ, whom thou sanctifiest to the
image and for the service of their Head, and comfortest them that they
may show forth his praise; illuminate us, that by faith we may see him
that is here represented to us. Soften our hearts, and humble us for
our sins. Sanctify and quicken us, that we may relish the spiritual
food, and feed on it to our nourishment and growth in grace. Shed
abroad the love of God upon our hearts, and draw them out in love to
him. Fill us with thankfulness and holy joy, and with love to one
another: comfort us by witnessing that we are the children of God.
Confirm us for new obedience. Be the earnest of our inheritance, and
seal us up to everlasting life.[260] Amen.

 _Then let the Minister deliver the Bread thus consecrated and
 broken to the Communicants, first taking and eating it himself as one
 of them, when he hath said,_

Take ye, eat ye; This is the body of Christ which is broken for you;
do this in remembrance of him.[261]

 _In like manner he shall deliver them the Cup, first drinking of it
 himself, when he hath said,_

This cup is the new testament in Christ's blood, [or Christ's blood of
the new testament,] which is shed for you for the remission of sins;
drink ye all of it in remembrance of him.[262]

 Let it be left to the Minister's choice, whether he will consecrate
 the bread and wine together, and break the bread and pour out the
 wine immediately; or whether he will consecrate and pour out the
 wine, when the Communicants have eaten the bread. If he do the
 latter, he must use the foregoing Prayers and expressions twice
 accordingly. And let it be left to his discretion, whether he will
 use any words at the breaking of the bread, and pouring out the wine,
 or not; and if the Minister choose to pray but once, at the
 consecration, commemoration, and delivery; let him pray as followeth,
 or to this sense:

Almighty God, thou art the Creator and the Lord of all. Thou art the
Sovereign Majesty whom we have offended. Thou art our merciful Father,
who hast given us thy Son to reconcile us to thyself; who hath
ratified the new testament and covenant of grace with his most
precious blood, and hath instituted this holy sacrament to be
celebrated in memorial of him, till his coming. Sanctify these thy
creatures of bread and wine, which, according to thy will, we set
apart to this holy use, that they may be sacramentally the body and
blood of thy Son Jesus Christ. And through his sacrifice and
intercession, give us the pardon of all our sins, and be reconciled to
us, and nourish us by the body and blood of Christ to everlasting
life. And to that end, give us thy quickening Spirit to show Christ to
our believing souls, that is here represented to our senses. Let him
soften our hearts, and humble us for our sins, and cause us to feed on
Christ by faith. Let him shed abroad thy love upon our hearts, and
draw them on in love to thee, and fill us with holy joy and
thankfulness, and fervent love to one another. Let him comfort us by
witnessing that we are thy children, and confirm us for new obedience,
and be the earnest of our inheritance, and seal us up to life
everlasting; through Jesus Christ, our Lord and Saviour. Amen.

 Let it be left to the Minister's discretion, whether to deliver the
 bread and wine to the people (at the table) only in general, each one
 taking it, and applying it to themselves; or to deliver it in general
 to so many as are in each particular form; or to put it into every
 person's hand: as also at what season to take the contribution for
 the poor. And let none of the people be forced to sit, stand, or
 kneel, in the act of receiving, whose judgment is against it.

 _The Participation being ended, let the Minister pray thus, or to
 this sense._

Most glorious God, how wonderful is thy power and wisdom, thy holiness
and justice, thy love and mercy in this work of our redemption, by the
incarnation, life, death, resurrection, intercession, and dominion of
thy Son! No power or wisdom in heaven or earth could have delivered us
but thine. The angels desire to pry into this mystery, the heavenly
host do celebrate it with praises, saying, Glory be to God in the
highest; on earth peace, good-will towards men. The whole creation
shall proclaim thy praises. Blessing, honour, glory, and power be unto
him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and honour, and
glory; for he hath redeemed us to God by his blood, and made us kings
and priests unto our God. Where sin abounded, grace hath abounded much
more. And hast thou indeed forgiven us so great a debt, by so precious
a ransom? Wilt thou indeed give us to reign with Christ in glory, and
see my race, and love thee, and be beloved of thee for ever? Yea,
Lord, thou hast forgiven us, and thou wilt glorify us, for thou art
faithful that hast promised. With the blood of thy Son, with the
sacrament, and with thy Spirit, thou hast sealed up to us these
precious promises. And shall we not love thee, that hast thus loved
us? Shall we not love thy servants, and forgive our neighbours their
little debt? After all this shall we again forsake thee, and deal
falsely in thy covenant? God forbid! O set our affections on the
things above, where Christ sitteth at thy right hand. Let us no more
mind earthly things, but let our conversation be in heaven, from
whence we expect our Saviour to come and change us into the likeness
of his glory. Teach us to do thy will, O God, and to follow him, who
is the author of eternal salvation to all them that do obey him. Order
our steps by thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over us.
Let us not henceforth live unto ourselves, but unto him who died for
us and rose again. Let us have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, but reprove them. And let our light so shine before men,
that they may glorify thee. In simplicity, and godly sincerity, and
not in fleshly wisdom, let us have our conversation in the world. Oh
that our ways were so directed that we might keep thy statutes! Though
Satan will be desirous again to sift us, and seek as a roaring lion to
devour, strengthen us to stand against his wiles, and shortly bruise
him under our feet. Accept us, O Lord, who resign ourselves unto thee,
as thine own; and with our thanks and praise, present ourselves a
living sacrifice to be acceptable through Christ, useful for thine
honour: being made free from sin, and become thy servants, let us have
our fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and Saviour.[263] Amen.

 _Next add this, or some such Exhortation, if there be time._

Dear brethren, we have been here feasted with the Son of God at his
table, upon his flesh and blood, in preparation for the feast of
endless glory. You have seen here represented, what sin deserveth,
what Christ suffered, what wonderful love the God of infinite goodness
hath expressed to us. You have had communion with the saints; you have
renewed your covenant of faith, and thankful obedience unto Christ;
you have received his renewed covenant of pardon, grace, and glory
unto you. O carry hence the lively sense of these great and excellent
things upon your hearts: you came not only to receive the mercy of an
hour, but that which may spring up to endless joy: you came not only
to do the duty of an hour, but to promise that which you must perform
while you live on earth. Remember daily, especially when temptations
to unbelief and sinful heaviness assault you, what pledges of love you
here received; remember daily, especially when the flesh, the devil,
or the world, would draw your hearts again from God, and temptations
to sin are laid before you, what bonds God and your own consent have
laid upon you. If you are penitent believers, you are now forgiven,
and washed in the blood of Christ. O go your way, and sin no more: no
more through wilfulness; and strive against your sins of weakness.
Wallow no more in the mire, and return not to your vomit. Let the
exceeding love of Christ constrain you, having such promises, to
cleanse yourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God; and as a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, to be zealous of good
works, and show forth the praises of him that hath called you.

 _Next sing part of the Hymn in metre, or some other fit Psalm of
 praise (as the Twenty-third, One Hundred and Sixteenth, One Hundred
 and Third, or One Hundredth, &c.) And conclude with this or the like
 Blessing:_

Now the God of peace, which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus
Christ, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his
will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.


THE CELEBRATION OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM.

 Let no minister, that is therein unsatisfied, be forced against his
 judgment, to baptize the child of open atheists, idolaters, or
 infidels, or that are unbaptized themselves, or of such as do not
 competently understand the essentials of christianity, (what it is to
 be a christian,) and the essentials of baptism; nor of such as never,
 since they were baptized, did personally own their baptismal
 covenant, by a credible profession of faith and obedience, received
 and approved by some pastor of the church, as before confirmation is
 required, and in his Majesty's Declaration. Nor yet the child of
 parents justly excommunicate, or that live in any notorious,
 scandalous sin, or have lately committed such a sin, (as if the child
 be gotten in adultery or fornication,) and being justly convicted of
 it, refuseth penitently to confess it, and promise reformation. But
 if either of the parents be duly qualified, and present the child to
 be baptized, (or another for them in case they cannot be present,)
 the child is to be received unto baptism.

 And if both the natural parents are infidels, excommunicate, or
 otherwise unqualified, yet if any become the pro-parents and owners
 of the child, and undertake to educate it in the faith of Christ, and
 fear of God, and so present it to be baptized, let it be done by a
 minister whose judgment doth approve it, but let no minister be
 forced to it against his judgment. Let the parents or owners come to
 the minister at some convenient time the week before, and acquaint
 him when they intend to offer their child to baptism, and give an
 account of their foresaid capacity, and receive his further
 ministerial assistance for the fuller understanding of the use and
 benefits of the sacrament, and their own duty. The font is to be
 placed to the greatest conveniency of the minister and people. The
 child or children being there presented, the minister may begin with
 this or the like speech directed to the parent or parents that
 present it.

That you may perform this service to God with understanding, you must
know, that God having made man in his own image, to love and serve
him, our first parents wilfully corrupted themselves by sin, and
became the children of death, and the captives of Satan, who had
overcome them by his temptation. And as by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, so death passed upon all, for that all
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. We are conceived in
sin, and are by nature children of wrath; for who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? By the offence of one, judgment came upon all
men to condemnation. But the infinite wisdom and love of the Father
hath sent his Son to be the Saviour of the world. The Word was made
flesh, and dwelt on earth, and overcame the devil and the world;
fulfilled all righteousness, and suffered for our sins upon the cross,
and rose again, and reigneth in glory, and will come again, and judge
the world in righteousness. In him God hath made and offered to the
world a covenant of grace, and in it the pardon of sin to all true
penitent believers, and power to be the sons of God and heirs of
heaven. This covenant is extended to the seed also of the faithful, to
give them the benefits suitable to their age, the parents dedicating
them unto God, and entering them into the covenant, and so God in
Christ will be their God, and number them with his people.

This covenant is to be solemnly entered into by baptism, which is a
holy sacrament instituted by Christ, in which a person professing the
christian faith (or the infant of such) is baptized in water into the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in signification and
solemnization of the holy covenant; in which, as a penitent believer,
(or the seed of such,) he giveth up himself (or is by the parent given
up) to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, from henceforth (or from
the time of natural capacity) to believe in, love, and fear this
blessed Trinity, against the flesh, the devil, and the world; and this
especially on the account of redemption; and is solemnly entered a
visible member of Christ and his church, a child of God, and an heir
of heaven. How great now is the mercy, and how great the duty that is
before you! Is it a small mercy for this child to be accepted into the
covenant of God, and washed from its original sin in the blood of
Christ, which is signified and sealed by this sacramental washing in
water, to be accepted as a member of Christ and of his church, where
he vouchsafeth his protection and provision, and the means and Spirit
of grace, and the renewed pardon of sin upon repentance, and for you
to see this happiness of your child? The duty on your part is, first
to see that you are stedfast in the faith and covenant of Christ, that
you perish not yourself, and that your child is indeed the child of a
believer; and then you are believingly and thankfully to dedicate your
child to God, and to enter it into the covenant in which you stand.
And you must know, that your faith, and consent, and dedication will
suffice for your children no longer than till they come to age
themselves; and then they must own their baptismal covenant, and
personally renew it, and consent, and give up themselves to God, or
else they will not be owned by Christ. You must therefore acquaint
them with the doctrine of the gospel, as they grow up, and with the
covenant now made, and bring them up in the fear of the Lord. And when
they are actually penitent believers, they must present themselves to
the pastors of the church, to be approved and received into the
communion of the adult believers.

If the persons be before well instructed in the nature of Baptism,
 and time require brevity, the Minister may omit the first part of
 this Speech, and begin at the description of Baptism, or after it. If
 there be need of satisfying the people of the duty of baptizing
 infants, the Minister may here do it; otherwise let the questions
 here immediately follow.

 _The Minister shall here say to the Parent, and the Parent answer
 as followeth._

It being the faithful and their seed to whom the promises are made;
and no man will sincerely dedicate his child to that God that he
believeth not in himself; I therefore require you to make profession
of your own faith.

_Quest._ Do you believe in God the Father Almighty, &c.?

_Answ._ All this I do unfeignedly believe.

_Quest._ Do you repent of your sins, and renounce the flesh, the
devil, and the world, and consent to the covenant of grace, giving up
yourself to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as your Creator and
reconciled Father, your Redeemer and your Sanctifier?

_Answ._ I do.

 [Or thus rather, if the parent be fit to utter his own faith.]

_Quest._ Do you remain stedfast in the covenant which you made in
baptism yourself?

_Answ._ Repenting of my sins, I do renounce the flesh, the devil,
and the world, and I give up myself to God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, my Creator and reconciled Father, my Redeemer and my Sanctifier.

_Quest._ Do you present and dedicate this child unto God, to be
baptized into this faith, and solemnly engaged in this covenant unto
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, against the flesh, the devil, and
the world?

_Answ._ It is my desire, (or,) I do present and dedicate him for
this end.

_Quest._ Do you here solemnly promise, that if God continue it
with you till it be capable of instructions, you will faithfully
endeavour to acquaint this child with the covenant in which he was
here by you engaged, and to instruct and exhort him to perform this
covenant, as ever he looks for the blessings of it, or to escape the
curses and wrath of God; that is, that he renounce the flesh, the
world, and the devil; and live not after them: and that he believe in
this one God, in three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, his
Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier. That he resign himself to him as
his absolute Owner, and obey him as his supreme Governor, and love him
as his most gracious Father, hoping to enjoy him as his felicity in
endless glory?

_Answ._ I will faithfully endeavour it.

_Quest._ Will you to this end faithfully endeavour to cause him
to learn the articles of the christian faith, the Lord's prayer, and
the ten commandments, and to read or hear the holy Scriptures, and to
attend on the public preaching of God's word? Will you endeavour, by
your own teaching, and example, and restraint, to keep him from
wickedness, and train him up in a holy life?

_Answ._ I will faithfully endeavour it by the help of God.

 _Then let the Minister pray thus, or to this sense:_

O most merciful Father, by the first Adam sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, and we are all by nature children of wrath; but thou
hast given thy only Son, to be the Seed or the woman, the Saviour of
the world, the Captain of our salvation, to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, and to wash us in his blood, and reconcile us
unto thee, and to renew us by the Holy Ghost, and to bruise Satan
under our feet. In him thou hast established the covenant of grace,
and hast appointed this holy sacrament of baptism for our solemn
entrance into the bonds of the covenant, and stating us in the
blessings of it, which thou extendest to the faithful and their seed.
We dedicate and offer this child to thee, to be received into thy
covenant and church. We beseech thee to accept him as a member of thy
Son, and wash him in his blood from the guilt of sin, as the flesh is
washed by this water. Be reconciled to him, and take him for thy
child, renew him to the image of thy Son, make him a fellow-citizen
with the saints, and one of thy household. Protect him and provide for
him as thy own, and finally preserve him to thy heavenly kingdom,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour.[264] Amen.

 Then the Minister shall ask of the Parent the name of the child to be
 baptized, and naming him, shall either dip him under the water, or
 else pour the water upon his face, if he cannot be safely or
 conveniently dipt, and shall use these words without alteration.

I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

 _And he shall thus declare:_

This child is now received by Christ's appointment into his church,
and solemnly entered into the holy covenant, and engaged, if he lives
to the use of reason, to rise with Christ to newness of life, as being
buried with him by baptism, and to bear his cross, and confess Christ
crucified, and faithfully to fight under his banner against the flesh,
the devil, and the world, and to continue his faithful soldier and
servant to the death, that he may receive the crown of life.

 _Then he shall give thanks and pray._

We thank thee, most merciful Father, that when we had broken the law,
and were condemned by it, thou hadst given us a Saviour, and life in
him, and hast extended thy covenant of grace to believers, and to
their seed, and hast now received this child into thy covenant and
church, as a member of Christ by this sacrament of regeneration. We
beseech thee, let him grow up in holiness; and when he comes to years
of discretion, let thy Spirit reveal unto him the mysteries of the
gospel, and the riches of thy love in Jesus Christ; and cause him to
renew and perform the covenant that he hath now made, and to resign
himself, and all that he hath, entirely unto thee his Lord, to be
subject and obedient to thee his Governor, and to love thee his Father
with all his heart, and soul, and might; and adhere unto thee, and
delight in thee as the portion of his soul, desiring and hoping to
enjoy thee in everlasting glory. Save him from the lusts and
allurements of the flesh, the temptations of the devil, and the baits
of pleasure, profit, and honour of the world, and from all the
corruptions of his own heart, and all the hurtful violence of his
enemies. Keep him in communion with the saints, in the love and use of
thy word and worship. Let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow Christ the Captain of his salvation, and be faithful unto the
death, and then receive the crown of life, through Jesus Christ our
Saviour.[265]

 _Then use this Exhortation or the like to the Parents._

You that have devoted this child to God, and engaged it in covenant to
him, must be thankful for so great a mercy to the child, and must be
faithful in performing what you have promised on your parts, in
instructing and educating this child in the faith and fear of God,
that he may own and perform the covenant now made, and receive all the
blessings which God hath promised. Hear what God hath made your duty,
"Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; but bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord." "Train up a child in the way he
should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it." "The rod
and reproof give wisdom; but a child left to himself bringeth his
mother to shame." "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might: and these words
which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart; and thou shalt
teach them diligently unto thy children, and thou shalt talk of them
when thou sittest in the house, and when thou walkest by the way, and
when thou liest down, and when thou risest up." Joshua saith, "As for
me and my house, we will serve the Lord." And Paul saith of Timothy,
"From a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus."[266]

 _Then say to the People thus, or to this sense._

You have heard, beloved, how great a dignity we were advanced to in
our baptism, to how great duty we are all engaged. O search and try,
whether you have kept or broken the covenant which you made, and have
lived according to the dignity of your calling. And if any of you be
atheists, unbelievers, or ungodly, and love not God above all, and
neglect Christ and his salvation, and are yet unsanctified, and live
after the flesh, the devil, and the world, which you here renounced;
as you love your souls, bewail your perfidious covenant-breaking with
God. Trust not the water of baptism alone: if you are not "born again
of the Spirit also, you cannot enter into the kingdom of God." Baptism
will not save you, if you have not the answer of a good conscience
unto God. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none
of his." Much less those wretches that hate sanctification, and
despise and scorn a holy life, when they were by baptism engaged to
the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier. Can you think to be saved by the
covenant which you keep not? O no! Your perfidiousness aggravateth
your sin and misery. "When thou vowest a vow to God, defer not to pay
it, for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed:
better it is that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow
and not pay." O bless the Lord, that it is a covenant of such grace
which is tendered to you. That upon true repentance and conversion,
even your covenant-breaking shall be forgiven; and therefore
penitently cast down yourselves before the Lord, and believingly cast
yourselves on Christ, and yield to the teachings and sanctifying
operations of the Holy Ghost. Yet know the day of your visitation, and
forsake the flesh, the devil, and the world, and turn to God with all
your hearts, and give up yourselves entirely to your Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and he will have mercy upon you, and will
abundantly pardon you. But if you still live after the flesh, you
shall die: and if you continue to neglect this great salvation, there
remaineth no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for
of judgment, and fire, which shall devour the adversaries.[267]

 Let no children be privately baptized, nor any Minister forced to
 baptize them any where, besides in the public assembly, unless upon
 some special weighty cause. If there be occasion for baptizing the
 adult, let the minister accordingly suit his expressions.


OF CATECHISING, AND THE APPROBATION OF THOSE THAT ARE TO BE ADMITTED
TO THE LORD'S SUPPER.

 Seeing none can be saved at years of discretion, that do not actually
 believe, and personally give up themselves in covenant to God the
 Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; therefore as parents must do their
 parts, so ministers must catechise the ignorant, and diligently
 labour to cause them both to learn the form of wholesome words, (even
 the Lord's prayer and the ten commandments, and some brief, yet full
 and sound catechism,) and to understand the meaning of them, and to
 engage their hearts into the love of God, and a holy obedience to his
 laws.

 To this end, let the minister, either every Lord's day, before the
 evening prayers, or at some convenient hour, or on some other day of
 the week, as oft as he can, examine publicly such as are not admitted
 to the Lord's supper, and take an account of their learning, and
 understanding the creed, the ten commandments, the Lord's prayer, and
 the catechism. And let him by questioning and explication, help them
 to understand them. And let such of the several families of the
 parish come in their turns, when they are called by the minister to
 be thus catechised. Also let the minister either go to their houses,
 or rather appoint the persons aforesaid in their courses at a certain
 hour and place, (in the church or any other fit place,) to come to
 him for personal instructions, where he may confer with those that
 are unmeet to be catechised publicly, or unwilling to submit to it;
 and there with humble, prudent, serious instruction and exhortation,
 let him endeavour to acquaint them with the substance of christian
 faith and duty, and to help them to make sure their calling and
 election, and to prepare for death and judgment, and exhort them to
 love and to good works, and warn them lest they be hardened through
 the deceitfulness of sin. But let him not in public or private meddle
 with impertinencies, or spend the time about smaller matters, or
 singular opinions, nor sift people to know things unfit or
 unnecessary to be disclosed, nor meddle with matters that do not
 concern him as a minister to inquire after; but help them to learn,
 and understand, and practise the christian religion expressed in the
 catechism.

 _The Catechism._

[Sidenote: See the Rubric for Catechism and Confirmation in the Common
Prayer, and also his Majesty's Declaration concerning ecclesiastical
affairs.]

 Let none be admitted by the minister to the sacrament of the Lord's
 supper, till they have at years of discretion understood the meaning
 of their baptismal covenant, and with their own mouths, and their own
 consent openly before the church, ratified and confirmed, and also
 promised, that by the grace of God, they will evermore endeavour
 themselves faithfully to observe and keep such things as by their
 mouth and confession they have assented to; and so being instructed
 in the christian religion, do openly make a credible profession of
 their own faith, and promise to be obedient to the will of God.

 A profession is credible, when it is made understandingly, seriously,
 voluntarily, deliberately, and not nullified by contradiction in word
 or deed. And that profession is incredible, that is made ignorantly,
 ludicrously, forcedly, rashly, or that is nullified by verbal or
 practical contradiction. And it must be practice first, that must
 make words credible, when the person by perfidiousness hath forfeited
 his credit. It is not private persons only, but the pastors of the
 church that must approve of this profession. Therefore, before any
 are admitted to the Lord's supper, they shall give a good account of
 their knowledge, faith, and christian conversation conformable
 thereunto, unto the pastors of their respective congregations, or
 else shall produce a certificate, that they have been approved or
 admitted to the Lord's supper in another congregation, of which they
 were members, and that by an allowed minister, upon such approved
 profession as aforesaid.

 If the person be able and willing, let him before the congregation
 give the aforesaid account at large, of his knowledge, faith, and
 obedience; but if through backwardness, or disability for public
 speech, he shall refuse it, let him make the same profession
 privately to the minister, and own it in the assembly, when the
 minister shall declare it, and ask him whether he owns it. But unless
 it be in case of some extraordinary natural imperfection, and
 disability of utterance, let him at least openly recite the creed,
 and profess his consent to the covenant with God the Father, Son, and
 Holy Ghost.

 Let the minister of every parish keep a double register: one of the
 names of all that are there baptized; another of the names of all
 that are approved upon their foresaid credible profession, and so
 admitted into the number of communicants, or that have a certificate
 of such approbation, regularly elsewhere performed.

 And if confirmation be continued, let his Majesty's Declaration be
 observed, requiring, That confirmation be rightly and solemnly
 performed, by the information, and with the consent, of the minister
 of the place.

 Let no minister be enforced to admit any himself to the Lord's
 supper, who hath been clancularly and irregularly approved.

 Those that after this approbation prove scandalous offenders, shall
 not by the minister be suffered to partake of the Lord's table, until
 they have openly declared themselves to have truly repented, and
 amended their former naughty lives.


OF THE CELEBRATION OF MATRIMONY.

 Before the solemnizing of marriage between any persons, their purpose
 of marriage shall be published by the minister, three several Lord's
 days in the congregation, at the place or places of their most usual
 abode respectively. And of this publication, the minister who is to
 join them in marriage shall have sufficient testimony, before he
 proceed to solemnize the marriage; the parents' consent being first
 sufficiently made known.

 At the celebration, the minister shall either by a sermon, or other
 exhortation, open to them the institution, ends, and use of marriage,
 with the conjugal duties which they are faithfully to perform to each
 other. And then shall demand of them whether it be their desire and
 purpose to be joined together in the bond of the marriage covenant;
 and if they answer affirmatively, he shall say to them,

I require and charge you, as you will answer at the dreadful day of
judgment, (when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed,) that if
either of you do know any impediment by pre-contract or otherwise, why
you may not lawfully be joined together in marriage, you discover it,
and proceed not.

 If no impediment be discovered by them or others, he shall proceed to
 pray.

[Sidenote: If they be young, it may be said, Bless them with children,
and let them be devoted, &c.]

Most merciful Father, who hast ordained marriage for mutual help, and
for the increase of mankind with a legitimate issue, and of the church
with a holy seed, and for prevention of uncleanness; bless thy own
ordinance to these persons, that entering this state of marriage in
thy fear, they may there entirely devote themselves unto thee, and be
faithful in all conjugal affections and duties unto each other; [and
if thou bless them with children,] let them be devoted unto thee, and
accepted as thine own, and blessed with thy grace, and educated in thy
fear. Subdue those corruptions that would make their lives unholy or
uncomfortable, and deliver them from temptations to impiety,
worldliness, unquietness, discontent, or disaffection to each other,
or to any unfaithfulness to thee or to each other. Make them meet
helps to each other in thy fear, and in the lawful management of the
affairs of this world. Let them not hinder, but provoke one another to
love and to good works; and foreseeing the day of their separation by
death, let them spend their days in a holy preparation, and live here
together as the heirs of life that must rejoice at the great marriage
day of the Lamb, and live for ever with Christ and all the holy angels
and saints in the presence of thy glory.[268] Amen.

 _The woman if she be under Parents or Governors, being by one of
 them, or some deputed by them, given to be married, the man with his
 right hand shall take the woman by the right hand, and shall say,_

I A. do take thee B. to be my married wife, and do promise and
covenant in the presence of God, and before this congregation, to be a
loving and faithful husband to thee, till God shall separate us by
death.

 _Then the woman shall take the man by the right hand with her right
 hand, and say,_

I B. do take thee A. to be my married husband, and I do promise and
covenant in the presence of God, and before this congregation, to be a
loving, obedient, and faithful wife unto thee, till God shall separate
us by death.

 _Then let the Minister say,_

These two persons, A. and B. being lawfully married according to God's
ordinance, I do pronounce them husband and wife. And those whom God
hath conjoined, let no man put asunder.

 _Next he may read the duty of Husbands and Wives out of Eph. v. 2;
 Col. iv. 2; 1 Pet. iii.; and Psalm cxxviii. or some other pertinent
 Psalm, may be said or sung: and let the minister exhort them to their
 several duties, and then pray:_

Most merciful Father, let thy blessings rest upon these persons now
joined in lawful marriage; sanctify them and their conversations,
their family, estates, and affairs, unto thy glory. Furnish them with
love to thee and to each other, with meekness, patience, and
contentedness. Let them not live unto the flesh, but unto the Spirit,
that of the Spirit they may reap everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and Saviour.[269] Amen.

 _Then let him conclude with a Benediction._

God Almighty, the Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, bless you in your
souls and bodies, families and affairs, and preserve you to his
heavenly kingdom. Amen.


THE VISITATION OF THE SICK, AND THEIR COMMUNION.

 The visitation of the sick being a private duty, and no part of the
 public Liturgy of the church, and the case of the sick being so
 exceeding various, as to soul and body; and it being requisite that
 ministers be able to suit their exhortations and prayers to the
 condition of the sick, but the words of such exhortations and prayers
 be left to their prudence.

 So urgent is the necessity of the sick, and so seasonable and
 advantageous the opportunity, that ministers may not negligently
 overpass them, but in love and tenderness instruct them according to
 their several conditions; endeavouring the conversion of the
 ungodly, the strengthening of the weak, and comforting such as need
 consolation; directing them how to improve their afflictions, and
 helping them to be sensible of the evil of sin, the negligences and
 miscarriages of their lives, the vanity of the world, their necessity
 of a Saviour, the sufficiency of Christ, the certainty and excellency
 of the everlasting glory; exhorting them to repentance and to faith
 in Christ, and to set their affections on the things above; and (if
 they are penitent believers) comfortably to hope for the kingdom
 which God hath promised to them that love him, committing their souls
 to their Redeemer, and quietly resting in the will, and love, and
 promises of God; resolving if God shall recover them to health, to
 redeem the time, and live the rest of their lives unto his glory; and
 being willing, if it be their appointed time, to depart and be with
 Christ. And they must be exhorted to forgive such as have wronged
 them, and to be reconciled to those with whom they have been at
 variance, and to make a pious, just, and charitable disposal of their
 worldly estates.


THE ORDER OF SOLEMNIZING THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD.

 It is agreeable to nature and religion, that the burial of christians
 be solemnly and decently performed. As to the cases, Whether the
 corpse shall be carried first into the church, that is to be buried
 in the church-yard; and whether it shall be buried before the sermon,
 reading, or prayer, or after, or in the midst of the reading, or
 whether any prayer shall be made at the grave, for the living; let no
 christians uncharitably judge one another about these things. Let no
 people keep up groundless usages, that being suspicious grieve their
 minister and offend their brethren. Let no minister that scrupleth
 the satisfying of people's ungrounded desires in such things, be
 forced to do it against his conscience; and let ministers that do use
 any of these customs or ceremonies, have liberty, when they suspect
 that the people desire them upon some error, to profess against that
 error, and teach the people better.

 Whether the minister come with the company that brings the corpse
 from the house, or whether he meet them, or receive them at the
 burial-place, is to be left to his own discretion. But while he is
 with them, let him gravely discourse of man's mortality, and the
 useful truths and duties thence to be inferred: and either at the
 grave, or in the reading place, or pulpit, by way of sermon,
 according to his discretion, let him (at least if it be desired)
 instruct and exhort the people concerning death, and the life to
 come, and their necessary preparation; seeing the spectacle of
 mortality, and the season of mourning, do tend to prepare men for a
 sober, considerate entertainment of such instructions: and he may
 read such scriptures as may mind them of death, resurrection, and
 eternal life, as 1 Cor. xv. or from verse 10 to the end, and Job i. 21;
 xix. 25, 26, 27; John xi. 25, 26; v. 28, 29. And his prayer shall
 be suited to the occasion.

 Whenever the rain, snow, or coldness of the season, make it
 unhealthful to the minister or people to stand out of doors, at least
 then let the reading, exhortation, and prayers, be used within the
 church.


OF EXTRAORDINARY DAYS OF HUMILIATION AND THANKSGIVING, AND ANNIVERSARY
FESTIVALS.

 When great afflictions lie upon the church, or any special part or
 members of it, or when any great sins have been committed among them,
 it is meet that in public, by fasting and prayer, we humble ourselves
 before the Lord, for the averting of his displeasure; and on such
 occasions it is the pastor's duty to confess his own and the people's
 sins, with penitence, and tenderness of heart, and by his doctrine
 and exhortation, to endeavour effectually to bring the people to the
 sight and sense of their sin, and the deserts of it, and to a firm
 resolution of better obedience for the time to come, being
 importunate with God in prayer for pardon and renewed grace.

 Upon the receipt of great and extraordinary mercies, the church
 (having opportunity) is to assemble for public thanksgiving unto God,
 and the minister to stir up the people to a lively sense of the
 greatness of those mercies, and joyfully to celebrate the praises of
 God, the author of them. And it is not unmeet on these days to
 express our joy in feasting and outward signs of mirth, provided they
 be used moderately, spiritually, and inoffensively, and not to
 gratify our sensual desires, and that we relieve the poor in their
 necessities (which also on days of humiliation and other seasons we
 must not forget). The occasions of such days of humiliation and
 thanksgiving being so various, as cannot be well suited by any
 standing forms, the minister is to apply himself to the respective
 duties, suitable to the particular occasions.

 Though it be not unlawful or unmeet to keep anniversary commemoration
 by festivals, of some great and notable mercies to the church or
 state, the memory whereof should be transmitted to posterity; nor to
 give any persons their due honour who have been the instruments
 thereof: yet because the festivals of the church's institution now
 observed, are much abused, and many sober, godly persons, ministers,
 and others, are unsatisfied of the lawfulness of the celebrating them
 as holidays, let the abuse be restrained; and let not the religious
 observation of those days by public worship, be forced upon any that
 are thus unsatisfied, provided they forbear all offensive behaviour
 thereupon.


OF PRAYER AND THANKSGIVING FOR PARTICULAR MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH.

 Besides the petitions that are put up for all in such distresses, in
 the general prayer, it is meet that persons in dangerous sickness, or
 other great affliction of body or mind, and women that are near the
 time of child-bearing, when they desire it, shall be particularly
 recommended to God in the public prayers of the church. Because all
 the members constitute one body, and must have the same care one for
 another, as suffering all with one that suffereth, and rejoicing all
 with one that is honoured. And the effectual fervent prayer of the
 righteous, especially of the whole congregation, availeth much with
 God. But because diseases, distresses, and grief of mind, are so
 various that no forms that are particular can suit them all; and
 because every minister should be able to suit his prayers to such
 various necessities of the people; we desire that it may be left to
 his discretion to pray for such according to their several cases,
 before or after sermon. But we desire that except in case of sudden
 necessity, they may send in their bills of request to him the night
 before, that he may consider of their cases, and may publish only
 such, and in such expressions, as in prudence he shall judge meet for
 the ears of the assembly.

 In the more ordinary cases of persons in sickness, danger, and
 distress, and that are delivered from them; these following prayers
 may be used, or such like.

 _A Prayer for the Sick, that is in hopes of Recovery._

Most merciful Father, though our sin doth find us out, and we are
justly afflicted for our transgressions, yet are we not consumed in
thy wrath; but thou punishest us less than our iniquities do deserve:
though thou causest grief, yet wilt thou have compassion according to
the multitude of thy mercies, for thou dost not willingly afflict and
grieve the children of men. Thou revivest the spirit of the humble,
and the heart of the contrite ones, for thou wilt not contend for
ever, neither wilt thou be always wroth, for the spirit would fail
before thee, and the soul which thou hast made. Look down in tender
mercy on the affliction of this thy servant. O Lord, rebuke him not in
thy wrath; neither chasten him in thy hot displeasure. All his desire
is before thee, and his groaning is not hid from thee; have mercy upon
him, O Lord, for he is weak. O Lord, heal him, whose bones and soul is
vexed. In death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who
shall give thee thanks? Remember that we are but flesh; a wind that
passeth away and cometh not again. Wilt thou break a leaf driven to
and fro? and wilt thou pursue the dry stubble? Remember not the
iniquities of his youth, or his transgressions: look upon his
affliction, and his pain, and forgive all his sins. Though the sorrows
of death do compass him about, yet if it be for thy glory and his
good, recover him, and let him live and praise thy name. Rebuke his
sickness; direct unto such means as thou wilt bless. In the time of
his trouble we call upon thee, do thou deliver him, and let him
glorify thee: however, show him the sin that doth offend thee; let him
search and try his ways, and confess and turn from his iniquity, and
let it be good for him that he was afflicted. Let this be the fruit of
it, to purge and take away his sin, that being chastened of the Lord,
he may not be condemned with the world. And though chastisement for
the present seemeth not to be joyous, but grievous, yet afterwards let
it yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness to this thy servant,
that is exercised therein. In the mean time, O Lord, be thou his
portion, who art good to the soul that seeketh thee, and waiteth for
thee. Let him patiently and silently bear thy yoke; let him hope and
quietly wait for thy salvation: considering that thou wilt not cast
off for ever; that thy anger is but for a moment, but in thy favour is
life. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning:
and that whom thou lovest, thou chastenest, and scourgest every son
whom thou receivest; and that if he endure chastening, thou dealest
with him as a son. If he be recovered, let him devote himself
entirely to they glory: that when thou hast put off his sackcloth and
mourning, and girded him with gladness, he may speak thy praise, and
give thee thanks. If he receive the sentence of death in himself, let
it cause him to trust in thee that raisest the dead, knowing that as
thou didst raise up the Lord Jesus, thou wilt raise him up also by
Jesus: therefore suffer not his hope to faint; but though his outward
man perish, yet let his inner man be renewed from day to day; and let
him live by faith, and look at the things which are not seen, ever at
the exceeding eternal weight of glory. Let him be found in Christ, not
having his own righteousness, but that which is of God by faith.
Restrain the tempter, and deliver thy servant from the sinful fears of
death, by Christ, who, through death destroyed the devil that had the
power of death; that he may find that death hath lost its sting, and
triumph over it by faith in him, through whom we are made more than
conquerors. That, by faith and love, his soul may now ascend unto his
Father and our Father, and to his God and our God; and is gone to
prepare a place for us; and hath promised, that where he is, there his
servants shall be also, that they may behold the glory which thou hast
given him. Magnify thyself in his body, whether by life or death, and
safely bring him into thy glorious presence, where is fulness of joy,
and everlasting pleasures, through Jesus Christ our Life and
Righteousness.[270] Amen.

 _A Prayer for Women drawing near the time of Child-bearing._

Most merciful Father, who hast justly sentenced woman, that was first
in the transgression, to great and multiplied sorrows, and
particularly in sorrow to bring forth children; yet grantest
preservation and relief, for the propagation of mankind. Be merciful
to this thy servant; be near her with thy present help, in the needful
time of trouble; and though in travail she hath sorrow, give her
strength to bring forth. Being delivered, let her remember no more the
anguish, for joy that a child is born into the world. Bless her in the
fruit of her body; and being safely delivered, let her return thee
hearty thanks, and devote it and the rest of her life to thy service,
through Jesus Christ our Saviour.[271] Amen.

 _A Thanksgiving for those that are restored from Dangerous
 Sickness._

We thank thee, O most gracious God, that thou hast heard us when we
cried unto thee, for thy servant in his weakness and distress; that
thou hast not turned away our prayer nor thy mercy from him. We cried
to thee, and thou hast delivered and healed him, thou hast brought him
from the grave, thou hast kept him alive, that he should not go down
into the pit, thou hast forgiven his iniquity, and healed his
diseases, thou hast redeemed his life from destruction, and hast
crowned him with loving-kindness and tender mercies, thou hast not
deprived him of the residue of his years, thou hast repented thee of
the evil. His age is not departed; thou hast renewed his youth, and
given him to see man, with the inhabitants of the world; and to see
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Day and night thy
hand was heavy upon him, but thou hast turned away thy wrath, and hast
forgiven the iniquity of his sin: for this every one that is godly
shall pray unto thee in a time of trouble. Thou art a hiding-place,
thou preservest us from trouble: when our flesh and our heart faileth
us, thou art the strength of our heart, and our portion for ever;
indeed, Lord, thou art good unto thine Israel; even to such as are
clean of heart. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but thou
deliverest them out of all: though all the day long they be afflicted,
and chastened every morning, yet are they continually with thee; thou
holdest them by thy right hand; thou art a present help in trouble,
when all the help of man is vain. Let thy servant love thee, because
thou hast heard his voice and supplication. Let him offer unto thee
the sacrifice of thanksgiving; and pay his vows to the Most High; and
take the cup of salvation, and call upon thee all his days. Let him be
wholly devoted to thy praise, and glorify thee in soul and body, as
being thine, and seasonably depart in peace unto thy glory; through
Jesus Christ, our Life and Righteousness.[272] Amen.

 _A Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of Women in Child-bearing._

We return thee thanks, most gracious God, that thou hast heard our
prayers for this thy handmaid; and hast been her help in the time of
her necessity, and delivered her from her fears and sorrows. Death and
life are in thy power; thou killest, and thou makest alive; thou
bringest down to the grave, and thou bringest up; thou makest the
barren to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. We thank
thee, that thou hast given thy servant to see the fruit of her womb,
and that thou hast brought her again to thy holy assembly, to go with
the multitude to thy house, and worship thee with the voice of joy and
praise, that she may enter into thy gates with thanksgiving, and into
thy courts with praise, and we may all be thankful to thee on her
behalf, and speak good of thy name. Thou art good, O Lord, to all, and
thy tender mercies are over all thy works; thou preservest them that
love thee; thou raisest up them that are bowed down; thou fulfillest
the desire of them that fear thee; thou also dost hear their cry, and
save them. Command thy blessing yet upon thy servant and her
offspring; let her not forget thee and thy mercies, but let her devote
the life which thou hast given her to thy service, and educate her
offspring, as a holy seed, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
And as thou hast said, that thy curse is in the house of the wicked,
but thou blessest the habitation of the just; let her and her house
serve thee, and let holiness to the Lord be written upon all wherewith
thou blessest her: let her make thee her refuge and habitation. Give
her the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in thy sight is of
great price. Let her not love the world, nor mind earthly things, but
use the world as not abusing of it; seeing the time is short, and the
fashion of this world passeth away. Restore her soul, and lead her in
the paths of righteousness: though she must walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, let her fear no evil. Let thy goodness and mercy
follow her all the days of her life, and let her dwell for ever in thy
glorious presence, through Jesus Christ, our Lord and Saviour.[273]
Amen.

 If the Child be dead, those passages which imply its living must be
 omitted; and if the Woman be such as the Church hath cause to judge
 ungodly, the Thanksgiving must be in words more agreeable to her
 condition, if any be used.


OF PASTORAL DISCIPLINE, PUBLIC CONFESSION, ABSOLUTION, AND EXCLUSION
FROM THE HOLY COMMUNION OF THE CHURCH.

 The recital of the curses are said in the book of Common Prayer, to
 be instead of the godly discipline of the primitive church, till it
 can be restored again, which is much to be wished, which is the
 putting of notorious sinners to open penitence. His Majesty's
 Declaration concerning ecclesiastical affairs, determineth that all
 public diligence be used for the instruction and reformation of
 scandalous offenders, whom the minister shall not suffer to partake
 of the Lord's table, until they have openly declared themselves to
 have truly repented and amended their former naughty lives, provided
 there be place for due appeals to superior powers.

 And the law of Christ commandeth, that if thy brother trespass
 against thee, go and tell him his faults between him and thee alone:
 if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother, but if he will
 not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth
 of two or three witnesses, every word may be established; and if he
 shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church; but if he shall
 neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man, or
 as a publican. And it is the office of the pastors of the several
 congregations, not only to teach the people in general, and guide
 them in the celebration of the public worship, but also to oversee
 them, and watch over each member of their flock particularly; to
 preserve them from errors, heresies, divisions, and other sins,
 defending the truth, confuting gainsayers and seducers, instructing
 the ignorant, exciting the negligent, encouraging the despondent,
 comforting the afflicted, confirming the weak, rebuking and
 admonishing the disorderly and scandalous, and directing all
 according to their needs in the matters of their salvation; and the
 people in such needs should have ordinary recourse to them, as the
 officers of Christ, for guidance, and resolution of their doubts; and
 for assistance in making their salvation sure; and in proving,
 maintaining, or restoring the peace of their consciences, and
 spiritual comfort.[274]

 If therefore any member of the church be a scandalous sinner, and the
 crime be either notorious or fully proved, let the pastor admonish
 him, and set before him the particular command of God which he
 transgresseth, the supreme authority of God which he despiseth, the
 promises and mercies which he treadeth under foot, and the curse and
 dreadful condemnation which he draweth upon himself. Let this be done
 with great compassion and tender love to the offender's soul, and
 with gravity, reverent and serious importunity, as beseemeth men
 employed on the behalf of God, for the saving of a soul; and yet with
 judgment, and cautelous prudence, not taking that for sin which is no
 sin, nor that for a gross and scandalous sin, which is but an
 ordinary human frailty; not dealing as unreverently with a superior
 as with an inferior; not making that public which should be
 concealed; nor reproving before others when it should be done more
 secretly; nor unreasonably speaking to those who through drink or
 passion are incapable of the benefit; nor yet offending by
 bashfulness, or the fear of man, or lukewarmness, negligence, or
 slighting over great offences, on the other extreme.

 Prudence also requireth them to be cautelous of over-meddling, where
 the magistrate's honour or concernment, or the church's unity or
 peace, or the reputation of others, or the interest of their
 ministry, requireth them to forbear.

 These cautions observed, if the scandalous offender continue
 impenitent, or unreformed, after due admonitions and patience, let
 the pastor in the congregation, when he is present, rebuke him before
 all, that the church may sufficiently disown the crime, and others
 may see the odiousness and danger of the sin. But let this also be
 with the love and prudence before mentioned.

 If the offender in obstinacy will not be there, the pastor may open
 the crime before the congregation: and present or absent, (in case he
 remain impenitent,) if the case will bear so long a delay, it is
 convenient, that the pastor publicly pray for his conviction and
 repentance, that he may be saved.

 And this he may do one, or two, or three, or more days, as the nature
 of the case and prudence shall direct him.

 If during these means for his recovery (after the proof of the crime)
 there be a communion of the church in the Lord's supper, let the
 pastor require him to forbear, and not suffer him to partake of the
 Lord's table.

 If yet the offender remain impenitent, let the pastor openly declare
 him unmeet for the communion of the church, and require him to
 abstain from it, and require the church to avoid communion with him.
 And let him bind him by the denunciations of the threatenings of God
 against the impenitent.

 But before this is done, let no necessary consultation with other
 pastors, or concurrence of the church, be neglected: and after let
 there be place for due appeals, and let ministers consent to give
 account when they are accused of mal-administration.

 But if, after private admonition, (while the offence is such as
 requireth not public confession,) the sinner be penitent, let the
 minister privately apply to his consolation the promises of the
 gospel, with such cautelous prudence, as is most suitable to his
 condition.

 And if he repent not till after public admonition, or that the
 scandal be so great and notorious, as that a public confession is
 necessary, let him, at a seasonable time appointed by the pastor,
 with remorse of conscience, and true contrition, confess his sin
 before the congregation, and heartily lament it, and clear the honour
 of his christian profession which he had stained, and crave the
 prayers of the church to God for pardon and reconciliation through
 Christ, and also crave the ministerial absolution and restoration to
 the communion of the church, and profess his resolution to do so no
 more; but to live in new obedience to God, desiring also their
 prayers for corroborating and preserving grace.

 It is only a credible profession of repentance, that is to be
 accepted by the church.

 The foregoing cautions must be carefully observed in such
 confessions, that they be not made to the injuring of the magistrate,
 or of the church, or of the reputation of others, or of the life,
 estate, or liberty of the offender, or to any other shame than is
 necessary to the manifesting of his repentance, and the clearing of
 his profession, and the righting of any that he hath wronged, and the
 honour and preservation of the church.

 When he hath made a credible profession of repentance, it is the
 pastor's duty, ministerially to declare him pardoned by Christ, but
 in conditional terms. [If his repentance be sincere.] And to absolve
 him from the censure of non-communion with the church, if he was
 under such a censure before his penitence, and to declare him meet
 for their communion, and to encourage him to come, and require the
 church to entertain him into their communion with gladness, and not
 upbraid him with his fall, but rejoice in his recovery, and endeavour
 his confirmation and preservation for the time to come: and it is his
 duty accordingly to admit him to communion, and theirs to have loving
 communion with him: all which the penitent person must believingly,
 lovingly, and joyfully receive. But if any by notorious perfidiousness,
 or frequent covenant-breaking, have forfeited the credit of their
 words, or have long continued in the sin which they do confess, so
 that their forsaking it hath no proof; the church then must have
 testimony of the actual reformation of such as these, before they may
 take their professions and promises as credible: yet here the
 difference of persons and offences is so great, that this is to be
 much left to the prudence of pastors that are present, and acquainted
 with the persons and circumstances of the case. In the transacting of
 all this, these following forms, to be varied as the variety of cases
 do require, may be made use of.

 _A Form of Public Admonition to the Impenitent._

[Sidenote: The sin may be named and aggravated when it is convenient.]

A. B. you are convict of a gross and scandalous sin; you have been
admonished and entreated to repent. The promises of mercies to the
penitent, and the threatenings of God against the impenitent, have not
been concealed from you. We have waited in hope of your repentance, as
having compassion on your soul, and desiring your salvation; but we
must say with grief, you have hitherto disappointed us. We are certain
from the word of God, that you must be penitent, if ever you will be
pardoned, and that except you repent, you shall everlastingly perish.
To acquaint you publicly with this, and yet here to offer you mercy
from the Lord, is the next duty laid upon us for your recovery. Oh!
blame us not, if, knowing the terrors of the Lord, we thus persuade
you, and are loth to leave you in the power of Satan, and loth to see
you cast out into perdition, and that your blood should be required at
our hands, as not having discharged our duty to prevent it.[275]

Be it known unto you therefore, that it is the God of heaven and
earth, the great, the jealous, and the terrible God, whose laws you
have broken, and whose authority you despise. You refuse his
government, who is coming with ten thousands of his saints, to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly of their
ungodly deeds and speeches; who hath told us that "evil shall not
dwell with him." "The foolish shall not stand in his sight." "He
hateth all workers of iniquity." "The ungodly shall not stand in
judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous." God hath
not his laws in vain. "Though the wicked contemn God, and say in their
hearts he will not require it;" "yet their damnation slumbereth not,
they are reserved to the day of judgment, to be punished." "And he
seeth that their day is coming." If men cut off the lives of those
that break their laws, will God be outfaced by the pride and
stubbornness of sinners? He will not; you shall know he will not; he
threateneth not in jest. "Who hath hardened himself against him, and
hath prospered?" "Are you not as chaff and stubble? and is not our God
a consuming fire?" "If briers and thorns be set against him in battle,
will he not go through them, and burn them up together?" "Can your
heart endure, or your hands be strong, in the day when God shall deal
with you? It is the Lord that hath spoken it, and he will do it." What
will you do, when you must bear with the pains of hell from God, that
now can scarce endure to be thus openly and plainly warned of it? If
we to please you should be silent and betray you, do you think the God
of heaven will fear or flatter you to please a worm? "Do you provoke
the Lord to jealousy? are you stronger than he?" O man! for your
soul's sake, let not Satan abuse your understanding, and sin befool
you. Must you not die? And doth not judgment follow, when all secrets
shall be opened, and God will no more entreat you to confess. "Behold,
the Judge standeth at the door." Will sin go then with you for as
light a matter as it doth now? Will you then deny it, or will you
stand to all the reasonings, or excuses, by which you would now
extenuate or cover it? Will you defend it as your friend; and be angry
with ministers and reprovers as your enemies? Or will you not mourn at
last, (with weeping and gnashing of teeth,) and say, "How have I hated
instruction, and my heart despised reproof; and have not obeyed the
voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me!" "Oh that you were wise, that you understood this, and that you
would consider your latter end!" Believe God's wrath before you feel
it: be convinced by the word and servants of the Lord, before you are
confounded by the dreadfulness of his majesty. Yet there is hope; but
shortly there will be none, if you neglect it. Yet "if you confess and
forsake your sins, you shall have mercy; but if you cover them, you
shall not prosper. And if, being oft reproved, you harden your neck,
you shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy." "Be not
deceived, God is not mocked. Whatsoever you sow, that shall you also
reap." O man! you know not what it is to deal with an offended and
revenging God. Nor what it is to hear Christ say, "Depart from me, ye
workers of iniquity; I never knew you: depart from me, ye wicked, into
everlasting fire." You know not what it is to be shut out of heaven, and
concluded under utter desperation; and in hell to look back upon this
obstinate impenitence, and rejecting of the mercy that would have
saved you; and there to have conscience telling you for ever, what it
is that you have done. Did you know what this is, could you, think a
penitent confessing and forsaking your sin to be a condition too hard
for the preventing of such a doleful state? O no! You know not what a
case you are casting your immortal soul into. The Lord give you
repentance, that you may never know it by experience. To prevent this,
is our business with you: we delight not to displease or shame you.
But God hath told us, "That if any do err from the truth, and one
convert him, let him know, that he which converteth a sinner from the
error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins." I do therefore by the command, and in the name of
Jesus Christ, require and beseech you, that you do, without any more
delay, confess your sins and heartily bewail them; and beg pardon of
them, and resolve and promise by the help of God to do so no more. And
bless God that you have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, whose blood will cleanse you from your sins, if you
penitently confess them; and that mercy may be yet had on so easy
terms. If you had any sense of your sin and misery, or any sense of
the dishonour done to God, or of the wrong that you have done to
others, and of the usefulness of your penitent confession, and
amendment, to the reparation of all these, you would cast yourself in
the dust, in shame and grief before the Lord, and before the church.
"To-day, therefore, if you will hear his voice, harden not your heart,
lest God forsake you, and give you over unto your own heart's lust, to
walk in your own counsels, and resolve in his wrath, you shall never
enter into his rest." And then God and this congregation will be
witnesses that you were warned; and your blood will be upon your own
head. But if, in penitent confession, you fly to Christ, and loathe
yourself for your iniquities, and heartily forsake them, I have
authority to promise you free forgiveness, and that your iniquity
shall not be your ruin.[276]

 _A Form of Confession, to be made before the Congregation._

[Sidenote: * Here the sin must be named and aggravated, when by the
pastor it is judged requisite.]

I do confess before God and this congregation, that I have greatly
sinned. * I have offended and dishonoured God, wronged the church, and
the souls of others. I have deserved to be forsaken of the Lord, and
cast out of his presence and communion of saints, into desperation,
and remediless misery in hell. I am no more worthy to be called thy
son, or to have a name or place among thy servants. I do here declare
mine iniquity, and am sorry for my sins; they are gone over my head as
a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me, they take hold upon me. I
am ashamed, as unworthy to look up towards heaven, but my hope is in
the blood and grace of Christ, who made his life a sacrifice for sin,
and came to seek and save that which was lost; whose grace aboundeth
where sin hath abounded. The Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I humbly
beg of the congregation that they will earnestly pray, that God will
wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sins;
that he will forgive them, and blot them out, and hide his face from
them, and remember them no more; that he will not cast me away from
his presence, nor forsake me as I have forsaken him, nor deal with me
according to my deserts: but that he will create in me a clean heart,
and renew a right spirit in me, and grant me the joy of his salvation.
And I beg pardon of the church, and all that I have wronged; and
resolve by the grace of God to do so no more; but to walk more
watchfully as before the Lord. And I desire all that are ungodly, that
they think never the worse of the laws, or ways, or servants of the
Lord for my misdoings; for if I had been ruled by God, and by his
servants, I had never done as I have done. There is nothing in
religion that befriendeth sin; there is nothing so contrary to it, as
God and his holy laws, which I should have obeyed. Rather let all take
warning by me, and avoid temptations, and live not carelessly, and
hearken not to the inclinations or reasonings of the flesh, nor trust
their weak and sinful hearts; but live in godly fear and watchfulness,
and keep under the flesh, and keep close to God, and hearken to the
faithful counsel of his servants. And I entreat your prayers to God,
that I may be strengthened by his grace, that I may sin thus no more,
lest worse befall me.[277]

 _A form of Prayer for a Sinner impenitent, after Public Admonition._

Most gracious God, according to thy command we have warned this
sinner, and told him of thy threatenings, and foretold him of thy
certain terrible judgments, that he might flee from the wrath to come;
but alas, we perceive not that he repenteth or relenteth, but
hardeneth his heart against reproof; as if he were able to contend
with thee, and overcome thy power. O let us prevail with thee for
grace, that we may prevail with him for penitent confession and
reformation. O pity a miserable sinner! so miserable, as that he
layeth not to heart his misery, nor pitieth himself. O save him from
the gall of bitterness, and from the bonds of his iniquity. Give him
repentance unto life, that he may recover himself out of the snare of
the devil, who is taken captive by him at his will. Give him not up to
a blind mind, to a seared conscience, a heart that is past feeling,
nor to walk in his own counsels, and after his own lusts. Let him no
longer despise the riches of thy goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, nor with a hardened, impenitent heart, treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of thy righteous
judgment; who wilt render to every man according to his deeds, even to
them that are contentious and obey not the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon
every soul of man that doeth evil. Let him be sure that the judgment
of God is according to truth against them that commit such things; and
let him not think in his impenitency to escape thy judgment. O suffer
him not, when he heareth the threatenings of thy word, to bless
himself in his heart, and say, I shall have peace, though I walk in
the imaginations of my heart, and add sin to sin; lest thy anger and
jealousy smoke against him, and thou wilt not spare him, but blot out
his name from under heaven, and all thy curses lie upon him, and thou
separate him to evil, even to the worm that dieth not, and to the fire
that is not quenched. O save him from his sins, from his impenitency,
and the pride and stubbornness of his heart. O save him from the
everlasting flames, and from thy wrath, which he is the more in danger
of, because he feeleth not, and feareth not his danger. Let him know
how hard it is for him to kick against the pricks, and how woeful to
strive against his Maker. Lay him at thy footstool in sackcloth and
ashes, in tears and lamentation, crying out, Woe unto me that I have
sinned; and humbling his soul in true contrition, and loathing
himself, and begging thy pardoning and healing grace, and begging the
prayers and communion of thy church, and resolving to sin wilfully no
more, but to live before thee in uprightness and obedience all his
days. O let us prevail with thee for the conversion of this impenitent
sinner, and so for the saving of his soul from death, and the hiding
and pardoning of his sins; that he that is lost may be found, and he
that is dead may be alive, and the angels of heaven, and we thy
unworthy servants here on earth, may rejoice at his repenting. Let us
see him restored by thy grace, that we may joyfully receive him into
our communion, and thou mayst receive him at last into thy heavenly
kingdom, and Satan may be disappointed of his prey; for thy mercy'
sake, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Saviour.[278] Amen.

 _A Form of Rejection from the Communion of the Church._

Jesus Christ, the King and Lawgiver of the church, hath commanded,
that, If a brother trespass against us, we go and tell him his fault
between him and us alone; and if he will not hear us, we shall then
take with us one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may be established; and if he shall neglect to
hear them, that he tell it to the church; and if he neglect to hear
the church, that he be to us as a heathen man, and a publican. And
that we keep no company, if any that is called a brother, be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard,
or an extortioner, with such a one, no, not to eat. And that we
withdraw ourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and
note him, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.
According to these laws of Christ, we have admonished this offending
brother, who hath greatly sinned against God, and grieved and injured
the church; we have earnestly prayed and patiently waited for his
repentance, but we have not prevailed. But after all, he continueth
impenitent, and will not be persuaded to confess and forsake his sin:
we do therefore, according to these laws of Christ, declare him unmeet
for the communion of the church, and reject him from it; requiring him
to forbear it, and requiring you to avoid him; and we leave him bound
to the judgment of the Lord, unless his true repentance shall prevent
it.[279]

 _A Form of Absolution, and Reception of the Penitent._

[Sidenote: * This must be omitted if the person was not first
rejected.]

Though you have greatly sinned against the Lord, and against his
church, and your own soul, yet seeing you humble yourself before him,
and penitently fly to Christ for mercy, resolving to do so no more;
hear now the glad tidings of salvation, which I am commanded to
declare unto you. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Seek the Lord while he may be
found; call upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon. He that covereth his sins shall not prosper; but
whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy. Brethren, if a
man be overtaken in a fault, restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness, considering thyself lest thou also be tempted. According to
this word of grace, [* I do loose the bonds here laid upon you, and
receive you again into the communion of the church,] requiring to
receive you, and not upbraid you with your sin, but rejoice in your
recovery. And I do declare to you the pardon of all your sins in the
blood of Christ, if your repentance be sincere. And I exhort and
charge you, that you believingly and thankfully accept this great,
unspeakable mercy, and that you watch more carefully for the time to
come, and avoid temptations, and subdue the flesh, and accept
reproofs, and see that you return not to your vomit, or to wallow
again in the mire, when you are washed; but obey the Spirit, and keep
close to God in the means of your preservation.[280]

 _A Form of Thanksgiving, or Prayer, for the Restored Penitent._

[Sidenote: * Leave out this if he was not rejected.]

O most merciful Father, we thank thee that thou hast brought as under
so gracious a covenant, as not only to pardon the sins of our
unregenerate state; but also upon our penitent confession, and return,
to cleanse us from all our unrighteousness, and pardon our falls by
the blood of Christ, and to restore our souls, and lead us again in
the paths of righteousness, and command thy servants to receive us. We
thank thee that thou hast thus restored this thy servant, giving him
repentance and remission of sin, [* and returning him to the communion
of thy church.] We beseech thee, comfort him with the believing
apprehensions of thy forgiveness and reconciliation through Jesus
Christ. Restore unto him the joy of thy salvation, and uphold him by
thy free Spirit; stablish, strengthen, settle him, that with full
purpose of heart he may cleave unto thee; and now thou hast spoken
peace to him he may not return again to folly. As he nameth the name
of Christ, let him depart from iniquity, and never more dishonour
thee, thy church or truth, nor his holy profession, but save him from
temptation. Let him watch and stand fast, and sin no more, lest worse
befall him. Let him not receive this grace in vain, nor turn it into
wantonness, nor continue in sin, that grace may abound. But let his
old man be crucified with Christ, and the body of sin be destroyed;
that henceforth he may no more serve sin, remembering what fruit he
had in those things whereof he is now ashamed, and that the end and
wages of sin is death: and let us all take warning by the falls of
others, and be not high-minded, but fear; and let him that thinketh he
standeth take heed lest he fall. Let us watch and pray that we enter
not into temptation, remembering that the flesh is weak; and our
adversary the devil walketh about seeking whom he may devour. And let
none of us hate our brother in our hearts, but in any wise rebuke our
neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him: and confirm us unto the end,
that we may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom
with thee, O Father, and thy Holy Spirit, be kingdom, and power, and
glory for ever.[281] Amen.


APPENDIX.

A LARGER LITANY, OR GENERAL PRAYER, TO BE USED AT DISCRETION.

O most holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, three Persons and one God, infinite in power, wisdom, and
goodness, our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; our Owner, Governor,
and Father; hear our prayers, and have mercy upon us, miserable
sinners.

O Lord our Saviour, whose incarnation, nativity, subjection, fasting,
temptation, poverty, reproaches, agony and bloody sweat, scourging,
desertion, crucifying, death, and burial, were all undergone to take
away the sins of the world; who being risen, ascended, and glorified,
art the great Priest, and Prophet, and King of thy universal church,
for which thou makest intercession, which thou dost gather, teach, and
guide by thy Spirit, word, and ministers, which thou dost justify and
wilt glorify with thyself, who wilt come again, and raise the dead,
and judge the world in righteousness; we beseech thee hear us,
miserable sinners. Cast us not out that come unto thee. Make sure to
us our calling and election, our unfeigned faith and repentance, that
being justified, and made the sons of God, we may have peace with him
as our reconciled God and Father.[282]

Let our hearts be right with thee our God, and stedfast in thy
covenant. Cause us to deny ourselves, and give up ourselves entirely
unto thee, our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, as being not our
own, but thine.[283]

Let thy Holy Spirit dwell in us, and sanctify us throughout, that we
may be new creatures, and holy as thou art holy; let it be in us the
Spirit of adoption and supplication, and the seal and earnest of our
glorious inheritance; and let us know that we are thine, and thou
abidest in us, by the Spirit which thou hast given us.[284]

As thy name, O Lord, is holy, and thy glory covereth the heavens, so
let the earth be filled with thy praises. Let our souls ever magnify
thee, O Lord, and our tongues extol thee. Let us speak of the glorious
honour of thy majesty, of thy greatness, thy power, thy glorious
kingdom, thy wisdom, holiness, truth, and righteousness, thy goodness,
thy mercy, and thy wondrous works. Let all flesh bless thy holy
name.[285]

Let the desire of our souls be to thy name: cause us to love thee with
all our hearts, to fear thee, trust in thee, and to delight in thee,
and be satisfied in thee as our portion, and whatever we do to do it
to thy glory.[286]

Keep us from inordinate self-love; from pride, and vain-glory, and
self-seeking; and from dishonouring thee, thy word, or service in the
world.[287]

Let the world acknowledge thee, the universal King. Give thy Son the
heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
his possession. Let the kingdoms of the world become his kingdoms.
Convert the atheistical, idolatrous, infidel, Mahometan, and ungodly
nations of the earth, that every knee may bow to Christ, and every
tongue confess him the King of kings, and Lord of lords, to the glory
of God the Father.[288]

Let the word of thy kingdom and salvation be preached to all the
world; let it have free course and be glorified: and by the power of
thy Spirit convert many unto Christ; and let him be thy salvation to
the ends of the earth. Send forth more labourers into the harvest,
which is great, and fit them for so great a work; and deliver them
from unreasonable and wicked men, that (to fill up their sins) forbid
them to speak to the people, that they might be saved.[289]

Deliver the churches that are oppressed by idolaters, Mahometans, or
other infidels and enemies. Give all thy servants prudence, patience,
and innocency, that, suffering as christians, and not as evil-doers,
they may not be ashamed, but may glorify thee, and wait for thy
salvation, committing the keeping of their souls unto thee, in hope of
a reward in heaven.[290]

Deliver the church from the Roman papal usurpations and corruptions.
Dispel the deceits of heresies, and false worship, by the light of thy
prevailing truth. Unite all christians in Christ Jesus, the true and
only universal Head; that by the true christian, catholic faith and
love, they may grow up in him, and may keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace; the strong receiving and bearing the infirmities of
the weak. Heal the divisions that are among believers. Let nothing be
done through strife or vain-glory, but in lowliness of mind let each
esteem other better than himself; and let all men know that we are
Christ's disciples, by our fervent love to one another.[291]

Let us be heartily and entirely thy subjects, believing that thou art
just, and the rewarder of them that diligently seek thee. Keep us from
atheism, idolatry, and disobedience; from infidelity, ungodliness, and
sensuality; from security, presumption, and despair.[292]

Let us study to please thee in all things. Let thy law be written in
our hearts; and let us delight to do thy will. Let our faith and
lives be ruled by thy word, which is able to make us wise unto
salvation; let us love it, search it, and understand it, and meditate
in it day and night.[293]

Let us not please ourselves or other men against thee, nor be led by
the wisdom or desires of the world and flesh, nor regard lying
vanities, nor through carelessness, rashness, or presumption, offend
thee.[294]

As all nations must be judged by thee, let them be ruled by thy laws,
and not make them void by men's traditions, nor worship thee in vain,
teaching for doctrine the commandments of men. But whatever thou
commandest, let them take heed to do; let them add nothing thereto,
nor take aught therefrom.[295]

Let us not take thy holy name in vain, but use it in truth and
reverence. Keep us from all blasphemy, perjury, profane swearing; from
lying before the God of truth; and from contempt and forgetfulness of
thy presence; from false, unworthy, unreverent thoughts or speeches of
God, and holy things; and from neglecting or abusing thy holy word and
worship.[296]

Help us to keep holy thy day, in remembrance of the blessed work of
our redemption, and reverently to attend thee in public worship; and
obediently to receive thy word; and fervently to call upon thy name;
and to delight ourselves in thanksgiving and joyful praises to thy
holiness in the communion of thy saints: and let us carefully see that
our households, and all within our gates, do serve thee, and not abuse
thy holy day.[297]

Have mercy on the kings and rulers of the earth, that they may escape
the temptations of worldly greatness, honours, and prosperity, which
would captivate them to the flesh, and draw their hearts from thee,
thy laws, and ways, and would engage them against thee and thy
servants. And as they are thy ministers, and magistracy is thine
ordinance, sanctify and dispose them to be nursing fathers to thy
church, to own thy interest, and rule for thee.[298]

Especially have mercy on thy servant Charles, our king: illuminate and
sanctify him by thy Holy Spirit, that above all things he may seek thy
glory, the increase of faith and obedience to thy laws, and may rule
us as being thy minister for good, not to be a terror to good works,
but to evil; that under him we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty.[299]

Have mercy upon all the royal family, the lords of the council, and
all the nobility, the judges, and magistrates of these lands. Cause
them to fear thee, and to be eminent in sobriety, righteousness, and
godliness, to protect the innocent, and be a terror to the wicked,
hating injustice, covetousness, and pride.[300]

Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, and not resist. Let
them obey the king, and all that are in authority under him, not only
for wrath, but for conscience' sake, as knowing that they rule by
thee, and for thee.[301]

Give all the churches able, holy, faithful pastors; and cause them
laboriously to preach, and rightly to divide the word of truth, to
feed thy people with knowledge, and lead them in the way of faith and
love, of holiness and peace, and to watch for their souls as those
that must give account; overseeing and ruling them, not by constraint,
but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as being
lords over thy heritage, but as the servants of all, and ensamples to
the flock; that when the chief Pastor shall appear, they may receive a
crown of glory.[302]

Let the congregations know those that have the ruling of them, and are
over them in the Lord, that labour among them, preaching to them the
word of God. Let them submissively and obediently hear, and esteem
them very highly in love for their work's sake, and account them
worthy of double honour.[303]

Let parents bring up their children in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord, diligently teaching them thy word, talking of it when they
are in their house, and when they walk by the way, when they lie down,
and when they rise up, that they may know their Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, in the days of their youth: and cause children to hear,
love, honour, and obey their parents, that they may have the blessing
of thine especial promise unto such.[304]

Let husbands love their wives, and prudently guide them in knowledge
and holiness; and let wives love, honour, and obey their husbands, as
meet helpers to them.[305]

Let masters rule their servants in holiness and mercy, remembering
they have a Master in heaven; and let servants reverently, singly, and
willingly be obedient, and do service to their masters as to the Lord,
from him expecting their reward.[306]

Keep us from murder, violence, and all injury to our neighbour's life
or health; from malice, cursing, reviling, and unadvised anger. Let us
not resist evil with evil, but forbear one another, and not give place
to wrath.[307]

Keep us from adultery, fornication, and all uncleanness, and the
occasions and appearances thereof. Let us take care as becometh
saints, that they be not immodestly named among us, and that no
corrupt communication proceed out of our mouths. Keep us from
chambering and wantonness, from lustful thoughts, and all immodest
attire, behaviour, looks, and actions.[308]

Keep us from theft and oppression, and any way wronging our neighbour
in his property and estate.[309]

Keep us from false witness-bearing, lying, and deceiving; from
slandering, backbiting, unjust, uncharitable censuring or reproaching;
from all perverting of justice, and wronging the reputation of our
neighbour; and from all consent or desire of such wrongs.[310]

Keep us from envy, and from coveting any thing that is our
neighbour's, to his wrong, and from seeking our own, or drawing to
ourselves, to the injury of his welfare; but let us love our
neighbours as ourselves, and do to others as we would they should do
to us.[311]

Teach us to love Christ and his holy image in his members, with a dear
and special love, and to love our enemies, and pray for them that hate
and persecute us, and to do good to all as we are able, but especially
to them of the household of faith.[312]

Cause us with patience to submit to all the disposals of thy will, and
wait thy end, and to love the demonstrations of thy holiness and
justice, though grievous to the flesh; and keep us from impatient
murmurings, and discontent, and arrogant reasoning against thy
will.[313]

Give us our daily bread, our necessary sustentation and provision for
thy service; and let us use it for thee, and not to satisfy the flesh.
Let us depend on thee, and trust thee for it in the lawful use of the
means. And bless thou our labours, and give us the fruits of the earth
in season, and such temperate weather as tendeth thereunto.[314]

Deliver us and all thy servants from such wants, distresses, griefs,
and sickness, as will unseasonably take us off thy service, and from
untimely death; and teach us to value and redeem our time, and work
while it is day.[315]

Keep us from gluttony, drunkenness, and all intemperance; from sloth
and idleness; from inordinate desires of pleasures or abundance; but
having food and raiment, let us be therewith contented.[316]

Of thy abundant mercy, through the sacrifice and merits of thy Son
according to thy promise, forgive us all our sins, and save us from
thy deserved wrath and condemnation. Remember not, O Lord, our
offences, nor the offences of our forefathers; but though our
iniquities testify against us, spare us and save us for thy mercy's
sake. O let not our sin deprive us of thy Spirit, or of access unto
thee, or communion with thee, or of thy favour or comfort, or the
light of thy countenance, or of everlasting life.[317]

Cause us to forgive from our hearts, the injuries done against us, as
we expect to be forgiven by thee the greatest debt. Keep us from all
revengeful desires and attempts. And do thou convert and pardon our
enemies, slanderers, oppressors, persecutors, and others that have
done us wrong.[318]

Keep us from running upon temptations: suffer not the tempter by
subtlety or importunity to corrupt our judgments, wills, affections,
or conversations. Cause us to maintain a diligent and constant watch
over our thoughts and hearts, our senses and appetites, our words and
actions; and as faithful soldiers, by the conduct and strength of the
Captain of our salvation, with the whole armour of God, to resist and
overcome the world, the devil, and the flesh unto the end.[319]

Save us from the temptations of prosperity and adversity. Let us not
be drawn from thee to sin by the pleasures, profits, or honours of the
world. Strengthen us for sufferings. Let us not forsake thee, or fall
in time of trial. Help us to deny ourselves, and take up our cross and
follow Christ, accounting the sufferings of this present time unworthy
to be compared with the glory to be revealed.[320]

Deliver us from the enmity and rage of Satan and his instruments; and
give not up thy servants, their souls or bodies, their peace or
liberties, estates or names, to their malicious wills; but save us and
preserve us to thy heavenly kingdom.[321]

We ask all this of thee, O Lord; for thou art the universal King, holy
and just, to whom it belongeth in righteousness to judge the world,
and save thy people. All power is thine to execute wrath upon thine
enemies, and to deliver and glorify thy flock; and none is able to
resist thee. Of thee, and through thee, and to thee, are all things,
and the glory shall be thine, for ever.[322] Amen.

THE CHURCH'S PRAISE FOR OUR REDEMPTION, TO BE USED AT DISCRETION.

Our souls do magnify thee, O Lord; our spirits rejoice in God our
Saviour, who remembered us in our low and lost estates, for his mercy
endureth for ever. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin. We kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law;
for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, and judgment
came upon all men to condemnation. But blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, that hath visited and redeemed his people, and hath raised up
a mighty salvation for us in the house of his servant David: as he
spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the
world began. A virgin hath conceived and brought forth: the Holy Ghost
did come upon her; the power of the Highest did overshadow her;
therefore the Holy One that is born of her, is called the Son of God:
his name is called Jesus, for he saveth his people from their sins. To
us is born a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord: he is the image of the
invisible God, the firstborn of every creature; for by him all things
were created that are in heaven and in earth, visible and invisible,
whether thrones or dominions, or principalities or powers, all things
were created by him and for him, and he is before all things, and by
him all things do consist. He is the power of God and the wisdom of
God; the true Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the
world. The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and men beheld his
glory as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth; for it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness
dwell. When the fulness of time was come, God sent his Son, made of a
woman, made under the law, to redeem them that are under the law. This
is the beloved Son in whom the Father is well pleased. For such a High
Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners. He did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his
mouth; when he was reviled, he reviled not again, leaving us an
example: who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree;
for God laid on him the iniquity of us all, and by his stripes we are
healed. When we were without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly, the just for the unjust: in this was manifest the love of God
towards us, that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that
we might live by him. Forasmuch as the children were partakers of
flesh and blood, he himself likewise took part with them, that he
might destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is,
the devil; and might deliver them, who through fear of death, were
all their lifetime subject to bondage. Having spoiled principalities
and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in his
cross. He was buried, and rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures; for God raised him, having loosed the pains of death,
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. He hath
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light by the
gospel. O death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy
victory?[323]

All power is given him in heaven and earth. When he ascended up on
high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men. And he gave
some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some
pastors, and some teachers, for the perfection of the saints, for the
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we
all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, to a perfect man. He is set at God's right hand in the
celestials, far above all principalities, and powers, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in
that to come. God hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to
be Head over all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness
of him that filleth all in all.[324]

Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God manifested
in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached to the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. This is
the record, that God hath given us eternal life, and this life is in
his Son. He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son
hath not life. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and
the world knew him not. He came to his own, and his own received him
not. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil.
But as many as receive him, to them gives he power to become the sons
of God, even to them that believe in his name. There is therefore now
no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. He forgiveth our iniquities, and will
remember our sins no more. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God's elect? It is God that justifieth: who is he that condemneth? It
is Christ that died; yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at
the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. If any man have
not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. He that nameth the
name of Christ must depart from iniquity. If we regard iniquity in
our hearts, God will not hear our prayers. But we are washed, we are
sanctified, we are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. Not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. And being justified by
faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom
also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and hope maketh not ashamed,
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost
which is given us. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be
saved by his life. He that spared not his own Son, but gave him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? He
that is gone to prepare a place for us, will come again and receive us
to himself, that where he is, there we may be also. It is his will
that they that the Father hath given him be with him where he is, that
they may behold the glory that is given him. Because he liveth we
shall live also; for we are dead, and our life is hid with Christ in
God. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in glory; when he shall come to be glorified in his
saints, and to be admired in all them that do believe. Then shall men
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between those that serve
God, and those that serve him not. Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He that overcometh
shall inherit all things. He shall enter into the joy of his Lord. He
shall be a pillar in the temple of God, and shall go out no more.
Christ will grant him to sit with him in his throne, even as he
overcame and is set down with his Father in his throne. He will
rejoice over us with joy, he will rest in his love, then, in the holy
city, the new Jerusalem, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband,
where the tabernacle of God will be with men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with
them, their God, and shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and
there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, no crying, nor pain, for the
former things are passed away. And the city needeth not the sun, or
the moon to shine in it, for the glory of God doth lighten it, and the
Lamb is the light thereof. The throne of God and of the Lamb shall be
in it, and his servants shall serve him, and shall see his face, who
is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of
lords. Of him, through him, and to him, are all things; to whom be
glory for ever.[325] Amen.

 [176] 1 Tim. 1. 15; Psal. 147. 5; Matt. 19. 17; 1 Tim. 6. 16;
 Dan. 7. 10; Isa. 57. 15; Psal. 149. 4; Heb. 10. 19, 20; Isa. 55. 6;
 Psal 95. 6; 12. 2; 99. 5; 51. 1, 17; 89. 7; Jer. 32. 40; Heb. 12. 28;
 1 Thess. 5. 23; Lev. 10. 3; Zech. 12. 10; Rom. 8. 26; James 5. 16;
 1. 6; Isa. 26. 8; Matt. 15. 18; John 4. 23, 24; 1 Thess. 2. 13;
 Acts 16. 14; Mark 4. 12; Phil. 1. 29; Prov. 1. 24, 25; Eccles. 5. 1;
 John 6. 45; Heb. 4. 22, 13; 2 Cor. 10. 4, 6; Psal. 69. 30; 106. 46;
 9. 14; 105. 3; 51. 15; 19. 14; Heb. 13. 21.

 [177] Isa. 66. 1; Psal. 111. 9; Luke 2. 13; Psal. 103. 20; Heb. 1. 6;
 Psal. 149. 1; Lev. 10. 3; Gen. 18. 27; 2 Tim. 2. 5; Dan. 9. 18;
 Hos. 14. 2; Rom. 8. 26; Heb. 12. 28; 2 Thess. 2. 10; Luke 19. 48;
 Isa. 1. 19; 2 Cor. 2. 16; James 5. 16; Psal. 63. 5; 1 Cor. 7. 35;
 Psal. 84. 10; 73. 28.

 [178] Gen. 1. 27.

 [179] Rom. 5. 12.

 [180] Rom. 3. 23.

 [181] John 3. 16.

 [182] Ver. 18.

 [183] Ver. 19.

 [184] Ver. 20.

 [185] Gal. 3. 13.

 [186] John 3. 5.

 [187] Ver. 6.

 [188] Matt. 18. 3.

 [189] Ezek. 33. 11.

 [190] Luke 15. 10.

 [191] Ver. 18, 19.

 [192] Psal. 5. 5; Rom. 6. 23; Eph. 1. 6, 12; John 4. 42; Rom. 3. 25;
 Eph. 1. 5; Luke 24. 47; Acts 5. 37; Prov. 28. 13; Rev. 3. 17;
 Psal. 51. 5; Eph. 2. 3; Isa. 48. 8; 53.6; Psal. 100. 3; 1 Cor. 6. 20;
 2 Cor. 8. 5; 1 Cor. 10. 31; 7. 32; 1 Thess. 4. 1; 1 John 3. 22;
 Rom. 2. 23; 1 Chron. 21. 7; Phil. 2. 21; Luke 18. 14; Rom. 15. 1;
 Psal. 47. 7; Rom. 7. 12; Dan. 9. 9, 10; Tit. 1. 7, 10; Rom. 8. 5;
 13. 14; 4. 20; Psal. 78. 7, 22; Isa. 51. 7, 8; Luke 12. 4, 5;
 Psal. 100. 5; 1 John 4. 16; Psal. 16. 5; Matt. 22. 7, 3; Psal. 37. 4;
 1 John 2. 15; 2 Tim. 5. 7; John 6. 27; Luke 10. 21, 22; Matt. 25. 26;
 Rom. 12. 11; Eph. 6. 11, 13, 14; Mark 8. 38; 2 Tim. 1. 8; Eph. 5. 15;
 Rom. 12. 1, 19; Acts 11. 23; 2 Pet. 1. 10; Luke 1. 71; Heb. 12. 28;
 Psal. 111. 9; 2 Tim. 2. 19; Phil. 3. 3; Psal. 29. 2; Rev. 1. 10;
 Rom. 13. 7; Tit. 3. 1; Eph. 6; Matt. 29. 39; 7. 12; 1 Cor. 10. 24;
 Eph. 4. 2, 32; Matt. 5. 44; Heb. 12. 14; Gal. 6. 10; Psal. 19. 12, 13;
 Rom. 2. 4; Psal. 51. 4; Rom. 2. 15; Psal. 78. 32, 37, 42;
 Luke 12. 35, 36, 40; Rom. 5. 6, 8, 10; Luke 14. 17; 8. 1; Acts 13. 26;
 Rev. 22. 17; 1 John 5. 11, 12; Matt. 22. 5; Heb. 2. 3; Psal. 119. 60;
 John 12. 40; Heb. 12. 25; Acts 7. 51; 2 Tim. 3. 8; Luke 15. 18;
 Numb. 16. 38; Rom. 1. 18; Eph. 5. 6; Dan. 9. 7, 8; Psal. 51. 1; 41. 1;
 143. 2; 51. 9, 11; Lev. 26. 25; Rev. 1. 5; John 1. 29; Eph. 1. 6;
 Matt. 12. 18; Gal. 3. 13; Isa. 53. 5; Psal. 85. 4; 67. 1; Acts 11. 18;
 Ezek. 20. 43; Psal. 51. 17; Ezek. 36. 26; Gal. 4. 6, 2; 2 Cor. 6. 16;
 Jer. 13. 13; Ezek. 11. 20; Psal. 119. 18; Eph. 3. 18; Matt. 13. 11;
 Eph. 1. 18; Rom. 2. 18; 2 Tim. 2. 26; Psal. 119. 104; Rom. 5. 5;
 8. 35, 39; Jer. 32. 40; Matt. 6. 3; Col. 3. 1; Matt. 6. 20, 21;
 Phil. 3. 20; Col. 3. 5; Gal. 6. 14; Rom. 1. 17; Heb. 11. 1; 1 Cor. 4;
 1 Pet. 3. 11; Luke 13. 14; 1 Cor. 9. 24; 1 Pet. 4. 2; Col. 1. 10;
 2 Cor. 5. 9; John 6. 38; Psal. 40. 8; 1. 2; Tit. 2. 12;
 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15; 1. 22; Eph. 4. 2, 32; James 5. 17; Psal. 15. 4;
 Eph. 5. 15; Phil. 1. 10; Titus 2. 14; Matt. 5. 44; Rom. 12. 19;
 Luke 21. 19; Mark 8. 34; Heb. 11. 26; Rom. 8. 17; Rev. 2. 10, 11.

 [193] Hab. 1. 13; Jude 15. Luke 13. 3; Mark 16. 16; Psal. 51. 5;
 Eph. 2. 3; Rom. 3. 22; Ezek. 20. 37; Matt. 28. 19; Eccl. 12. 1;
 Deut. 11. 1; Col. 1. 10; 1 Cor. 10. 31; Gen. 5. 22; 2 Cor. 5. 7;
 Phil. 3. 20; Rom. 12. 11; Deut. 6. 5; Eph. 2. 3; Rom. 8. 7;
 Exod. 20. 4, 7, 8, 11, 12, &c.; 2 Pet. 2. 9; Rom. 13. 8, 9;
 Mat. 7. 12; Mark 6. 33. 1 Tim. 6. 8; Luke 10. 41, 42; Rom. 5. 8;
 Luke 24. 47; Rom. 3. 25; Matt. 22. 4, 5; Heb. 2. 3; Acts 7. 51;
 Prov. 1. 23; Jam. 4. 7; 1 Pet. 5. 9; Psal. 51. 4; Psal. 19. 12, 13;
 Isa. 59. 12; Psal. 103. 110; 50. 11; Mark 9. 44; Psal. 52. 8;
 Eph. 1. 12, 13; Psal. 71. 5; 78. 7; 119. 81; 51. 1; 2 Cor. 5. 18;
 1. 19; John 1. 7; Gal. 4. 6; 1 Thess. 5. 23; Rom. 5. 5; Deut. 30. 6;
 Psal. 31. 16; Matt. 1. 21; 1 Thess. 1. 10; Tit. 2. 14; Col. 1. 10;
 1 Pet. 2. 3; Ephes. 5. 16; 2 Pet. 1. 10; Matt. 6. 11; 1 Tim. 6. 4;
 Heb. 13. 5; Matt. 6. 25; 2 Pet. 3. 11; Matt. 26. 41; James 4. 6;
 Gal. 5. 17; 1 John 5: 4, 5; Rev. 2. 17; 2 Pet. 2. 10; Luke 1. 17;
 Psal. 73. 24.

 [194] 2 Chron. 30. 9.

 [195] 1 John 2. 1, 2.

 [196] Acts. 13. 38, 39.

 [197] Rom. 5. 20, 21.

 [198] 1 John 1. 7, 8, 9.

 [199] Matt. 11. 28-30.

 [200] Rev. 22. 17.

 [201] John 6. 37.

 [202] Heb. 8. 12.

 [203] Rom. 8. 9.

 [204] 2 Cor. 5. 17.

 [205] Rom. 8. 1, 5.

 [206] Ver. 6.

 [207] Ver. 7.

 [208] Ver. 8.

 [209] Ver. 13.

 [210] Gal. 5. 19-21.

 [211] Ver. 22-24.

 [212] Rom. 13. 13, 14.

 [213] 1 John 2. 15, 16.

 [214] Matt. 7. 13, 14.

 [215] Tit. 2. 11-14.

 [216] Psal. 1. 1, 2.

 [217] Ver. 5.

 [218] Heb. 12. 28, 29.

 [219] 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12.

 [220] 1 Cor. 15. 56.

 [221] Luke 4. 16-18.

 [222] Acts 13. 27; 1. 2.

 [223] Neh. 8. 4, 6; 9. 2-6, 10, 38; Acts 12. 12; 1 Tim. 4. 5;
 Acts 1. 14; 16. 13, 16; 1 Tim. 2. 8; 1 Cor. 14, 15, 16; Luke 4. 16, 18;
 Neh. 8. 8; Acts 20. 7, 9; 2 Tim. 4. 1, 2; Acts 4. 20; 2 Cor. 4. 13;
 John 16. 20; 1 Cor. 2. 7, 13; Matt. 7. 29. Tit. 2. 15; Matt. 21. 45;
 Mark 12. 12, 13, 17; Eph. 6. 19, 20; Jude 22, 23; Acts 18. 25;
 2 Tim. 2. 24, 25; 1 Tim. 5. 17; Acts 20. 36; Psal. 2; Rev. 11. 15;
 1 Tim. 2. 1-3; 2 Thess. 2. 1, 2; 2. 8; 1 Thess. 2. 16; Rev. 18. 19;
 Matt. 6. 9; 9. 37, 38; 1 Tim. 2. 3; Eph. 6. 19; 1 Thess. 5;
 2 John 17, 20; 1 Sam. 12. 23; 2 Cor. 4. 5; Phil. 1. 15, 16;
 James 3. 1, 15-17; Luke 9. 55; 1 Cor. 14. 26; 2 Cor. 10. 8;
 Psal. 92. 1; Rev. 1. 10; Acts 20. 7; Col. 3. 16, 17; Psal. 118;
 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2; 1 Tim. 3. 5; 3. 15; 2 Tim. 2. 2, 15; Acts 20. 7, 9.

 [224] Luke 11. 28.

 [225] Num. 6. 24-26.

 [226] 2 Cor. 13. 14.

 [227] Prov. 8. 15; Dan. 4. 32; Heb. 2. 9; Psal. 65. 11; 93. 14;
 65. 4; 60. 5; 80. 13; 59. 1; 61. 6; Isa. 45. 13; Matt. 3. 3;
 Isa. 59. 8; 11. 2; 1 Kings 1. 3, 7, 9; Josh. 1. 8; Zech. 12. 8;
 2 Sam. 14. 17; Psal. 15. 4; 101. 6. Prov. 25. 5; 1 Tim. 2. 2;
 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8; Rev. 21. 5; Zech. 8. 13; Isa. 60. 15; James 3. 17;
 2 Sam. 23. 3; John 7. 27; 2 Chron. 19. 6; Amos 5. 24; Rom. 13. 1-3;
 Rev. 11. 16; Psal. 68. 28; Jer. 31. 23; Matt. 6. 13.

 [228] Matt. 28. 19; John 5. 7; 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6; 1 Tim. 1. 17;
 Mal. 2. 10; Heb. 1. 2, 3, 5, 8; 1 Pet. 2. 8; Psal. 22. 28;
 1 Cor. 12. 4-6; Psal. 103. 19; Acts 7. 59; Heb. 2. 14, 9;
 1 Cor. 15. 4; 1 Tim. 3. 6; John 1. 29; Eph. 1. 20, 22;
 Rom. 8. 30, 33, 24; Eph. 5. 1; 1 Thess. 4. 16, 17; 2 Pet. 1. 10;
 2 Tim. 1. 5; Rom. 5. 1, 2, 10; 2 Cor. 6. 18; Gal. 4. 6.

 [229] 1 Pet. 1. 2; Rom. 8. 11; Matt. 8. 34, 35; 2 Cor. 8. 5;
 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20; Rev. 4. 11; John 12. 28; Matt. 5. 16;
 Psal. 22. 23, 27, 28; 2 Tim. 3. 2; Matt. 7. 22; Gal. 5. 26; 2. 19.

 [230] Psal. 2.; 47. 7; Rev. 11. 15; 2 Tim. 2. 26; Acts 26. 18;
 Rom. 11. 25; Matt. 9. 38; 24. 14; 2 Thess. 3. 1, 2; Rev. 2. 3, 19;
 3. 10; Luke 18. 7; Rev. 18.; 19.

 [231] Eph. 4. 3, 5, 13, 15, 16; Tit. 3. 10; 2 Cor. 2. 17;
 1 Cor. 1. 10; Rom. 14. 1; 15. 1; 3 John 9; Rom. 1. 31; Luke 9. 55;
 Psal. 77. 10; Phil. 2. 3.

 [232] Psal. 14.; Eph. 2. 3, 12; 2 Tim. 3. 2-4; 1 Cor. 6. 9;
 2 Thess. 2. 10; Rom. 8. 24; Psal. 40. 8; 1. 2; Isa. 8. 20;
 Psal. 119. 97, 27.

 [233] Matt. 15. 9; Exod. 20. 4, 7, 8; Mark 7. 21, 22; Jam. 5. 12;
 Eccl. 5. 1, 6; Ezek. 2. 26; Neh. 13. 17; Rev. 1. 10.

 [234] Prov. 21. 1; Psal. 2. 10-12; Isa. 49. 23; 2 Chron. 19. 6;
 Rom. 1. 11; 1 Tim. 6. 9; Matt. 21. 44; John 11. 48; Psal. 2. 2-4.

 [235] 1 Tim. 2. 2; Psal. 59. 1; 2 Chron. 1. 10; 29. 3; 15. 12, 13;
 Rom. 13. 3, 4; 1 Pet. 2. 14; 1 Tim. 2. 2.

 [236] Psal. 72. 1; Prov. 8. 16; Exod. 18. 21. Job 29; Isa. 1. 17, 23;
 Psal. 15. 4.

 [237] Rom. 13. 1, 2, 5; 1 Tim. 2. 2; 1 Pet. 2. 13.

 [238] 2 Cor. 3. 6; Jer. 3. 15; 2 Tim. 4. 2; Eph. 4. 11, 13;
 James 3. 17; Ezek. 34.; 1 Pet. 5. 1-4; Matt. 20. 25, 26, 27.

 [239] Heb. 13. 7, 17; 1 Thess. 5. 12, 13; 1 Tim. 5. 17.

 [240] Eph. 6. 1; Eccl. 12. 1; Exod. 20. 12; Eph. 6. 1, 2; 5. 25, 22;
 1 Pet. 3. 7; Col. 4. 1; 3. 22-24.

 [241] 1 John 3. 15; Luke 3. 14; 2 Cor. 7. 2; Prov. 29. 22;
 Matt. 5. 22.

 [242] Matt. 5. 27, 28; 1 Cor. 6. 9; Rom. 13. 13; Eph. 5. 3, 4, 12.

 [243] Eph. 4. 28; 1 Thess. 4. 6; Psal. 82. 2; Prov. 19. 5; 10. 18;
 Psal. 15. 3; Matt. 7. 12.

 [244] Exod. 20. 17; Matt. 22. 39; 7. 12; 25. 40.

 [245] 1 Pet. 1. 22.

 [246] Matt. 5. 44; Gal. 6. 10; Luke 11. 3; 1 Tim. 6. 8;
 Deut. 28. 3, 4; Psal. 112.; 128.; Deut. 11. 14; Phil. 2. 27;
 Rom. 13. 13, 14; 12. 11; Mark 8. 36.

 [247] 1 John 2. 1, 2; Gal. 6. 1; Jam. 5. 19, 20; Ezek. 6. 9;
 Eph. 1. 6, 7; Heb. 7. 25; Matt. 6. 12, 14, 15; 5. 44; Luke 23. 34;
 Matt. 26. 41.

 [248] Jam. 4. 7; 1 John 2. 13; 5. 4; Rom. 8. 13; Gal. 5. 17;
 1 John 2. 16, 17; 2 Tim. 2. 18; Rom. 8. 17.

 [249] 1 Pet. 5. 8; Psal. 140. 1-3; 2 Tim. 4. 18.

 [250] 1 Tim. 1. 17; Matt. 6. 13; Rom. 11. 36.

 [251] Psal. 119. 108; Eph. 1. 6; Psal. 116. 17; 2. Cor. 9. 15;
 Psal. 107. 22; 2 Cor. 1. 3; Psal. 86. 15; Exod. 33. 6, 7; Isa. 43. 7;
 Rev. 4. 11; Gen. 1. 27; Psal. 8. 5, 6; Deut. 31. 16; 32. 5; Hos. 4. 7;
 Psal. 6. 10; Hos. 13. 4; Gen. 4. 4; John 3. 16; Heb. 2. 16; John 1. 14;
 Eph. 3. 8; 1 Tim. 3. 16; 1 Pet. 1. 12; Heb. 2. 18; Matt. 4. 10;
 2 Cor. 8. 9; 1 Pet. 2. 22; Matt. 4. 10; 1 John 1. 9; Phil. 2. 7;
 Heb. 12. 2; Rev. 3. 18; Psal. 32. 1; 1 Pet. 2. 23; Heb. 2. 10;
 Isa. 53. 5, 6; 1 Tim. 1. 6; 1 Cor. 15. 3; Heb. 2. 14; Gal. 3. 13;
 Matt. 11. 28; Rev. 22. 14; Eph. 1. 22; Psa. 2. 8; Phil. 2. 9;
 Matt. 28. 19; John 5. 22; Heb. 8. 6; 2 Pet. 1. 4; 1 John 5. 11;
 2 Pet. 1. 19; Psal. 119. 130; Eph. 2. 20; 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20;
 Acts 26. 17, 18; Tit. 3. 3-6; 2 Tim. 2. 25; Eph. 4. 18; John 12. 40;
 1 Tim. 4. 2; Psal. 81. 11, 12; John 5. 4; Luke 19. 27; 1 Pet. 3. 20;
 Rom. 10. 21; Heb. 12. 25; Ezek. 33. 11; Prov. 1. 22, 23; John 6. 44;
 Acts 16. 14; 1 John 4. 19; Rom. 10. 20; Amos 5. 12; Rom. 5. 1;
 Acts 11. 18; Rom. 8. 14-17; Eph. 5. 30; Gal. 4. 6; Eph. 2. 19;
 1 Pet. 1. 3-6; Rom. 8. 28; Eph. 3. 12; Heb. 4. 16; Psal. 50. 15;
 1 Tim. 2. 8; Matt. 11. 13; Psal. 89. 7; 28. 6; 31. 22; 86. 13;
 Psal. 57. 3; 31. 20; 32. 7; 31. 33; 103. 10; 30. 5; Hab. 3. 2;
 Psal. 32. 6; 25. 10; 5. 7; 107. 1; 105. 3; 89. 15, 16; Psal. 84. 4;
 90. 14; 73. 24; John 17. 24; Rev. 22. 4.

 [252] Psal. 103. 1-4, 12; 1 John 3. 1; Psal. 63. 3, 4;
 Psal. 73. 25-27, 23; 94. 19; 73. 24.

 [253] Psal. 36. 7-9; 16. 9, 11; 23. 6; 36. 10; 30. 12.

 [254] Luke 2. 14; Psal. 149. 1, 4-6; 145. 10-13; Rev. 4. 8, 11;
 15. 3, 4; 5. 12; 13. 9, 10.

 [255] Psal. 107. 8, 21, 22; 96. 2; 29. 2; 96. 9, 11, 13; 103. 20-22;
 145. 21; 150. 6.

 [256] Mal. 4. 1; Heb. 12. 29; 1 Sam. 6. 20; Mal. 3. 2; Isa. 1. 4;
 Luke 19. 10; Eph. 2. 5; Luke 15. 32; Ezek. 16. 6, 8, 9; Col. 1. 13;
 Jer. 6. 28; Deut. 4. 23; 6. 5, 6; 11. 22; Psal. 100. 3, 4;
 Heb. 12. 25; Deut. 9. 12; 32. 5; 2 Tim. 3. 2; 1 John 2. 15; Eph. 2. 2;
 Gal. 5. 24; Matt. 22. 37, 40; Luke 10. 42; Matt. 25. 30; Rom. 2. 23;
 1 Cor. 10. 31; 1 Thess. 4. 1; Luke 8. 18; Matt. 24. 15; Psal. 1. 2;
 Deut. 6. 6; Phil. 4. 6; 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28; Isa. 64. 7; Col. 2. 7;
 Acts 2. 42, 45-47; 1 Cor. 11. 29; Mal. 1. 7, 10, 12; 2. 10, 11;
 Psal. 85. 8; Gen. 4. 16; Psal. 51. 11; 2 Chron. 15. 2; Matt. 22. 12;
 7. 23; Mal. 1. 10; 1 Pet. 2. 24; Isa. 53. 10; Psal. 51. 1; Rev. 1. 5;
 Hos. 14. 2; Ezek. 18. 38; Heb. 8. 12; Ezek. 33. 11; Hos. 14. 4;
 Psal. 35. 3; John 6. 37; Hos. 14. 2; Matt. 22. 4; 5. 6; John 6. 55;
 4. 14; Eph. 3. 18, 19; 1 Pet. 1. 8; Matt. 15. 27; John 6. 35, 51;
 Psal. 85. 8; Eph. 4. 30; Heb. 3. 13; Col. 3. 5; Eph. 3. 16;
 Psal. 119. 175.

 [257] Psal. 100. 3; Rev. 4. 11; 1 Tim. 1. 17; Psal. 51. 4;
 Deut. 32. 6; 1 John 3. 1; John 3. 16; Luke 22. 20; Heb. 9. 17;
 Luke 22. 19.

 [258] 1 Cor. 11. 23-26.

 [259] Acts 7. 59, 60; Rev. 1. 5; 1 Pet. 3. 18; Luke 22. 2, 19, 20;
 1 Cor. 11. 26; Heb. 7. 25, 27; 9. 26; John 4. 10; 6. 63;
 Rom. 8. 9, 11; Heb. 2. 17; Col. 2. 19; John 6. 27; Matt. 26. 26;
 Heb. 10. 12; John 1. 29.

 [260] Matt. 28. 19; John 15. 26; Matt. 1. 20; 2 Pet. 1. 21;
 Acts 20. 23; Rom. 8. 9; 1 Cor. 12. 11; 1 Pet. 1. 15; 2. 9; John 14. 16;
 Eph. 1. 17, 18; Luke 24. 31; Ezek. 36. 26; Zech. 12. 10; Rom. 8. 5;
 John 6. 53-57; Rom. 5. 5; Cant. 1. 4; Eph. 5. 18, 20; Rom. 14. 17;
 1 Thess. 4. 9; Rom. 8. 16; 1 Cor. 1. 8; Eph. 1. 13, 14.

 [261] 1 Cor. 11. 24.

 [262] Matt. 26. 27. 28; 1 Cor. 11. 25.

 [263] Rom. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 24. Eph. 3. 10. Rom. 3. 22, 26; Tit. 3. 4;
 Rom. 5. 6; Acts 4. 12; 1 Pet. 1. 12; Luke. 2. 13, 14; Rev. 5. 12, 13;
 9. 10; Rom. 5. 20; 1 Pet. 1. 19; Matt. 18. 32, 33; Rev. 3. 21; 22. 4;
 Rom. 8. 38, 39; Heb. 10. 23; 2 Pet. 1. 4; Heb. 9. 15; Eph. 4. 30;
 Luke 7. 47; Matt. 18. 33; 1 John 4. 11; Ezek. 9. 13, 14; Psal. 44. 17;
 Rom. 6. 1, 2; Col. 3. 2; Phil. 3. 18-21; Psal. 143. 10; Heb. 5. 9;
 Psal. 119. 133; 2 Cor. 5. 15; Eph. 1. 11; Matt. 5. 16; 2 Cor. 1. 12;
 Psal. 119. 5; Luke 22. 31; 1 Pet. 5. 8, 10; Eph. 6. 11; Rom. 16. 20;
 1 Cor. 6. 20; Rom. 12. 1; 2 Tim. 2. 21; Rom. 6. 22.

 [264] Rom. 5. 12; Eph. 2. 3; John 3. 16; Gen. 3. 15; John 4. 42;
 Heb. 9. 26; Rev. 1. 15; Rom. 5. 10; Tit. 3. 5; Rom. 16. 10; Heb. 8. 6;
 Matt. 28. 19, 20; Gen. 17. 10, 11; Ezek. 20. 37; Rom. 6. 3, 4;
 Tit. 3. 5; 1 Cor. 12. 12; Gen. 17.; Rom. 9. 8; Acts 2. 39;
 Matt. 23. 37; Deut. 30. 10-12; Matt. 10. 13, 14; 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13;
 Rev. 1. 5; Eph. 5. 26; Job 11. 52; Heb. 2. 13; Eph. 2. 19; 3. 15;
 Zech. 9. 11, 15, 16; 1 Pet. 5. 7; 2 Tim. 4. 18.

 [265] Rom. 5. 12, 18; Gal. 3. 13; 1 John 5. 11; Acts 2. 39;
 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13; Psal. 44. 3, 4; 2 Cor. 8. 5; Psal. 119. 94;
 Eph. 5. 24; Matt. 22. 37; Deut. 10. 20, 21; 11. 22-30; Psal. 16. 5;
 27. 4; Tit. 1. 2; 2. 13; 3. 7; 1 John 2. 5, 6, 17; Gal. 5. 14;
 Matt. 6. 13; Psal. 81. 12; James 1. 14; Luke 1. 71; 1 Cor. 10. 16;
 1 John 1. 7; 2 Cor. 6. 14; 1 Pet. 1. 2; John 9. 31; Luke 9. 23;
 Heb. 2. 10; Rev. 2. 10.

 [266] Eph. 6. 4; Prov. 22. 6; 29. 15; Deut. 6. 5-7; Josh. 24. 15;
 2 Tim. 3. 15.

 [267] John 3. 5, 6; 1 Pet. 3. 21; Rom. 8. 9; Eccl. 5. 4, 5.

 [268] Gen. 2. 18, 1. 28; Mal. 2. 15; 2 Cor. 7. 14, 9; Heb. 13. 4;
 Luke 1. 6; Eph. 5. 22, &c.; Mal. 2. 15, 16; Psal. 127. 3;
 Matt. 19. 13, 14; Deut. 29. 11, 12; Ezek. 16. 8; Prov. 20. 7;
 Eph. 6. 4; 1 Pet. 3. 1, 7; 1 Tim. 3. 11; 5. 13, 14; 1 Cor. 7. 5, 29;
 Gen. 2. 18; Prov. 5. 18; Heb. 10. 26; 1 Cor. 7. 29; Luke 12. 40;
 1 Pet. 3. 7; Rev. 19. 7; John 17. 24.

 [269] Gen. 28. 3; Tit. 1. 15; 1 Tim. 4. 5; 1 Cor. 10. 31;
 1 Thess. 3. 12; Eph. 5. 25; Gal. 5. 22; Rom. 8. 1, 13; Gal. 6. 8.

 [270] Luke 23. 41; Lam. 3. 22; Ezra 9. 13; Lam. 3. 32, 33;
 Isa. 57. 15-17; Psal. 25. 18; 6. 1; 38. 9; 6. 2, 3, 5; 78. 39;
 Job 13. 25; Psal. 25. 7, 18; 116. 3; Isa. 38. 16, 19; Psal. 119. 175;
 Luke. 4. 39; Isa. 38. 21; Psal. 50. 15; Job. 10. 2; Psal. 139. 13;
 Lam. 3. 40; Psal. 119. 71, 67; Isa. 27. 9; 1 Cor. 11. 32; Heb. 12. 11;
 Lam. 3. 24-27, 31; Psal. 30. 5; Heb. 12. 6, 7; Isa. 38. 19, 20;
 Psal. 116.9, 12, &c.; 30. 11, 12; 2 Cor. 1. 9; 4. 16; 5. 8;
 Heb. 10. 38; 2 Cor. 4. 18, 17; Phil. 3. 9; 1 Cor. 10. 13; Heb. 2.14;
 1 Cor. 15. 55; Rom. 8. 37; Col. 3. 1; John 20. 17; 14. 23; 17. 26;
 17. 24; Phil. 1. 2; Psal. 16. 11.

 [271] 1 Tim. 2. 14; Gen. 3. 16; 1 Tim. 2. 15; Psal. 46. 1; Isa. 37. 3;
 John 16. 12; Deut. 28. 4; 2 Cor. 1. 10, 11; 1 Sam. 2; 1. 28.

 [272] Psal. 30. 2; 3. 4; 66. 20; 30. 3; 103. 3, 4; Isa. 38. 10, 12;
 Jer. 26. 3, 13; Psal. 103. 5; Isa. 38. 11; Psal. 27. 13; 32. 4, 5;
 106. 23; 32. 6, 7; 73. 26; 73. 1; 34. 19; 73. 19, 23; 60. 11; 46. 1;
 116. 1, 12, 18, 13, 14; Isa. 38. 20; 1 Cor. 6. 20; Luke 2. 29;
 1 Cor. 1. 30.

 [273] Psal. 34. 3, 4; Rev. 1. 18; 1 Sam. 2. 6; Psal. 113. 9; 127. 3;
 42. 4; 110. 4; 145. 9, 20, 14; 19.; Deut. 28. 8; Psal. 13. 3
 Isa. 44. 3; Deut. 8. 11, 14; Psal. 116.; Isa. 83. 10; Mal. 2. 15;
 1 Cor. 7. 14; Eph. 6. 4; Deut. 6. 6; Prov. 6. 33; Josh. 24. 15;
 Zech. 14. 20, 21; Psal. 91. 4; 1 John 2. 15; Phil. 3. 1, 18;
 1 Cor. 7. 31, 29, 30; Psal. 23. 3, 4, 6; Jude 24.

 [274] Matt. 18. 15-17.

 [275] Luke 13. 3, 5; Acts 5. 31; Luke 12. 47.

 [276] Jude 14. 15; Psal. 5. 4, 5; 1. 5, 6; Psal. 10. 13;
 2 Pet. 2. 3, 9; Psal. 37. 13; Job 9. 4; Psal. 1. 4; Isa. 5. 24;
 Heb. 12. 29; Isa. 27. 4; Ezek. 22. 14; 1 Cor. 10. 22; Matt. 10. 26;
 James 5. 9; Matt. 13. 42, 50; Prov. 5. 11-13; Deut. 32. 29;
 Prov. 28. 13; 29. 1; Gal. 6. 7; Matt. 7. 23; 25. 41; James 5. 19, 20;
 1 John 1. 7, 9; 2. 1, 2; Psal. 95. 8, 12; 81. 11, 12; Luke 24. 4, 7;
 Ezek. 18. 30-32.

 [277] Josh. 7. 19; Prov. 28. 13; Psal. 32. 5; Exod. 10. 16;
 Gal. 1. 13; 2 Chron. 15. 2; Gen. 4. 16; Psal. 51. 11; Matt. 27. 5;
 Luke 15. 21; Mark 12. 8; Psal. 38. 18, 4; 40. 12; Luke 13. 13;
 1 Tim. 1. 1; Heb. 9. 26; Luke 19. 10; Rom. 5. 10; James 5. 16;
 Psal. 51. 2, 1, 9; Heb. 8. 12; Psal. 51. 11, 27; 9.; 103. 10;
 51. 10, 12; 2 Cor. 2. 7, 10; John 8. 11; Mark 13. 37; Psal. 73. 1, 15;
 Eccles. 8. 12; 2 Chron. 20. 20; James 1. 13, 14; Psal. 5. 5;
 1 John 3. 4; Gal. 6. 1; 1 Cor. 10. 11, 12; 2 Sam. 11. 2; Gen. 3. 6;
 Matt. 26. 41, 75; Heb. 12. 28; 1 Cor. 9. 25-27; 2 Chron. 25. 16;
 Eph. 3. 16; John 5. 14.

 [278] 2 Cor. 5. 11; Matt. 3. 7; Prov. 29. 1; 1 Cor. 10. 22;
 Acts 8. 22, 23; 11. 18; 2 Tim. 2. 25, 26; 1 Tim. 4. 2; Eph. 4. 19;
 Psal. 81. 12; Rom. 2. 4-6, 8, 9; Deut. 29. 19-21; Mark 9. 24;
 Matt. 1. 21; Deut. 9. 17; 2 Cor. 6. 2; Luke 19. 41, 42; Prov. 28. 14;
 Acts 9. 5; Isa. 45. 9; Joel 2. 1-3; Lam. 5. 16; Psal. 51.;
 James 5. 20; Gal. 6. 1; Luke 15. 27; Ezek. 33. 14, 16; 2 Tim. 2. 26.

 [279] Luke 19. 27; Micah 4. 2; Matt. 18. 15, 16; 1 Cor. 5. 11;
 Tit. 3. 10; Matt. 18. 15-17; 2 Thess. 3. 6, 14, 15; 1 Cor. 11. 5;
 2 Sam. 12. 14; 2 Thess. 3. 6, 14; Acts 8. 24; 2 Tim. 2. 25, 26;
 1 Cor. 5. 13; Matt. 18. 18.

 [280] 2 Sam. 12. 13; 2 Chron. 33. 12, 13; Rom. 10. 15; 1 John 2. 1, 2;
 1 John 1. 9; Isa. 55. 6, 7; Prov. 28. 13; Gal. 6. 1; Matt. 18. 8;
 Luke 15.; 2 Cor. 2. 7. 10; Acts 13. 38; 8. 8; Luke 15. 25, 27;
 Matt. 26. 41; Psal. 85. 8; 1 Cor. 9. 25-27; Psal. 141. 5; 2 Pet. 2. 22.

 [281] Rom. 3. 25; 1 John 1. 9; 2. 1, 2; Psal. 23; 103. 3; Matt. 9. 2;
 Rom. 5. 1-3; Psal. 51. 12; 1 Pet. 5. 10; Acts 11. 23; Psal. 85. 8;
 2 Tim. 2. 19; John 5. 14; 2 Cor. 6. 1; Rom. 6. 1; Matt. 6. 13;
 1 Cor. 16. 13; Jude 24.

 [282] Matt. 28. 19; 1 John 5. 7; 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6; 1 Tim. 1. 17;
 Psal. 139. 7-9; 14. 7, 4; Isa. 40. 17; Neh. 9.; Rev. 4. 8; 15.;
 Ezek. 18. 4; Psal. 47. 7; 119. 68; 147. 9; Mal. 2. 10; Deut. 32. 6;
 Luke 11. 2; Acts 7. 59, 60; Heb. 2. 11; Phil. 2. 7-9; Luke 2. 51;
 Matt. 4. 1, 2; 2 Cor. 8. 9; Matt. 12. 24; Luke 22. 24;
 Matt. 27. 26, 28, 30. Mark 14. 50; 15. 34; 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4;
 John 1. 29; Heb. 1. 3; 2. 9; 3. 1; 4. 14; Acts 3. 22, 23; Heb. 7. 25;
 John 12. 32; Matt. 28. 19, 20; 1 Cor. 12.; Eph. 4.; 5. 26, 27;
 John 17. 4; 1 Thess. 4. 14-16; John 5. 22; Acts 17. 31; John 6. 37;
 2 Peter 1. 10; 1 Tim. 1. 5; Acts 5. 31; John 1. 12; Rom. 5. 10;
 2 Cor. 16. 18.

 [283] Psal. 78. 37; Matt. 8. 34; 1 Cor. 8. 6; 6. 19, 20.

 [284] Rom. 8. 9; 1 Thess. 5. 23; 1 Cor. 5. 17; 1 Pet. 1. 16;
 Rom. 8. 15; Zech. 12. 10; Eph. 1. 13, 14; 1 John 3. 24.

 [285] Luke 1. 49; Hab. 3. 3; Luke 1. 46; Psal. 66. 17;
 145. 5-8, 11, 12, &c., 21.

 [286] Isa. 26. 8; Deut. 11. 22; 10. 12, 20, 21; Psal. 4. 5; 63. 5;
 1 Cor. 10. 31.

 [287] 2 Tim. 3. 2, 4; Phil. 2. 3, 21; Rom. 2. 23, 24; Matt. 5. 16.

 [288] Psal. 47. 2, 7; 2. 8, 12; Rev. 11. 15; 1 Tim. 2. 1, 4;
 John 11. 52; 12. 32; Phil. 2. 10, 11.

 [289] Matt. 24. 14; 2 Thess. 3. 1; Dan. 12. 3; Isa. 49. 6;
 Matt. 9. 38; Eph. 6. 19; 2 Thess. 3. 2; 1 Thess. 2. 16.

 [290] Luke 18. 7; Matt. 10. 16; Luke 21. 19; 1 Pet 2. 15;
 3. 14, 17; 4. 15, 16, 19; Micah 7. 7; Matt. 5. 11, 12.

 [291] Psal. 119. 134; Matt. 15. 9, 13; Rev. 12; 19. 3; John 9. 10;
 Luke 22. 25, 26; 2 Pet. 2; Jude; 2 Tim. 3. 9; Eph. 4. 15, 16; 3. 5;
 Rom. 14. 1; 15. 1; Jer. 32. 39; 1 Cor. 1. 10; Phil. 2. 3; John 13. 35;
 Eph. 5. 2.

 [292] Rom. 3. 26; Heb. 11. 6; Eph. 2. 2, 3; 2 Thess. 2. 12;
 Rom. 8. 13; Psal. 19. 13; Rom. 8. 24.

 [293] Col. 1. 10; Heb. 8. 10; Psal. 40. 8; Isa. 8. 20; Acts 28. 32;
 2 Tim. 3. 15; 2 Thess. 2. 10; John 5. 39; Luke 24. 45; Psal. 1. 2.

 [294] Rom. 15. 1, 2; Gal. 1. 10; 1 Cor. 3. 19; 2 Cor. 1. 12;
 Rom. 8. 13; John 2. 8; Psal. 19. 11-13.

 [295] Rom. 2. 16; Micah 4. 2; Matt. 15. 3, 6, 9, 11; Deut. 31.

 [296] Exod. 20. 7; Psal. 89. 7; Jer. 4. 2; Matt. 15. 19; James 5. 12;
 Rev. 22. 12; Jer. 5. 22; Acts 5. 3; 8. 20; Mal. 1. 6, 7, 12;
 2. 2, 7-9.

 [297] Rev. 1. 10; Acts 20. 7; 1 Cor. 16. 2; Isa. 58. 13; Heb. 10. 25;
 1 Cor. 14; Acts 3. 42, 46; Psal. 98. &c.; 119. 1. Josh. 24. 15;
 Exod. 20. 10.

 [298] 1 Tim. 2. 2; Psal. 2. Jer. 5; 5, 6. Luke 18. 21, 25;
 1 Cor. 1. 26; Luke 21. 12; John 7. 48; Ezra 4. 12, &c.; Rom. 13. 2, 4;
 Isa. 49. 23; 2 Chron. 19. 6.

 [299] Lam. 4. 20; 1 Kings 3. 19, 11; Psal. 51. 10; 1 Sam. 10. 9;
 2 Kings 18. 3, 4, 6; Rom. 13. 4, 5; 1 Tim. 2. 2.

 [300] Psal. 72. 1; Prov. 8. 16; Exod. 18. 17; Job 29.; Isa. 17. 23;
 Luke 1. 51-53.

 [301] Rom. 13. 1, 6; 1 Pet. 2. 13; 1 Tim. 2. 2.

 [302] 2 Cor. 3. 6; 1 Tim. 5. 17; 2 Tim. 2. 15; Jer. 3. 15;
 2 Tim. 4. 2; 2. 22; 1. 13; Heb. 13. 17; 1 Pet. 5. 1-4.

 [303] 1 Thess. 5. 11; Heb. 13. 17; 1 Tim. 5. 17.

 [304] Eph. 6. 4; Deut. 6. 6, 7; Eccles. 12. 1; Eph. 6. 1-3.

 [305] Eph. 5. 25, 22; 1 Pet. 3. 1, 7; Gen. 2. 22.

 [306] Eph. 6. 9, 5.

 [307] 1 John 3. 15; Luke 3. 14; 2 Cor. 7. 2; Matt. 5. 22, 39;
 Rom. 12. 17.

 [308] Eph. 4. 2; Rom. 12. 19; Matt. 5. 27, 28; 1 Cor. 6. 9;
 Rom. 13. 13; 1 Thess. 5. 22; Eph. 5. 3; 4. 29; 1 Pet. 3. 2, 3;
 Job 31. 1.

 [309] Eph. 4. 28; Psal. 62. 10; 73. 8; 1 Thess. 4. 6.

 [310] Prov. 19. 5; 12. 17; 10. 10; Matt. 7. 1, 2; Psal. 15. 3; 82. 2;
 Lev. 19. 17; Prov. 23.

 [311] Gal. 5. 21, 26; Exod. 20. 17; Phil. 2. 21; Matt. 22. 39; 7. 12.

 [312] Matt. 15. 40; 1 Pet. 1. 22; Matt. 5. 44-46; Gal. 6. 10.

 [313] Psal. 39. 9; Matt. 26. 30; Acts 21. 14; Jam. 5. 7, 8, 11;
 2 Kings 20. 19; Mal. 3. 13, 14.

 [314] Luke 11. 13; Deut. 28. 45; Rom. 13. 14; Luke 12. 20;
 Eph. 5. 16; John 9. 4.

 [315] Deut. 28. 6, 8, &c.; Phil. 2. 27; Psal. 102. 24; Luke 12. 20;
 Eph. 5. 16; John 9. 4.

 [316] Rom. 13. 13; 1 Cor. 9. 25; 1 Tim. 5. 6, 13; Eph. 4. 28;
 Prov. 21. 17; 23. 4; 1 Tim. 6. 8, 9.

 [317] Psal. 51. 1; 1 John 1. 2; Heb. 8. 12; Dan. 9. 6, 16;
 Jer. 14. 7; Psal. 31. 16; 51. 11, 12, 19; Rom. 8. 1.

 [318] Matt. 6. 2, 14, 15; Rom. 12. 19; Luke 6. 27-29; Acts 7. 60.

 [319] Matt. 26. 41; James 4. 7; Prov. 4. 23; Job 31. 1; Matt. 12. 36;
 Heb. 2. 10; 2 Tim. 2. 3; 1 John 2. 13; 5. 4; Rom. 8. 13; 2 Tim. 2. 8.

 [320] Prov. 30. 8, 9; 1 John 2. 15, 16; Rom. 8. 17; Matt. 13. 21, 22;
 8. 24; Rom. 8. 18.

 [321] Matt. 6. 13; Rom. 16. 20; Psal. 140. 1-3; 31. 8; 17. 2, 12;
 1 Tim. 4. 18.

 [322] 1 Tim. 1. 17; Psal. 145. 17; Acts 17. 31; Psal. 72. 4, 13;
 Jude 14, 15; 2 Thess. 1. 10; Psal. 62. 1; 147. 5; Job 9. 4;
 Rom. 11. 36.

 [323] Luke 1. 46; Psal. 136. 23; Rom. 5. 12; Psal. 78. 10; Rom. 3. 23;
 5. 18; Luke 1. 68-70; Isa. 7. 14; Luke 1. 35; Matt. 1. 21; Luke 2. 17;
 Col. 1. 15-17; 1 Cor. 1. 24; John 1. 9, 14; Col. 1. 19; Gal. 4. 4;
 Matt. 17. 5; Heb. 7. 26; 1 Pet. 2. 22, 23, 24; Isa. 53. 5, 6;
 1 Pet. 3. 18; 1 John 4. 4; Heb. 2. 14, 15; Col. 2. 15; 1 Cor. 15. 4;
 Acts 2. 24; 2 Tim. 1. 10; 1 Cor. 15. 55.

 [324] Matt. 28. 18; Eph. 4. 8-13; Eph. 1. 20-23.

 [325] 1 Tim. 3. 16; 1 John 5. 11; John 1. 10, 11; 3. 19; 1. 12;
 Rom. 8. 1; Psal. 103. 3; Heb. 8. 12; Rom. 8. 33, 34; Tit. 2. 14;
 Rom. 8. 9; 2 Tim. 2. 19; Psal. 66. 18; 1 Cor. 6. 11; Tit. 3. 5;
 Rom. 5. 1, 2, 5, 10; 8. 32; John 14. 2, 3; 17. 24; 14. 19; Col. 3. 4;
 2 Thess. 1. 10; Mal. 3. 18; Matt. 13. 34; Rev. 21. 7; Matt. 25. 21;
 Rev. 3. 12, 21; Zeph. 3. 17; Rev. 21. 2-4, 23; 22. 3, 4; 1 Tim. 6. 15;
 Rom. 11. 36.




END OF VOL. I.

JOHN CHILDS AND SON, BUNGAY.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Christian Directory (Part 4 of 4), by 
Richard Baxter

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHRISTIAN DIRECTORY PART 4 ***

***** This file should be named 43967-0.txt or 43967-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/9/6/43967/

Produced by Colin Bell, Chris Pinfield and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

