CHAPTER XIX.

GENERAL DIRECTIONS AND PARTICULAR CASES OF CONSCIENCE, ABOUT CONTRACTS
IN GENERAL, AND ABOUT BUYING AND SELLING, BORROWING AND LENDING,
USURY, &C. IN PARTICULAR.


_Tit. 1. General Directions against injurious Bargaining and
Contracts._

Besides the last directions, chap. xviii., take these as more nearly
pertinent to this case.

_Direct._ I. See that your hearts have the two great principles
of justice deeply and habitually innaturalized or radicated in them,
viz. The true love of your neighbour, and the denial of yourself;
which in one precept are called, The loving of your neighbour as
yourself. For then you will be freed from the inclination to injuries
and fraud, and from the power of those temptations which carry men to
these sins. They will be contrary to your habitual will or
inclination; and you will be more studious to help your neighbour,
than to get from him.

_Direct._ II. Yet do not content yourself with these habits, but
be sure to call them up to act, whenever you have any bargaining with
others; and let a faithful conscience be to you as a cryer to proclaim
God's law, and say to you, Now remember love and self-denial, and do
as you would be done by. If Alexander Severus so highly valued this
saying, _Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris_, as to make
it his motto, and write and engrave it on his doors and buildings
(having learned it of some christians or Jews, saith Lampridius); what
a crime and shame is it for Christ's own professed disciples neither
to learn nor love it! Put home the question when you have any
bargaining with others, How would I be dealt with myself, if my case
were the same with his?

_Direct._ III. When the tempter draweth you to think only of your
own commodity and gain, remember how much more you will lose by sin,
than your gain can any way amount to. If Achan, Gehazi, Ahab, Judas,
&c. had foreseen the end, and the greatness of their loss, it would
have curbed their covetous desires. Believe God's word from the bottom
of your heart, that you shall lose things eternal if you sinfully get
things temporal, and then you will not make haste to such a bargain,
to win the world and lose your souls.

_Direct._ IV. Understand your neighbour's case aright, and
meditate on his wants and interest. You think what you want yourself;
but you think not whether his wants with whom you deal, may not be as
great as yours: consider what his commodity costeth him; or what the
toil of the workman's labour is; what house rent he hath to pay, and
what a family to maintain; and whether all this can be well done upon
the rates that you desire to trade with him. And do not believe every
common report of his riches, or of the price of his commodity; for
fame in such cases is frequently false.

_Direct._ V. Regard the public good above your own commodity. It
is not lawful to take up or keep up any oppressing monopoly or trade,
which tendeth to enrich you by the loss of the commonwealth or of
many.

_Direct._ VI. Therefore have a special regard to the laws of the
country where you live; both as to your trade itself, and as to the
price of what you sell or buy. For the law is made for the public
benefit, which is to be preferred before any private man's. And when
the law doth directly or indirectly set rates upon labours or
commodities, ordinarily they must be observed; or else you will commit
two sins at once, injury and disobedience.

_Direct._ VII. Also have special respect to the common estimate,
and to the market price. Though it be not always to be our rule, yet
ordinarily it must be a considerable part of it, and of great regard.

_Direct._ VIII. Let not imprudent thinking make you seem more
covetous than you are. Some imprudent persons cannot tell how to make
their markets without so many words, even about a penny or a trifle,
that it maketh others think them covetous, when it is rather want of
wit. The appearance of evil must be avoided. I know some that are
ready to give a pound to a charitable use at a word, who will yet use
so many words for a penny in their bargaining as maketh them deeply
censured and misunderstood. If you see cause to break for a penny or a
small matter, do it more handsomely in fewer words, and be gone: and
do not tempt the seller to multiply words, because you do so.

_Direct._ IX. Have no more to do in bargaining with others,
especially with censorious persons, than you needs must; for in much
dealing usually there will be much misunderstanding, offence, censure,
and complaint.

_Direct._ X. In doubtful cases, when you are uncertain what is
lawful, choose that side which is safest to the peace of your
consciences hereafter; though it be against your commodity, and may
prove the losing of your right.


_Tit. 2. Cases of Conscience about Justice in Contracts._

_Quest._ I. Must I always do as I would be done by? Or hath this
rule any exceptions?

_Answ._ The rule intendeth no more but that your just self-denial
and love to others, be duly exercised in your dealings with all. And,
1. It supposeth that your own will or desires be honest and just, and
that God's law be their rule. For a sinful will may not be made the
rule of your own actions or of other men's. He that would have another
make him drunk, may not therefore make another drunk: and he that
would abuse another man's wife, may not therefore desire that another
man would lust after or abuse his wife. He that would not be
instructed, reproved, or reformed, may not therefore forbear the
instructing or reproving others. And he that would kill himself, may
not therefore kill another. But he that would have no hurt done to
himself injuriously, should do none to others: and he that would have
others do him good, should be as willing to do good to them.

2. It supposeth that the matter be to be varied according to your
various conditions. A parent that justly desireth his child to obey
him, is not bound therefore to obey his child; nor the prince to obey
his subjects; nor the master to do all the work for his servants,
which he would have his servants do for him. But you must deal by
another as you would (regularly) have them deal by you, if you were in
their case, and they in yours. And on these terms it is a rule of
righteousness.

_Quest._ II. Is a son bound by the contract which his parents or
guardians made for him in his infancy?

_Answ._ To some things he is bound, and to some things not. The
infant is capable of being obliged by another upon four accounts:
1. As he is the parents' own (or a master's to whom he is in absolute
servitude). 2. As he is to be ruled by the parents. 3. As he is a
debtor to his parents for benefits received. 4. As he is an expectant,
or capable of future benefits to be enjoyed upon conditions to be
performed by him. 1. No parents or lord have an absolute propriety in
any rational creature; but they have a propriety _secundum quid, et
ad hoc_: and a parent's propriety doth in part expire or abate, as
the son groweth up to the full use of reason, and so hath a greater
propriety in himself. Therefore he may oblige his son only so far as
his propriety extendeth, and to such acts, and to no other; for in
those his will is reputatively his son's will. As if a parent sell his
son to servitude, he is bound to such service as beseemeth one man to
put another to. 2. As he is rector to his child, he may by contract
with a third person promise that his child shall do such acts, as he
hath power to command and cause him to do: as to read, to hear God's
word, to labour as he is able; but this no longer than while he is
under his parent's government: and so long obedience requireth him to
perform their contracts, in performing their commands. 3. The child
having received his being and maintenance from them, remains obliged
to them as his benefactors in the debt of gratitude as long as he
liveth: and that so deeply that some have questioned whether ever he
can requite them (which _quoad valorem beneficii_ he can do only
by furthering their salvation; as many a child hath been the cause of
the parent's conversion). And so far as the son is thus a debtor to
his parents, he is obliged to do that which the parents by contract
with a third person shall impose upon him. As if the parents could not
be delivered out of captivity, but by obliging the son to pay a great
sum of money, or to live in servitude for their release: though they
never gave him any money, yet is he bound to pay the sum, if he can
get it, or to perform the servitude; because he hath received more
from them, even his being. 4. As the parents are both owners,
(_secundum quid_,) and rulers, and benefactors to their child, in all
three respects conjunct, they may oblige him to a third person who is
willing to be his benefactor, by a conditional obligation to perform
such conditions that he may possess such or such benefits: and thus a
guardian or any friend who is fit to interpose for him, may oblige
him. As to take a lease in his name, in which he shall be bound to pay
such a rent, or do such a service, that he may receive such a
commodity which is greater. Thus parents oblige their children under
civil governments to the laws of the society or kingdom, that they may
have the protection and benefits of subjects. In these cases the child
can complain of no injury; for it is for his benefit that he is
obliged: and the parent (in this respect) cannot oblige him to his
hurt: for if he will quit the benefit, he may be freed when he will
from his obligation, and may refuse to stand to the covenant if he
dislike it. If he will give up his lease, he may be disobliged from
the rent and service.

In all this you may see that no man can oblige another against God or
his salvation: and therefore a parent cannot oblige a child to sin,
nor to forbear hearing or reading the word of God, or praying, or any
thing necessary to his salvation: nor can he oblige him to hear an
heretical pastor; nor to marry an infidel or wicked wife, &c.

And here also you may perceive on what grounds it is that God hath
appointed parents to oblige their children in the covenant of baptism,
to be the servants of God and to live in holiness all their days.

And hence it is apparent, that no parents can oblige their children to
be miserable, or to any such condition which is worse than to have no
being.

Also that when parents do (as commonly they do) profess to oblige
their children as benefactors for their good, the obligation is then
to be interpreted accordingly: and the child is then obliged to
nothing which is really his hurt.

Yea, all the propriety and government of parents, cannot authorize
them to oblige the child to his hurt, but in order to some greater
good, either to the parents themselves, or to the commonwealth, or
others; at least that which the parents apprehend to be a greater
good: but if they err through ignorance or partiality, and bind the
child to a greater hurt for their lesser good, (as to pay two hundred
pounds to save them from paying one hundred pounds,) whether their
injury and sin do excuse the child from being obliged to any more than
the proportion of the benefit required, I leave undetermined.

_Quest._ III. But what if the parents disagree, and one of them
will oblige the child, and the other will not?

_Answ._ 1. If it be an act of the parents as mere proprietors for
their own good, either of them may oblige him in a just degree;
because they have severally a propriety. 2. If it be an act of
government, (as if they oblige him to do this or that act of service
at their command in his minority,) the father may oblige him against
the mother's consent, because he is the chief ruler; but not the
mother against the father's will, though she may without it.

_Quest._ IV. Is a man obliged by a contract which he made in
ignorance or mistake of the matter?

_Answ._ I have answered this before in the case of marriage, part
iii. chap. i.: I add here,

1. We must distinguish between culpable and inculpable error. 2.
Between an error about the principal matter, and about some smaller
accidents or circumstances. 3. Between a case where the law of the
land or the common good interposeth, and where it doth not.

1. If it be your own fault that you are mistaken you are not wholly
freed from the obligation; but if it was your gross fault, by
negligence or vice, you are not at all freed; but if it were but such
a frailty as almost all men are liable to, so that none but a person
of extraordinary virtue or diligence could have avoided the mistake,
then equity will proportionably make you an abatement or free you from
the obligation. So far as you were obliged to understand the matter,
so far you are obliged by the contract; especially when another is a
loser by your error.

2. An inculpable error about the circumstances, or smaller parts, will
not free you from an obligation in the principal matter; but an
inculpable error in the essentials will.

3. Except when the law of the land or the common good, doth otherwise
overrule the case; for then you may be obliged by that accident. In
divers cases the rulers may judge it necessary, that the effect of the
contract shall depend upon the bare words, or writings, or actions;
lest false pretences of misunderstanding should exempt deceitful
persons from their obligations, and nothing should be a security to
contractors. And then men's private commodity must give place to the
law and to the public good.

4. Natural infirmities must be numbered with faults, though they be
not moral vices, as to the contracting of an obligation, if they be in
a person capable of contracting. As if you have some special defect of
memory or ignorance of the matter which you are about. Another who is
no way faulty by over-reaching you, must not be a loser by your
weakness. For he that cometh to the market, or contracteth with
another that knoweth not his infirmity, is to be supposed to
understand what he doth, unless the contrary be manifest: you should
not meddle with matters which you understand not; or if you do, you
must he content to be a loser by your weakness.

5. Yet in such cases, another that hath gained by the bargain, may be
obliged by the laws of equity and charity, to remit the gain, and not
to take advantage of your weakness; but he may so far hold you to it,
as to secure himself from loss; except in cases where you become the
object of his charity, and not of commutative justice only.

_Quest._ V. Is a drunken man, or a man in a transporting passion,
or a melancholy person, obliged by a contract made in such a case?

_Answ._ Remember still, that we are speaking only of contracts
about matters of profits or worldly interest; and not of marriage or
any of another nature. And the question as it concerneth a man in
drunkenness or passion, is answered as the former about culpable
error; and as it concerneth a melancholy man, it is to be answered as
the former question, in the case of natural infirmity. But if the
melancholy be so great as to make him uncapable of bargaining, he is
to be esteemed in the same condition as an idiot, or one in deliration
or distraction.

_Quest._ VI. But may another hold a man to it, who in drunkenness
or passion maketh an ill bargain, or giveth or playeth away his money;
and repenteth when he is sober?

_Answ._ He may (ordinarily) take the money from the loser, or him
that casteth it thus away; but he may not keep it for himself: but if
the loser be poor, he should give it to his wife or children whom he
robbeth by his sin: if not, he should either give it to the magistrate
or overseer for the poor, or give it to the poor himself. The reason
of this determination is, because the loser hath parted with his
propriety, and can lay no further claim to the thing; but yet the
gainer can have no right from another's crime: if it were from an
injury, he might, so far as is necessary to reparations; but from a
crime he cannot; for his loss is to be estimated as a mulct or
penalty, and to be disposed of as such mulcts as are laid on swearers
and drunkards are. Only the person by his voluntary bargain, hath made
the other party instead of the magistrate, and authorized him (in
ordinary cases) to dispose of the gain, for the poor or public good.

_Quest._ VII. Am I obliged by the words or writings which usually
express a covenant, without any covenanting or self-obliging intention
in me, when I speak or write them?

_Answ._ Either you utter or write those words with a purpose to
make another believe that you intend a covenant; or at least by
culpable negligence, in such a manner as he is bound so to understand
you, or justified for so understanding you: or else you so use the
words, as in the manner sufficiently to signify that you intend no
covenant or self-obligation. In the former case you bind yourself (as
above said); because another man is not to be a loser, nor you a
gainer or a saver, by your own fraud or gross negligence. But in the
latter case you are not bound, because an intent of self-obliging is
the internal efficient of the obligation; and a signification of such
an intent, is the external efficient, without which it cannot be. If
you read over the words of a bond, or repeat them only in a narrative,
or ludicrously; or if a scrivener write a form of obligation of
himself, to a boy for a copy, or to a scholar for a precedent, these
do not induce any obligation in conscience, nor make you a debtor to
another. Thus also the case of the intent of the baptizer or baptized
(or parent) is to be determined.

_Quest._ VIII. May a true man promise a robber money, for the
saving of his life, or of a greater sum, or more precious commodity?

_Answ._ Yes, in case of necessity, when his life or estate cannot
better be preserved; and so taxes may be paid to an enemy in arms, or
to a plundering soldier (supposing that it do no other hurt, which is
greater than the good). Any man may part with a lesser good to
preserve a greater; and it is no more voluntary or imputable to our
wills, than the casting of our goods into the sea to save the vessel
and our lives.

_Quest._ IX. May I give money to a judge, or justice, or court
officer, to hire him to do me justice, or to keep him from doing me
wrong; or to avoid persecution?

_Answ._ You may not, in case your cause be bad, give any thing to
procure injustice against another; no nor speak a word for it nor
desire it: this I take as presupposed. You may not give money to
procure justice, when the law of the land forbiddeth it, and when it
will do more hurt accidentally to the others than good to you: when it
will harden men in the sin of bribery, and cause them to expect the
like from others. But except it be when some such accidental greater
hurt doth make it evil, it is as lawful as to hire a thief not to kill
me: when you cannot have your right by other means, you may part with
a smaller matter for a greater.

_Quest._ X. But if I make such a contract, may the other lawfully
take it of me?

_Answ._ No: for it is now supposed that it is unlawful on his
part.

_Quest._ XI. But if under necessity of force I promise money to a
robber, or a judge, or officer, am I bound to perform it when my
necessity is over?

_Answ._ You have lost your own propriety by your covenant, and
therefore must not retain it; but he can acquire no right by his sin:
and therefore some say that in point of justice you are not bound to
give it him, but to give it to the magistrate for the poor; but yet
prudence may tell you of other reasons _a fine_ to give it the man
himself, though justice bind you not to it; as in case that else he
may be revenged and do you some greater hurt; or some greater hurt is
any other way like to be the consequent; which it is lawful by money
to prevent. But many think that you are bound to deliver the money to
the thief or officer himself; because it is a lawful thing to do it,
though he have no just title to it; and because it was your meaning,
or the signification of your words in your covenant with him; and if
it were not lawful to do it, it could not be lawful to promise to do
it, otherwise your promise is a lie. To this, those of the other
opinion say, that as a man who is discharged of his promise by him
that it was made to, is not to be accounted false if he perform it
not; so is it as to the thief or officer in question; because he
having no right, is to you as the other that hath quit his right. And
this answer indeed will prove, that it is not strict injustice not to
pay the money promised; but it will not prove that it is not a lie to
make such a promise with an intent of not performing it, or that it is
not a lie to make it with an intent of performing it, and not to do it
when you may. Though here a Jesuit will tell you that you may say the
words of a promise, with an equivocation or mental reservation to a
thief or persecuting magistrate (of which see more in the chapters of
lying, vows, and perjury). I am therefore of opinion that your promise
must be sincerely made, and according to the true intent of it you
must offer the money to the thief or officer; except in case the
magistrate forbid you, or some greater reason lie against it, which
you foresaw not when you made the promise. But the offender is
undoubtedly obliged not to take the money.

The same determination holdeth as to all contracts and promises made
to such persons, who by injurious force constrained us to make them.
There is on us an obligation to veracity, though none to them in point
of justice, because they have no proper right; nor may they lawfully
take our payment or service promised them. And in case that the public
good unexpectedly cross our performance, we must not perform it: such
like is the case of conquerors, and those that upon conquest become
their vassals or subjects upon unrighteous terms. But still remember,
that if it be not only a covenant with man, but a vow to God, which
maketh him a party, the case is altered, and we remain obliged.

_Quest._ XII. But may I promise the thief or bribe-taker to
conceal his fault? And am I obliged to the performance of such a
promise?

_Answ._ This is a promise of omitting that which else would be a
duty. It is ordinarily a duty to reveal a thief and bribe-taker that
he may be punished. But affirmatives bind not _ad semper_; no act
(especially external) is a duty at all times, therefore not this, of
revealing an offender's fault. And if it be not always a duty, then it
must be none when it is inconsistent with some greater benefit or
duty; for when two goods come together, the greater is to be
preferred: therefore in case that you see in just probability, that
the concealment of the sinner will do more hurt to the commonwealth or
the souls of men, than the saving of your life is like to do good, you
may not promise to conceal him, or if you sinfully promise it, you may
not perform it; but in case that your life is like to be a greater
good than the not promising to conceal him, then such a promise is no
fault, because the disclosing him is no duty. But to judge rightly of
this is a matter of great difficulty. If it be less than life which
you save by such a promise, it oft falls out that it is a lesser good
than the detecting of the offence.

But it will here be said, If I promise not to conceal a robber, I must
conceal him nevertheless; for when he hath killed me, I cannot reveal
him: and I must conceal the bribe-taker; for till I have promised
secrecy, I cannot prove him guilty. And he that promiseth to forbear a
particular good action whilst he liveth, doth yet reserve his life for
all other good works; whereas if he die, he will neither do that nor
any other. But this case is not so easily determined: if Daniel die,
he can neither pray nor do any good on earth. And if he live he may do
much other good, though he never pray; and yet he might not promise to
give over praying to save his life. I conceive that we must
distinguish of duties essential to the outward part of christianity,
or of constant, indispensable necessity; and duties which are
alterable, and belong only to some persons, times, and places; also
between the various consequents of omissions. And I conceive that
ordinarily a man may promise for the saving of his life, that he will
forbear a particular, alterable duty or relation; as to read such a
commentary, to speak with such a minister, to be a magistrate or a
minister, &c. in case we have not before bound ourselves never to give
over our calling till death; and in case that the good which will
follow our forbearance, is likely (to a judicious person) to be
greater than the evil. But no man may promise to omit such a duty as
God hath made necessary during life; as not to love God, or fear, or
trust him; not to worship him, and call upon him, and praise him; not
to do good to men's souls or bodies in the general; or not to preach
or pray while I am a minister of Christ; or not at all to govern while
you are a governor; for all these contradict some former and greater
promises or duties. Nor may you omit the smallest duty to save your
life, at such a time when your death is like to do more good, than
your life would do without that one duty. Apply this to the present
case.

_Quest._ XIII. If another man deceive me into a promise or
covenant against my good, am I bound to perform it when I have
discovered the deceit?

_Answ._ Yes, 1. In case that the law of the land, or other
reasons for the public good, require it. 2. Or in case that you were
faulty by negligence, heedlessness, or otherwise guilty of your own
deceit, in any considerable and avoidable degree. Otherwise, in that
measure that he deceived you, and in those respects, you are not
obliged.

_Quest._ XIV. If the contracting parties do neither of them
understand the other, is it a covenant? Or if it be, whose sense must
carry it?

_Answ._ If they understand not each other in the essentials of
the contract, it is no contract in point of conscience; except where
the laws for the public safety do annex the obligation to bare
external act. But if they understand not one another in some
circumstances, and be equally culpable or innocent, they must come to
a new agreement in those particulars; but if one party only be guilty
of the misunderstanding, he must bear the loss, if the other insist on
it.

_Quest._ XV. Am I bound to stand to the bargains which my friend,
or trustee, or servant maketh for me, when it proveth much to my
injury or loss?

_Answ._ Yes, 1. If they exceed not the bounds of that commission
or trust which they received from you. 2. Or if they do, yet if by
your former trusting and using them, or by any other sign, you have
given the other party sufficient cause to suppose them intrusted by
you to do what they do, so that he is deceived by your fault, you are
bound at least to see that he be no loser by you; though you are not
bound to make him a gainer, unless you truly signified that you
authorized them to make the contract. For if it be merely your
friend's or servant's error, without your fault, it doth not bind you
to a third person. But how far you may be bound to pardon that error
to your friend or servant, is another question; and how far you are
bound to save them harmless. And that must be determined by laying
together all other obligations between them and you.

_Quest._ XVI. If I say I will give such or such a one this or
that, am I bound thereby to do it?

_Answ._ It is one thing to express your present mind and
resolution, without giving away the liberty of changing it; and it is
another thing to intend the obliging of yourself to do the thing
mentioned. And that obligation is either intended to man, or to God
only; and that is either in point of rendition and use, or in point of
veracity, or the performance of that moral duty of speaking truth. If
you meant no more in saying, I will do it, or I will give it, but that
this is your present will, and purpose, and resolution, yea, though it
add the confident persuasion that your will shall not change; yet this
no further obligeth you than you are obliged to continue in that will;
and a man's confident resolutions may be lawfully changed upon
sufficient cause. But if you intended to alienate the title to
another, or to give him present right, or to oblige yourself for the
future to him by that promise; or to oblige yourself to God to do it
by way of peremptory assertion, as one that will be guilty of a lie if
you perform it not; or if you dedicate the thing to God by those words
as a vow; then you are obliged to do accordingly (supposing nothing
else to prohibit it).

_Quest._ XVII. Doth an inward promise of the mind not expressed,
oblige?

_Answ._ In a vow to God it doth; and if you intend it as an
assertion obliging you in point of veracity, it doth so oblige you
that you must lie. But it is no contract, nor giveth any man a title
to what you tacitly thought of.

_Quest._ XVIII. May I promise an unlawful thing (simply so)
without an intention of performing it, to save my life from a thief or
persecutor?

Answ. No: because it is a lie, when the tongue agreeth not with the
heart. Indeed those that think a lie is no sin when it hurteth not
another, may justify this, if that would hold good; but I have before
confuted it, part i. in the chapter against lying.

_Quest._ XIX. May any thing otherwise unlawful become a duty upon
a promise to do it?

_Answ._ This is answered before, part i. chapter of perjury and
vows: a thing unlawful will be so still, notwithstanding a vow or
promise; and some so of that also which is unlawful antecedently but
by accident; as e. g. It is not simply unlawful to cast away a cup of
wine or a piece of silver (for it is lawful upon a sufficient cause);
but it is unlawful to do it without any sufficient cause. Now suppose
I should contract with another that I will do it; am I bound by such a
contract? Many say no, because the matter is unlawful though but by
accident; and the contract cannot make it lawful. I rather think that
I am bound in such a case; but yet that my obligation doth not exclude
me wholly from sin; it was a sin before I promised it (or vowed it) to
cast away a farthing causelessly. And if I causelessly promised it, I
sinned in that promise; but yet there may be cause for the
performance: and if I have entangled myself in a necessity of sinning
whether I do it or not, I must choose the lesser sin; for that is then
my duty. (Though I should have chosen neither as long as I could avoid
it.) In a great and hurtful sin I may be obliged rather to break my
covenant than to commit it, yet it is hard to say so of every
accidental evil: my reasons are, 1. Because the promise or covenant is
now an accident to be put into the balance; and may weigh down a
lighter accident on the other side (but I know that the great
difficulty is to discern which is indeed the preponderating accident).

2. I think if a magistrate command me to do any thing which by a small
accident is evil (as to spend an hour in vain, to give a penny in
vain, to speak a word which, antecedently, was vain) that I must do
it; and that then it is not vain because it manifesteth my obedience
(otherwise obedience would be greatly straitened). Therefore my own
contract may make it my duty; because I am able to oblige myself as
well as a magistrate is. 3. Because covenant-breaking (and perjury) is
really a greater sin than speaking a vain word; and my error doth not
make it no sin, but only entangles me in a necessity of sinning which
way soever I take.

_Quest._ XX. If a man make a contract to promote the sin of
another for a reward, (as a corrupt judge or lawyer, officer or clerk,
to promote injustice; or a resetter, to help a thief; or a bawd or
whore, for the price of fornication,) may he take the reward, when the
sin is committed (suppose it repented of)?

_Answ._ The offender that promised the reward, hath parted with
his title to the money; therefore you may receive it of him (and
ought, except he will rightly dispose of it himself); but withal to
confess the sin and persuade him also to repent: but you may not take
any of that money as your own (for no man can purchase true propriety
by iniquity); but either give it to the party injured, (to whom you
are bound to make satisfaction,) or to the magistrate or the poor,
according as the case particularly requireth.

_Quest._ XXI. If I contract, or bargain, or promise to another,
between us two, without any legal form or witness, doth it bind me to
the performance?

_Answ._ Yes, _in foro conscientiæ_, supposing the thing
lawful; but if the thing be unlawful _in foro Dei_, and such as
the law of the land only would lay hold of you about, or force you to,
if it had been witnessed, then the law of the land may well be
avoided, by the want of legal forms and witnesses.

_Quest._ XXII. May I buy an office for money in a court of
justice?

_Answ._ Some offices you may buy (where the law alloweth it, and
it tendeth not to injustice); but other offices you may not: the
difference the lawyers may tell you better than I, and it would be
tedious to pursue instances.

_Quest._ XXIII. May one buy a place of magistracy or judicature
for money?

_Answ._ Not when your own honour or commodity is your end:
because the common good is the end of government; and to a faithful
governor, it is a place of great labour and suffering, and requireth
much self-denial and patience. Therefore they that purchase it as a
place of honour, gain, or pleasure, either know not what they
undertake, or have carnal ends; else they would rather purchase their
liberty and avoid it. But if a king, or a judge, or other magistrate,
see that a bad man (more unfit to govern) is like to be put in, if he
be put by, it is lawful for him to purchase the people's deliverance
at a very dear rate (even by a lawful war, which is more than money,
when the sovereign's power is in such danger): but the heart must be
watched, that it pretend not the common good, and intend your own
commodity and honour; and the probable consequents must be weighed;
and the laws of the land must be consulted also; for if they
absolutely prohibit the buying of a place of judicature, they must be
obeyed.[156] And ill effects may make it sinful.

_Quest._ XXIV. May one sell a church benefice, or rectory, or
orders?

_Answ._ If the benefice be originally of your own gift, it is at
first in your power to give part or all, to take some deductions out
of it or not: but if it be really given to the church, and you have
but the patronage or choice of the incumbent, it is sacrilege to sell
it for any commodity of your own: but whether you may take somewhat
out of a greater benefice, to give to another church which is poorer,
dependeth partly on the law of the land, and partly upon the probable
consequents. If the law absolutely forbid it, (supposing that unlawful
contracts cannot be avoided unless some lawful ones be restrained,) it
must be obeyed for the common good; and if the consequent of a lawful
contract be like to be the more hurtful encouragement of unlawful
ones, such examples must be forborne, though the law were not against
them. But to sell orders is undoubted simony; (that is, the office of
the ministry, or the act of ordination;) though scribes may be paid
for writing instruments.

_Quest._ XXV. May a man give money for orders or benefices, when
they cannot otherwise be had?

_Answ._ This is answered in quest. xxii. 1. If the law absolutely
forbid it, for the common safety, you may not. 2. If your end be
chiefly your own commodity, ease, or honour, you may not. But in case
you were clear from all such evils, and the case were only this,
whether you might not give money to get in yourself, to keep out a
heretic, a wolf, or insufficient man, who might destroy the people's
souls, I see not but it might well be done.

_Quest._ XXVI. May I give money to officers, servants, or assistants
for their furtherance?

_Answ._ For writings or other servile acts about the circumstantials
you may; but not (directly or indirectly) to promote the simoniacal
contract. What you may not give to the principal agent, you may not
give his instruments or others for the same end.

_Quest._ XXVII. May I give or do any thing afterward by way of
gratitude, to the patron, bishop, or any others, their relations or
retainers?

_Answ._ Not when the expectation of that gratitude was a (secret
or open) condition of the presentation or orders; and you believe that
you should not else have received them: therefore promised gratitude
is but a kind of contracting. Nor may you show gratitude by any
scandalous way, which seemeth simony. Otherwise, no doubt but you may
be prudently grateful for that or any other kindness.

_Quest._ XXVIII. May not a bishop or pastor take money for
sermons, sacraments, or other offices?

_Answ._ Not for the things themselves; he must not sell God's
word and sacraments, or any other holy thing. But they that serve at
the altar may live on the altar, and the elders that rule well are
worthy of double honour; and the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the
corn should not be muzzled. They may receive due maintenance while
they perform God's service, that they may be vacant to attend their
proper work.

_Quest._ XXIX. May one person disoblige another of a promise made
to him?

_Answ._ Yes, if it be no more than a promise to that person;
because a man may give away his right; but if it be moreover a vow to
God, or you intend to oblige yourself in point of veracity under the
guilt of a lie if you do otherwise, these alter the case, and no
person can herein disoblige you.

_Quest._ XXX. But what if the contract be bound by an oath, may
another then release me?

_Answ._ Yes, if that oath did only tie you to perform your
promise; and were no vow to God, which made him a party by dedicating
any thing to him; for then the oath being but subservient to the
promise, he that dischargeth you from the promise, dischargeth you
also from the oath which bound you honestly to keep it.

_Quest._ XXXI. Am I bound by a promise when the cause or reason
of it proveth a mistake?

_Answ._ If by the cause you mean only the extrinsical reasons
which moved you to it, you may be obliged nevertheless for finding
your mistake; only so far as the other was the culpable cause, (as is
aforesaid,) he is bound to satisfy you; but if by the cause you mean
the formal reason, which constituteth the contract, then the mistake
may in some cases nullify it (of which enough before).

_Quest._ XXXII. What if a following accident make it more to my
hurt than could be foreseen?

_Answ._ In some contracts it is supposed or expressed, that men
do undertake to run the hazard; and then they must stand obliged. But
in some contracts, it is rationally supposed that the parties intend
to be free, if so great an alteration should fall out. But to give
instances of both these cases would be too long a work.

_Quest._ XXXIII. What if something unexpectedly fall out, which
maketh it injurious to a third person? I cannot sure be obliged to
injure another.

_Answ._ If the case be the latter mentioned in the foregoing
answer, you may be thus free; but if it be the former, (you being
supposed to run the hazard, and secure the other party against all
others,) then either you were indeed authorized to make this bargain,
or not; if not, the third person may secure his right against the
other; but if you were, then you must make satisfaction as you can to
the third person. Yea, if you made a covenant without authority, you
are obliged to save the other harmless, unless he knew your power to
be doubtful, and did resolve to run the hazard.

_Quest._ XXXIV. What if something fall out which maketh the
performance to be a sin?

_Answ._ You must not do it; but you must make the other
satisfaction for all the loss which you were the cause of, unless he
undertook to stand to the hazard of this also (explicitly or
implicitly).

_Quest._ XXXV. Am I obliged if the other break covenant with me?

_Answ._ There are covenants which make relations (as between
husband and wife, pastor and flock, rulers and subjects); and
covenants which convey title to commodities, of which only I am here
to speak. And in these there are some conditions which are essential
to the covenant; if the other first break these conditions, you are
disobliged. But there are other conditions which are not essential,
but only necessary to some following benefit, whose non-performance
will only forfeit that particular benefit; and there are conditions
which are only undertaken subsequent duties, trusted on the honesty of
the performer; and in these a failing doth not disoblige you. These
latter are but improperly called conditions.

_Quest._ XXXVI. May I contract to perform a thing which I foresee
is like to become impossible or sinful, before the time of
performance come, though it be not so at present.

_Answ._ With all persons you must deal truly; and with just
contractors openly; but with thieves, and murderers, and persecutors,
you are not always bound to deal openly. This being premised, either
your covenant is absolutely, This I will do, be it lawful or not,
possible or impossible; and such a covenant is sin and folly: or it is
conditional, This I will do, if it continue lawful, or possible: this
condition (or rather exception) is still implied where it is not
expressed, unless the contrary be expressed: therefore such a covenant
is lawful with a robber with whom you are not bound to deal openly;
because it is but the concealing from him the event which you foresee.
As e. g. you have intelligence that a ship is lost at sea, or is like
to be taken by pirates, which the robber expecteth shortly to come
safe into the harbour: you may promise him to deliver up yourself his
prisoner, when that ship cometh home. Or you know a person to be
mortally sick, and will die before the next week; you may oblige
yourself to marry or serve that person two months hence; for it is
implied, if he or she be then alive. But with equal contractors, this
is unlawful, with whom you are obliged not only to verity but to
justice; as in the following cases will be further manifested.


_Tit. 3. Special Cases about Justice in Buying and Selling._

_Quest._ I. Am I bound to endeavour that he whom I deal with may
be a gainer by the bargain as well as I?

_Answ._ Yes, if you be equally in want, or in the like condition;
but if he be very poor, and you be rich, charity must be so mixed with
justice, that you must endeavour that it be more to his commodity than
yours (if he be one indeed that you owe charity to). And if you be
poor, and he be rich, you may be willing to be the only gainer
yourself, so be it you covet not another's, nor desire that he be
wronged; for when he hath power to deal charitably, you may be willing
of his charity or kindness.

_Quest._ II. May I desire or take more than my labour or goods
are worth, if I can get it?

_Answ._ 1. Not by deceit, persuading another that they are worth
more than they are. 2. Not by extortion, working upon men's ignorance,
error, or necessity (of which more anon). 3. Not of any one that is
poorer than yourself, or of any one that intendeth but an equal
bargain. 4. But if you deal with the rich, who in generosity stick not
at a small matter, and are willing another should be a gainer by them,
and understand what they do, it is lawful to take as much as they will
give you.

_Quest._ III. May I ask in the market more than my goods are
truly worth?

_Answ._ In the case last mentioned you may; when you are selling
to the rich, who are willing to show their generosity, and to make you
gainers. But then the honest way is to say, it is worth but so much;
but if you will give so much more because I need it, I will take it
thankfully. Some think also where the common custom is to ask more
than the worth, and people will not buy unless you come down from your
first demand, that then you may lawfully ask more, because else there
is no trading with such people. My judgment in this case is this,
1. That ordinarily it is better to ask no more at all but a just gain;
and that the inconveniences of doing otherwise are greater than any on
the other side; for he that heareth you ask unjustly may well think
that you would take unjustly if you could get it, and consequently
that you are unjust. 2. But this just gain lieth not always just in an
indivisible quantity, or determinate price. A man that hath a family
to maintain by his trade, may lawfully take a proportionable, moderate
gain; though if he take less he may get something too. To be always
just at a word is not convenient; for he that may lawfully get two or
three shillings or more in the pound of the rich, may see cause to let
a poorer person have it for less; but never ask above what it is
reasonable to take. 3. And if you once peremptorily said, I will take
no less, then it is not fit to go from your word. 4. And if you do
meet with such fools or proud gallants, who will not deal with you
unless you ask dear, it is just that when they have given you more
than it is worth, you tell them so, and offer them the overplus again.
And for them that expect that you abate much of your asking, it is an
inconvenience to be borne, which will be ever to your advantage when
you are once better known.

_Quest._ IV. How shall the worth of a commodity be judged of?

_Answ._ 1. When the law setteth a rate upon any thing (as on
bread and drink with us) it must be observed. 2. If you go to the
market, the market price is much to be observed. 3. If it be in an
equal contract, with one that is not in want, you may estimate your
goods as they cost you, or are worth to you, though it be above the
common price; seeing the buyer is free to take or leave them. 4. But
if that which you have to sell be extraordinarily desirable, or worth
to some one person more than to you or another man, you must not make
too great an advantage of his convenience or desire; but be glad that
you can pleasure him, upon equal, fair, and honest terms. 5. If there
be a secret worth in your commodity which the market will take no
notice of, (as it is usual in a horse,) it is lawful for you to take
according to that true worth if you can get it. But it is a false rule
of them that think their commodity is worth as much as any one will
give.

_Quest._ V. Is it lawful to make a thing seem better than it is,
by trimming, adorning, or setting the best side outward or in sight;
or to conceal the faults of what I am to sell?

_Answ._ It is lawful to dress, polish, adorn, or set out your
commodity, to make it seem as it is indeed, but not to make it seem
better than it is: except in some very few unusual cases; as if you
deal with some fantastical fool, who will not buy it, nor give you the
true worth, except it be so set out, and made in some respects to seem
better than it is. It is lawful so far to serve their curiosity or
humour, as to get the worth of your commodity. But if you do it to get
more than the worth by deceiving, it is a sin. And such glossing hath
so notable an appearance of deceit, that for that scandal it should be
avoided.

2. And as for concealing the fault, the case is the same; you ought
not to deceive your neighbour, but to do as you would be done by; and
therefore must not conceal any fault which he desireth or is concerned
to know. Except it be when you deal with one who maketh a far greater
matter of that fault than there is cause, and would wrong you in the
price if it were known: yea, and that exception will not hold neither,
except in a case when you must needs sell, and they must buy it:
because, 1. You may not have another man's money against his will,
though it be no more than the thing is worth. 2. Because it will be
scandalous when the fault is known by him that buyeth it.

_Quest._ VI. What if the fault was concealed from me when I
bought it, or if I were deceived or over-reached by him that sold it
me, and gave more than the worth, may I not repair my loss by doing
as I was done by?

_Answ._ No: no more than you may cut another's purse, because
yours was cut; you must do as you would be done by, and not as you are
done by. What you may do with the man that deceived you, is a harder
question; but doubtless you may not wrong an honest man, because you
were wronged by a knave.

_Object._ But it is taken for granted in the market, that every
man will get as much as he can have, and that _caveat emptor_ is
the only security; and therefore every man trusteth to his own wit,
and not to the seller's honesty, and so resolveth to run the hazard.

_Answ._ It is not so among christians, nor infidels who profess
either truth or common honesty. If you come among a company of
cut-purses, where the match is made thus, Look thou to thy purse, and
I will look to mine, and he that can get most let him take it! then
indeed you have no reason to trust another. But there are no tradesmen
or buyers who will profess that they look not to be trusted, or say, I
will lie or deceive you if I can. Among thieves and pirates such total
distrust may be allowed; but among sober persons in civil societies
and converse, we must in reason and charity expect some truth and
honesty, and not presume them to be all liars and deceivers, that we
may seem to have allowance to be such ourselves. Indeed we trust them,
not absolutely as saints, but with a mixture of distrust, as fallible
and faulty men: and so as to trust our own circumspection above their
words, when we know not the persons to be very just. But we have no
cause to make a market a place of mere deceit, where every one saith,
Trust not me, and I will not trust thee; but let us all take one
another for cheats and liars, and get what we can! Such censures
savour not of charity, or of just intentions.

_Quest._ VII. What if I foresee a plenty and cheapness in a time
of dearth, which the buyer foreseeth not, (as if I know that there are
ships coming in with store of that commodity which will make it
cheap,) am I bound to tell the buyer of it, and hinder my own gain?

_Answ._ There may be some instances in trading with enemies, or
with rich men, that regard not such matters, or with men that are
supposed to know it as well as you, in which you are not bound to tell
them. But in your ordinary equal trading, when you have reason to
think that the buyer knoweth it not, and would not give so dear if he
knew it, you are bound to tell him; because you must love your
neighbour as yourself, and do as you would be done by, and not take
advantage of his ignorance.

_Quest._ VIII. If I foresee a dearth, may I not keep my commodity
till then?

_Answ._ Yes, unless it be to the hurt of the commonwealth; as if
your keeping it in be the cause of the dearth, and your bringing it
forth would help to prevent it.

_Quest._ IX. May one use many words in buying and selling?

_Answ._ You must use no more than are true, and just, and useful:
but there are more words needful with some persons who are talkative
and unsatisfied than with others.

_Quest._ X. May I buy as cheap as I can get it, or give less than
the thing is worth?

_Answ._ If it be worth more to you than the market price,
(through your necessity,) you are not bound to give above the market
price. If it be worth less to you than the market price, you are not
bound to give more than it is worth to you, as suited to your use.
But you must not desire nor seek to get another's goods or labour for
less than it is worth in both these respects (in common estimate, and
to you).

_Quest._ XI. May I take advantage of another's necessity to buy
for less than the worth, or sell for more: as e. g. a poor man must
needs have money suddenly for his goods, though he sell them but for
half the worth; and I have no need of them: am I bound to give him the
worth when I have no need? and when it is a great kindness to him to
give him any thing in that strait? So also when I have no desire to
sell my horse, and another's necessity maketh him willing to give more
than he is worth, may I not take it?

_Answ._ To the first case: you must distinguish between an act of
justice and of charity; and between your need of the thing and the
worth of it to you. Though you have no need of the poor man's goods,
yet if you buy them, both justice and charity require that you give
him as much as they are worth to you, though not so much as they are
worth in the market: yea, and that you buy them of him in his
necessity; for if you give him but what they are worth to you, you are
no loser by it; and you should do another good, when it is not to your
own hurt or loss. By what they are worth to you, I mean so much as
that you be no loser. As, if it be meat or drink, though you have no
present need, perhaps you will shortly have need, and if you buy not
that, you must buy as much of somewhat else. In strict justice you may
be a saver, but not a gainer, by buying of the poor in their
necessity. 2. But if you buy a durable commodity for less than it is
worth, you should take it but as a pledge, and allow the seller
liberty to redeem it if he can, that he may get more after of another.
3. And to the poor in such necessity, charity must be exercised as
well as justice. Therefore if you are able to lend them money to save
them the loss of underselling, you should do it. (I account that man
only able who hath money which no greater service of God requireth.)
And if you are not able yourself, you should endeavour to get some
others to relieve him, if you can without a greater inconvenience.

And for the second case, it is answered before: you may not take more
than it is worth, ever the more for another's necessity; nor in any
other case than you might have done it in, if there had been no such
necessity of his.

_Quest._ XII. May I not make advantage of another's ignorance or
error in bargaining?

_Answ._ Not to get more than your commodity is worth, nor to get
his goods for less than the worth; no, nor to get the true worth
against his will, or with scandal: but if it be only to get a true
worth of your own commodity when he is willing, but would be offended
if his ignorance in some point were cured, you may so far make use of
his ignorance to a lawful end, as is said before in the case of
concealing faults.

_Quest._ XIII. May I strive to get before another, to get a good
bargain which he desireth?

_Answ._ Yes, if you do it not out of a greedy mind, nor to the
injury of one that is poorer than yourself: you should rather further
the supply of your neighbour's greater needs; otherwise speed and
industry in your calling is no fault, nor yet the crossing of a
covetous man's desires: you are not bound to let every man have what
he would have.

_Quest._ XIV. May I buy a thing out of another's hand, or hire a
servant which another is about or is treating with? Or may I call a
chapman from another to buy of me?

_Answ._ There are some cases in which you may not do it, and some
in which you may. You may not do it out of a greedy covetousness; nor
to the injury of the poor: nor when the other hath gone so far in the
bargain that it cannot be honestly broken; for then you injure the
third person, and tempt the other to a sin: nor may you do it so as to
disturb the due and civil order, which should be among moderate men in
trading. And it is a great matter how the thing is accounted of by the
custom of the country or market where you bargain; for where it is of
ill report, and accounted as unjust, the scandal should make you avoid
such a course. But yet in some cases it is lawful, and in some a
needful duty. It is lawful when none of the foresaid reasons (or any
such other) are against it: it is a duty when charity to the poor or
oppressed doth require it. As e. g. a poor man must needs sell his
land, his horse, his corn, or goods: a covetous oppressor offereth him
less than it is worth. The poor man must take his offer if he can get
no more: the oppressor saith that it is injustice for any one to take
his bargain out of his hand, or offer money till he have done: in this
case it may be a duty, to offer the poor man the worth of his
commodity, and save him from the oppressor. A covetous man offereth a
servant or labourer less than their service or labour is worth; and
will accuse you, if you interrupt his bargain and would offer his
servant more: in this case it may be your duty to help the servant to
a better master. A chapman is ready to be cheated by an unconscionable
tradesman, to give much more for a commodity than its worth: charity
may oblige you in such a case to offer it him cheaper. In a word, if
you do it for your own gain, in a greedy manner, it is a sin; but if
you do it when it is not scandalous or injurious, or do it in charity
for another's good, it is lawful, and sometimes a duty.

_Quest._ XV. May I dispraise another's commodity to draw the
buyer to my own?

_Answ._ This case is sufficiently answered in the former:
1. You may not use any false dispraise: 2. Nor a true one out of
covetousness, nor in a scandalous manner. 3. But you may help to save
another from a cheater, by opening the deceit in charity to him.

_Quest._ XVI. What should I do in doubtful cases, where I am
uncertain whether the thing be just or not?

_Answ._ Causeless, perplexing, melancholy scruples, which would
stop a man in the course of his duty, are not to be indulged: but in
rational doubts, first use your utmost diligence (as much as the
nature of the cause requireth) to be resolved; and if yet you doubt,
be sure to go the safer way, and to avoid sin rather than loss, and to
keep your consciences in peace.

_Quest._ XVII. If the buyer lose the commodity between the
bargain and the payment, (as if he buy your horse, and he die before
payment, or presently after,) what should the seller do to his relief?

_Answ._ If it were by the seller's fault, or by any fault in the
horse which he concealed, he is to make the buyer full satisfaction.
If it were casually only, rigorous justice will allow him nothing; and
therefore if it be either to a man that is rich enough to bear it
without any great sense of the loss, or in a case where in common
custom the buyer always standeth to the loss, mere justice will make
him no amends. But if it be where custom makes some abatement judged a
duty, or where the person is so poor as to be pinched by the loss,
that common humanity, which all good men use in bargaining, which
tempereth justice with charity, will teach men to bear their part of
the loss; because they must do as they would be done by.

_Quest._ XVIII. If the thing bought and sold prove afterward of
much more worth than was by either party understood, (as in buying of
ambergris and jewels it oft falleth out,) is the buyer bound to give
the seller more than was bargained for?

_Answ._ Yes, if it were the seller's mere ignorance and
insufficiency in that business which caused him so to undersell it (as
if an ignorant countryman sell a jewel or ambergris, who knoweth not
what it is, a moderate satisfaction should be made him). But if it
were the seller's trade, in which he is to be supposed to be
sufficient, and if it be taken for granted beforehand, that both buyer
and seller will stand to the bargain whatever it prove, and that the
seller would have abated nothing if it had proved less worse than the
price, then the buyer may enjoy his gain; much more if he run any
notable hazard for it, as merchants use to do.

_Quest._ XIX. What if the title of the thing sold prove bad,
which was before unknown?

_Answ._ If the seller either knew it was bad, or through his
notable negligence was ignorant of it, and did not acquaint the buyer
with so much of the uncertainty and danger as he knew, or if it was
any way his fault that the buyer was deceived, and not the buyer's
fault, he is bound to make him proportionable satisfaction. As also in
case that by law or bargain he be bound to warrant the title to the
buyer. But not in case that it be their explicit or implicit agreement
that the buyer stand to the hazard, and the seller hath done his duty
to make him know what is doubtful.

_Quest._ XX. What if a change of powers or laws do overthrow the
title, almost as soon as it is sold, (as it oft falls out about
offices and lands,) who must bear the loss?

_Answ._ The case is near the same with that in quest. xvii. It is
supposed that the seller should have lost it himself if he had kept it
but a little longer; and that neither of them foresaw the change; and
therefore that the seller hath all his money, rather for his good hap,
than for his lands or office (which the buyer hath not). Therefore
except it be to a rich man that feeleth not the loss, or one that
expressly undertook to stand to all hazards, foreseeing a possibility
of them, charity and humanity will teach the seller to divide the
loss.

The same is the case of London now consumed by fire; where thousands
of suits are like to rise between the landlords and the tenants. Where
the providence of God (permitting the burning zeal of some papists)
hath deprived men of the houses which they had hired or taken leases
of, humanity and charity requireth the rich to bear most of the loss,
and not to exact their rents or rebuilding from the poor, whatever the
law saith, which could not be supposed to foresee such accidents. Love
your neighbours as yourselves; do as you would be done by; and oppress
not your poor brethren; and then by these three rules you will
yourselves decide a multitude of such doubts and difficulties, which
the uncharitable only cannot understand.


_Tit. 4. Cases of Conscience about Lending and Borrowing._

_Quest._ I. May a poor man borrow money, who knoweth that he is
unable to repay it, and hath no rational proof that he is very likely
to be able hereafter?

_Answ._ No: unless it be when he telleth the lender truly of his
case, and he is willing to run the hazard; else it is mere thievery
covered with the cheat of borrowing; for the borrower desireth that
of another, which he would not lend him, if he expected it not again;
and to take a man's money or goods against his will is robbery.

_Object._ But I am in great necessity.

_Answ._ Begging in necessity is lawful; but stealing or cheating
is not, though you call it borrowing.

_Object._ But it is a shame to beg.

_Answ._ The sin of thievish borrowing is worse than shame.

_Object._ But none will give me if I beg.

_Answ._ If they will give but to save your life at the present,
you must take it, though they give you not what you would have: the
poorest beggar's life is better than the thief's.

_Object._ But I hope God may enable me to pay hereafter.

_Answ._ If you have no rational way to manifest the soundness of
that hope to another, it is but to pretend faith and hope for thievery
and deceit.

_Object._ God hath promised, that those that fear him shall want
no good thing. And therefore I hope I may be able to repay it.

_Answ._ If you want not, why do you borrow? If you have enough to
keep you alive by begging, God maketh good all his promises to you;
yea, or if you die by famine. For he only promiseth you that which is
best; which for aught you know may be beggary or death. God breaketh
not promise with his servants who die in common famine, no more than
with them who die in plagues or wars. Make not God the patron of sin;
yea, and your faith a pretence for your distrust. If you trust God,
use no sinful means; if you trust him not, this pleading of his
promise is hypocrisy.

_Quest._ II. May a tradesman drive a trade with borrowed money,
when his success, and so his repayment, is utterly an uncertain thing?

_Answ._ There are some trades where the gain is so exceeding
probable, next to certain, as may warrant the borrowing of money to
manage them, when there is no rational probability of failing in the
payment. And there are some tradesmen, who have estates of their own,
sufficient to repay all the money which they borrow. But otherwise,
when the money is rationally hazardous, the borrower is bound in
conscience to acquaint the lender fully with the hazard, that he may
not have it against his will. Otherwise he liveth in constant deceit
or thievery. And if he do happen to repay it, it excuseth not his sin.

_Quest._ III. If a borrower be utterly unable to pay, and so
break while he hath something, may he not retain somewhat for his food
or raiment?

_Answ._ No: unless it be in order to set up again in hope to
repay his debts: for all that he hath being other men's, he may not
take so much as bread to his mouth, out of that which is theirs,
without their consent.

_Quest._ IV. But if a man have bound himself to his wife's
friends upon marriage to settle so much upon her or her children, and
this obligation was antecedent to his debts, may he not secure that to
his wife or children, without any injury to his creditors?

_Answ._ The law of the land must much decide this controversy. If
the propriety be actually before transferred to wife or children, it
is theirs, and cannot be taken from them; but if it were done after by
a deed of gift to defraud the creditors, then that deed of gift is
invalid, till debts be paid. If it be but an obligation and no
collation of propriety, the law must determine who is to be first
paid; and whether the wife be supposed to run the hazard of gaining or
losing with the husband: and though the laws of several countries
herein differ, and some give the wife more propriety than others do,
yet must they in each place be conscientiously observed, as being the
rule of such propriety. But we must see that there be no fraudulent
intent in the transaction.

_Quest._ V. May not a tradesman retain somewhat to set up again,
if his creditors be willing to compound for a certain part of the
debt?

_Answ._ If he truly acquaint them with his whole estate, and they
voluntarily allow him part to himself, either in charity, or in hope
hereafter to be satisfied, this is no unlawful course; but if he hide
part from them, and make them believe that the rest is all, this is
but a thievish procurement of their composition or consent.

_Quest._ VI. May a borrower lawfully break his day of promised
payment, in case of necessity?

_Answ._ True necessity hath no law: that is, a man is not bound
to do things naturally impossible; but if he might have foreseen that
necessity, or the doubtfulness of his payment at the day, it was his
sin to promise it, unless he put in some limitation, If I be able, and
acquainted the lender with the uncertainty. However it be, when the
time is come, he ought to go to his creditor, and tell him of his
necessity, and desire further time, and endeavour to pay it as soon as
he is able: and if he be not able, to make him what satisfaction he
can, by his labour, or any other lawful way.

_Quest._ VII. May I borrow of one to pay another, to keep my day
with the first?

_Answ._ Yes, if you deal not fraudulently with the second, but
are able to pay him, or acquaint him truly with your case.

_Quest._ VIII. Suppose that I have no probability of paying the
last creditor, may I borrow of one to pay another, and so live upon
borrowing; or must I rather continue in one man's debt?

_Answ._ If you truly acquaint your creditors with your state, you
may do as is most to your convenience. If the first creditor be able
and willing rather to trust you longer, than that you should borrow of
another to pay him, you may continue his debtor, till you can pay him
without borrowing, but if he be either poor or unwilling to bear with
you, and another that is able be willing to venture, you may better
borrow of another to pay him. But if they be all equally unwilling to
stand to any hazard by you, then you must rather continue in the first
man's debt, because if you wrong another you will commit another sin:
nay, you cannot borrow in such a case, because it is supposed that the
other will not lend, when he knoweth your case. And you must not at
all conceal it from him.

_Object._ But it may be my ruin to open my full state to another.

_Answ._ You must not live upon cheating and thievery to prevent
your ruin: and what can it be less to get another man's money against
his will, if you hide your case, which if he knew he would not lend it
you.

_Object._ But what if I tell him plainly, that I will pay him
certainly by borrowing of another, though I cannot pay him for mine
own, and though I be not like to pay the last?

_Answ._ If you truly thus open your case to every one that you
borrow of, you may take it, if they will lend it; for then you have
their consent: and it is supposed, that every one is willing to run
the hazard of being the last creditor.

_Quest._ IX. May I lend upon pledges, pawns, or mortgages for my
security?

_Answ._ Yes, so you take not that from a poor man for a pledge, which
is necessary to his livelihood and maintenance: as the bed which he
should lie on, the clothes which he should wear, or the tools which he
should work with; and be not cruel on pretence of mercy.

_Quest._ X. May I take the forfeiture and keep a pledge or
mortgage upon covenants?

_Answ._ If it be among merchants and rich men, an act of
merchandise, and not of mere security for money lent, then it is
another case: as if they make a bargain thus, Take this jewel or this
land for your money; and it shall be yours if I pay you not at such a
day: I am willing to stand to the hazard of uncertainty; if I pay you
not, suppose it is for my own commodity, and not through disability.
In this case it is lawful to take the forfeiture, or detain the thing.
But if it be properly but a pledge to secure the money, then the final
intent is but that your money may be repaid; and you may not take the
advantage of breaking a day, to take that from another which is none
of your own. Justice will allow you only to take so much as your money
came to, and to give the overplus (if there be any) to the debtor. And
mercy will require you rather to forgive the debt, than to keep a
pledge which he cannot spare, but to his ruin and misery, (as his
food, his raiment, his tools, his house, &c.) unless you be in as
great necessity as he.

_Quest._ XI. May I take the bond or promise of a third person as
security for my money?

_Answ._ Yes, in case that other be able and willing to be
responsible; for you have his own consent; but great caution should be
used, that you take no man that is insufficient, from whom mercy
forbiddeth you to take it, in case the principal debtor fail; unless
you take his suretiship but _in terrorem_, resolving not to take
it of him: and also that you faithfully tell the sureties that you
must require it of them in case of non-payment, and therefore try
whether indeed they are truly willing to pay it: for if they be such
as truly presume that you will not take it of them, or will take it
ill to be sued for it, you should not take their suretiship, unless
you purpose not to seek it (except in necessity).

_Quest._ XII. Is it lawful to lend upon usury, interest, or
increase?

_Answ._ This controversy hath so many full treatises written on
it, that I cannot expect that so few words as I must lay out upon it
should satisfy the studious reader. All the disputes about the name of
usury I pass by; it being, The receiving any additional gain as due
for money lent, which is commonly meant by the word, and which we mean
in the question. For the questions, Whether we may bargain for it, or
tie the debtor to pay it? Whether we may take it after his gain as
partaking in it, or before? Whether we must partake also in the loss,
if the debtor be a loser? with other such like, are but subsequent to
the main question, Whether any gain (called use) may be taken by the
lender as his due for the money lent? My judgment is as followeth.

I. There is some such gain or usury lawful and commendable. II. There
is some such gain or usury unlawful and a heinous sin. I shall first
give my reasons of the first proposition.

I. If all usury be forbidden it is either by the law of nature, or by
some positive law of supernatural revelation: if the latter, it is
either by some law of Moses, or by some law of Christ: if the former,
it is either as against the rule of piety to God, or against justice
or charity to men. That which is neither a violation of the natural
laws of piety, justice, or charity; nor against the supernaturally
revealed laws of Moses or of Christ, is not unlawful. But there is
some usury which is against none of all these; _ergo_ there is some
usury which is not unlawful.

I will first lay you down the instances of such usury, and then prove
it. There is a parcel of land to be sold for a thousand pounds, which
is worth forty pounds per annum, and hath wood on it worth a thousand
pounds (some such things we have known): John N. is willing to
purchase it; but he hath a poor neighbour, T. S. that hath no money,
but a great desire of the bargain. J. N. loving his neighbour as
himself, and desiring his wealth, lendeth him the thousand pounds upon
usury for one year. T. S. buyeth the land, and selleth the wood for
the same money, and repayeth it in a year, and so hath all the land
for almost nothing; as if J. N. had purchased the land and freely
given it him, after a year or two; the gift had been the same.

_Object._ Here you suppose the seller wronged by selling his land
almost for nothing.

_Answ._ 1. That is nothing at all to the present case, but a
different case by itself. 2. I can put many cases in which such a sale
may be made without any wrong to the seller: as when it is done by
some prince, or state, or noble and liberal person, purposely
designing the enriching of the subjects, or after a war, as lately in
Ireland. So that the question is, whether J. N. may not give T. S. a
thousand or eight hundred pounds' worth of land, taking a year's rent
first out of the land, or a year's use for the money, which cometh to
the same sum.

Another: a rich merchant trading into the East Indies, having five
thousand pounds to lay out upon his commodities in traffic, when he
hath laid out four thousand five hundred pounds, lendeth in charity
the other five hundred pounds to one of his servants to lay out upon a
commodity, which when it cometh home will be worth two thousand
pounds; and offereth him to secure the carriage with his own;
requiring only the use of his money at six per cent. Here the taking
of thirty pounds' use, is but the giving him one thousand four hundred
and seventy pounds, and is all one with deducting so much of the gift.

Another instance: certain orphans having nothing left them but so much
money as will by the allowed use of it find them bread and poor
clothing; the guardian cannot lay it out in lands for them; and if he
maintain them upon the stock, it will be quickly spent, and he must
answer for it: a rich man that is their neighbour tradeth in iron
works, (furnaces or forges,) or lead works, or other such commodities,
in which he constantly getteth the double of the stock which he
employeth, or at least twenty pounds or forty pounds in the hundred;
the guardian dare not lend the money to any poor man, lest he break
and never be able to pay it; therefore he lendeth it this rich man.
And if he have it without usury, the poor orphans give the rich man
freely twenty pounds or forty pounds a year, supposing their stock to
be a hundred; if he take usury, the rich man doth but give the poor
orphans some part of his constant gain.

Another instance: in a city or corporation where there is a rich trade
of clothing or making silks, there is a stock of money given by legacy
for the poor, and intrusted into the hands of the richest of the city,
to trade with and give the poor the use of it: and there is another
stock left to set up young beginners, who have not a stock to set up
themselves; on condition that they give the third part of their gain
to the poor, and at seven years' end resign the stock: the question
is, Whether the poor should be without this use of their money, and let
the rich go away with it? or whether they may take it?

Now I prove that such usury is not forbidden by God.

1. It is not forbidden us by the law of Moses: (1.) Because Moses's
law never did forbid it: for, 1. It is expressly forbidden as an act
of unmercifulness; and therefore forbidden only to the poor and to
brethren, Exod. xxii. 25; Lev. xxv. 36, 37. Yea, when the poor are not
named, it is the poor that are meant; because in that country they did
not keep up stocks for merchandise or trading, but lent usually to the
needy only: at least the circumstances of the several texts show, that
it is only lending to the needy, and not lending to drive on any
enriching trades, which is meant where usury is forbidden.[157] 2. And
it is expressly allowed to be used to strangers, Deut. xxiii. 19, 20,
to whom nothing unjust or uncharitable might be done; only such a
measure of charity was not required towards them as unto brethren. And
there were more merchants of strangers that traded with them in
foreign commodities, than of Jews that fetched them home: so that the
prohibition of usury is in the law itself restrained only to their
lending to the poor; but in the prophets who do but reprove the sin,
it is expressed without that limitation, partly because it supposeth
the meaning of the law to be known, which the prophets did but apply,
and partly because there was little or no lending used among the Jews,
but to the needy as an act of charity.

(2.) And if it had been forbidden in Moses's law only, it would not
extend to christians now; because the law of Moses, as such, is not in
force: the matter of it is much of the law of nature indeed; but as
Mosaical, it was proper to the Jews and proselytes, or at least
extended not to the christian gentiles; as is plain in 2 Cor. iii. 7;
Gal. iii. 19, 24; v. 3; Ephes. ii. 15; 1 Tim. i. 7; Heb. vii. 12, 16, 19.
Moses's law as such never bound any other nations, but the proselytes
that joined themselves to the Jews (nor was all the world obliged so
to be proselyted as to take up their laws): much less do they bind us
that are the servants of Christ, so long after the dissolution of
their commonwealth. So much of them as are part of the law of nature,
or of any positive law of Christ, or of the civil law of any state,
are binding as they are such natural, christian, or civil laws. But
not one of them as Mosaical: though the Mosaical law is of great use
to help us to understand the law of nature in many particular
instances, in which it is somewhat difficult to us.

2. There is no positive law of Christ forbidding all usury: as for
Luke vi. 32, 35, it is plainly nothing to the case; for he saith not,
Lend, looking for no gain or increase, but looking for nothing again.
And the context showeth that the meaning must be one of these two;
either, q. d. Lend not only to them that will lend to you again when
you are in want; but even to the poor, that you can never hope to
borrow of; or else, Lend not only to them that are able to pay you,
and where your stock is secured, but to the needy where your money is
hazarded; and though they will pay you if they are able, yet you have
little or no hope that ever they should be able to repay: lend so, as
to be willing to make a gift of it in case the borrower never repay
it. And there is no other text that can be pretended against it in the
New Testament.

3. And that the law of nature doth not forbid all usury, will appear
by examining the several parts of it. The law of nature forbiddeth but
three sorts of sins: 1. Those that are against piety to God. 2. Those
that are against our own welfare. 3. Those that are against our
neighbour's good: and that is, 1. Against justice. 2. Against charity.
There is none that falleth not under some of these heads.

1. And that usury is not naturally evil as against piety to God; 2. Or
as against ourselves, and our own welfare; I need not prove, because
no reason nor reasonable person doth lay any such accusation against
it. Though they that think it absolutely unlawful, say that it is
consequently against God, as every violation of his law is. But that
is nothing to the case.

3. Therefore there is no doubt but the whole controversy is resolved
into this last question, Whether all usury be against justice or
charity to our neighbour? Justice obligeth me to give him his own;
charity obligeth me to give him more than his own, in certain cases,
as one that love him as myself. That which is not against justice, may
be against charity; but that which is against charity, is not always
against justice strictly taken. And that which is an act of true
charity, is never against justice; because he that giveth his
neighbour more than his own, doth give him his own and more. There is
a usury which is against justice and charity; there is a usury which
is against charity, but not against mere justice; and there is a usury
which is against neither justice nor charity. If I prove it charitable
it is superfluous to say more.

All the instances before given are notoriously charitable. That which
is for the preservation of the lives and comforts of the poor, and of
orphans, or for the enriching of my neighbour, is an act of charity;
but such is some usury, past all doubt, as is before declared. Where
the contrary is an act of cruelty, the usury is not against charity,
but for it. For the rich to deny to the poor and orphans a part of
that gain, which they make by the improvement of their own money, is
oppression and cruelty; if it be cruel to let a beggar die or starve,
when we should feed and clothe him of our own; much more to let the
poor and orphans starve and perish rather than give them the increase
of their own, or part of it at least. As for them that say, It may be
as well improved otherwise, they are unexperienced men; it is a known
falsehood as to the most, though some few may meet with such
opportunities. At least it is nothing to them that cannot have other
ways of improving it; who are very many.

Moreover, when it is not an act of charity, yet it may be not against
charity in these cases: 1. When the lender is poor and the borrower
rich; yea, it may be a sin to lend it freely. "He that oppresseth the
poor to increase his riches, and he that gives to the rich, shall
surely come to want," Prov. xxii. 16. It is a giving to the rich to
lend freely that money which they improve to the increase of their
riches. 2. When the lender is not obliged to that act of charity,
though the borrower be poorer than himself. Which falleth out in a
hundred cases; and may be comprised under this one general, When the
lender is obliged to expend that same money in some other greater,
better work: as at the same time while a man that is worth but twenty
pounds a year, is in debt to a man that hath a thousand pounds a year,
there may be a hundred or a thousand poor people worth nothing, ready
to perish, whom the rich is rather bound to succour, than him that
hath but twenty pounds a year. And there may be works of piety (as to
set up a school, or promote the preaching of the gospel) which may be
as great as either. And the richest that is, cannot do all the good
that is to be done, nor relieve all the persons that are in want;
therefore when he must leave much undone, if he would give all his
substance, it is (_cæteris paribus_) a sin, to give that to a man that
can make shift without it, and pass by a hundred in much deeper
necessity and distress; so that he who either exerciseth charity in
his usury, or doth nothing against charity and justice, certainly
sinneth not by that usury. For all the scriptures which speak against
usury, speak against it as a cruel or uncharitable thing.

_Object._ But it is sometimes necessary for a law to forbid that
which otherwise would be good, when it cannot be done, without
encouraging others to a greater evil; such as ordinary usury is; and
then that law must be observed.

_Answ._ This is true _in thesi_, that such cases there are;
but it is unproved and untrue in this case; for, 1. There is no such
law. 2. There is no such reason or necessity of such a law. For God
can as well make laws against unrighteous or uncharitable increase or
usury, without forbidding that which is charitable and just, as he can
make laws against unrighteous or uncharitable buying or selling
without condemning that which was good and just; or as he can forbid
gluttony, drunkenness, idleness, pride, without forbidding eating,
drinking, apparel, or riches. He can easily tell men of whom and in
what case to take use, and when not.

He that would see all other objections answered, and the case fully
handled, hath many treatises on both sides extant to inform him.

II. That there is a sort of usury which is evil I know of no man that
doubteth, and therefore need not stand to prove.

_Quest._ When is usury sinful?

_Answ._ As is before said, When it is against either justice or
charity. 1. When it is like cheating bargaining, which under pretence
of consent and a form of justice doth deceive or oppress, and get from
another that which is not truly ours but his. 2. When you lend for
increase where charity obligeth you to lend freely; even as it is a
sin to lend expecting your own again, when charity obligeth you to
give it. 3. When you uncharitably exact that which your brother is
disabled utterly to pay, and use cruelty to procure it (be it the use
or the principal). 4. When you allow him not such a proportion of the
gain as his labour, hazard, or poverty doth require; but because the
money is yours, will live at ease upon his labours. 5. When in case of
his losses you rigorously exact your due without that abatement, or
forgiving debts, (whether use or principal,) which humanity and
charity require. In a word, when you are selfish, and do not as,
according to true judgment, you may desire to be done by, if you were
in his case.

_Quest._ But when am I bound to exercise this charity in not
taking use?

_Answ._ As I said before, 1. Whenever you have no more urgent,
and necessary, and excellent work, to lay out that money on, which you
are so to receive. 2. Yea, though another work may be in itself
better, (as to relieve many poorer, better men with that money,) yet
when you cannot take it, without the utter undoing of the debtor, and
bringing him into as bad a case, as any single person whom you would
relieve, it is the safer side to leave the other unrelieved, (unless
it be a person on whom the public good much dependeth,) rather than to
extort your own from such a one to give another. Because that which
you cannot get without a scandalous appearance of cruelty, is _quoad
jus in re_ not yours to give, till you can better get possession of
it; and therefore God will not expect that you should give it to
another.

In all this I imply that as you must prefer the lives of others in
giving alms, before your own conveniences and comforts, and must not
say, I cannot spare it, when your necessity may spare it, though not
your pleasure; so also in taking use of those that you are bound to
show charity to, the same rule and proportions must be observed in
your charity.

Note also, that in all this it appeareth, that the case is but
gradually different, between taking the use and taking the principal.
For when the reason for remitting is the same, you are as well bound
to remit the principal as the use.

But this difference there is, that many a man of low estate may afford
to lend freely to a poorer man for a little time, who cannot afford to
give it. And prudence may direct us to choose one man to lend freely
to for a time, because of his sudden necessity, when yet another is
fitter to give it to.

_Quest._ XIII. Is lending a duty? If so, must I lend to all that
ask me, or to whom?

_Answ._ Lending is a duty, when we have it, and our brother's
necessity requireth it, and true prudence telleth us, that we have no
better way to lay it out, which is inconsistent with that. And
therefore rich men ordinarily should both lend and give as prudence
shall direct. But there is an imprudent and so a sinful lending: as,
1. When you will lend that which is another's, and you have no power
to lend. 2. When you lend that which you must needs require again,
while you might easily foresee that the borrower is not like to pay.
Lend nothing but what you have either great probability will be
repaid, or else which you are willing to give in case the debtor
cannot or will not pay; or at least when suing for it will not have
scandalous and worse effects than not lending. For it is very ordinary
when you come to demand it and sue for it, to stir up the hatred of
the debtor against you, and to make him your enemy, and to break his
charity by your imprudent charity; in such a case, if you are obliged
to relieve him, give him so much as you can spare, rather than lend
him that which you cannot spare, but must sue for. In such cases, if
charity go not without prudence, nor prudence without charity, you may
well enough see when to lend, and how much.

_Quest._ XIV. Is it lawful to take upon usury in necessity, when
the creditor doth unjustly or unmercifully require it?

_Answ._ Not in case that the consequents (by encouraging sin or
otherwise) be like to do more hurt, than the money will do you good.
Else, it is lawful when it is for your benefit; as it is lawful to
take part of your wages for your work, or part of the worth of your
commodity, when you cannot have the whole; and as it is lawful to
purchase your rights of an enemy, or your life of a thief; as is
aforesaid. A man may buy his own benefit of an unrighteous man.

_Quest._ XV. Doth not contracting for a certain sum of gain, make
usury to be in that case unlawful, which might lawfully be taken of
one that is free?

_Answ._ Yes, in case that contracting determine an uncertain case
without sufficient cause: as if you agree, that whether the borrower
gain or lose, and be poor or rich, I will have so much gain; that is,
whether it prove merciful or unmerciful, I will have it. But then in
that case, if it so prove unmerciful, it may not be taken without
contracting, if freely offered. No contract may tie the debtor to that
which is against justice or charity; and no contract may absolutely
require that which may prove uncharitable; unless there be a tacit
condition or exception of such a case implied. Otherwise I see no
scripture or reason, why a contract altereth the case, and may not be
used to secure that increase which is neither unrighteous nor
unmerciful: it may be the bond of equity, but not of iniquity. As in
case of a certain gain by the borrower, a certain use may be
contracted for; and in case of uncertain gain to the borrower, a
conditional contract may be made. Yea, in case of merchandise, where
men's poverty forbiddeth not such bargains, I see not but it is lawful
to sell a greater uncertain gain, for a smaller certain gain; and so
to make the contracts absolute (as Amesius Cas. Consc. on this
question showeth). As all oppression and unmercifulness must be
avoided, and all men must do as they would (judiciously) be done by;
so it is a bad thing to corrupt religion, and fill the world with
causeless scruples, by making that a sin which is no sin. Divines that
live in great cities and among merchandise, are usually fitter judges
in this case, than those that live more obscurely (without experience)
in the country.


_Tit. 5. Cases of Conscience about Lusory Contracts._

_Quest._ 1. Is it lawful to lay wagers upon the credit or
confidence of one another's opinions or assertions in discourse? As e.
g. I will lay you so much that I am in the right?

_Answ._ Yes, if these three things concur: 1. That the true end
of the wager is, to be a penalty to him that shall be guilty of a rash
and false assertion, and not to gratify the covetousness of the other.
2. That it be no greater a sum than can be demanded and paid, without
breach of charity, or too much hurt to the loser (as above the
proportion of his error). 3. That it be no other but what both parties
are truly willing to stand to the loss of, if either of them lose, and
that beforehand they truly seem so willing to each other.

_Quest._ II. Is it lawful to lay wagers upon horseraces, dogs,
hawks, bear-baitings, or such games as depend upon the activity of
beast or man?

_Answ._ Yes, upon the two last expressed conditions; and, 3. That
it be not an exercise which is itself unlawful, by cruelty to beasts,
or hazard to the lives of men, (as in fencing, running, wrestling, &c.
it may fall out if it be not cautelously done,) or by the expense of
an undue proportion of time in them, which is the common malignity of
such recreations.

_Quest._ III. May I lawfully give money to see such sports, as
bear-baitings, stage-plays, masks, shows, puppet-plays, activities of
man or beast? &c.

_Answ._ There are many shows that are desirable and laudable, (as
of strange creatures, monsters, rare engines, activities, &c.) the
sight of which it is lawful to purchase, at a proportionable price; as
a prospect through one of Galileo's tubes or such another, is worth
much money to a studious person. But when the exercise is unlawful,
(as all stage-plays are that ever I saw, or had just information of;
yea, odiously evil; however it is very possible that a comedy or
tragedy might with abundance of cautions be lawfully acted,) it is
then (usually) unlawful to be a spectator either for money or on free
cost. I say, (usually,) because it is possible that some one that is
necessitated to be there, or that goeth to find out their evil to
suppress them, or that is once only induced to know the truth of them,
may do it innocently; but so do not they, who are present voluntarily
and approvingly. 3. And if the recreation be lawful in itself, yet
when vain persons go thither to feed a carnal fancy and vicious
humour, which delighteth more in vanity, than they delight in piety,
and when it wasteth their time and corrupteth their minds, and
alienateth them from good, or hindereth duty, it is to them unlawful.

_Quest._ IV. Is it lawful to play at cards or dice for money, or
at any lottery?[158]

_Answ._ The greatest doubt is, whether the games be lawful, many
learned divines being for the negative, and many for the affirmative;
and those that are for the affirmative lay down so many necessaries or
conditions to prove them lawful, as I scarce ever yet saw meet
together; but if they be proved at all lawful, the case of wagers is
resolved as the next.

_Quest._ V. May I play at bowls, run, shoot, &c. or use such
personal activities for money?

_Answ._ Yes, 1. If you make not the game itself bad, by any
accident. 2. If your wager be laid for sport, and not for covetousness
(striving who shall get another's money, and give them nothing for
it). 3. And if no more be laid than is suitable to the sport, and the
loser doth well and willingly pay.

_Quest._ VI. If the loser who said he was willing, prove angry
and unwilling when it cometh to the paying, may I take it, or get it
by law against his will?

_Answ._ No, not in ordinary cases: because you may not turn a
sport to covetousness, or breach of charity; but in case that it be a
sport that hath cost you any thing, you may in justice take your
charges, when prudence forbids it not.


_Tit. 6. Cases of Conscience about Losing and Finding._

_Quest._ I. If I find money or any thing lost, am I bound to seek
out the owner, if he seek not after me? and how far am I bound to seek
him?

_Answ._ You are bound to use such reasonable means, as the nature
of the case requireth, that the true owner may have his own again. He
that dare keep another man's money, because he findeth it, it is like
would steal, if he could do it as secretly. Finding gives you no
propriety, if the owner can be found: do as you would be done by, and
you may satisfy your conscience. If nearer inquiry will not serve, you
are bound to get it cried in the market, or proclaimed in the church,
or mentioned in the Curranto's that carry weekly news, or any probable
way, which putteth you not upon unreasonable cost or labour.

_Quest._ II. May I take any thing for the finding of it, as my
due?

_Answ._ You may demand so much as shall pay for any labour or
cost which you have been at about it, or finding out the owner. But no
more as your due; though a moderate gratuity may be accepted, if he
freely give it.

_Quest._ III. May I desire to find money or any thing else in my
way? or may I be glad when I have found it?

_Answ._ You should first be unwilling that your neighbour should
lose it, and be sorry that he hath lost it; but supposing that it be
lost, you may moderately desire that you may find it rather than
another; not with a covetous desire of the gain; but that you may
faithfully gratify the owner in restoring it, or if he cannot be found
may dispose of it as you ought. And you should be more sorry that it
is lost, than glad that you find it, except for the owner.

_Quest._ IV. If no owner can be found, may I not take it and use
it as mine own?

_Answ._ The laws of the land do usually regulate claims of
propriety in such matters. Where the law giveth it to the lord of the
manor, it is his, and you must give it him. Where it giveth it to no
other, it is his that findeth it; and occupancy will give him
propriety. But so as it behoveth him to judge, if he be poor, that
God's providence ordered it for his own supply; but if he be rich,
that God sent it him but as to his steward, to give it to the poor.

_Quest._ V. If many be present when I find it, may I not wholly
retain it to myself; or may I not conceal it from them if I can?

_Answ._ If the law overrule the case, it must be obeyed; but if
it do not, you may, if you can, conceal it, and thereby become the
only finder, and take it as your own, if the owner be not found: but
if you cannot conceal it at the time of finding, they that see it with
you, are partly the finders as well as you; though perhaps the largest
share be due to the occupant.

_Quest._ VI. If I trust my neighbour or servant with money or
goods, or if another trust me, who must stand to the loss if they be
lost?

_Answ._ Here also the law of the land as regulating proprieties
must be very much regarded; and especially the true meaning of the
parties must be understood: if it was antecedently the expressed or
implied meaning that one party in such or such a case should bear the
loss, it must in strict justice be according to the true meaning of
the parties. Therefore if a carrier that undertaketh to secure it,
loseth it, he loseth it to himself. Or if one that it is lent to on
that condition (explicit or implicit) lose it, it is to himself. But
if a friend to whom you are beholden for the carriage, lose it, who
undertook no more than to bestow his labour, the loss must be yours;
yea, though it was his negligence or drunkenness that was the fault;
for you took him and trusted him as he is. But if a servant, or one
obliged to do it by hire, do without any other agreement, only
undertake to serve you in it, and loseth it, the law or custom of the
country is instead of a contract; for if the law or custom lay the
loss on him, it is supposed that he consented to it in consenting to
be your servant; if it lay it on you, it is supposed that you took
your servant on such terms of hazard. But if it be left undecided by
law and custom, you may make your servant pay only so much as is a
proportionable penalty for his fault, but no more, as any satisfaction
for your loss; except you agreed with him to repay such losses as were
by his default. And when it is considered what strict justice doth
require, it must also be considered what charity and mercy do require,
that the poor be not oppressed.


_Tit. 7. Directions to Merchants, Factors, Chaplains, Travellers,
that live among Infidels._

_Quest._ I. Is it lawful to put oneself, or servants, especially
young unestablished apprentices, into temptations of an infidel
country, (or a popish,) for the getting of riches, as merchants
do?[159]

_Answ._ This cannot be truly answered without distinguishing, 1.
Of the countries they go from. 2. Of the places they go to. 3. Of the
quality of the persons that go. 4. Of the causes of their going.

I. Some countries that they go from may be as bad as those that they
go to, or in a state of war, when it is better to be absent, or in a
time of persecution, or at least of greater temptation than they are
like to have abroad. And some are contrarily as a paradise in
comparison of those they go to, for holiness and helps to heaven, and
for peace and opportunities of serviceableness to God and the public
good.

II. Some countries which they may go to, may have as good helps for
their souls as at home, if not by those of the religion of the
nation, yet by christians that live among them, or by the company
which goeth with them; or at least there may be no great temptations
to change their religion, or debauch them, either through the civility
and moderation of those they live among, or through their sottish
ignorance and viciousness, which will rather turn men's hearts against
them. But some countries have so strong temptations to corrupt men's
understandings through the subtlety of seducers, and some have such
allurements to debauch men, and some such cruelties to tempt them to
deny the truth, that it is hard among them to retain one's innocency.

III. Some that go abroad are understanding, settled christians, able
to make good use of other men's errors, and sins, and ill examples or
suggestions, and perhaps to do much good on others; but some are
young, and raw, and unexperienced, whose heads are unfurnished of
those evidences and reasons by which they should hold fast their own
profession against the cunning reasonings of an adversary, and their
hearts are unfurnished of that love to truth, and that serious
resolution, which is necessary to their safety, and therefore are like
to be corrupted.

IV. Some are sent by their princes as agents or ambassadors on
employments necessary to the public good; and some are sent by
societies on business necessary to the ends of the society; and some
go in case of extreme poverty and necessity, having no other way of
maintenance at home; and some go in obedience to their parents and
masters that command it them; and some go to avoid the miseries of a
war, or the danger of a sharp persecution at home, or the greater
temptations of a debauched or seducing age, or some great temptations
in their families. But some go for fancy, and some for mere
covetousness, without need.

By these distinctions the case may be answered by men that are
judicious and impartial. As,

I. _Affirm._ 1. It is lawful for ambassadors to go among
infidels, that are sent by princes and states; because the public good
must be secured.

2. It is lawful for the agents of lawful societies or trading
companies to go (_cæteris paribus_, the persons being capable);
because trade must be promoted, which tendeth to the common good of
all countries.

3. It is not only lawful, but one of the best works in the world, for
fit persons to go on a design to convert the poor infidels and
heathens where they go. Therefore the preachers of the gospel should
not be backward to take any opportunity, as chaplains to ambassadors,
or to factories, &c. to put themselves in such a way.

4. It is lawful for a son or servant (whose bonds extend to such a
service) to go in obedience to a superior's command; and God's special
protection may be trusted in a way of obedience.

5. It is lawful for one in debt to go, that hath probable hopes that
way and no other to pay his debts. Because he is a defrauder if he
detain other men's money, while a lawful way of repaying it may be
taken.

6. It is lawful for a duly qualified person to go in case of extreme
poverty, to be able to live in the world; and that poverty may be
called extreme to one that was nobly born and educated, which would be
no poverty to one that was bred in beggary.

7. It is lawful for a well qualified person, who desireth riches to
serve God, and to do good with, to go in a way of trading, though he
be in no poverty or necessity himself. Because God's blessing on a
lawful trade may be desired and endeavoured, and he that should do all
the good he can, may use what lawful means he can to be enabled to do
it. And other men's wants should be to us as our own, and therefore we
may endeavour to be able to relieve them.

8. In a time of such civil war, when a man knoweth not which side to
take, it may be better for some men to live abroad; yea, among
infidels.

9. There is little to dissuade a man whose trade leadeth him into a
country that is better than his own, or so sottish as to have small
temptation, and that hath the company of faithful christians, with
which he may openly worship God, and privately converse to his
spiritual edification.

10. In urgent cases one may go for a time, where he can have no use of
public church worship, so be it he have private means and
opportunities of holy living.

11. It is lawful on less occasions to leave one's own country in a
time of debauchery, when temptations at home are greater than those
abroad, or in a time of such persecution as may lawfully be avoided,
than at another time.

12. A settled christian may go more safely, and therefore lawfully, on
smaller urgencies, than a young, raw, lustful, fanciful, unsettled
novice may.

II. _Neg._ 1. It is not lawful for any one to seek riches or
trade abroad or at home, principally for the love of riches, to raise
himself and family to fulness, prosperity, or dignity: though all this
may be desired when it is a means to God's service and honour, and the
public good, and is desired principally as such a means.

2. It is not lawful to go abroad, especially into infidel or popish
countries, without such a justifiable business, whose commodity will
suffice to weigh down all the losses and dangers of the remove.

3. The dangers and losses of the soul are to be valued much above
those of the body and estate, and cannot be weighed down by any mere
corporal commodity.

4. It is less dangerous usually to go among Turks and heathens, (whose
religion hath no tempting power to seduce men,) than among Socinians
or papists, whose errors and sins are cunningly and learnedly promoted
and defended.

5. It is not lawful for merchants or others for trade and love of
wealth or money, to send poor raw, unsettled youths into such
countries where their souls are like to be notably endangered, either
by being deprived of such teaching and church helps which they need,
or by being exposed to the dangerous temptations of the place; because
their souls are of more worth than money.

6. It is not lawful therefore for master or servant to venture his own
soul in such a case as this last mentioned; that is, so far as he is
free, and without necessity doth it only for commodity sake.

7. We may not go where we cannot publicly worship God, without
necessity, or some inducement from a greater good.

8. The more of these hinderances concur the greater is the sin: it is
therefore a mere wilful casting away of their own souls, when
unfurnished, unsettled youths (or others like them) shall for mere
humour, fancy, or covetousness leave such a land as this, where they
have both public and private helps for their salvation, and to go
among papists, infidels, or heathens, where talk or ill example is
like to endanger them, and no great good can be expected to
countervail such a hazard, nor is there any true necessity to drive
them, and where they cannot publicly worship God, no, nor openly own
the truth, and where they have not so much as any private company to
converse with, that is fit to further their preservation and
salvation, and all this of their own accord, &c.

_Quest._ II. May a merchant or ambassador leave his wife, to live
abroad?

_Answ._ 1. We must distinguish between what is necessitated, and
what is voluntary. 2. Between what is done by the wife's consent, and
what is done without. 3. Between a wife that can bear such absence,
and one that cannot. 4. Between a short stay, and a long or continued
stay.

1. The command of the king, or public necessities, may make it lawful,
except in a case so rare as is not to be supposed (which therefore I
shall not stand to describe). For though it be a very tender business
to determine a difference between the public authority or interest,
and family relations and interest, when they are contradictory and
unreconcilable, yet here it seemeth to me, that the prince and public
interest may dispose of a man contrary to the will and interest of his
wife; yea, though it would occasion the loss, 1. Of her chastity. 2.
Or her understanding. 3. Or her life: and though the conjugal bond do
make man and wife to be as one flesh. For, 1. The king and public
interest may oblige a man to hazard his own life, and therefore his
wife's. In case of war, he may be sent to sea, or beyond sea, and so
both leave his wife (as Uriah did) and venture himself. Who ever
thought that no married man might go to foreign wars without his
wife's consent? 2. Because as the whole is more noble than the part,
so he that marrieth obligeth himself to his wife, but on supposition
that he is a member of the commonwealth, to which he is still more
obliged than to her.

2. A man may for the benefit of his family leave his wife for travel
or merchandise, for a time, when they mutually consent upon good
reason that it is like to be for their good.

3. He may not leave her either without or with her own consent, when a
greater hurt is like to come by it, than the gain will countervail. I
shall say no more of this, because the rest may be gathered from what
is said in the cases about duties to wives, where many other such are
handled.

_Quest._ III. Is it lawful for young gentlemen to travel in other
kingdoms, as part of their education?[160]

_Answ._ The many distinctions which were laid down for answer of
the first question, must be here supposed, and the answer will be
mostly the same as to that, and therefore need not be repeated.

1. It is lawful for them to travel that are necessarily driven out of
their own country, by persecution, poverty, or any other necessitating
cause.

2. It is lawful to them that are commanded by their parents (unless in
former excepted cases, which I will not stay to name).

3. It is the more lawful when they travel into countries as good or
better than their own, where they are like to get more good than they
could have done at home.

4. It is more lawful to one that is prudent and firmly settled both in
religion, and in sobriety and temperance, against all temptations
which he is like to meet with, than to one that is unfurnished for a
due resistance of the temptations of the place to which he goeth.

5. It is more lawful to one that goeth in sober, wise, and godly
company, or is sent with a wise and faithful tutor and overseer, than
to leave young, unsettled persons to themselves.

6. In a word, it is lawful when there is a rational probability, that
they will not only get more good than hurt, (for that will not make it
lawful,) but also more good than they could probably have other ways
attained.

II. But the too ordinary course of young gentlemen's travels out of
England now practised, I take to be but a most dangerous hazarding, if
not a plain betraying them to utter undoing, and to make them
afterwards the plagues of their country, and the instruments of the
common calamity. For, 1. They are ordinarily sent into countries far
worse and more dangerous than their own, where the temptations are
stronger than they are fit to deal with; into some countries where
they are tempted to sensuality, and into some where they are tempted
to popery or infidelity. In some countries they learn to drink wine
instead of beer; and arising from the smaller sort to the stronger, if
they turn not drunkards, they contract that appetite to wine and
strong drink, which shall prove (as Clemens Alexandrinus calleth
gluttony and tippling) a throat-madness, and a belly-devil, and keep
them in the sin of gulosity all their days. And in some countries they
shall learn the art of gluttony, to pamper their guts in curious,
costly, uncouth fashions, and to dress themselves in novel,
fantastical garbs, and to make a business of adorning themselves, and
setting themselves forth with proud and procacious fancies and
affections, to be looked upon as comely persons to the eyes of others.
In some countries they shall learn to waste their precious hours in
stage-plays, and vain spectacles, and ceremonies, attendances, and
visits, and to equalize their life with death, and to live to less use
and benefit to the world than the horse that carrieth them. In most
countries they shall learn either to prate against godliness, as the
humour of a few melancholy fools, and be wiser than to believe God, or
obey him, or be saved; or at least to grow indifferent and cold in
holy affections and practices: for when they shall see papists and
protestants, Lutherans and Calvinists, of contrary minds, and hear
them reproaching and condemning one another, this cooleth their zeal
to all religion, as seeming but a matter of uncertainty and
contention. And when they also see how the wise and holy are made a
scorn in one country, as bigots and Hugonots, and how the protestants
are drunkards and worldlings in another country, and how few in the
world have any true sense and savour of sound and practical religion,
and of a truly holy and heavenly life, (as those few they are seldom
so happy as to converse with,) this first accustometh them to a
neglect of holiness, and then draweth their minds to a more low,
indifferent opinion of it, and to think it unnecessary to salvation.
For they will not believe that so few shall be saved as they find to
be holy in the world; and then they grow to think it but a fancy and a
troubler of the world.

And it addeth to their temptation, that they are obliged by the carnal
ends which drew them out, to be in the worst and most dangerous
company and places, that is, at princes' courts, and among the
splendid gallantry of the world; for it is the fashions of the great
ones which they must see, and of which when they come home they must
be able to discourse: so that they must travel to the pest-houses of
pomp, and lust, of idleness, gluttony, drunkenness, and pride, of
atheism, irreligiousness, and impiety, that they may be able to glory
what acquaintance they have got of the grandeur and gallantry of the
suburbs of hell, that they may represent the way to damnation
delectable and honourable to others, as well as to themselves.[161]

But the greatest danger is of corrupting their intellectuals, by
converse with deceivers where they come; either infidels, or juggling
Jesuits and friars: for when those are purposely trained up to
deceive, how easy is it for them to silence raw and unfurnished
novices, (yea, even when all their five senses must be captivated, in
the doctrine of transubstantiation)! And when they are silenced they
must yield: or at least they have deluding stories enough of the
antiquity, universality, infallibility, unity of their church, with a
multitude of lies of Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and other reformers,
to turn their hearts and make them yield. But yet that they may be
capable of doing them the more service, they are instructed for a time
to dissemble their perversion, and to serve the Roman pride and
faction in a protestant garb and name.

Especially when they come to Rome, and see its glory, and the
monuments of antiquity, and are allured with their splendour and
civilities, and made to believe that all the reports of their
inquisitions and cruelties are false, this furthereth the fascination
of unexperienced youths.

2. And usually all this while the most of them lay by all serious
studies, and all constant employment, and make idleness and converse
with the idle or with tempters, to be their daily work. And what a
mind is like to come to, which is but one half year or twelve months
accustomed to idleness, and to vain spectacles, and to a pleasing
converse with idle and luxurious persons, it is easy for a man of any
acquaintance with the world or with human nature to conjecture.

3. And they go forth in notable peril of their health or lives. Some
fall into fevers, and die by change of air and drinks: some fall into
quarrels in taverns, or about their whores, and are murdered. Some few
prove so stedfast against all the temptations of the papists, that it
is thought conducible to the holy cause that they should be killed in
pretence of some quarrel, or be poisoned. Some by drinking wine do
contract such sickness, as makes their lives uncomfortable to the
last. And the brains of many are so heated by it, that they fall mad.

4. And all this danger is principally founded in the quality of the
person sent to travel; which are ordinarily empty lads, between
eighteen and twenty-four years of age, which is the time of the
devil's chief advantage; when naturally they are prone to those vices
which prove the ruin of the most, though you take the greatest care of
them that you can.[162] 1. Their lust is then in the highest and most
untamed rage. 2. Their appetites to pleasing meats and drinks are then
strongest. 3. Their frolicsome inclinations to sports and recreations
are then greatest. 4. And ignorant and procacious pride beginneth then
to stir. 5. All things that are most vile and vain, are then apt to
seem excellent to them, by reason of the novelty of the matter as to
them, who never saw such things before, and by reason of the false
esteem of those carnal persons, to whose pomp, and consequently to
whose judgment, they would be conformed. 6. And they are at that age
exceedingly inclined to think all their own apprehensions to be right,
and to be very confident of their own conceptions, and wise in their
own eyes; because their juvenile intellect being then in the most
affecting activity, it seemeth still clear and sure to them, because
it so much affects themselves. 7. But above all, they are yet
unfurnished of almost all that solid wisdom, and settled holiness,
and large experience, which is most necessary to their improvement of
their travels, and to their resistance of all these temptations. Alas!
how few of them are able to deal with a Jesuit, or hold fast their
religion against deceivers! If the very vices, the ambition, the
carnal policies and pomps, the filthiness and worldliness of the Roman
clergy, did not become a preservative to men's minds against the
temptations which would draw them to their way, and if the atheism,
infidelity, whoredoms, and profaneness of papists did not become
antidotes, how few were like to return uninfected! And because the
Jesuits know that they can never take this stumblingblock out of the
way, therefore too many of them have thought best to debauch those
first whom they would proselyte, and reconcile them first to plays,
and drunkenness, and whoredoms, that so the dislike of these may not
hinder their reconciliation with the kingdom of Rome; yea, that a
seeming necessity of a priest's pardon, may make it seem necessary to
become their subjects.

And as unfurnished are these young travellers usually to resist the
temptations to this sensuality, lust, and pomp, as those of popery; so
that they are perfidiously sent into a pest-house, when they are in
the greatest disposition to be infected. And if they come not home
drunkards, gluttons, gamesters, idle, prodigal, proud, infidels,
irreligious, or papists, it is little thanks to those perfidious
parents, who thus perform their promise for them in baptism, by
sending them to Satan's schools and university to be educated.

Whereas if they were but kept to their due studies, and under a holy
government at home, till they were furnished with sound religious
knowledge, and till they were rooted in holiness, and in love to a
pious, sober life, and till they had got a settled hatred of
intemperance and all sin, and till they had a map of the places,
persons, and affairs of the world well imprinted on their minds by
study and due information, then necessary travel would be more safe;
and then they would be in a capacity to learn wisdom from other men's
folly, and virtue from other men's vice, and piety from other men's
impiety; which novices are rather apt to imitate.

5. And in the mean time the loss of all the helps which they should
have at home, doth greatly tend to their destruction. For they oft
travel into countries, where they shall have no public worship of God
which is lawful, or which they understand; or if they have, it is
usually cold preaching and dull praying, when they have need of the
best, and all too little. And they have seldom such pious society to
edify and quicken them by private converse, as they have, or might
have, here at home; and seldom come into such well ordered, religious
families. And if human nature be prone to infection by temptations,
and so averse to holiness, that all means is too little, and even in
the best families folly and sensuality, and a distaste of godliness,
often thrive; (as unsown weeds overspread the garden, where with great
cost and labour only better things were sowed;) what then but sin and
misery can be expected from those that by their own parents are
banished from their native country (not so well as into a wilderness,
but) into the pestilent, infected countries of the world.

I would ask those parents that plead for this crime and cruelty as a
kindness; are you no wiser or better yourselves than the company into
which you send your children? Can you teach them and educate them no
better, nor give them better examples, than they are like to have
abroad? Can you set them on no better work, for the improvement of
their time? If not, why do you not repent of this your shame and
misery, and reform yourselves? If you can, why will you then betray
your children? Or if you cannot, are there no schools, no learned and
pious men, no religious families and company at home, in your own
land, where you might place them to better advantage, than thus to
expose them to the tempter? Undoubtedly there are; and such as may be
had at cheaper rates.[163]

6. And it is not the smallest part of the guilt and danger, that they
are sent abroad without due oversight and conduct. They that do but
get them some sober or honest servant to attend them, or some sober
companion, think they have done well; whenas they had need of some
divine or tutor of great learning, piety, prudence, and experience,
whom they will reverence and obey, that may take the oversight of
them, and be ready to answer any sophist that would seduce them. But
the charge of this is thought too great for the safety of their own
children, whom they themselves expose to a necessity of it.

I know that carnal minds will distaste all this, and have objections
enough against it, and reasons of their own, to make it seem a duty to
betray and undo their children's souls, and to break their promise
made for them in baptism: "All this is but our preciseness: they must
have experience and know the world, or else they will be contemptible
_tenebriones_ or owls! Whenever they go it will be a temptation,
and such they must have at home. There is no other part of their age
so fit, or that can be spared, and we must trust God with them
wherever they are; and they that will be bad, will be bad in one place
as well as another; and many are as bad that stay at home." And thus
_quos perdere vult Jupiter hos dementat_; yea, the poor children
and commonwealth must suffer for such parents' sottish folly. And well
saith Solomon, "The rich man is wise in his own conceit," Prov.
xxviii. 11. And because it is not reason indeed but pride, and the
rich disease and carnality which is here to be confuted, I shall not
honour them with a distinct, particular answer; but only tell them, If
all companies be alike, send them to Bedlam or to a whorehouse. If all
means be alike, let them be janizaries, and bred up where Christ is
scorned: if you think they need but little helps, and little watching,
it seems you never gave them more. And it is a pity you should have
children, before you know what a man is, and how much nature is
corrupted, and how much is needful to its recovery. And it is a pity
that you dedicated them to God in baptism, before you believed Christ,
and knew what you did, and engaged them to renounce the world, the
flesh, and the devil, under a crucified Christ, while you purposed
like hypocrites to train them in the school and service of the world,
the flesh, and the devil, and in the contempt of the cross of Christ,
or of a holy, mortified life. And if all ages be alike, and novices be
equal to experienced persons, let the scholars rule their master, and
let boys be parliament men and judges, and let them be your guides at
home! And if acquaintance with courtship and the customs of the world,
and the reputation of such acquaintance, be worth the hazarding of
their souls, renounce God, and give up your names to Mammon, and be
not such paltry hypocrites, as to profess that you believe the
Scriptures, and stand to your baptismal vows, and place your hopes in
a crucified Christ, and your happiness in God's favour and the life to
come. And if the preaching of the gospel, and all such religious
helps, be unnecessary to your unsettled children, dissemble not by
going to church, as if you took them to be necessary to yourselves.
In a word, I say as Elias to the Israelites, "Why halt ye between two
opinions? If God be God, follow him." If the world be God, and pride
and sensuality and the world's applause be your felicity, follow it,
and let it be your children's portion. Do you not see more wise, and
learned, and holy, and serviceable persons among us, proportionably,
in church and state, that were never sent for an education among the
papists and profane, than of such as were?

But I will proceed to the directions which are necessary to those that
must or will needs go abroad, either as merchants, factors, or as
travellers.

_Direct._ I. Be sure that you go not without a clear warrant from
God; which must be (all things laid together) a great probability, in
the judgment of impartial, experienced, wise men, that you may get or
do more good than you were like to have done at home. For if you go
sinfully without a call or warrant, you put yourself out of God's
protection, as much as in you is; that is, you forfeit it: and
whatever plague befalls you, it will arm your accusing consciences to
make it double.

_Direct._ II. Send with your children that travel, some such
pious, prudent tutor or overseer as is afore described: and get them
or your apprentices into as good company as possibly you can.

_Direct._ III. Send them as the last part of all their education,
when they are settled in knowledge, sound doctrine, and godliness, and
have first got such acquaintance with the state of the world, as
reading, maps, and conversation and discourse can help them to: and
not while they are young, and raw, and uncapable of self-defence, or
of due improving what they see. And those that are thus prepared, will
have no great lust or fancy to wander, and lose their time, without
necessity; for they will know, that there is nothing better
(considerably) to be seen abroad, than is at home; that in all
countries, houses are houses, and cities are cities, and trees are
trees, and beasts are beasts, and men are men, and fools are fools,
and wise men are wise, and learned men are learned, and sin is sin,
and virtue is virtue; and these things are but the same abroad as at
home: and that a grave is every where a grave, and you are travelling
towards it, which way ever you go. And happy is he that spendeth his
little time so, as may do God best service, and best prepare him for
the state of immortality.

_Direct._ IV. If experience of their youthful lust and pride, and
vicious folly, or unsettled dangerous state, doth tell you plainly,
that your child or apprentice is unfit for travel, venture them not
upon it, either for the carnal ornaments of education, or for your
worldly gain. For souls that cost the blood of Christ, are more
precious than to be sold at so low a rate; and especially by those
parents and masters that are doubly obliged to love them, and to guide
them in the way to heaven, and must be answerable for them.

_Direct._ V. Choose those countries for your children to travel
in, which are soundest in doctrine and of best example, and where they
may get more good than hurt; and venture them not needlessly into the
places and company of greatest danger; especially among the Jesuits
and friars, or subtle heretics, or enemies of Christ.

_Direct._ VI. Study before you go, what particular temptations
you are like to meet with, and study well for particular preservatives
against them all: as you will not go into a place infected with the
plague, without an antidote. It is no small task, to get a mind
prepared for travel.

_Direct._ VII. Carry with you such books as are fittest for your use,
both for preservation and edification: as to preserve you from popery,
Drelincourt's and Mr. Pool's small Manual: for which use my "Key for
Catholics," and "Safe Religion," and "Sheet against Popery" may not be
useless. And Dr. Challoner's "Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam" is short and
very strong. To preserve you against infidelity, "Vander Meulin," in
Latin, and Grotius; and in English my "Reasons of the Christian
Religion" may not be unfit. For your practice, the Bible and the
"Practice of Piety," and Mr. Scudder's "Daily Walk," and Mr. Reyner's
"Directions," and Dr. Ames's "Cases of Conscience."

_Direct._ VIII. Get acquaintance with the most able reformed
divines, in the places where you travel; and make use of their
frequent converse, for your edification and defence. For it is the
wisest and best men in all countries where you come, that must be
profitable to you, if any.

_Direct._ IX. Set yourselves in a way of regular study if you are
travellers, as if you were at home, and on a course of regular
employment if you are tradesmen, and make not mere wandering and
gazing upon novelties your trade and business; but redeem your time as
laboriously as you would do in the most settled life. For time is
precious, wherever you be; and it must be diligence every where that
must cause your proficiency; for place and company will not do it
without your labour. It is not a university that will make a sluggish
person wise, nor a foreign land that will furnish a sensual sot with
wisdom: _Cœlum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt_.
There is more ado necessary to make you wise, or bring you to heaven,
than to go long journeys, or see many people.

_Direct._ X. Avoid temptations: if you acquaint yourselves with
the humours, and sinful opinions, and fashions of the time and places
where you are, let it be but as the Lacedemonians called out their
children to see a drunkard, to hate the sin; therefore see them, but
taste them not, as you would do by poison or loathsome things. Once or
twice seeing a folly and sin is enough. If you do it frequently,
custom will abate your detestation, and do much to reconcile you to
it.

_Direct._ XI. Set yourselves to do all the good you can to the
miserable people in the places where you come. Furnish yourselves with
the aforesaid books and arguments, not only to preserve yourselves,
but also to convince poor infidels and papists. And pity their souls,
as those that believe that there is indeed a life to come, where
happiness and misery will show the difference between the godly and
the wicked. Especially merchants and factors, who live constantly
among the poor ignorant christians, Armenians, Greeks, papists, who
will hear them; and among heathens (in Indostan and elsewhere) and
Mahometans (especially the Persians, who allow a liberty of
discourse). But above all, the chaplains of the several embassies and
factories. Oh what an opportunity have they to sow the seeds of
christianity among the heathen nations! and to make known Christ to
the infidel people where they come! And how heavy a guilt will lie on
them that shall neglect it! And how will the great industry of the
Jesuits rise up in judgment against them and condemn them!

_Direct._ XII. The more you are deprived of the benefit of God's
public worship, the more industrious must you be, in reading Scripture
and good books, and in secret prayer and meditation, and in the
improvement of any one godly friend that doth accompany you to make up
your loss, and to be instead of public means. It will be a great
comfort among infidels, or papists, or ignorant Greeks, or profane
people, to read sound, and holy, and spiritual books, and to confer
with some one godly friend, and to meditate on the sweet and glorious
subjects, which from earth and heaven are set before us; and to solace
ourselves in the praises of God, and to pour out our suits before him.

_Direct._ XIII. And that your work may be well done, be sure that
you have right ends; and that it be not to please a ranging fancy, nor
a proud, vain mind, nor a covetous desire of being rich or high, that
you go abroad; but that you do it purposely and principally to serve
God abroad, and to be able to serve him the better when you come home,
with your wit, and experience, and estates. If sincerely you go for
this end, and not for the love of money, you may expect the greater
comfort.[164]

_Direct._ XIV. Stay abroad no longer than your lawful ends and
work do require: and when you come home, let it be seen that you have
seen sin that you might hate it; and that by the observation of the
errors and evils of the world, you love sound doctrine, spiritual
worship, and holy, sober, and righteous living, better than you did
before; and that you are the better resolved and furnished for a
godly, exemplary, fruitful life.

One thing more I will warn some parents of, who send their sons to
travel, to keep them from untimely marrying, lest they have part of
their estate too soon: that there are other means better than this,
which prudence may find out: if they would keep them low, from fulness
and idleness, and bad company, (which a wise, self-denying, diligent
man may do, but another cannot,) and engage them to as much study and
business (conjunct) as they can well perform, and when they must needs
marry, let it be done with prudent, careful choice; and learn
themselves to live somewhat lower, that they may spare that which
their son must have: this course would be better than that hazardous
one in question.

[156] Whether the consequent be good or hurt is like to be greater,
must be well considered.

[157] Exod. xx. 21, "Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress
him." Exod. xxiii. 9, "Thou shalt not oppress a stranger," &c. So
that usury to a stranger was no oppression.

[158] Of recreations, see before.

[159] Leg. Steph. Vinan. Pigh. in Hercule prodigo, pag. 130-132. Cui
peregrinatio dulcis est, non amat patriam: si dulcis est patria,
amara est peregrinatio. August.

[160] Lege Eurycic. Pateani Orat. 9.

[161] Read Bishop Hall's "Quo Vadis" on this subject.

[162] Peregrinatio levia tædia quædam animorum et veluti nauseas
tollit: non tollit morbos qui altius penetrarunt, quam ut externa
ulla medicina huc pertingat. Id. ib.

[163] Congressus sapientum confert prudentiam: non montes, non maria.
Erasm.

[164] Peregrinatio omnis obscura et sordida est iis quorum industria
in patria potest esse illustris. Cicer.




