notes on geography, chronology, and diplomacy. The prolegomena are
alone one camel’s load, and the paralipomena are borne with great
difficulty by another camel.’

“The king answered:

“‘Gentlemen, I thank you for the trouble that you have taken. But I
am very busy with the cares of state. Moreover, I have aged while you
worked. I am arrived, as says the Persian poet, half-way along the road
of life, and even supposing I die full of years, I cannot reasonably
hope to have the time to read such a lengthy history. It shall be
placed in the archives of the kingdom. Be good enough to make me a
summary better fitted to the brevity of human life.’

“The Persian academicians worked twenty years; then they brought to
the king 1500 volumes on three camels.

“‘Sire,’ said the permanent secretary, in a weakened voice, ‘here is
our new work. We believe we have omitted nothing essential.’

“‘That may be,’ answered the king, ‘but I shall not read it. I am old;
lengthy undertakings do not suit my years; abridge it further and do
not be long about it.’

“They lingered so little that at the end of ten years they returned
followed by a young elephant bearing 500 volumes.

“‘I flatter myself I have been succinct,’ said the permanent secretary.

“‘You have not yet been sufficiently so,’ answered the king.

“‘I am at the end of my life. Abridge, abridge, if you want me to know
the history of mankind ere I die.’

“The permanent secretary reappeared before the palace at the end of
five years. Walking with crutches, he held by the bridle a small donkey
which bore a big book on its back.

“‘Hasten,’ said the officer to him, ‘the king is dying.’

“The king in fact was on his death-bed. He turned on the academician
and his big book his nearly expiring gaze, and said with a sigh:

“‘I shall die, then, without knowing the history of mankind!’

“‘Sire,’ replied the learned man, who was almost as near death as
himself, ‘I will sum it up for you in three words: _They were born,
they suffered, they died!_’

“Thus did the king of Persia learn the history of the world in the
evening of his life.”




XVII

MONSIEUR NICODÈME


While, at the sign of the _Image de Sainte Catherine_, my good master,
seated on the highest rung of the ladder, was reading Cassiodorus with
great pleasure, an elderly man came into the shop, of an arrogant air,
and severe aspect. He went straight to Monsieur Blaizot, who smilingly
stretched his head over the counter.

“Monsieur,” he said, “you are sworn bookseller, and I must take you for
a well-conducted man. Nevertheless, in your display of goods a volume
of the works of Ronsard is open at the frontispiece, which represents a
naked woman. And it is a thing not fit to be looked at.”

“Pardon me, Monsieur,” replied Monsieur Blaizot, gently, “it is a
frontispiece of Léonard Gautier’s who, in his day, was considered a
very able draughtsman.”

“It matters little to me,” replied the elder, “that the draughtsman
was clever. All that I take into consideration is that he represented
nudities. This figure has nothing on but its hair, and I am grievously
surprised, Monsieur, that a man of age and prudence, such as you
appear, should expose it to the gaze of the young men who frequent the
Rue St. Jacques. You would do well to burn it, following the example of
Father Garasse, who expended his means in acquiring, in order to burn
them, a number of books opposed to public decency and to the Society
of Jesus. At least, it would be more decent in you to hide it in the
most secret recess of your shop, which conceals, I fear, many a book
calculated to excite minds to vice, not only by their text, but by
their plates.”

Monsieur Blaizot replied, reddening, that such a suspicion was unjust,
and it grieved him coming from a worthy man.

“I must tell you who I am,” said the elder. “You see before you
Monsieur Nicodème, the President of the Purity League. The end that I
pursue is to outdo in niceness in the matter of modesty the regulations
of the _Lieutenant de Police_. I busy myself, with the help of a
dozen Parliamentary councillors, and two hundred churchwardens from
the principal parishes, in clearing away nudities exposed in public
places, such as squares, boulevards, streets, alleys, quays, courts,
and gardens. And, not content with establishing modesty in the public
way, I exert myself to spread its dominion even into the salon, the
study, and the bedroom, whence it is but too often banished. Know,
Monsieur, that the Society that I have founded has trousseaux made for
young married people, containing long and ample night-garments which
permit these young spouses chastely to go about the execution of God’s
commandment relative to increase and multiplication. And, to mingle
charm, if I may say so, with austerity, these garments are trimmed with
pleasing embroidery. I plume myself on having thus invented garments of
an intimate nature so well designed to make another Sarah and Tobias of
all our young couples, and to cleanse the sacrament of marriage from
the impurities which unfortunately have clung to it.”

My good master, who, his nose in Cassiodorus, had been listening to
their discourse, replied with the utmost gravity from the top of his
ladder, that he thought the invention admirable, and praiseworthy, but
that he had a still more excellent one of the kind.

“I would that our young spouses,” said he, “were rubbed from head
to foot with blacking before they met, making their skin like
boot-leather, which would greatly damp the criminal ardours of the
flesh, and be a grievous obstacle to the caresses, kisses, and
endearments that lovers practise too generally between the sheets.”

Monsieur Nicodème, lifting his head at these words, saw my good master
on the ladder, and saw also from his demeanour that he was laughing at
him.

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” said he, with sadness and indignation, “I would
forgive you did you merely laugh at me. But you ridicule at the same
time, decency and public morals, and there you are much to blame. In
spite of wicked jokes, the Society that I have founded has already done
good and useful work. Crack your jokes, sir! We have fixed six hundred
vine or fig-leaves on the statues in the king’s gardens.”

“Admirable indeed, sir,” responded my good master, adjusting his
spectacles, “and at that rate every statue will soon have its leaf.
But (seeing that objects have no meaning for us save by association of
ideas) in placing vine-leaves and fig-leaves on statues, you transfer
the quality of indecency to the leaves; so that one can no longer
see vine or fig-tree on the countryside without conceiving them as
sheltering some indecency; and it is no small sin, my good sir, to fix
immodesty on these innocent plants. Allow me to tell you further that
it is a dangerous thing to make a study, as you do, of everything that
may cause disquietude and uneasiness to the flesh, without reflecting
that if a given shape be such as to scandalise souls, each of us who
bears the original of that shape will scandalise himself, except he be
less than a man—a thing one does not like to contemplate.”

“Monsieur,” responded the aged Nicodème, rather heatedly, “I gather
from the language you hold that you are a libertine and a debauchee.”

“Monsieur,” said my good master, “I am a Christian, and as for living
in debauchery, I could not think of such a thing, having enough to
do to gain my daily bread, wine, and tobacco. Such as you see me,
Monsieur, I know no orgy but the silent orgies of meditation, and the
only feast I sit down to is the feast of the Muses. But I, as a wise
man, consider that it is a bad thing to outbid in shamefacedness the
teachings of the Catholic religion, which on this subject allows a good
deal of liberty, and adjusts itself easily to people’s customs and
prejudices. I take you to be tainted with Calvinism and to be leaning
to the heresy of iconoclasm. For, in truth, one does not know whether
your zeal will not go so far as to burn images of God and the saints,
from hatred of the humanity evident in them. Such words as modesty,
decency, and shame, which come so readily from your mouth, have as a
matter of fact no precise and constant meaning. Custom and nice feeling
can alone define them with truth and moderation. I only acknowledge
poets, artists, and pretty women, as judges in these delicate matters.
What an extraordinary notion, to set up a row of attorneys in judgment
on Grace and Pleasure!”

“But, Monsieur,” replied the aged Nicodème, “we have nothing to do with
Smiles or Graces, still less with images of God and the saints, and you
are maliciously fastening a quarrel on us. We are decent people, who
wish to turn aside the eyes of our sons from improper sights, and one
knows well enough what is decent and what is not. Do you wish, Monsieur
l’Abbé, that our young people should be open to every temptation of the
streets?”

“Ah! Monsieur,” replied my good master. “We must all be tempted. It is
the lot of men and Christians on this earth. And the most formidable
temptation comes from within—not from without. You would not take so
much trouble to remove from the shop windows any sketch of nude women
if, as I have done, you had studied the lives of the Fathers of the
desert. There you would have seen how, in a frightful wilderness, far
from any carved or painted shape, torn with hair-shirts, macerated with
penance, faint from fasting, tossing on a bed of thorns, the anchorites
were penetrated to the very marrow with the prickings of carnal
desire. In their wretched cells they saw visions a thousand times more
voluptuous than this allegory which offends you in Monsieur Blaizot’s
window.

“The devil, or, as free-thinkers would say, nature, is a better painter
of lascivious scenes than Giulio Romano himself. He surpasses all the
Italian and Flemish masters in grouping, movement, and colour. Alas!
one is powerless against his glowing pictures. Those that shock you
are of small account in comparison, and you would do wisely to leave
to the care of the _Lieutenant de Police_, as your fellow citizens are
willing it should be left, the guardianship of public decency. Truly
your ingenuousness astonishes me; you have little notion what a man is,
and what society is, and of the fever and insurgence of a great city.
Oh! the silly greybeards, who in the midst of all the uncleanness
of a Babylon where every lifted curtain shows the eye or the arm of
a courtesan, where busy humanity touch and quicken one another in
the public squares, fall a-groaning and complaining of a few naughty
pictures hung up on book-sellers’ stalls; and carry their lamentations
even to the very Parliament of the kingdom when a woman has shown her
legs to some fellows in a dancing-saloon—just the most ordinary sight
in the world for them.”

Thus spoke my good master from the top of his ladder. But Monsieur
Nicodème stopped his ears in order not to hear him, and cried out on
his cynicism.

“Heavens!” he sighed, “what can be more disgusting than a naked woman,
and how shameful to compromise, as does this Abbé, with an immorality
which is the ruin of a country, for people can only exist by purity of
morals.”

“It is true, Monsieur,” said my good master, “that peoples are strong
only so long as they preserve their morals; but by that is understood
a community of rules, opinions, and interests, and a generous-minded
obedience to law; not trifles such as occupy you. Beware, moreover,
lest shamefacedness, failing as a charm, become but a piece of
stupidity, and less the artless dullness of your fears present a
ridiculous spectacle and one not a little indecent.”

But Monsieur Nicodème had already left the place.




