XIII

ACADEMIES


We learnt that day that the Bishop of Séez had just been elected a
member of the _Académie Française_. Twenty years ago he had delivered
a panegyric on St. Maclou, which was considered rather a good thing,
and I am willing to believe that there were some excellent passages in
it; for my good master, Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard, had put a hand to
it before quitting the Bishop’s palace with Madame de la Baillive’s
chambermaid. Monseigneur de Séez was descended from the best Norman
aristocracy. His piety, his cellar, and his stable, were justly vaunted
throughout the kingdom, and his own nephew dispensed the ecclesiastical
patronage all over the country. His election surprised nobody. It was
approved by all the world, save by the “grey-stockings” of the _Café
Procope_, who are never content. They are grumblers.

My good master blamed them gently for their contradictory temper.

“Of what does Monsieur Duclos complain?” said he. “Since yesterday, he
is the equal of Monseigneur de Séez, who has the handsomest clergy and
the finest pack of hounds in the kingdom. For academicians are equal by
virtue of the statutes.[9]

“It is true that it is the insolent equality of revellers, which
ceases, when, the meeting over, my lord bishop steps into his chariot,
leaving Monsieur Duclos to splash his woollen stockings in the gutter.
But if he does not want thus to be put on a par with my lord Bishop
of Séez, why does he rub shoulders with the badge bedecked. Why does
he not hie him to a tub, like Diogenes, or like me, to a stall at
the Innocents? It is only in a tub, or in a stall, that one can lord
it over this earthly grandeur. It is only there that one is a real
prince, and a real lord. Happy is he who has not fixed his hopes on
the Academy! Happy is he who lives exempt from fears and desires, and
who knows the emptiness of all things! Happy is he who knows that it
is equally a vanity to be an Academician, or not to be one. Such a one
leads, untroubled, a life obscure and unseen. Fair liberty follows him
everywhere he goes. He celebrates in the shade the stilly offices of
wisdom, and all the Muses smile on him as on one initiated into their
service.”

Thus spoke my good master, and I admired the pure enthusiasm which
swelled his voice and shone in his eyes. But the restlessness of youth
fermented in me. I wanted to take sides, to throw myself into the
fight, to declare myself for or against the Academy.

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” I asked. “Should not the Academy call to itself the
best minds in the kingdom, rather than the uncle of the man who has the
ecclesiastical patronage in his gift?”[10] I asked my good master.

“My son,” he answered gently, “if Monseigneur de Séez appears austere
in his ordinances, great and gallant in his life, and if he is in
fact, a paragon among prelates, and pronounced that panegyric on St.
Maclou, the exordium of which, relative to the healing of the King’s
evil by the King of France, seemed to be noble, do you want the Society
to turn him out for the sole reason that he has a nephew as powerful
as he is amiable? That would be showing a truly ferocious virtue, and
punishing Monseigneur de Séez inhumanly for the grandeur of his family.
The Academy wished to forget that. That alone, my son, is sufficiently
magnanimous.”

I was daring enough to make reply to this speech, so carried away was I
by the fire of youth.

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” said I, “allow my feelings to oppose your arguments.
All the world knows that Monseigneur de Séez has only become
considerable by the suppleness of his character and his manners, and
what one admires in him is his skill in detaching himself from both
parties.... We have seen him glide gently between the Jesuits and the
Jansenists, tincting his pale prudence with the roses of Christian
charity.... He thinks he has done enough when he has displeased no one,
and all his care is to sustain his position. Thus it is not his great
heart which has gained for him the suffrages of the King’s illustrious
_protégés_.[11] Neither is it his great mind. For, with the exception
of this panegyric on St. Maclou, which he had (as all the world knows)
but the trouble of reading, this peace-loving bishop has only let us
hear the depressing instructions issued to his clergy.

“He recommends himself by the amenity of his language and the
politeness of his conversation. Are these sufficient titles to
immortality?”

“Tournebroche,” answered Monsieur l’Abbé, civilly, “you reason with
the simplicity given to you by Madame, your mother, at your birth,
and I see that you will keep your natural candour for long enough. I
congratulate you upon it. But innocence must not make you unjust; it
is enough that it leaves you ignorant. The immortality that they have
bestowed on Monseigneur de Séez does not call for the attainments of a
Bossuet or a Belzunce; it is not graven in the heart of an astounded
people—it is inscribed in a big book; and you can well understand that
these paper laurels only suit the heads of such heroes.

“If, among the Forty, there are persons of more gentility than genius,
what harm do you see in it? Mediocrity triumphs in the Academy. But
where does it not? Do you see it less powerful in Parliament or in
the royal Council, where doubtless it is less fitted to find place?
Must one be an exceptional man to work at a dictionary which wishes to
regulate custom, and can only follow it?

“Academicians, or academists, were instituted, as you know, to fix the
best usage in matters of speech, to purge the language of all archaisms
and vulgar impurities, and to see that a second Rabelais, or a second
Montaigne, does not arise, smelling of the rabble, of pedantry, or of
the provinces. They assembled, to this end, gentlemen, who knew good
usage and writers who were interested in knowing it. That gave rise
to alarm lest the assembly should, tyrannically, reform the French
language. But it was soon recognised that these fears were vain, and
the academists, far from imposing custom, obeyed it. In spite of their
veto we continue to say as before, ‘I shut my door.’[12]

“The Assembly soon resigned itself to entombing the progress of usage
in a big dictionary. It is the sole care of the Immortals.[13] When
they are not sitting they find leisure for recreation with one another.
For that they need pleasant companions, easy and affable, amiable
colleagues, well-informed men, and men who know the world. This is
not always the case with men of great talent. Genius is sometimes
unsociable. An exceptional man is rarely a man of resource. The Academy
could do without Descartes and Pascal. Who says that it could do well
without Monsieur Godeau or Monsieur Conrart, or any other person of a
supple, complacent, and circumspect turn of mind?”

“Alas!” I sighed, “then it is no senate of divine beings, or council of
immortals, no august Areopagus of poetry and eloquence?”

“By no means, my son. It is a society which teaches manners, and which
has gained a great reputation for that among foreign nations, and
particularly among the Muscovites. You have no idea what admiration
the _Académie Française_ inspires among German barons, colonels of
the Russian Army and English milords. Europeans rate nothing higher
than our Academicians and our dancers. I knew a Sarmatian princess
of great beauty who, passing through Paris, impatiently sought for an
academician, whoever he might be, to make him a present of her virtue.”

“If it be thus,” I cried, “why do the academicians risk compromising
their good reputation by these unfortunate selections which are so
universally blamed?”

“Stop, Tournebroche, my son, do not say anything evil of unfortunate
selections,” replied my master. “To begin with, in all human
undertakings one must take into consideration the part played by
chance, which is, upon the whole, the part played by God on earth, and
the only occasion where Divine Providence manifests itself clearly in
this world. For you well understand, my son, that what we call the
absurdity of chance and the caprice of fortune, are, in reality, but
the revenge taken in sport by Divine justice on the counsels of the
would-be wise. In the second place, it is suitable in assemblies to
give some play to caprice and fancy. A perfectly reasonable society
would be a perfectly unbearable one. It would languish under the cold
rule of justice. It would not have any belief in its own power or
freedom if it did not taste, from time to time, the delicious pleasure
of braving public opinion and good sense. It is the darling sin of the
powers of this world to be taken with bizarre caprices. Why should not
the Academy indulge in whims just as much as the Grand Turk or a pretty
woman?

“Many opposite passions unite to inspire these unfortunate selections
which vex simple souls. It is a pleasure for good people to take an
unfortunate mortal and make an academician of him. Thus the God of the
psalmist takes the poor man from his dunghill. _Erigens de stercore
pauperem, ut collocet eum cum principibus, cum principibus populi
sui._ These are strokes which astonish the nations and those who deal
them must think themselves armed with a mysterious force and terrible
power. And what pleasure to drag the poor soul from his dunghill, while
leaving, meanwhile, some intellectual despot in the shade! It is to
quaff, at a draught, a rare and delicious mixture of charity fulfilled
and jealousy satisfied. It is enjoyment in every sense and content for
the whole man. And you want the academicians to resist the sweetness of
such a philtre!

“We must take into consideration again, that in procuring for
themselves this very sophisticated pleasure, the academicians act for
the best in their own interests. A society formed exclusively of great
men would not be numerous, and would appear rather depressing.

“Great men cannot endure one another, and they have little wit. It is
good to let them mix with smaller fry. It amuses them. The small fry
benefit by their neighbourhood, the great by the comparison with the
small, and there is profit for both one and the other. Let us admire by
what skilful play, what ingenious contrivance, the _Académie Française_
passes on to some of its members the importance it gains from others.
It is a collection of suns and planets, where all shine with their own
or with a borrowed effulgence.

“I go even further. Unfortunate selections are necessary to the
existence of this society. If, in the elections, the Academy did
not take the side of weakness and error, if it did not have the air
of choosing haphazardly at times, it would make itself so hated by
all that it could no longer continue to exist. In the republic of
letters it would be as a tribunal set in the midst of condemned men.
Infallible, it would appear odious. What an affront for those who
were not chosen, were the elected one always the best! The daughter
of Richelieu must seem a little volatile, so as not to appear too
insolent. What saves her is that she takes fancies. Her injustice
proves her innocence. It is because we know her capricious that she
can reject us without wounding us. It is sometimes so advantageous to
her to deceive herself that I am tempted to believe, notwithstanding
appearances, that she does it on purpose. She has admirable ruses for
dealing tactfully with the self-love of the candidates she sets aside.
An election of such a kind disarms envy. It is in her apparent faults
that you must admire her true wisdom.”


FOOTNOTES:

[9]

     _Cf._ SAINT-EVREMONT (_Les Académiciens_):

     GODEAU. Good-day, dear Colletet.

     COLLETET (_throwing himself on his knees_). Say, my lord of Grasse,
     What I must do when I before you pass.
     Should I not kiss, perhaps, your hallowed shoon?

     GODEAU. We are all equal, all Apollo’s own.
     “Rise up, my Colletet—”

     COLLETET. “Does your worship’s grace
     Permit the liberty, to your very face!”

     GODEAU. “Our intercourse is nothing changed, elsewhere
     You see me bishop; _Godeau_, simply, here.”

Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard, lived under the old régime. In those days
it was said that the French Academy had the merit of establishing
perfect equality between its members, an equality not recognised in
law. Nevertheless, it was destroyed in 1793 as “the last refuge of
aristocracy.”

[10] He means the bishop whom the king had appointed distributor of
ecclesiastical patronage.

[11] The king was protector of the Academy.

[12] It is true that the Academy condemned this expression:

     “Custom, too strong, as oftentime before,
     Makes us, improperly, say _Shut the Door_,
     Usage will, daily, authorise a word,
     Natheless employed in manner quite absurd.
     Would you escape December’s cold and gloom,
     You must _Push to the Door_ and _Shut the Room_.”

     SAINT-EVREMONT (_Les Académiciens_).


[13] In those days the Academy awarded no prizes.




