IV

THE AFFAIR OF THE MISSISSIPPI


It is well known that during the year 1722 the Parliament of Paris sat
in judgment on the Mississippi affair, in which were implicated, along
with the directors of the Company, a minister of State, secretary to
the King, and many subinspectors of provinces. The Company was accused
of having corrupted the officers of the King and his dominions, who had
in reality stripped it with the greed usual to people in office under
weak governments. And it is certain that at this period all the springs
of government were slackened and warped.

At one of the sittings of this memorable action, Madame de la
Morangère, wife of one of the directors of the Mississippi Company,
was called before the members of Parliament in the upper chamber.
She gave evidence that a Monsieur Lescot, secretary to the
_Lieutenant-Criminel_,[3] having sent for her to come in secret to the
Châtelet, made her understand that it lay with her entirely to save
her husband, who was a fine man and of comely aspect. He said to her,
nearly in these terms: “Madame, what vexes the true friends of the
King in this business is that the Jansenists are not implicated in it.
Jansenists are enemies to the Crown as well as to religion. Help us,
Madame, to convict one of them and we will acknowledge the service to
the State by giving you back your husband with all his possessions.”

When Madame de la Morangère had reported this conversation, which
was not intended for the public, the President of the Parliament
was obliged to call Monsieur Lescot to the upper chamber, who at
first tried to deny it. But Madame de la Morangère had beautiful
ingenuous eyes, whose gaze he could not meet. He grew troubled and was
confounded. He was a big, villainous-looking, red-haired man like Judas
Iscariot. This affair, noticed by the Press, became the talk of Paris.
It was spoken of in the salons, on the public walks, at the barbers’,
and in the coffee-houses. Everywhere Madame de la Morangère gained as
much sympathy as Lescot caused disgust.

Public curiosity was still rife when I accompanied my good master
Monsieur Jérôme Coignard to Monsieur Blaizot’s, who, as you know, is a
bookseller in the Rue St. Jacques, at the sign of the _Image de Sainte
Catherine_. In the shop we found Monsieur Gentil, private secretary to
one of the ministers of State, whose face was hidden in a book newly
come from Holland, and the celebrated Monsieur Roman, who has treated
of systems of State in various estimable works. Old Monsieur Blaizot
was reading his paper behind the counter.

Monsieur Jérôme Coignard, always avid of news, slid up to him to glean
what he could across his shoulder. This man, learned and of so rare a
genius, owned nothing of the goods of this world, and when he had drunk
his pint at the _Petit Bacchus_ he had not a halfpenny left in his
pockets to buy a news-sheet. Having read the depositions of Madame de
la Morangère over Monsieur Blaizot’s shoulder, he cried out that it was
well, and that it pleased him to see wickedness topple from its high
seat under the weak hand of woman, as in wonderful examples witnessed
to in Holy Writ.

“This lady,” he added, “although allied with public men of whom I do
not approve, may be likened unto those strong women lauded in the Book
of Kings. She pleases by an uncommon mixture of straightforwardness
and finesse, and I applaud her telling victory.”

Monsieur Roman interrupted him:

“Take care, Monsieur l’Abbé,” said he, stretching out his arm, “take
care how you look at this affair from an individual and personal point
of view, without troubling yourself as you should do with the public
interests that are bound up in it. There are reasons of State in all
this, and it is clear that this supreme reason demanded that Madame
de la Morangère should not speak, or that her words should not find
credence.”

Monsieur Gentil lifted his nose from his book. “The importance of this
incident,” said he, “has been much exaggerated.”

“Ah, Mr. Secretary,” retorted Monsieur Roman, “we cannot believe that
an incident that will lose you your place can be without importance.
For you will fall by it, sir, you and your master. For my part, I am
full of regrets. But what consoles me for the fall of the Ministry now
reeling under the shock is that they were powerless to prevent it.”

Monsieur Gentil made us understand by a slight wink that on this point
he saw eye to eye with Monsieur Roman.

The latter continued:

“The State is like the human body—all the functions it accomplishes are
not noble. Some there are indeed that one must needs hide, I may say
the most necessary.”

“Ah, Monsieur,” said the Abbé, “was it then necessary that Monsieur
Lescot should so behave to the unfortunate wife of a prisoner? It was
infamous!”

“Oh,” said Monsieur Roman, “it was infamous when it was known. Before,
it was of no importance. If you wish to enjoy the benefit of being
governed, which alone raises mankind above the animals, you must leave,
to those who govern, the means of exercising power, and the first of
these means is secrecy. That is why popular government, which is the
least secret of all, is also the weakest. Do you then think, Monsieur
l’Abbé, that you can govern men by virtue? That is a wild dream!”

“I do not think so,” replied my good master, “I have noticed in the
varied chances of my life that men are evil beasts; one can only
control them by force and cunning. But one must be measured and not
offend the small amount of good tendencies which mingles with the evil
instincts in their minds. For after all, Monsieur, man, all cowardly,
stupid, cruel, as he is was made in God’s image, and there remain to
him still certain features of his primal shape. A government drawn
from the common stock of average honesty, and that yet scandalises the
people, should be deposed.”

“Speak lower, Monsieur l’Abbé,” said the Secretary.

“The King can do no wrong,” said Monsieur Roman, “and your maxims are
seditious, Monsieur l’Abbé. You deserve, you and your like, not to be
governed at all.”

“Oh!” said my good master, “if, as you give us to understand,
government consists in swindling, violence, and exactions of all
kinds, there is not much fear that this threat will take effect, and
we shall find, for long enough yet, ministers of State and governors
of provinces to carry on our affairs. Only I should much like to see
others in place of these. The new-comers could not be worse than the
old, and who knows but that they may be even slightly better?”

“Take care!” said Monsieur Roman, “take care! What is admirable in a
state, is succession and continuity, and if there is no perfect state
in this world, it is because, according to my idea, the flood in the
time of Noah disordered the transmission of crowns. It is a confusion
we have not quite set straight to this day.”

“Monsieur,” retorted my good master, “you are amusing with your
theories. The history of the world is full of revolutions. One sees
but civil wars, tumults, and seditions, caused by the wickedness
of princes, and I know not which to admire the most nowadays, the
impudence of the rulers, or the patience of the people.”

The secretary complained then that Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard overlooked
the benefits of royalty, and Monsieur Blaizot represented to us that it
was not fitting to contend about public matters in a bookseller’s shop.

When we were outside, I pulled my good master by the sleeve.

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” I said, “have you then forgotten the old woman of
Syracuse, that you now want to change the tyrant?”

“Tournebroche, my son,” answered he, “I acknowledge with a good grace
that I have fallen into a contradiction. But this ambiguity, that you
justly point out in my words, is not as evil as that called antinomy
by the philosophers. Charron, in his book on ‘Wisdom,’ affirms that
antinomies exist which cannot be resolved. For my part, I am no sooner
plunged in meditations of the kind than I see in my mind’s eye half a
dozen of these she-devils take each other by the nose and make pretence
to tear each other’s eyes out, and one sees at once that one would
never come to the end of reconciling these obstinate shrews. I lose all
hope of making them agree, and it is their fault if I have not much
advanced metaphysics. But in the present case the contradiction, my
son, is merely apparent. My reason always sides with the old woman of
Syracuse. I think to-day what I thought yesterday. Only I have let my
feelings run away with me and have yielded to passion as do the vulgar.”


FOOTNOTES:

[3] A stipendiary magistrate.




