V

EASTER EGGS


My father kept a cook-shop in the Rue St. Jacques opposite to St.
Benoît-le-Bétourné. I do not pretend that he had any affection for
Lent; the sentiment would not have been natural in a cook. But he
observed the fasts and days of abstinence like the good Christian that
he was. For lack of money to buy a dispensation from the Archbishop
he supped off haddock on fast-days, with his wife, his son, his dog,
and his usual guests, of whom the most assiduous was my good master,
Monsieur l’Abbé Jérôme Coignard. My pious mother would not have allowed
Miraut, our watchdog, to gnaw a bone on Good Friday. That day she put
neither meat nor fat in the poor animal’s mess. In vain did Monsieur
l’Abbé Coignard represent to her that this was doing the wrong thing,
and that in all justice, Miraut, who had no share in the sacred
mysteries of redemption, ought not to suffer in his allowance.

“My good woman,” said this great man, “it is fitting, that we, as
members of the Church, should sup off haddock; but there is a certain
superstition, impiety, temerity—nay even sacrilege—to associate a dog,
as you do, with these mortifications of the flesh, made infinitely
precious by the interest God Himself takes in them, and which that
interest apart would be contemptible and ridiculous. It is an abuse,
which your simplicity renders innocent, but which would be criminal in
a Divine, or even in a judiciously minded Christian. Such a practice,
my good lady, leads straight to the most shocking heresy. It tends to
no less than the upholding of the theory that Jesus Christ died for
dogs even as for the sons of Adam. And nothing is more contrary to the
Scriptures.”

“That may be,” replied my mother. “But if Miraut ate meat on Good
Friday I should fancy to myself that he was a Jew, and have a horror of
him. Is that committing a sin, Monsieur l’Abbé?”

My excellent master answered gently, taking a drink of wine:

“Ah dear creature, without deciding at this moment if you sin or if
you do not, I can tell you for a certainty that there is no malice
in you, and I believe more surely in your eternal salvation than in
that of five or six bishops and cardinals of my acquaintance, who have
nevertheless written fine treatises on the canon law.”

Miraut swallowed his mess sniffing at it, as if he did not like it, and
my father went off with Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard to take a stroll to
the _Petit Bacchus_.

Thus passed the holy time of Lent at the _Sign of the Reine Pédauque_.
But from early Easter morn, when the bells of St. Benoît-le-Bétourné
announced the joyful Resurrection, my father spitted chickens, ducks,
and pigeons by the dozen, and Miraut, in the corner by the glowing
fire-place, sniffed the good smell of fat, wagging his tail with grave
and pensive joy. Old, tired, and nearly blind, he still relished the
joys of this life, whose ills he accepted with a resignation which made
them less unkind for him. He was a sage, and I am not surprised that my
mother associated such a reasonable creature in her good works.

Having heard High Mass we dined in the savoury-smelling shop. My father
brought to this repast a pious joy. He had commonly, as companions, a
few attorneys’ clerks, and my good master Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard.
This year of grace 1725, at Easter-tide, I remember, my good master
brought Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, whom he had dragged from a loft in the
Rue des Maçons, where this learned man wrote, day and night, news of
the republic of letters for Dutch publishers. On the table a mound of
red eggs rose from a wire basket. And when Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard had
said the Benedicite, these eggs formed the topic of conversation.

“One reads in Ælius Lampridus,” said Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, “that
a hen owned by the father of Alexander Severus laid a red egg on the
birthday of that child destined to Empire.”

“This Lampridus, who had not much intelligence,” said my good master,
“had better have left such a tale to the old wives who have spread
it abroad. You have too much good sense, sir, to deduce from this
ridiculous fable the Christian custom of serving red eggs on Easter
Day?”

“I do not indeed believe,” replied Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, “that this
usage is derived from the egg of Alexander Severus. The only conclusion
that I wish to draw from the fact, as reported by Lampridus, is that a
red egg, among the heathen, presaged supreme power. For the rest,” he
added, “that egg must have been reddened in some manner, for hens do
not lay red eggs.”

“Excuse me,” said my mother, who was standing by the fire-place
decorating the dishes, “in my childhood I saw a black hen who laid
eggs shading into brown; that is why I am ready to believe that there
are hens whose eggs are red, or of a colour approaching red, as for
instance brick-colour.”

“That is quite possible,” said my good master, “and Nature is more
diverse and varied in her productions than we commonly believe. There
are oddities of every sort in the generating of animals, and one sees
in natural-history collections far stranger monsters than a red egg.”

“For instance, they keep a calf with five feet, and a child with two
heads, in the King’s collection,” said Monsieur Nicolas Cerise.

“They can better that at Auneau, near Chartres,” said my mother,
putting on the table, as she spoke, a dozen strings of sausages and
cabbage, whence a pleasing odour rose up to the joists of the ceiling.
“I saw there, gentlemen, a new-born infant with goosefeet and a
serpent’s head. The midwife who received it got such a shock that she
threw it in the fire.”

“Be careful,” said Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard, “be careful, for man is
born of woman to serve God, and it is unimaginable that he could serve
Him with a serpent’s head, and it follows therefore that there are no
children of the kind, and that your midwife was dreaming or making fun
of you.”

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” said Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, with a slight smile.
“You have seen as I have, in the King’s collection, a bi-sexual fœtus
with four legs, preserved in a jar filled with spirits of wine, and in
another jar, a child without a head and with an eye over the navel.
Could these monsters serve God any better than the child with the
serpent’s head our hostess speaks of? And what is one to say of those
who have two heads, so that one does not know whether they have two
souls? Acknowledge, Monsieur l’Abbé, that nature, while amusing herself
with such cruel sport, puzzles the theologian no little?”

My good master had already opened his mouth to speak, and doubtless
he would have entirely demolished the objection of Monsieur Nicolas
Cerise, had not my mother, whom nothing could stop when she wanted to
speak anticipated him by saying very loudly that the child at Auneau
was no human creature, and it was the devil himself who had fathered it
on a baker’s wife. “And the proof is,” she added, “that no one thought
of having it baptized, and that it was buried in a napkin at the bottom
of the enclosed garden. If it had been a human being it would have been
buried in consecrated ground. When the devil fathers a child it takes
the shape of an animal.”

“My good woman,” replied Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard, “it is marvellous
that a villager should know more of the devil than a Doctor of
Divinity. I admire the way you interest yourself in the matron of
Auneau, to the extent of knowing if such fruit of a woman is one with
mankind, redeemed by the blood of God. Believe me, these devilries are
but unclean fancies which you should purge from your mind. It is not
written in the Fathers that the devil fathers children on poor girls.
All these tales of satanic fornication are disgusting imaginings, and
it is a disgrace that the Jesuits and Dominicans have written treatises
on them.”

“You speak well, Abbé,” said Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, impaling a
sausage from the dish. “But you give no answer to what I said, that the
children born without heads are far from being adapted to the destiny
of mankind, which, the Church tells us, is to know God and to serve
Him and to love Him, and in that, as in the amount of germs which
are wasted, nature is not, speaking plainly, sufficiently theological
and Christian. I may add that she exhibits no religious spirit in any
of her acts, and seems to ignore her God. That is what frightens me,
Monsieur l’Abbé.”

“Oh!” cried my father, waving on the end of his fork a drum-stick of
the chicken he was carving, “Oh! this is indeed gloomy and dreary talk,
ill-suited to the feast we celebrate to-day. And it is my wife who is
to blame, who offers us a child with a serpent’s head as if it were an
agreeable dish for honest company. That out of my beautiful red eggs
should come so many diabolical tales!”

“Ah, mine host,” said Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard. “It is true that
everything comes out of the egg. From this idea the heathens have drawn
many philosophical fables. But that from eggs, so Christian under their
antique purple as those we have just eaten, should escape such a flight
of wild impieties, that is what amazes me.”

Monsieur Nicolas Cerise looked at my good master, winking his eye, and
said, with a thin laugh:

“Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard, these eggs, whose beetroot-tinted shells lie
scattered on the floor under our feet, are not in their essence as
Christian and Catholic as it pleases you to think them. Easter Eggs, on
the contrary, are of heathen origin, and recall, at the time of spring
equinox, the mysterious burgeoning of life. It is an ancient symbol
which has been preserved in the Christian religion.”

“One might equably reasonably uphold,” said my good master, “that it
is a symbol of the Resurrection of Christ. I, for one, have no wish
to load religion with symbolical subtleties. I would most willingly
believe that the pleasure of eating eggs, denied to us during Lent,
is the sole reason why on this day they appear on the tables with
honour and clothed in royal purple. But no matter, these are mere
trifles, serving to amuse the learned and the bookmen. What is worth
considering in your talk, Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, is that you bring
into opposition nature and religion, and you want to make them inimical
to each other. Impiety! Monsieur Nicolas Cerise. And so horrible that
this good fellow of a cook trembles at it without understanding it.
But I am not a whit disturbed; and such arguments cannot, even for one
minute, seduce a mind which knows how to govern itself.

“In truth, Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, you have proceeded by that
rational and scientific route which is but a narrow, short, and
dirty blind-alley, on coming to the end of which we break our noses
ingloriously. You argue in the manner of a thoughtful apothecary,
who thinks he understands nature because he can smell some of her
manifestations. And you have concluded that natural generation
producing monsters is no part of the secret of God, Who creates men to
celebrate His glory, ‘_Pulcher hymnus Dei homo immortalis_’: It was
very generous of you to omit mention of the new-born who die as soon as
they see the light, of the mad, and the imbecile, and all creatures who
are not, from your point of view, what Lactantius calls a worthy hymn
to God, _Pulcher hymnus Dei._ But what do you know of it all, and what
do we know of it all, Monsieur Nicolas Cerise? You take me for one of
your readers at Amsterdam or at the Hague, to wish to make me believe
that the unintelligibility of nature is an objection to our holy
Christian faith. Nature, sir, shows to our eyes but a succession of
incoherent images in which it is impossible for us to find a meaning,
and I grant you, that according to her, and in tracking her footsteps,
I fail to discern in the child that is born either the Christian,
the man, or even the individual; and the flesh is an absolutely
indecipherable hieroglyphic. But that matters nothing, and we are
looking at the wrong side of the tapestry. Do not let us fix our gaze
on that, but understand that from that side we can know nothing. Let us
turn entirely to the understandable, which is the human soul united to
God.

“You are amusing, Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, with your nature and your
generation. You are, to my mind, like some good fellow who thinks he
has surprised the King’s secrets because he has seen the paintings
which decorate the council chamber. In the same way that the secrets
are to be found in the conversation of the King and his ministers, so
is the fate of man in the thought which proceeds alike from the created
and the Creator. All the rest is but folly and amusement, fit to divert
the loungers, of whom one sees many in the Academies. Do not talk to me
of nature, except of what one sees at the _Petit Bacchus_ in the person
of Catherine the lace-maker, who is plump and well-made.

“And you, mine host,” added Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard, “give me to
drink, for I have a thirst on me, all the fault of Monsieur Nicolas
Cerise, who thinks nature an atheist. And, by a thousand devils, so
she is, and perforce must be, to some extent; and if at all times she
declares the glory of God, it is without knowing it, for there is no
knowledge, save in the mind of man, which alone proceeds from both the
finite and the infinite. Give me to drink!”

My father poured out a brimming glass for my good master, Monsieur
l’Abbé Coignard, and for Monsieur Nicolas Cerise, and forced them to
clink their glasses, which they did right heartily, for they were good
fellows.




