IX

SCIENCE


That day we tramped as far as the Pont Neuf, my good master and I,
where the recesses were covered with those trestles on which the
second-hand booksellers expose a conglomeration of romances and books
of devotion. There one may find at twopence apiece the complete
_Astrée_ and the _Grand Cyrus_, worn and thumbed by provincial readers,
with the “Ointment for Burns,” and divers works of the Jesuits. My
good master was accustomed, in passing, to read some pages of these
works, of which he made no purchase, being out of funds, and wisely
keeping for the _Petit Bacchus_ the sixpence he happened by a rare
chance to have in his breeches’ pocket. For the rest, he did not thirst
to possess the good things of this world, and the best works did not
make him envious so long as he could get acquainted with the noble
passages in them, on which he expatiated afterwards with admirable
wisdom. The trestles of the Pont Neuf pleased him in that the books
were impregnated with the smell of frying from the near neighbourhood
of the hot-potato sellers, and this great man inhaled at the same time
the welcome fragrance of cooking and of science.

Adjusting his spectacles, he examined the display of a second-hand
dealer with the contentment of a happy soul, to which all things are
gracious, for all things gain a grace from their reflection in it.

“Tournebroche, my son,” he said to me, “there are books to be found on
the stall of this good man, fashioned in the days when printing was,
so to speak, in its swaddling-clothes, and these books still suffer
from the effects of the roughness of our forbears. I find a barbarous
chronicle of Monstrelet, an author said to have been more frothy than
a pot of mustard, and two or three lives of Ste. Marguerite, which the
gossips of old put as a compress on their stomachs during the pains
of childbirth. It would be inconceivable that men could be so idiotic
as to write and to read similar absurdities, if our holy religion
did not teach us that they are born with a germ of imbecility. And
as the light of faith has never failed me, not even, happily, in the
sins of the couch or of the table, I can more easily understand
their past stupidity than their present intelligence, which, to speak
frankly, appears to me illusory and deceptive, as it will seem to
future generations, for man is in his essence a stupid animal, and the
progress of his mind is but the empty consequence of his restlessness.
That is the reason, my son, that I mistrust what they call science
and philosophy, which are, to my mind, but an abuse of visions, and
fallacious figures, and, in a certain sense, the advantage gained by
the evil spirit over the soul. You will understand that I am far from
believing all the devilries with which popular credulity frightens
itself. I think with the Fathers that temptation is within us, and
that we are to ourselves our own demons and bedevilments. But I bear
a grudge against Monsieur Descartes and against all the philosophers
who, following his example, have searched for a rule of life and the
principles of conduct in the knowledge of nature. For, after all,
Tournebroche, my son, what is knowledge of nature if it be not a
fantasy of the senses? And what does science add to it, I ask you,
with its savants, from the time of Gassendi, who was no donkey, and
Descartes and his disciples, down to that precious fool, Monsieur de
Fontenelle? Large spectacles, my son, spectacles like those which sit
on my nose. All the microscopes and telescopes which we make a show
of, what are they but glasses a little clearer than these of mine, that
I bought last year at the fair of St. Laurence, of which the glass
for the left eye, the one I see the best with, was unhappily cracked
this winter by a footstool flung at my head by the lame cutler, who
fancied I was kissing Catherine the lace-maker, for he is a coarse
man, and utterly obfuscated by his visions of carnal desires. Yes,
Tournebroche, my son, what are these instruments with which the savants
and the curious fill their galleries and their cabinets? What are
spectacles, astrolabes, compasses, if not the means of helping the
senses to keep their illusions, and to multiply our fatal ignorance
of nature while we multiply our relations with her? The most learned
among us differ merely from the ignorant by the faculty they acquire
of amusing themselves with manifold and complicated errors. They see
the world in a faceted topaz, instead of seeing it as does Madame, your
mother, for instance, with the naked eye the good God has given her.
But they do not alter their eyes in donning spectacles; they do not
alter dimensions in using apparatus proper to the measurement of space;
they do not alter the weight of things in using very sensitive scales.
They discover new appearances merely, and are but the plaything
of new illusions. That is all! If I were not convinced, my son, of
the holy truths of our religion, there would be left to me in this
conviction, which I hold, that all human knowledge is but a progress
in phantasmagoria, nothing but to throw myself from this parapet into
the Seine, which has seen many others drown since she began to flow, or
to go and ask of Catherine that form of oblivion from the ills of this
world which one finds in her arms, and for which it would be indecent
for me to look, in my position, and above all, at my age. I should not
know what to believe in the midst of all this apparatus, whose powerful
deceptions would increase immeasurably the falsehood of my outlook and
I should be an entirely miserable academician.”

My good master was talking in this fashion before the first recess
to the left, counting from the Rue Dauphine, and he was beginning to
frighten the dealer who took him for an exorcist, when he suddenly
picked up an old geometry, illustrated with sufficiently bad cuts by
Sebastien Leclerc.[7]

“Perhaps,” he said, “instead of drowning myself in love or in water,
if I were not a Christian and a Catholic, I should decide to throw
myself into the study of mathematics where the mind finds the aliment
of which it is most in need, to wit: sequence and continuity. And I vow
that this little book, quite ordinary as it is, gives me a certain good
opinion of man’s genius.”

At these words he opened the treatise by Sebastien Leclerc so widely,
at the section concerning triangles, that he nearly broke it clean in
two. But soon he flung it down in disgust.

“Alas,” he murmured, “numbers depend on time, lines on space, and these
again are but human illusions. Without man there is neither mathematics
nor geometry, and it is, after all, but a form of knowledge which does
not draw us out of ourselves, although it affects an air of quite
magnificent independence.”

Having spoken, he turned his back on the relieved bookstall-keeper, and
drew a long breath.

“Ah! Tournebroche, my son,” he continued, “you see me suffering from an
ill that I have brought on myself, and burnt with the fiery tunic with
which I have been at such pains to clothe and deck myself.”

He spoke thus in a fanciful fashion, being in reality clad in a
shocking old overcoat generally held together by two or three buttons
which, moreover, were not even fastened in their own button-holes, and,
as he was accustomed to say laughingly, when one spoke to him of it, it
was an adulterous connection, a presentation of city manners!

He spoke with warmth:

“I hate science,” said he, “for having loved it too much, after the
manner of voluptuaries who reproach women with not having come up to
the dream they formed of them. I wanted to know everything, and I
suffer to-day for my culpable folly. Happy,” added he, “oh! very happy
are those good people assembled round that vendor of quack medicines.”

And he pointed with his hand to the lackeys, the chambermaids, and the
porters of St. Nicolas, forming a circle round a practitioner who was
giving a demonstration with his attendant.

“Look, Tournebroche,” said he, “they laugh heartily when that funny
fellow kicks the other man’s behind. And in truth it is a pleasant
sight, quite spoilt for me by thinking about it, for when one looks
for the essence of this foot and the rest of it, one laughs no more.
I ought, being a Christian, to have recognised earlier the malignity
of that heathen saying, ‘Happy is he who knows the cause of things.’ I
ought to have shut myself in holy ignorance as in an enclosed garden,
and remained as the little children. I should not truly have been
amused with the coarse play of this Mondor (this Molière of the Pont
Neuf would have had little attraction for me when his prototype already
appears to me too scurrilous[8]), but I should have found pleasure in
the plants of my garden, I should have praised God in the flowers and
fruit of my apple-trees.

“An immoderate curiosity has led me astray my son; I have lost, in
the intercourse with books and learned men, the peace of heart,
holy simplicity, and that purity of the simple-minded, all the more
admirable in that it falters neither in the tavern nor in the hovel;
as may be seen in the example of the lame cutler, and, if I dare say
so, in that of your father, the cook, who retains much innocence
though drunken and debauched. But it is not thus with him who has
studied books. They leave, eternally, a bitter superiority, and a proud
sadness.”

Talking thus, his speech was cut off by the roll of drums.


FOOTNOTES:

[7] The geometry of which Jacques Tournebroche speaks is decorated
with designs by Sebastien Leclerc which I, on the contrary, admire for
their precise elegance and delicate exactitude, but one must endure
contradiction (ANATOLE FRANCE).

[8] It is a priest speaking thus (ANATOLE FRANCE).




