Chapter XVI. entitled “France is a land of freedom for all sorts of
people.”




XVI

HISTORY


Monsieur Roman placed half a dozen volumes on the counter.

“I beg of you, Monsieur Blaizot,” said he, “to send me these books.

“There are ‘Mother and Son,’ the ‘Memoirs of the Court of France,’ and
the ‘Testament of Richelieu.’ I should be grateful if you will add to
them anything new you have received lately in the way of history, and
more particularly, anything treating of France since the death of Henry
IV.... All these are works in which I am extremely interested.”

“You are right, Monsieur,” said my master. “Books on history are full
of light stuff very suitable to amuse an honest fellow, and one is sure
of finding a great number of pleasant stories.”

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” answered Monsieur Roman, “what I look for from the
historians is not frivolous amusement. It is a serious study, and I am
filled with despair if I find fiction mingled with fact. I study human
actions in relation to the conduct of nations, and I seek for maxims of
government in history.”

“I am not ignorant of that, Monsieur,” said my good master. “Your
treatise on ‘Monarchy’ is renowned enough for us to know that you have
conceived a political system drawn from history.”

“In such sort,” said Monsieur Roman, “I have been the first to draw
rules for princes and ministers which they cannot avoid without danger.”

“And we behold you, Monsieur, on the frontispiece of your book, in the
likeness of Minerva, presenting to a youthful king the mirror handed
you by the muse, Clio, hovering above your head, in a study decked with
busts and pictures. But allow me to tell you, Monsieur, that this muse
is a story-teller, and that she holds out to you a mirror of falsehood.
There are few truths in history, and the only facts on which all agree
are those we get from a single source. Historians contradict one
another every time they meet. Even more! We see that Flavius Josephus,
who has pourtrayed the same incidents in his ‘Antiquities’ and in his
‘Wars of the Jews,’ records them differently in each of these works.
Titus Livius is but a collector of fables; and Tacitus, your oracle,
gives me the impression of an unsmiling deceiver who flouts all the
world under a pretence of gravity. I have a sufficient esteem for
Thucydides, Polybius, and Guicciardini. As for our own Mézeray, he does
not know what he is saying, any more than do Villaret and Abbé Vély.
But I am accusing historians; it is history itself I should attack.

“What is history? A miscellany of moral tales, or an eloquent medley of
narratives and speeches, according as the historian is a philosopher
or a spouter. You may find eloquent passages, but one must not look
for the truth there, because truth consists in showing the necessary
relation of things, and the historian does not know how to establish
this relation, because he is unable to follow the chain of effects
and causes. Consider that every time that the cause of an historical
fact lies in a fact that is not historical, history fails to see it.
And as historical facts are intimately allied to non-historical facts,
it comes about that events are not linked after their natural order
in history, but are connected one with another by mere artifices of
rhetoric. And I ask you also to notice that the distinction between
facts which appear in history and facts which do not is entirely
arbitrary. It results from this that, far from being a science, history
is condemned by a vice in its essence to the chaos of untruth.
Sequence and continuity will always be lacking to it, and without
these there can be no true knowledge. You see also that one can draw
no prognostic as to the future of a nation from its past history. Now,
the peculiarity of science is to be prophetic, as may be seen by those
tables where the moon’s periods, tides, and eclipses are to be found
calculated beforehand, whilst revolutions and wars escape calculation.”

Monsieur Roman explained to Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard that he merely
asked of history facts, somewhat confused it is true, uncertain,
mingled with errors, but infinitely precious, through their subject,
which is man.

“I know,” he added, “how human annals are curtailed and mixed with
fable. But, though a strict sequence of cause and effect fails us, I
see in it a kind of plan that one loses and then finds again, like the
ruins of temples half-buried in the sand. That alone is of immense
value to me. And I flatter myself that, in the future, history,
formed from abundant material and treated with method, will rival in
exactitude the natural sciences.”

“Do not reckon on that,” said my good master, “I should rather believe
that the growing abundance of memoirs, correspondence, and filed
records, will render the task more difficult to future historians.
Mr. Elward, who gives up his life to the study of the revolution in
England, assures me that one man’s lifetime would not suffice in
which to read the half of what was written during the disturbances.
It reminds me of a story told to me by Monsieur l’Abbé Blanchet on
this subject, which I will tell you as I remember it, regretting that
Monsieur l’Abbé Blanchet is not here to tell it you himself, for he is
a man of wit.

“Here is the apologue:

“When the young prince Zémire succeeded his father on the throne of
Persia, he called all the academicians of his kingdom together, and
said:

“‘The learned Zeb, my instructor, has taught me that monarchs would be
liable to fewer errors if they were enlightened by past experience.
Therefore I wish to study the history of nations. I order you to
compose a universal history and to neglect nothing to make it complete.’

“The wise men promised to carry out the prince’s desire, and having
withdrawn they set to work immediately. At the end of twenty years they
appeared before the king, followed by a caravan composed of twelve
camels each bearing 500 volumes. The secretary of the academy, having
prostrated himself on the steps of the throne, spoke in these terms:

“‘Sire, the academicians of your kingdom have the honour to place
at your feet the universal history that they have compiled at your
majesty’s behests. It comprises 6000 volumes and contains all that
we could possibly collect regarding the customs of nations and the
vicissitudes of empires. We have inserted the ancient chronicles which
have been luckily preserved, and we have illustrated them with abundant
