XV

REVOLUTIONARY MEASURES


Mr. Rockstrong, who was a sensible man, bore my good master no malice
for his sincerity of speech. When the landlord of the _Petit Bacchus_
had brought a pot of wine, the pamphleteer lifted his glass and drank
to Abbé Coignard’s health, calling him a rogue, a friend of robbers, a
tool of tyrants and an old scamp! all with quite a jovial air.

My master returned his compliments with a good grace, congratulating
him on the fact that he drank to a man whose natural humour had
remained unaffected by philosophy.

“As for myself,” he added, “I feel that my intelligence is quite spoilt
by reflection. And as it is not in the nature of mankind to think with
any profundity, I own that my leaning to thought is an odd mania and
highly inconvenient. In the first place it makes me unfit for any
undertaking, for our actions result from a limited outlook and narrow
way of thinking. You will be astonished, Mr. Rockstrong, if you picture
to yourself the simple-mindedness of the men of genius who have stirred
the world. Conquerors and statesmen, who have changed the face of the
earth, have never reflected on the essence of the beings they handled
so roughly. They shut themselves up altogether in the pettiness of
their grand projects and the wisest see but very few things at a time.
Such as you see me, Mr. Rockstrong, it would be impossible for me to
work like Alexander at the conquest of India, or to found and govern an
empire, or, generally speaking, to throw myself into any one of those
vast undertakings which tempt the pride of the impetuous. Reflection
would hamper me, from the outset, and I should find reasons for coming
to a stop at every move I made.”

Then turning to me my good master said sighing:

“Thought is a great infirmity, God keep you from it Tournebroche, my
son, as He has kept His greatest saints, and the souls for whom He
cherishes a singular predilection, and for whom He reserves eternal
glory. Men who think little, or who think not at all, go about their
business happily in this world and the next, whilst the meditative
soul is incessantly menaced with its temporal and spiritual loss. Such
malice lies in thought! Reflect and tremble, my son, at the thought
that the serpent of Genesis is the oldest of philosophers and their
everlasting prince.”

Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard drank a great draught of wine and went on in a
low voice:

“As regards my salvation, that is a subject to which I have never
applied my intelligence. I have never exercised my reason on the truths
of the Faith. Unhappily, I have meditated the deeds of men and the ways
of cities; therefore I am no longer fit to govern an Island, as was
Sancho Panza.”

“That is a very good thing,” retorted Mr. Rockstrong, laughingly,
“for your isle would be a retreat for bandits and vagabonds where the
criminal would judge the innocent, if perchance there were any.

“I well believe it! Mr. Rockstrong, I well believe it!” answered my
good master! “It is quite possible that, if I were to govern another
island of Barataria, manners would be as you say. With one stroke you
have depicted all the empires of the world. I feel that mine would
be no better than the rest. I have no illusions about mankind, and,
so as not to hate them, I despise them. I despise and pity them,
Mr. Rockstrong. But they bear me no good-will for it. They want to
be hated. One vexes them when one shows them the gentlest, the most
indulgent, the most charitable, most human and gracious of all feelings
that they could inspire: contempt. Nevertheless, mutual contempt means
peace on earth, and if men would only thoroughly despise one another
they would do themselves no further harm and live together in an
amiable tranquillity.

“All the ills of civilised societies originate in people thinking too
highly of each other, and raising honour, like a monster, above the
wretchedness of the flesh and the spirit. This feeling makes them both
proud and cruel, and I detest the pride that wants honour to be shown
to it and to others, as if anyone descended from Adam could be worthy
of honour! An animal which eats, drinks (give me something to drink),
and makes love, is worthy of pity, interesting perhaps, even sometimes
pleasant and agreeable.

“He can only be honourable by the effect of a most absurd and
headstrong prejudice in his favour. This prejudice is the source of all
the ills from which we suffer. It is a detestable kind of idolatry.
And to assure to humanity a sweetening of their existence you must
begin by recalling them to their natural humility.

“They will be happy, when, brought back again to a true appreciation of
their condition, they despise one another without there being a single
exception to this most excellent contempt.”

Mr. Rockstrong shrugged his shoulders.

“My fat Abbé,” said he, “you are a pig.”

“I am but a man,” replied my master, “you flatter me, and I feel in
me the germs of that bitter pride that I detest, and that vain-glory
which leads the human race into duels and into war. There are times,
Mr. Rockstrong, when I would have my throat cut for my opinions; which
would be an act of madness. For who can prove that I reason better than
you, you, who reason excessively badly! Give me something to drink!”

Mr. Rockstrong courteously filled my good master’s glass.

“Abbé, you talk nonsense,” he said, “but I love you, and I should much
like to know what you find blameworthy in my public behaviour, and
why you side against me with tyrants, forgers, thieves, and dishonest
judges?”

“Mr. Rockstrong, allow me first of all to diffuse over you and your
friends, with a sweet impartiality, that single sentiment which gently
puts an end to quarrels, and brings pacification. Bear with me if I
respect neither the one nor the other enough to consign them to the
vengeance of the law and to call down punishment on their heads.
Men, whatsoever they do, are always silly sheep, and I leave to
milord-chancellor, who condemned you, the Ciceronian declamations on
state crimes. I have little taste for Catiline orations from whichever
side they come. I am merely sad to see a man like you occupied in
changing forms of government. It is the most frivolous and empty
method of using one’s intelligence, and to fight people in office is
folly, unless it is a way of earning one’s bread and getting on in the
world. Give me something to drink! Bethink you, Mr. Rockstrong, that
these startling changes in the State, meditated by you, are merely
displacements of particular men, and that men taken in the mass are one
like another, average in evil as well as in good; so that to replace
two or three hundred ministers, governors of provinces, colonial
agents, and bonneted presidents of courts, by two or three hundred
others, is as good as doing nothing, and is simply putting Philip and
Barnabas in place of Paul and Xavier. As to changing the condition of
people at the same time, as you hope to do, that is quite impossible,
for that condition does not depend on the ministers, who count for
nothing, but on the earth and its fruits, industry, commerce, money
amassed in the kingdom, the cleverness of the townfolk in trade and
exchange—all things, which be they good or bad, are not kept going by
either the prince or the officers of the crown.”

Mr. Rockstrong quickly interrupted my good master:

“Who does not know,” he exclaimed, “that the condition of industry
and commerce depends on the government, and that only under a free
government can you have good finance?”

“Liberty,” continued Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard, “is but the result
of the wealth of citizens, who free themselves as soon as they are
powerful enough to be independent. People take all the liberty they
can enjoy, or, to put it more plainly, they imperiously clamour for
institutions in recognition and guarantee of the rights which they have
acquired by their industry.

“All liberty emanates from them and their several actions. Their most
involuntary movements enlarge the mould of the state which shapes
itself on them.[15]

“So that one may say that detestable as tyranny is, every tyranny is
necessary, and despotic governments are but the strait-waistcoat on
a feeble and dwindled body. And who does not see that the outward
appearance of government is like the skin which reveals the structure
of an animal without being the cause of it?

“You seize hold upon the skin without troubling yourself about the
viscera, in which you show little natural philosophy, Mr. Rockstrong.”

“So you make no difference between a free state and a tyrannical
government, and all that you regard as nothing but the hide of the
beast, my fat Abbé. And you fail to see that the expenditure of the
prince and the depredations of ministers can ruin agriculture and wear
out trade by raising the taxes.”

“Mr. Rockstrong, there cannot be at the same period and for the same
country more than one possible form of government, any more than an
animal can have more than one pelt at a time. From which it results,
that we must leave to the care of Time, who is a courtly person, the
changing of empires and the remaking of laws. He works at it slowly,
untiringly, and kindly.”

“And you don’t think, my fat Abbé, that we ought to help the old man
who figures on the clocks with a scythe in his hand? You do not believe
that a revolution, such as that of the English or that in the Low
Countries, can have any effect on the condition of the people. No? You
old idiot! you deserve to be crowned with a fool’s cap!”

“Revolutions come about in conservation of good things already
acquired, and not to gain new. It is the folly of nations, it is your
own, Mr. Rockstrong, to found great hopes on the downfall of princes.
People assure unto themselves, by revolting from time to time, the
preservation of their threatened liberties. They have never gained new
liberties thereby. But they are fooled with words. It is remarkable,
Mr. Rockstrong, that men will easily let themselves be killed for words
of no meaning. Ajax made the remark long ago: ‘I thought in my youth’
the poet makes him say, ‘that deeds were more powerful than words, but
I see to-day that the word is the stronger of the two.’ Thus said Ajax,
son of Oileus. Mr. Rockstrong, I am very thirsty!”


FOOTNOTES:

[15] In the time of Abbé Coignard the French already thought themselves
free. The sieur d’Alquié wrote in 1670:

“Three things make a man happy in this world, to know the charm of
intercourse, dainty meats, and liberty, perfect and entire. We have
seen in what way our illustrious kingdom has fulfilled the two first,
so it remains for us merely to show that the third is not lacking
to it, and that liberty is no less a fact than the two preceding
advantages. The thing will appear true to you if, to start with, you
will consider attentively the name of our state, the matter of its
foundation, and its usual customs: for one sees at the start that
the name of _France_ means nothing else than _Franchise_ or liberty,
conformably to the designs of the founders of this monarchy, who,
having noble and generous souls, and being unable to bear either
slavery or the least servitude, resolved among themselves to throw off
the yoke of all kinds of captivity and to be as free as men may be;
this is why they came to the land of the Gauls, which was a country
whose people were neither less warlike nor less jealous of their
_Franchise_ or liberty than they themselves were. As to the second
point, we know that beyond the inclinations and plans they had in
founding this state, they were always their own masters; they made
laws for their sovereign which, limiting their powers, still preserved
their privileges to them, in such wise that if anyone wishes to deprive
them of them, they become enraged and rush to arms with such speed
that nothing can hold them back when this point is involved. As to the
third point, I declare that France is so enamoured of liberty that she
cannot endure a slave, so that Turks and Moors and still less Christian
people, may never wear irons nor be loaded with chains once in her
country, and thus it comes about, that when slaves come to be in France
they are no sooner on her territory than, full of joy, they cry: Long
live France and her beloved liberty!”

_Les délices de la France_ ... by François Savinien d’Alquié, Amsterdam
1670.

