XIV

SEDITION-MONGERS


My good master and I having paid our accustomed visit at the sign of
the _Image de Sainte Catherine_, we found in the shop the famous Mr.
Rockstrong, mounted on the highest rung of the ladder ferreting out the
old books, of which he is a connoisseur. For it pleases him, as is well
known, in his troubled existence to collect precious books and fine
prints.

Condemned by the English Parliament to imprisonment for life for
taking part in Monmouth’s Rebellion, he lives in France, whence he is
continually sending articles to the gazettes of his country.[14]

My good master, as his habit was, let himself down on to a stool, then
raised his eyes to the ladder where Mr. Rockstrong was turning about
with the squirrel-like agility he has preserved in his declining years.

“God be thanked!” said he, “I see, _Monsieur le Rebelle_, you are as
well and as young as ever.”

Mr. Rockstrong turned on my good master the glowing eyes that light up
his sallow countenance.

“Why do you call me a rebel?” he asked, “you fat Abbé!”

“I call you a rebel, Mr. Rockstrong, because you have failed. One is a
rebel when one is vanquished. Victors are never rebels.”

“Abbé, you speak with a disgusting cynicism.”

“Beware, Mr. Rockstrong; that maxim does not come from me. It comes
from a very great man. I found it among the papers of Julius Cæsar
Scaliger.”

“Well, Abbé, those are villainous papers. And it is an infamous saying.
Our loss, due to the irresolution of our chief, and to an indolence
which he paid for with his life, does not alter the goodness of our
cause. And honest people conquered by rogues, remain honest people.”

“It pains me to hear you talk of honest people and rogues, in public
matters, Mr. Rockstrong. These simple expressions might suffice to
indicate the good and the bad side in those combats of angels which
were fought in Heaven before the creation of the world; and which your
fellow countryman, John Milton, has sung with very great barbarity.
But, on this terraqueous globe, camps are not, however desirable
it might be, so equally divided that one can discriminate, without
prejudice or compliance, between the army of the pure and the impure;
nor even distinguish the side of the just from the unjust. So that,
success must necessarily remain the only witness to the goodness of a
cause. I annoy you, Mr. Rockstrong, by telling you that one is rebel
when one is vanquished. Yet when it happens to you to climb to power,
you will not suffer rebellion.”

“Abbé, you do not know what you are saying. I have always hastened to
the side of the vanquished.”

“Truly, Mr. Rockstrong, you are a natural and constant enemy of the
State. You are hardened in your enmity by the force of your genius,
which finds pleasure in destruction and ruin.”

“Abbé, do you call me a criminal?”

“Mr. Rockstrong, if I were a statesman, or a friend of the prince, like
Monsieur Roman, I should take you for a remarkable criminal. But I am
not a sufficiently fervent believer in the religion of politics to be
very terrified at the murmur of your crimes, or of outrages which make
more noise than they do harm.”

“Abbé, you are immoral!”

“If it be only at such a price one can afford to be indulgent, Mr.
Rockstrong, do not blame me too severely.”

“I have no use, my fat Abbé, for an indulgence that you share between
me, the victim, and the scoundrels in Parliament, who condemned me with
such revolting injustice.”

“It is amusing to hear you talk of the injustice of the lords, Mr.
Rockstrong.”

“Is it not a crying injustice?”

“It is quite true, Mr. Rockstrong, that you were convicted, on a
ridiculous charge, by the Lord-Chancellor for a collection of libels,
none of which came in particular under the ban of the English law; it
is true that in a country where one is allowed to write anything and
everything, you were punished for some pungent writings; it is true
that they used, as weapons, obsolete and out-of-the-way forms whose
imposing hypocrisy poorly dissimulated the impossibility of getting
at you by legal methods; it is true that the milords who judged you
were interested in your ruin, since Monmouth’s, and your success
would infallibly have dragged them from their seats. It is true your
ruin was decided on beforehand in the royal Councils. It is true you
escaped by flight, from a mediocre kind of martyrdom in truth, but
a painful one. For imprisonment for life is a penalty even if one
may reasonably hope to escape from it soon. But there is no justice
nor injustice there. You were condemned for State reasons—which is
extremely honourable. And more than one of the lords who condemned you
had conspired with you twenty years before. Your crime was to have
frightened those in office—and it is an unpardonable one. Ministers
and their friends invoke the safety of the State when danger threatens
their fortunes or their posts. And they are willing to believe
themselves necessary for the preservation of the empire, for they
are for the most part interested parties and no philosophers. But
that does not make bad men of them. They are human beings and that is
quite enough to explain their pitiable mediocrity, their stupidity and
their avarice. But whom do you set up against them, Mr. Rockstrong?
Other men of equal mediocrity, and yet more greedy, because they are
hungrier. The people of London would have borne with them as they bear
with the others. They awaited your victory or your defeat to declare
themselves, wherein they gave proof of remarkable sagacity. The people
are well advised when they judge that they have nothing to gain or lose
by change of masters.”

Thus spoke Abbé Coignard, and Mr. Rockstrong with inflamed countenance,
eyes on fire, and wig starting from his head, shouted at him with
gestures from the top of his ladder: “Abbé, I understand thieves and
all types of rogues in Chancery and Parliament. But I do not understand
you, who, without any personal interest in the matter, out of pure
malice, propound maxims that they themselves profess but for their own
profit. You must be wickeder than they, for you have nothing to gain in
the matter. It is beyond me, Abbé!”

“It is a sign of my being a philosopher,” gently replied my good
master. “It is in the nature of wise men to irritate the rest of
mankind. Anaxagoras was a celebrated example of it. I do not speak of
Socrates who was but a sophist. But we see that in all times and in all
countries the opinions of meditative minds were subjects of scandal.
You think yourself very different from your enemies, Mr. Rockstrong,
and that you are as lovable as they are odious. Allow me to tell you
that this is but the effect of your pride and of your high courage.
In actual fact, you share in common with those who condemned you, all
human weaknesses and passions. If you are more honest than many of
them, and even if you are a man of incomparable vivacity of mind, you
are filled with a talent for hatred and discord which renders you very
inconvenient in a well-regulated country. The calling of a journalist,
in which you excel, has raised to the highest degree of perfection the
wonderful partiality of your mind, and though a victim of injustice,
you are yourself not just. What I have just said embroils me both with
you and with your enemies, and I am very certain I shall never obtain
a fat living from the minister who has them in his gift. But I prize
freedom of mind more highly than a fat abbey or a cosy priory. I shall
have succeeded in vexing all the world, but I shall die in peace, and
in contentment of heart.”

“Abbé,” half-laughingly, replied Mr. Rockstrong, “I forgive you,
because I think you a little mad. You make no difference between
rogues and honest men, and you would not rather have a free country
than a despotic and shuffling government. You are a lunatic, and of no
ordinary kind.”

“Let us go and drink a pot of wine at the _Petit Bacchus_, Mr.
Rockstrong,” said my good master, “and I will explain to you, while
emptying my glass, why I am totally indifferent to forms of government,
and why I do not trouble myself about any change of masters.”

“Very willingly,” said Mr. Rockstrong, “I shall be interested to drink
in company with such a bad arguer as you.”

He sprang lightly down from his ladder, and we all three repaired to
the inn.


FOOTNOTES:

[14] I have not found this Mr. Rockstrong mentioned in the memoirs
relating to Monmouth’s Rebellion. (ANATOLE FRANCE.)




