VI

THE NEW MINISTRY


Mr. Shippen, who practised the trade of a locksmith at Greenwich,
dined every day, during his short stays in Paris, at the _Sign of the
Reine Pédauque_, in the company of his landlord and of my good master,
Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard.

That day, at dessert, having called for a bottle of wine as was his
custom, lighted his pipe, and drawn from his pocket the London Gazette,
he set himself peaceably to smoke, drink, and read; then folding his
paper, and placing his pipe on the edge of the table, he said:

“Gentlemen, the Government is defeated.”

“Oh!” said my good master, “it is of no consequence.”

“Pardon me,” said Mr. Shippen, “it _is_ a matter of consequence,
for the former ministry being Tory, the new one will be Whig, and
moreover, everything that happens in England is of importance.”

“Sir,” replied my good master, “We have seen greater changes than
that in France. We have seen the four officials known as Secretaries
of State replaced by six or seven Councils of ten members apiece, and
the Secretaries of State hewn in ten pieces and then re-established
in their original shape. At each of these changes there were some who
swore that all was lost, and others that all was saved. And rhymes were
made about it all. For my part, I take little interest in what is done
in the King’s cabinet, for I notice that the course of life is in no
way changed, and after reforms men are as before, selfish, avaricious,
cowardly, cruel, stupid and furious by turns, and there is always a
nearly even number of births, marriages, cuckolds, and gallowsbirds,
in which is made manifest the beautiful ordering of our society. This
condition is stable, sir, and nothing could shake it, for it is founded
on human misery and imbecility, and those are foundations which will
never be wanting. The whole edifice gains from them a strength which
defies the efforts of the worst of princes, and of the ignorant crowd
of officials who assist them.”

My father, who, larding-pin in hand, was listening to this
conversation, made this amendment with deferential firmness: that good
ministers are to be found, and that he could remember one, who had
recently died, as the author of a very wise regulation protecting cooks
against the devouring ambitions of butchers and confectioners.

“That may be, Monsieur Tournebroche,” retorted my good master, “and
it is a matter to discuss with confectioners. But what is necessary
to consider is that empires subsist, not by the wisdom of certain
Secretaries of State, but by the needs of millions of men, who, to
live, work at all sorts of lowly and ignoble arts such as industry,
commerce, agriculture, war, and navigation. These individual hardships
make up what is called the greatness of a people, and neither prince
nor ministers have a part in them.”

“You are mistaken, sir,” said the Englishman, “ministers do their part
by making laws, of which a single one may enrich or ruin the nation.”

“Oh, as for that,” replied the Abbé, “it is a risk that must be run.
Since the affairs of the State are so widespread that the intelligence
of a single man cannot embrace them, we must forgive ministers for
working blindly thereat, and harbour no resentment against the good or
evil they do, but suppose that they moved as in a game of blind-man’s
buff. Moreover, this evil and this good would seem less to us if
estimated without superstition, and I doubt, sir, if a general order
could have the effect that you mention. I judge by the women of
the town, who are themselves alone, in a year, the object of more
regulations than are put forth in a century for all other classes in
the kingdom, and who, none the less, carry on their business with an
exactitude based on the forces of nature. They laugh at the simple
blackening which a magistrate named Nicodème[4] meditates in regard
to them, and make fun of Monsieur Baiselance, the mayor[5] who has
formed, along with several attorneys and treasury officials, an
impotent association for their ruin. I can tell you that Catherine, the
lace-maker, is ignorant of the very name of Baiselance, and that she
will remain ignorant of it until her end, which will be a Christian
one—at least I hope so. And I infer that all the laws with which a
minister swells his portfolio, are but useless papers which neither
enable us to live nor prevent us from living.”

“Monsieur Coignard,” said the locksmith from Greenwich, “it is easy to
see by the baseness of your talk that you are accustomed to servitude.
You would speak differently of statesmen and laws if you had, as I
have, the happiness to enjoy a free Government.”

“Mr. Shippen,” said the Abbé, “true liberty is that of a soul
enfranchised from the vanities of this world. As for public liberty, I
do not care a cherrystone for it! It is an illusion which flatters the
vanity of the ignorant.”

“You confirm me in the idea,” said Mr. Shippen, “that the French are
mere monkeys.”

“Allow me,” said my father, brandishing his larding-pin, “there are
lions also to be found amongst them.”

“Only citizens fail you then,” retorted Mr. Shippen. “All the world
discusses public matters in the Tuileries Gardens, without one
reasonable notion resulting from their squabbles. Your population is
but a turbulent wild-beast show.”

“Sir,” said my good master, “it is true that when human societies
attain to a certain degree of refinement, they turn aside from the
manners of a menagerie, and that it is evidence of progress to live in
a cage, instead of wandering miserably in the woods. And this tendency
is common to all the countries of Europe.”

“Sir,” said the Greenwich locksmith, “England is no menagerie, for she
has a Parliament on which her Ministers depend.”

“Sir,” said the Abbé, “it may be that one day France will also have
Ministers obedient to a Parliament. Better still. Time brings many
changes in the constitution of empires, and one can fancy that, in
a century or two, France may adopt popular government. But, sir,
secretaries of State, who count for little in our day, will then no
longer count for anything. For instead of depending on the King, from
whom they derive their period and power, they will be subject to
public opinion, and will share its instability. It is to be remarked
that statesmen only exercise their power, with any force, in absolute
monarchies, as is seen in the example of Joseph the son of Jacob,
Pharaoh’s Minister, and in that of Haman, Minister to Ahasuerus, who
played a great _rôle_ in the government; the first in Egypt, the second
among the Persians. It needed the coincidence of a strongly established
crown and a weak king, in France, to strengthen the arm of a Richelieu.
Under popular government, ministers will become so impotent that even
their wickedness and stupidity will do harm no more.

“They will receive from the general assemblies only an uncertain
and precarious authority; unable to indulge in far-flung hopes and
vast schemes, they will spend their ephemeral existence in wretched
expedients. They will grow jaundiced in the unhappy effort to read
their orders on the five hundred faces of a crowd, ignorant and at
cross-purposes; they will languish in restless impotence. They will
become unused to foresee anything or prepare anything, and they will
only study intrigue and falsehood. They will fall from so low that
their fall will do them no harm, and their names, chalked on the walls
by little scribbling school-boys, will make the bourgeois laugh.”

Mr. Shippen shrugged his shoulders at this speech.

“It’s possible,” he said, “I can well enough imagine the French in such
a state.”

“Oh,” said my good master, “in that state the world will go on its way.
We shall still have to eat, it is the great need which gives rise to
all others.”

Mr. Shippen said, shaking out his pipe:

“In the meanwhile they promise us a minister who will favour the
farmers, but who will ruin trade if he has his way. I must look to it,
for I am a locksmith at Greenwich, and I shall call all the locksmiths
together and address them.”

He put his pipe in his pocket and went out without saying good-night to
us.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] _Vide post_, p. 174.

[5] Monsieur Baiselance or Baisselance, succeeded Montaigne,
considerably later, as Mayor of Bordeaux. [A. F.]




VII

THE NEW MINISTRY (_concluded_)


After supper, as it was a fine night, Abbé Jérôme Coignard took a
turn in the Rue St. Jacques where the lamps were being lighted, and
I had the honour to accompany him. He stopped under the porch of St.
Benoît-le-Bétourné, and pointing with a plump hand, shaped equally
well for scholastic demonstration and for delicate caress, at one of
the stone benches ranged on either side beneath the antique statues
fouled with obscene scrawls. “Tournebroche, my son,” said he, “if you
are of the same turn of mind we will take the air for a moment or two
on one of these well-polished old stones where so many beggars before
us have rested from their troubles. Perchance some of those countless
poor creatures have here held quite excellent talk among themselves....
We shall run the risk of catching fleas. But you, my son, being at
the amorous age, may believe they are Jeannette, the viol player’s,
or Catherine, the lace-maker’s, who are in the habit of bringing their
gallants here at dusk; and their bite will seem sweet to you. That is
an illusion permitted to your youth. For me, who am past the age of
these charming follies, I shall tell myself that one must not give way
too much to the weakness of the flesh, and that a philosopher must not
trouble about fleas which, like all else in the world, are among God’s
mysteries.”

So saying, he sat down, taking care not to disturb a small Savoyard and
his marmoset who were sleeping their innocent sleep on the old stone
bench. I sat down by his side. The conversation which had occupied the
dinner-hour came back to my mind:

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” I asked this good master, “you were speaking a
while ago of ministers. Those of the King did not impress you by their
clothes, nor by their coaches, nor by their genius, and you judged them
with the freedom of a mind which nothing astonishes. Then, considering
the lot of these officials in a popular state (should it ever be
established), you showed them to us as wretched to excess and less
worthy of praise than of pity. Are you then, perhaps, opposed to free
governments as revived from the republics of antiquity?”

“I am personally inclined to love popular government, my son,” answered
my good master. “My humbleness of condition draws me towards it,
and Holy Writ, of which I have made some study, confirms me in this
preference, for the Lord said in Ramah: ‘The people of Israel desired
a king that I should not reign over them.’ And He said, ‘Now this
will be the manner of king that shall reign over you: he will take
your sons and appoint them for himself and for his chariots, and to
be his horsemen, and some shall run before his chariot. And he will
take your daughters to be confectioners and to be cooks and to be
bakers.’ _Filias quoque vestras faciet sibi unguentarias et focarias et
panificas._ That is said expressly in the Book of Kings, and one still
sees that the monarch brings his subjects two grievous gifts: war and
tithes. And if it be true that monarchies are of Divine institution
it is equally true that they present all the characteristics of human
imbecility and wickedness. It is credible that Heaven has given them to
the people for their chastisement: _Et tribuit eis petitionem eorum._

     ‘Often in His anger He accepts our sacrifice,
     His gifts are often the penalty of our crimes.’

“I could quote, my son, many fine passages from old authors where the
hatred of tyranny is described with admirable vigour. Finally, I think
I have always shown some strength of soul in disdaining the pride of
the flesh, and have, quite as much as the Jansenist Blaise Pascal, the
disgust for swashbucklers. All these reasons speak to my heart and to
my intelligence in favour of popular government. I have made it the
subject of meditations, which one day I shall put down in writing, in
a work of that kind of which they say that one must break the bone
to find the marrow. I want you to understand from that, that I shall
compose a new _Praise of Folly_ which will appear frivolity to the
frivolous, but the wise will recognise wisdom under the cap and bells.
In short, I shall be a second Erasmus; following his example I shall
teach the people by a learned and judicious playfulness. And you will
find, my son, in one chapter of this treatise, every enlightenment
on the subject that interests you; you will acquire a knowledge of
the condition of statesmen placed in dependence on popular states or
assemblies.”

“Oh, Monsieur l’Abbé!” I cried, “how impatient I am to read this book!
When do you think it will be written?”

“I do not know,” replied my good master, “and truth to tell I think
I shall never write it. Plans made by man are often thwarted. We
have no power over the smallest particle of the future, and this
uncertainty common to Adam’s race, is carried to extremes in my case
by a long series of misfortunes. That is why, my son, I despair of
ever being able to compose this respectable jest. Without giving you
a political treatise, seated on this bench, I will tell you at least
how I came to have the idea of introducing into my imaginary book a
chapter wherein would appear the weakness and spite of servants taken
on by good man Demos when master, if he ever become so, of which I
am not quite decided, for I do not meddle in prophecy, leaving this
preoccupation to maidens who vaticinate after the manner of the sibyls
such as the Cumean, the Persian, or the Tiburtine, ‘_quarum insigne
virginitas est et virginitatis præmium divinatio_.’ Let us then turn to
our subject. It is nearly twenty years since I lived in the pleasant
town of Séez, where I was librarian to the Bishop. Some travelling
actors, who chanced to pass, gave a fairly good tragedy in a barn;
I went to it and saw a Roman emperor appear whose wig was decorated
with more laurels than a ham at the fair of Saint Laurence. He seated
himself in a curule chair; his two ministers, in court dress with their
impressive insignia, took their place on either side on stools, and the
three formed a Council of State before the footlights, which stank
exceedingly. Eventually, during the course of their deliberations, one
of the councillors drew a satirical portrait of the consuls during the
latter period of the Republic. He showed them as impatient to use and
abuse their temporary power—enemies of the public good, and jealous of
their successors, in whom they were only assured of seeing accomplices
to their robbery and peculation. This is how he spoke:

     ‘These little monarchs, reigning for a year,
     Seeing the limit of their rule so near,
     Spoil the green fruit, of fairest seed and growth,
     Rather than leave what they to leave are loath.
     Since they have little part in what they wield,
     Take a full harvest from the public field,
     Assured of pardon, for their easy heirs
     Hope for like treatment when the turn is theirs.’[6]

“Well, my son, these lines which, by their sententious precision
recall the quatrains of Pibrac, are more excellent as regards meaning
than the rest of the tragedy, which smells a little too much of the
pompous frivolities of the princes’ Fronde, and is altogether spoilt
by the heroic love-affairs of a kind of Duchesse de Longueville, who
appears under the name of Émilie. I took care to remember them so as
to meditate upon them. For one finds beautiful maxims even in works
written for the theatre. What the poet says in these eight lines, on
consuls of the Roman Republic, applies equally well to ministers of
democracies whose power is precarious.

“They are weak, my son, because they depend on a popular assembly,
incapable equally of the large and profound views of a politician,
and of the innocent stupidity of an idle king. Ministers are only
great if they second, as did Sully, an intelligent prince, or if, like
Richelieu, they take the place of the monarch. And who does not feel
that Demos will have neither the obstinate prudence of a Henry IV,
nor the favourable inertia of a Louis XIII? Even supposing he knows
what he wants he will not know how to carry out his wishes, nor even
if they be feasible. Ordering ill, he will be badly obeyed, and will
always believe himself betrayed. The deputies he will send to his
States-General will keep up his illusions by ingenious lies up to the
moment of falling under his unjust or legitimate suspicions. These
states will perpetuate the same confused mediocrity as the mob from
which they spring. They will revolve multiple and obscure thoughts.
They will give the heads of government the task of carrying out vague
wishes of which they themselves are not conscious, and their ministers,
more unhappy than Œdipus in the fable, will be devoured, each in turn,
by the Sphinx with a hundred heads for not having guessed the riddle
of which the Sphinx herself was ignorant. The source of their greatest
unhappiness will be their enforced resignation to impotence, and to
talk instead of action. They will become rhetoricians and very bad
rhetoricians, for talent, bringing some clarity with it, will be their
undoing. They will have to train themselves to speak without saying
anything, and the least foolish amongst them will be condemned to lie
more than all the others. So, the most intelligent will become the
most despicable. And if any are to be found clever enough to conclude
treaties, regulate finance, and see to business, their knowledge will
serve them nothing, for time will fail them, and time is the stuff of
great undertakings.

“These humiliating conditions will discourage the good and lend
ambition to the bad. From all sides, ambitious incompetence will rise
from the depth of struggling villages to the first posts in the State,
and as probity is not natural to mankind, but must be cultivated
with great care and long-continued artifice, we shall see clouds of
peculators fall on the public treasury. The evil will be much increased
by the outburst of scandal, for, as it is difficult to hide anything
under popular government, by the fault of some all will become suspect.

“I do not conclude from this, my son, that people will be more unhappy
then than they are now, I have told you often enough in our former
conversations that I do not think the fate of a nation depends on
its prince and its ministers, and it is ascribing too much virtue to
laws to make them the source of general prosperity or unhappiness.
Nevertheless, the multitude of laws is grievous, and I also fear that
the States-General will abuse their legislative powers.

“It is the harmless foible of Colin and Jeannot to frame laws while
they keep their sheep, and to say: ‘If I were king!’ When Jeannot
is king he will promulgate more edicts in a year than the Emperor
Justinian codified during all his reign. It is in that direction,
it seems to me, that Jeannot’s reign will prove formidable. But
that of kings and emperors was usually so bad one could not fear a
worse, and Jeannot, no doubt, will not commit many more follies,
nor wickednesses, than all those princes girt with the double or
triple crown, who, since the deluge, have covered the world with
blood and destruction. His very incapacity and turbulence will have
this much good in them that they will render impossible those learned
correspondences between country and country we call diplomacy,
which end in nothing but in the artistic lighting-up of useless and
disastrous wars. The ministers of good man Demos unceasingly kicked,
hustled, humiliated, thrown down and assailed with more rotten apples
and eggs than the worst harlequin in a booth at a fair, will have no
leisure to prepare carnage politely, in the secrecy and peace of the
cabinet, on the board of green cloth, by conferences in regard to what
is called the balance of Europe, which is but the happy hunting-ground
of the diplomat. There will be no more foreign policy, and that will be
a great thing for unhappy humanity.”

At these words my good master rose up, and continued as follows: “It is
time to go in, my son, for I feel the dew penetrate by reason that my
clothes are in holes in various places. Also, by remaining any longer
under this porch, we risk frightening away the lovers of Catherine and
Jeannette, who here await the hour of tryst.”


FOOTNOTES:

[6]

     Ces petits souverains qu’on fait pour une année,
     Voyant d’un temps si court leur puissance bornée,
     Des plus heureux desseins font avorter le fruit,
     De peur de le laisser à celui que les suit.
     Comme ils ont peu de part aux biens dont ils ordonnent,
     Dans le champ du public largement ils moissonnent,
     Assurés que chacun leur pardonne aisément,
     Espérant à son tour un pareil traitement.




