X

THE ARMY


So, being on the Pont Neuf, we heard the roll of drums. It was the call
to attention of a recruiting-sergeant, who, hand on hip, was strutting
in an open space in front of a dozen soldiers, who were carrying bread
and sausages spiked on the bayonets of their guns. A circle of beggars
and youngsters looked on open-mouthed.

He twirled his moustache and made his proclamation.

“Do not let us listen to him,” said my good master to me. “It would
be waste of time. This sergeant speaks in the king’s name. He has no
talent for speaking. If it would please you to hear a clever discourse
on the same subject you should go into one of those bakehouses on the
Quai de la Ferraille, where the crimps cajole the lackeys and bumpkins.
These crimps, being rascals, are bound to be eloquent. I remember, in
my youth, in the time of the late king, having heard the most wonderful
harangue from the mouth of one of these dealers in men, who kept shop
in the Unhappy Valley, which you can see from here, my son. Recruiting
men for the Colonies: ‘Young men who surround me,’ said he, ‘you have
no doubt heard tell of the Land of Cockayne; it is to India you must
go to find this land of fortune, where one is in clover. Do you wish
for gold, pearls, diamonds? The roads are paved with them, one has but
to stoop to pick them up. And you need not even stoop. The savages
will pick them up for you. I do not even mention the coffee, the
lemons, pomegranates, oranges, pineapples, and the thousand delicious
fruits which grow without cultivation as in an earthly paradise. Did
I speak to women and children I might extol all these dainties, but
I am talking to men.’ I omit, my son, all that he said about glory,
but you may believe he equalled Demosthenes in vigour and Cicero in
fluency. The result of his discourse was the sending of five or six
unhappy beings to die of yellow fever in the swamps, so true is it
that eloquence is a dangerous weapon, and that talent for the arts
exercises its irresistible force for evil as well as for good. Thank
God, Tournebroche, in that, not having given you talents of any kind,
He does not expose you to become one day the scourge of nations. One
recognises the favourites of God by their lack of wit, and I have
experienced that the fairly quick intelligence heaven has given me has
been but an unceasing cause of danger to my peace in this world and in
the next. What would it be if the heart and thought of a Cæsar dwelt in
my head and my breast? My desires would recognise no sex and I should
be untouched by pity. I should light the fire of inextinguishable war
at home and abroad. And yet the great Cæsar had a delicate soul and a
certain gentleness. He died decently under the dagger of his virtuous
assassins. Day of the Ides of March! Ever fatal day, when sententious
brutes destroyed this charming monster! I am fain to weep over the
divine Julius along with Venus, his mother, and if I call him a monster
it is from affection, for in his equable soul nothing was excessive
save power. He had a natural feeling for rhythm and proportion. He
found equal pleasure in his youth in the beauties of debauchery or
those of grammar. He was an orator, and his beauty doubtless ornamented
the purposed dryness of his speeches. He loved Cleopatra with that
geometric exactitude that he brought to all his doings. He put in his
writings and in his actions his talent for clarity. He was the friend
of order and peace, even in war, sensitive to harmony, and so able
a maker of laws that we still live, barbarians as we are, under the
majesty of his rule, which has made the world what it is to-day. You
see, my son, I am not sparing in praise or love for him. Commander,
dictator, sovereign-pontiff he moulded the world with his beautiful
hands. And I—I, have been professor of eloquence at the college of
Beauvais, secretary to an opera-singer, librarian to my Lord Bishop of
Séez, public-writer at the cemetery of the Holy Innocents, and tutor
to the son of your father at the sign of the _Reine Pédauque_. I have
made a beautiful catalogue of precious manuscripts, I have written some
pamphlets, of which it is best not to speak, and set down on wastepaper
certain maxims scornfully declined by the booksellers. Nevertheless,
I would not change my existence for that of the great Cæsar. It would
cost my innocence too much. And I would rather be an obscure man,
poor and despised, as indeed I am, than rise to the height whence new
destinies are opened to the world through paths of blood.

“This recruiting-sergeant, whom you can hear from here promising
these vagabonds a halfpenny a day, with bread and meat, fills me, my
son, with profound reflections on war and armies. I have worked at
all trades save that of a soldier, which has always filled me with
disgust and terror, by the characteristics of servitude, false glory,
and cruelty, attached to it, which are in direct opposition to my
peaceful temper, to my wild love of freedom, and to my turn of mind,
which, judging sanely of glory, estimates at its rightful worth that
attainable by a musketeer. I am not speaking at all of my incorrigible
leaning to meditation which would have been exceedingly thwarted by
sword and gun exercise. Not desirous of being Cæsar you will easily
understand that neither do I wish to be a La Tulipe or Brin-d’Amour.
And I own to you, my son, that military service seems to me to be the
most terrible pest of civilised nations.

“This is the opinion of a philosopher. There is nothing to show that it
will ever be shared by a large number of people. And in actual fact,
kings and republics will always find as many soldiers as they want for
their parades and their wars. I have read Machiavelli’s treatises at
Monsieur Blaizot’s, at the sign of the _Image de Sainte Catherine_,
where they are all very nicely bound in parchment. They deserve it
my son, and, for my part, I hold an infinitely high opinion of the
Florentine secretary, who was the first to remove from political action
the legendary foundation of justice, on which they set up nothing but
highly respectable villainies. This Florentine, seeing his country at
the mercy of its hireling defenders, conceived the idea of a national
and patriotic army. He says somewhere in his books that it is right
that all citizens should unite for the safety of their country and all
be soldiers. I have likewise heard this theory sustained at Monsieur
Blaizot’s by Monsieur Roman, who is very zealous, as you know, for
state rights. He has no care save for the general, and the universal,
and will never be content until the day when every private interest is
sacrificed to the public interest. Thus Machiavelli and Monsieur Roman
wish us all to be soldiers, since we are all citizens. I do not say,
as do they, that it is just, nor do I say that it is unjust, because
justice and injustice are matter for debate, and it is a subject which
only sophists can decide.”

“What! my good master,” I cried in sorrow and surprise, “you hold that
justice depends on the reasoning of a sophist, and that our actions are
just or unjust according to the arguments of a clever man! Such a maxim
shocks me more than I can say.”

“Tournebroche, my son,” replied Monsieur l’Abbé Coignard, “you must
consider that I speak of human justice, which is different from God’s
justice, and generally opposed to it. Men have never upheld the idea
of justice and injustice save by eloquence which is prone to embrace
the for and against. Perhaps, my son, you would seat justice on
sentiment, but beware lest on this petty site you merely raise some
humble domestic hovel, some cabin of old Evander, or hut for a Philemon
and Baucis. But the palace of law, the tower of State institutions,
needs other foundations. Ingenuous nature alone could not support such
weight of inequity, and these redoubtable walls rise from a foundation
of most ancient falsehood, by the subtle and fierce art of law-givers,
magistrates, and princes. It is folly, Tournebroche my son, to enquire
if a law be just or unjust, and it is the same of military service as
of other institutions of which one cannot say if they be good or bad on
principle, since there is no principle saving God, from Whom all things
come. You must protect yourself, my son, against this kind of slavery
to words, to which men submit themselves with such docility. Know
then, that the word justice has no meaning, if it be not in theology,
where it is terribly expressive. Recognise that Monsieur Roman is
but a sophist when he demonstrates to you that one owes service to a
prince. Nevertheless, I think if the prince ever orders all citizens
to become soldiers, he will be obeyed, I don’t say with docility, but
light-heartedly. I have noticed that the profession most natural to
man is that of a soldier; it is the one to which he is drawn the most
easily by his instincts, and by his tastes, which are not always good.
And beyond some rare exceptions, of which I am one, man may be defined
as an animal with a musket. Give him a fine uniform with the hope of
fighting, and he will be happy. Also, we make the military calling the
noblest, which is true, in a sense, for it is the oldest calling, and
the earliest of mankind made war. The military calling, moreover, has
this appropriateness to human nature, that it never thinks, and clearly
we are not made for thought.

“Thought is a malady peculiar to certain individuals which cannot
propagate itself without promptly ending the race. Soldiers live in
company, and man is a sociable animal. They wear blue-and-white,
blue-and-red, or grey-and-blue coats, ribbons, plumes, and cockades,
which give them the same advantage over women as the cock over the
hen. They march to war and pillage and man is naturally thievish,
libidinous, destructive, and easily touched by glory. The love of glory
decides us Frenchmen, above all, to take up arms. And it is certain,
that in public opinion, military glory eclipses all. To be assured of
this, read history. La Tulipe may be held excused if he was no more a
philosopher than Titus Livius.”




XI

THE ARMY (_continued_)


My good master continued in these terms:

“One must consider, my son, that men joined one to another in the
succession of the ages by a chain of which they see but a few links,
attach the notion of nobility to customs whose origin was lowly and
barbarous. Their ignorance feeds their vanity. They found their glories
on old, unhappy, far-off things, and the nobility of the profession of
arms is due entirely to that savagery of early times of which the Bible
and the poets have preserved the remembrance. And what, in fact, is
this military nobility flaunted with so much pride over us, if not the
debased legacy of those unfortunate hunters of the woods whom the poet
Lucretius has depicted in such a way that one does not know if they be
men or beasts? It is wonderful, Tournebroche, my son, that war and
the chase, of which the thought alone should overwhelm us with shame
and remorse when we recall the wretched needs of our nature and our
inveterate wickedness, serve on the contrary, as matter for vain-glory
to men, that Christian peoples should continue to honour the profession
of butcher and executioner, when it is of old standing in families,
and that finally one estimates among refined people the celebrity of
citizens by the quantity of murders and carnage that they bear so to
speak, in their veins.”

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” I said to my good master, “do you not think that the
profession of arms is looked upon as noble because of the danger one
runs therein and the courage that it is necessary to display?”

“Truly, my son,” answered my good master, “if the state of man is noble
in proportion to the danger that he runs I do not fear to state that
peasants and labourers are the noblest men in the kingdom for they risk
death every day by fatigue or hunger. The perils to which soldiers and
commanders expose themselves are less in number and in duration, they
last but a few hours in a lifetime, and consist in facing cannon-balls
and bullets which kill less surely than poverty. Men must needs be
light and frivolous, my son, to give more honour to a soldier’s doings
than to the work of a labourer and to place the destruction of war at a
higher price than the arts of peace.”

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” I asked again, “do you not consider that soldiers
are necessary to the safety of the state and that we should honour them
in recognition of their usefulness?”

“It is true, my son, that war is a necessity of human nature and
one cannot imagine nations who will not fight, that is to say, who
are neither homicides, pillagers, nor incendiaries. Neither can you
conceive a prince who is not in some measure a usurper. They would
reproach him too much on that score, and they would despise him for
it as one who was no lover of glory. For war is necessary to men; and
is more natural to them than peace which is but war’s interval. Thus
one sees princes hurling their armies on one another on the worst
of pretexts, and for the most futile of reasons. They invoke their
honour, which is excessively touchy. A mere breath suffices to make a
stain on it which cannot be washed save in the blood of ten, twenty,
thirty, or a hundred thousand men, in proportion to the population
of the contending principalities. If only one thinks of it, it is
inconceivable that the honour of a prince can be cleansed by the blood
of these unhappy beings, or rather one realises that it is a mere
form of speech, void of meaning; but for words men go willingly to
their death. What is yet more wonderful, is that a prince gains much
honour from the theft of a province and the outrage that would be
punished by death in the case of some daring private individual becomes
praiseworthy if it is carried out with the most outrageous cruelty by a
sovereign with the help of his hirelings.”

My good master, having thus spoken, drew his box from his pocket and
sniffed up a few remaining grains of rappee.

“Monsieur l’Abbé,” I said, “are there no wars that are just, and fought
for a good cause?”

“Tournebroche, my son,” he answered me, “civilized nations have much
overstrained the injustice of war and they have rendered it very
iniquitous as well as very cruel. The first wars were undertaken for
the establishment of tribes on fertile lands. Thus the Israelites
conquered the land of Canaan. Hunger forced them to it. The advancement
of civilization extended war to the conquest of colonies and foreign
markets, as is seen in the example of Spain, Holland, England and
France. Lastly, one has seen kings and emperors steal provinces of
which they had no need, which they ruined, which they made waste,
without profit to themselves and without other advantage than to raise
pyramids and triumphal arches. And this abuse of war is the more odious
as one must believe that nations are becoming more and more wicked by
the advancement of the arts, or rather that war, being a necessity to
human nature, is waged for its own sake when there is absolutely no
reason for waging it.

“This reflection grieves me deeply, for I am disposed by my condition
and inclination to the love of my fellow creatures. And what puts the
finishing touch to my sadness, Tournebroche, my son, is that I find my
snuff-box is empty, and want of snuff is where I feel my poverty the
most.”

As much to distract his thoughts from this personal trouble as to
instruct myself in his teaching, I asked him if civil war did not seem
to him the most detestable kind of war there was?

“It is odious enough,” he replied, “but not so very inept, for members
of a state when they come to blows between themselves have more chance
of knowing why they fight than in the case where they go to war against
a foreign people. Seditious and intestinal quarrels are usually born
of the extreme wretchedness of the people. They are the result of
despair, and the only issue left to the unhappy beings who may obtain
thereby better conditions and sometimes even a hand in the game of
ruling. But it is to be remarked, my son, that the more unhappy, and
therefore excusable, are the insurgents, the less chance they have of
winning the game. Starved and stupefied, armed but with their rage,
they are incapable of great plans or of prudent considerations so
that they are easily reduced by the prince. He has more difficulty in
putting down rebellion among the great, which is to be detested, for
it has not the excuse of necessity. In fine, my son, whether civil or
foreign, war is execrable, and has a malignity that I detest.”




XII

THE ARMY (_concluded_)


“I will show you, my son,” said my good master, “in the condition of
these poor soldiers who are going to serve their king, both man’s
shame and his glory. In fact, war sets us back and drives us to our
natural savagery. It is the result of the ferocity that we have in
common with the beasts; not only with lions and cocks, who bring a
gallant bearing to it, but with little birds, such as jays and tits,
whose ways are very quarrelsome, and even with insects, such as wasps
and ants, who fight with a bloodthirstiness of the like of which the
Romans themselves have left no example. The principal causes of war
are the same in man and animal, who struggle with one another to
gain or keep their prey, to defend their nest or their lair, or to
gain a mate. There is no distinction in all this, and the rape of
the Sabines perfectly recalls those duels between stags which make
the woods bloody of a night. We have merely succeeded in lending a
certain colouring to base and natural motives by the notions of honour
with which we cover them, and without great exactitude at that. If
we believe that we fight for very noble motives in these days, the
nobility of them dwells entirely in the vagueness of our sentiments.
The less the object of war is simple, clear, and precise, the more
war itself is odious and detestable. And if it be true, my son, that
we have come to killing one another for honour’s sake, it is beyond
all bounds. We have surpassed the cruelty of wild beasts, who do each
other no injury without good reason. And it is only right to say
that man is wickeder and more unnatural in his wars than are bulls
or ants in theirs. But that is not all, for I detest armies less for
the death they sow, than for the ignorance and stupidity that follow
in their train. There is no worse enemy of the arts than a captain of
mercenaries or marauders, and as a rule commanders are as unfitted
for letters as are their soldiers. The habit of imposing his will by
force makes your old soldier very awkward in speech, for eloquence has
its source in the necessity of persuasion. Also, military men affect
a disdain of speech and fine attainments. I remember having known at
Séez in the days when I was librarian to the Bishop, an old captain,
who had grown grey in harness and passed for a gallant man, wearing
proudly a large scar across his face. He was an old ruffian, and had
killed many a man and violated more than one nun quite good-humouredly.
He understood his business fairly well and was very particular
regarding the appearance of his regiment, which marched past better
than any other. In short, a brave man and a good comrade, when it was
question of draining a pot as well I saw at the inn of the _Cheval
Blanc_, where many a time I held my own against him. Now it happened
one night that I accompanied him (for we were good friends) while he
was instructing his men how to find their way by the stars. He first
let me have Monsieur de Louvois’ ordinance on the subject, and as he
had repeated it by heart for the last thirty years, he made no more
mistakes than in his _Pater_ or _Ave_. He started off by saying that
the soldiers must begin by searching the heavens for the pole-star,
which is fixed in relation to the other stars, which turn round it
in the contrary direction to the hands of a watch. But he did not
understand all he said. For after having repeated his sentence two or
three times in a sufficiently imperious voice, he stooped and said in
my ear:

‘Show me this beggar of a pole-star, Abbé. The devil take me if I
can distinguish it in this mess of candle-ends with which the sky is
littered!’

“I told him at once the way to find it, and pointed it out with my
finger. ‘Oh! Oh!’ cried he, ‘the silly thing is perched very high! From
where we are we cannot see it without straining our necks.’ And he
immediately gave orders to his officers to withdraw the men fifty paces
so they should more easily see the pole-star. What I am telling you, my
son, I heard with my own ears, and you will agree that this wearer of
a sword had a sufficiently naïve notion of the system of the universe,
particularly of the stellar parallaxes. Yet he wore the king’s orders
on a fine embroidered coat, and was more honoured in the state than
a learned divine. It is this uncouthness that I cannot endure in the
army.”

My good master having stopped to take breath at these words, I asked
him if he did not think, despite this captain’s ignorance, that one
must have much intelligence to win battles? He answered me in these
words:

“Taking into consideration, Tournebroche, my son, the difficulty
that there is in getting together and leading armies, the knowledge
necessary in the attack or the defence of a place, and the ability
demanded for a good order of battle, one easily admits that only a
genius nearly super-human, such as that of a Cæsar, is capable of such
an undertaking, and one would be astonished that minds were to be found
capable of holding all the qualities proper to a true fighting-man. A
great commander does not only know the configuration of a country, but
its manners and customs, and also the industries of its inhabitants.
He keeps in his mind an infinity of little circumstances from which
he forms in the end large and simple views. The plans which he has
slowly meditated and traced out beforehand, he may change in the midst
of action by a sudden inspiration, and he is at the same time, very
prudent and very bold; his thoughts move, now with the dull slowness of
the mole, now soar up with an eagle’s flight.

“Nothing is truer than this. But bethink you, my son, that when two
armies are in sight of one another, one of them must be conquered; from
which it follows that the other will necessarily be victorious, without
its chief in command having all the qualities of a great commander,
or without his even having one of them. There are, I take it, clever
commanders; there are also lucky ones, whose glory is no less. How,
in these astounding collisions, are we to disentangle the effect of
art from the result of luck? But you are leading me from my subject,
Tournebroche, my son, I want to show you that war is man’s disgrace
nowadays, but that in other days it was his pride. Of necessity the
arbitrament of empires, war has been the great school-mistress of the
human race. It is by her that men have learnt patience, firmness,
disdain of danger, the glory of sacrifice. The day that the herdsmen
first rolled pieces of rock to form an enclosure behind which they
defended their women and cattle, the first human society was founded,
and the progress of the arts assured. This great good that we enjoy,
our native land, that august thing the Romans adored above all their
gods, the town, ‘Urbs,’ is the daughter of war.

“The first city was a fortified enclosure, and it was in that rough and
bloody cradle that were nursed august laws, flourishing industries,
science and learning. And that is why the true God wishes to be called
the God of battles.

“What I tell you on this subject, Tournebroche, my son, does not mean
that you should sign your engagement to this recruiting-sergeant and
be seized with the desire to become a hero as the recipient of sixty
strokes of the rod on your back every day, on an average.

“War is, moreover, in our time but an inherited evil, a prurient return
to savage life, a criminal puerility. The princes of our day, and
especially the late king, will for ever bear the notoriety of having
made war the sport and amusement of courts. It saddens me to think that
we have not yet seen the end of this preconcerted slaughter.

“As to the future, the unfathomable future, let me, my son, dream of it
as more in accord with the spirit of sweetness and equity which dwells
in me. The future is a place where there is room for dreams. It is
there, as in Utopia, that it pleases the wise men to build. I should
like to believe that nations will one day cultivate the virtues in
peace. It is in the increasing size of armaments that I flatter myself
I see a far-distant presage of universal peace. Armies will augment
unceasingly in strength and number. Whole nations will be swallowed up
by them. Then the monster will perish from his surfeit. He will burst
from too much fatness.”




