VIII

THE CITY MAGISTRATES


That evening we betook ourselves, my master and I, to the arbour of
the _Petit Bacchus_, where we found Catherine the lace-maker, the
lame cutler, and the father who begot me. They were all seated at the
same table before a jug of wine, of which they had taken enough to be
pleasant and sociable.

Two magistrates had just been elected according to form, out of four,
and my father was talking of it, according to the measure of his lights
and his talents.

“The pity is,” said he, “that these city magistrates are gentlemen of
the long robe, and not cooks, and that they hold their magistracy from
the king, and not from the tradesmen, notably not from the corporation
of Parisian cooks of which I am the banner-bearer. If they were of my
choosing they would abolish tithes and the salt tax, and we should
all be happy.... At any rate, if the world does not walk backwards
like a crab, a day will come when magistrates will be elected by the
tradesmen.”

“No doubt,” said Monsieur l’Abbé, “magistrates will one day be elected
by the masters and their apprentices.”

“Mind what you are saying, Monsieur l’Abbé,” said my father anxiously,
and drawing his brows together. “When apprentices mix themselves up
with the election of magistrates all will be lost. In the days when
I was apprenticed I thought of nothing but of misappropriating my
master’s wife and goods. But since I own a shop and a wife I attend to
the public interest, in which my own is bound up.”

Lesturgeon, our landlord, brought a jug of wine. He was a small,
red-haired man, quick, and rough.

“You speak of the new magistrates,” he said, his hands on his hips, “I
only wish them as much wisdom as the old ones, who were nevertheless
not very knowing about the public welfare. But they were beginning
to learn their business. You know, Monsieur Léonard (he spoke to my
father), the school where the children of the Rue St. Jacques go to
learn their alphabet, is built of wood, and a slow match and a few
shavings would suffice to make it blaze like a veritable midsummer
night’s bonfire. I warned the gentlemen of the Hôtel de Ville about it.
My letter did not err in style for I had it written for sixpence by a
scrivener who has a stall under the Val-de-Grace. I represented to the
magistrate that all the small boys of the neighbourhood were in daily
danger of being grilled, like chitterlings, which was a matter for
thought, having regard to the sensibility of mothers. The magistrate
who has to do with the schools answered politely, after a year had
elapsed, that the danger run by the small boys of the Rue St. Jacques
roused all his solicitude, and that he was eager to remove it, and, in
consequence he was sending a fire-engine to the afore-mentioned pupils.
‘The king,’ he added, ‘having in his goodness built a fountain in
commemoration of his victories, at two hundred paces from the school,
water would not be lacking, and the children will learn in a few days
to manage the engine which the town consents to grant them free.’

“On reading this letter I jumped to the ceiling. And returning to
Val-de-Grace I dictated a reply to the scrivener as follows:

“‘Honoured City-magistrate—Sir, in the schoolhouse of the Rue St.
Jacques are two hundred youngsters, of whom the oldest is but seven
years of age. These are fine firemen, sir, to work your fire-engine.
Take it back again, and have a schoolhouse built of stone and rubble.’

“This letter, like the former one, cost me sixpence, including the
seal. But I did not lose my money, for, after twenty months had
passed, I received a reply in which the magistrate assured me that
the youngsters of the Rue St. Jacques were worthy of the care of the
Parisian magistrates, who would prudently watch over their safety. We
remain there. If my magistrate leaves his post I shall have to begin
all over again, and pay a shilling once more to the scrivener in the
Val-de-Grace. That is why, Monsieur Léonard, although I am firmly
convinced there are faces at the town-hall which would be better
fitted to play the buffoon at a fair, I have not the slightest desire
to see new faces there, and I particularly wish to keep him of the
fire-engine.”

“For my part,” said Catherine, “it is the _Lieutenant-Criminel_ I have
a grudge against. He allows Jeannette, the viol player, to prowl about
every day, at twilight, under the porch of St. Benoît-le-Bétourné.
It is a disgrace. She walks through the streets with a kerchief tied
round her head, and trails her dirty skirts through every gutter in the
place. The public places should be reserved for girls well turned-out
enough to show themselves with credit.”

“Oh! I reckon the pavement belongs to all the world,” said the lame
cutler. “And one of these days I shall follow the example of our
landlord, Lesturgeon, and go to the scrivener in the Val-de-Grace
to get him to draw up, in my name, a fine petition in favour of
poor hawkers. I cannot push my cart into a good position but I am
at once bothered by the police, and as soon as a lackey or a couple
of servant-girls stop at my stall, a big, black rascal turns up and
orders me, in the name of the law, to go and undo my bundle elsewhere.
Sometimes I am on ground rented by the market people, at others, I find
myself a near neighbour of Monsieur Leborgne, sworn cutler. Another
time I must yield the pavement to the carriage of a bishop or a prince.
And there I am, getting into my harness and pulling at the straps,
happy if the lackeys and the chambermaids have not carried off without
payment, profiting by my awkwardness, a needle-case, some scissors, or
a fine blade from Chatellerault. I am sick of suffering tyranny. I am
sick of experiencing the injustice of the justiciaries. I feel a great
desire to revolt.”

“I know from that sign,” said my good master, “that you are a
magnanimous cutler.”

“I am not at all magnanimous, Monsieur l’Abbé,” modestly replied the
cripple, “I am vindictive, and resentment has pushed me to sell,
in secret, songs written against the king, his mistresses, and his
ministers. I keep a fairly good assortment in the tilt of my cart. Do
not betray me. That of the twelve reed-pipes is admirable.”

“I will not betray you,” answered my father, “a good song is worth
a glass of wine to me, and even more, I do not say anything either
about the knives, and I am glad, my good fellow, that you sell yours,
for all the world must live. But acknowledge that one cannot allow
wandering hawkers to enter into competition with tradesmen who rent
a shop and pay taxes. Nothing is more contrary to law and order. The
impudence of these draggle-tails is unspeakable. How far would it not
go were it not checked. Last year did not a peasant from Montrouge
come to a stop in front of the _Reine Pédauque_ with his little cart
full of pigeons that he was selling, ready cooked, for two liards and
a sou cheaper than I sell mine! And the bumpkin cried, in a voice fit
to crack the windows of my shop, ‘Beautiful pigeons for five sous.’ I
threatened him twenty times with my larding-pin. But he answered me,
stupidly, that the street belonged to all the world. I made a complaint
to the _Lieutenant-Criminel_ who saw justice done, and rid me of the
villain. I do not know what has become of him, but I owe him a grudge
for the harm he did me, for the sight of my usual customers, buying
his pigeons, by couples, nay even by half-dozens, gave me an attack of
jaundice, from the effect of which I became melancholy for a long time.
I wish they’d stick as many feathers on his body, with glue, as he had
plucked from the winged creatures he sold ready-cooked in my very face,
and that thus be-feathered from head to foot he was led through the
streets at the tail of his cart.”

“Monsieur Léonard,” said the lame cutler, “you are hard on poor people.
It is thus the unfortunate are driven to desperation.”

“Master Cutler, I counsel you,” said my good master, laughing, “to
order at the Innocents by some paid writer, a satire on Maître Léonard
and to sell it along with your songs on the twelve pipes of King Louis.
Our friend here should be celebrated a little, who, in a semi-servile
state, aspires, not to freedom but to tyranny. I conclude from all your
talking, gentlemen, that the policing of towns is a difficult art,
that one must try and reconcile diverse and often contrary interests,
that the public welfare is made up of a large number of private and
individual woes, and that in fact, it is already rather wonderful that
people shut up within walls do not devour one another. It is a blessing
one must attribute to their poltroonery. Public peace is founded simply
on the feeble courage of citizens who hold each other in respect by
reason of their reciprocal fear. And the prince, in inspiring all with
awe, assures to them the inestimable benefit of peace. As to your
magistrates, whose power is weak, and who are incapable of serving or
of injuring you much, and whose merits consist chiefly in their tall
canes and wigs, do not complain overmuch that they are chosen by the
king and ranked, or little short of it, since the last reign, with
officers of the Crown. Friends of the prince, they are vaguely inimical
to all citizens, and this enmity is rendered bearable to each by the
perfect equality with which it bears upon all. It is like rain, of
which one with another we receive but a few drops. One day, when they
are elected by the people (as they tell us they were in the early days
of the monarchy) magistrates will have friends and foes in the town.
Elected by the shop-people, paying rent and tithes, they will ill-use
the hawkers. Elected by the hawkers, they will ill-use the tradesmen.
Elected by the artisans, they will be in opposition to the masters,
who make the artisans work. It will be an incessant cause of dispute
and quarrels. They will form a turbulent council where each will
agitate for the interests and passions of his electors. Nevertheless,
I fancy they will not make the present magistrates regretted who only
depend on the prince. Their clamorous vanity will amuse the citizens
who will see themselves as in an enlarging mirror. They will employ
mediocre powers after a mediocre fashion. Risen from the mass of the
people they will be as incapable of fostering it as of restraining
it. The rich will be frightened at their audacity, and the poor will
blame their fearfulness, whereas they will really display only noise
and impotence. For the rest, they may be equal to common tasks, and
to administering the public wealth with that insufficient sufficiency
which they always attain to and never get beyond.”

“Ouf!” said my father, “you have spoken well, Monsieur l’Abbé—now
drink!”




