CHAPTER XVI.
SLOTH.

NOT the least, if the last, of capital sins is sloth, and it is very
properly placed; for who ever saw the sluggard or victim of this
passion anywhere but after all others, last!

Sloth, of course, is a horror of difficulty, an aversion for labor,
pain and effort, which must be traced to a great love of one's comfort
and ease. Either the lazy fellow does nothing at all--and this is
sloth; or he abstains from doing what he should do while otherwise
busily occupied--and this too, is sloth; or he does it poorly,
negligently, half-heartedly--and this again is sloth. Nature imposes
upon us the law of labor. He who shirks in whole or in part is
slothful.

Here, in the moral realm, we refer properly to the difficulty we find
in the service of God, in fulfiling our obligations as Christians and
Catholics, in avoiding evil and doing good; in a word, to the discharge
of our spiritual duties. But then all human obligations have a
spiritual side, by the fact of their being obligations. Thus, labor is
not, like attendance at mass, a spiritual necessity; but to provide for
those who are dependent upon us is a moral obligation and to shirk it
would be a sin of sloth.

Not that it is necessary, if we would avoid sin, to hate repose
naturally and experience no difficulty or repugnance in working out our
soul's salvation. Sloth is inbred in our nature. There is no one but
would rather avoid than meet difficulties. The service of God is
laborious and painful. The kingdom of God suffers violence. It has
always been true since the time of our ancestor Adam, that vice is
easy, and virtue difficult; that the flesh is weak, and repugnance to
effort, natural because of the burden of the flesh. So that, in this
general case, sloth is an obstacle to overcome rather than a fault of
the will. We may abhor exertion, feel the laziest of mortals; if we
effect our purpose in spite of all that, we can do no sin.

Sometimes sloth takes on an acute form known as aridity or barrenness
in all things that pertain to God. The most virtuous souls are not
always exempt from this. It is a dislike, a distaste that amounts
almost to a disgust for prayer especially, a repugnance that threatens
to overwhelm the soul. That is simply an absence of sensible fervor, a
state of affliction and probation that is as pleasing to God as it is
painful to us. After all where would the merit be in the service of
God, if there were no difficulty?

The type of the spiritually indolent is that fixture known as the
half-baked Catholic--some people call him "a poor stick"--who is too
lazy to meet his obligations with his Maker. He says no prayers,
because he can't; he lies abed Sunday mornings and lets the others go
to mass--he is too tired and needs rest; the effort necessary to prepare
for and to go to confession is quite beyond him. In fine, religion is
altogether too exacting, requires too much of a man.

And, as if to remove all doubt as to the purely spiritual character of
this inactivity, our friend can be seen, without a complaint,
struggling every day to earn the dollar. He will not grumble about
rising at five to go fishing or cycling. He will, after his hard day's
work, sit till twelve at the theatre or dance till two in the morning.
He will spend his energy in any direction save in that which leads to
God.

Others expect virtue to be as easy as it is beautiful. Religion should
conduce to one's comfort. They like incense, but not the smell of
brimstone. They would remain forever content on Tabor, but the dark
frown of Calvary is insupportable. Beautiful churches, artistic music,
eloquent preaching on interesting topics, that is their idea of
religion; that is what they intend religion--their religion--shall be,
and they proceed to cut out whatever jars their finer feelings. This is
fashionable, but it is not Christian: to do anything for God--if it is
easy; and if it is hard,--well, God does not expect so much of us.

You will see at a glance that this sort of a thing is fatal to the
sense of God in the soul; it has for its first, direct and immediate
effect to weaken little by little the faith until it finally kills it
altogether. Sloth is a microbe. It creeps into the soul, sucks in its
substance and causes a spiritual consumption. This is neither an acute
nor a violent malady, but it consumes the patient, dries him up, wears
him out, till life goes out like a lamp without oil.



CHAPTER XVII.
WHAT WE BELIEVE.

OUR first duty to God, and the first obligation imposed upon us by the
First Commandment is Faith, or belief in God--we must know Him.

Belief is solely a manner of knowing. It is one way of apprehending, or
getting possession of, a truth. There are other ways of acquiring
knowledge; by the senses, for instance, seeing, hearing, etc., and by
our intelligence or reason. When truth comes to us through the senses,
it is called experience; if the reason presents it, it is called
science; if we use the faculty of the soul known as faith, it is
belief.

You will observe that belief, experience and science have one and the
same object, namely, truth. These differ only in the manner of
apprehending truth. Belief relies on the testimony of others;
experience, on the testimony of the senses; science, on that of the
reason. What I believe, I get from others; what I experience or
understand, I owe to my individual self. I neither believe nor
understand that Hartford exists--I see it. I neither understand nor see
that Rome exists--I believe it. I neither see nor believe that two
parallel lines will never meet--I reason it out, I understand it.

Now it is beside the question here to object that belief, or what we
believe, may or may not be true. Neither is all that we see, nor all
that our reason produces, true. Human experience and human reason, like
all things human, may err. Here we simply remark that truth is the
object of our belief, as it is the object of our experience and of
understanding. We shall later see that if human belief may err, faith
or divine belief cannot mislead us, cannot be false.

Neither is it in order here to contend that belief, of its very nature,
is something uncertain, that it is synonymous of opinion; or if it
supposes a judgment, that judgment is "formidolose," liable at any
moment to be changed or contradicted. The testimony of the senses and
of reason does not always carry certain conviction. We may or may not
be satisfied with the evidence of human belief. As for the divine, or
faith, it is certain, or it is not at all; and who would not be
satisfied with the guarantee offered by the Word of God!

And the truths we believe are those revealed by God, received by us
through a double agency, the written and the oral word, known as
Scripture and Tradition. Scripture is contained in the two Testaments;
Tradition is found in the bosom, the life of the Church of Christ, in
the constant and universal teachings of that Church.

The Scripture being a dead letter cannot explain or interpret itself.
Yet, since it is applied to the ever-varying lives of men, it needs an
explanation and an interpretation; it is practically of no value
without it. And in order that the truth thus presented be accepted by
men, it is necessary, of prime necessity, that it have the guarantee of
infallibility. This infallibility the Church of Christ possesses, else
His mission were a failure.

This infallibility is to control the vagaries of Tradition, for
Tradition, of its very nature, tends to exaggeration, as we find in the
legends of ancient peoples. Exaggerated, they destroy themselves, but
in the bosom of God's Church these truths forever retain their
character unchanged and unchangeable.

If you accept the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth as
revealed by God and delivered to man by the infallible Church from the
Bible and Tradition, you have what is called ecclesiastical, Catholic
or true faith. There is no other true faith. It is even an open
question whether there is any faith at all outside of this; for outside
the Church there is no reasonable foundation for faith, and our faith
must be reasonable.

However, granting that such a thing can be, the faith of him who takes
and leaves off the divine Word is called divine faith. He is supposed
to ignore invincibly a portion of revealed truth, but he accepts what
he knows. If he knew something and refused to embrace it, he would have
no faith at all. The same is true of one who having once believed,
believes no longer. He impeaches the veracity of God, and therefore
cannot further rely on His Word.

Lastly, it matters not at all what kind of truths we receive from God.
Truth is truth always and ever. We may not be able to comprehend what
is revealed to us, and little the wonder. Our intelligence is not
infinite, and God's is. Many things that men tell us we believe without
understanding; God deserves our trust more than men. Our incapacity for
understanding all that faith teaches us proves one thing: that there
are limits to our powers, which may be surprising to some, but is
nevertheless true.



