CHAPTER XL.
THE PROFESSION.

ONE of the advantages of the monastic life, created by vows, is that it
is wholly in keeping with human nature such as God created it. Men
differ in their spiritual complexion more widely even than they do in
mental caliber and physical make-up. All are not fitted by character
and general condition for the same 'career; we are "cut out" for our
peculiar tasks. It is the calling of one to be a soldier, of another to
be a statesman, because each is best fitted by nature for this
particular walk of life. The born poet, if set to put together a
machine, will, in the majority of cases, make a sorry mess of the job,
and a bricklayer will usually prove to be an indifferent story-writer.

So also one is called to be a good Christian, while his brother may be
destined for a more perfect life. If there are vocations in the natural
life, why should there not be in the supernatural, which is just as
truly a life? If variety of aptitudes and likes determine difference of
calling, why should this not hold good for the soul as well as for the
body and mind? If one should always follow the bent of one's
legitimately natural inclinations, no fault can reasonably be found if
another hearkens to the voice of his soul's aspirations and elect a
career in harmony with his nature.

There are two roads on which all men must travel to their destiny. One
is called the way of Precept, the other the way of Counsel. In each the
advantages and inconveniences are about equally balanced. The former is
wide and level with many joys and pleasures along the way; but there
are many pitfalls and stumbling blocks, while on one side is a high,
steep precipice over which men fall to their eternal doom. Those
destined by Providence to go over this road are spiritually shod for
the travel; if they slip and tumble, it is through their own neglect.

Some there are to whom it has been shown by experience--very little
sometimes suffices--that they have, for reasons known alone to God,
been denied the shoe that does not slip; and that if they do not wish
to go over the brink, they must get off the highway and follow a path
removed from this danger, a path not less difficult but more secure for
them. Their salvation depends on it. This inside path, while it insures
safety for these, might lead the others astray. Each in his respective
place will be saved; if they exchange places, they are lost.

Then again, if you will look at it from another standpoint, there
remains still on earth such a thing as love of God, pure love of God.
And this love can be translated into acts and life. Love, as all well
know, has its degrees of intensity and perfection. All well-born
children love their parents, but they do not all love them in the same
degree. Some are by nature more affectionate, some appreciate favors
better, some receive more and know that more is expected of them.

In like manner, we who are all children of the Great Father are not all
equally loving and generous. What therefore is more natural than that
some should choose to give themselves up heart, soul and body to the
exclusive service of God? What is there abnormal in the fact that they
renounce the world and all its joys and legitimate pleasures, fast,
pray and keep vigil, through pure love of God? There is only one thing
they fear, and that is to offend God. By their vows they put this
misfortune without the pale of possibility, as far as such a thing can
be done by a creature endowed with free will.

Of course there are those for whom all this is unmitigated twaddle and
bosh. To mention abnegation, sacrifice, etc., to such people is to
speak in a language no more intelligible than Sanskrit. Naturally one
of these will expect his children to appreciate the sacrifices he makes
for their happiness, but with God they think it must be different.

There was once a young man who was rich. He had never broken the
Commandments of God. Wondering if he had done enough to be saved, he
came to the Messiah and put the question to Him. The answer he received
was, that, if he were sinless, he had done well, but that there was a
sanctity, not negative but positive, which if he would acquire, would
betoken in him a charity becoming a follower of a Crucified God. Christ
called the young man to a life of perfection. "If thou wilt be perfect,
go, sell what thou hast, give to the poor, then come, and follow me."
It is not known whether this invitation was accepted by the young man;
but ever since then it has been the joy of men and women in the
Catholic Church to accept it, and to give up all in order to serve the
Maker.

Scoffers and revilers of monasticism are a necessary evil. Being given
the course of nature that sometimes runs to freaks, they must exist.
Living, they must talk, and talking they must utter ineptitudes. People
always do when they discourse on things they do not comprehend. But let
this be our consolation: monks are immortal. They were, they are, they
ever shall be. All else is grass.



CHAPTER XLI.
THE RELIGIOUS.

OWING to the disturbance over things religious in France, vows and
those who exemplify them in their lives are receiving of late a large
share of public attention. On this topic, it seems, every one is
qualified to speak; all sorts of opinions have been ventilated in the
religious, the non-religious, and the irreligious press, for the
benefit of those who are interested in this pitiful spasm of Gallic
madness against the Almighty and His Church. The measure of
unparalleled tyranny and injustice, in which antipathy to religious
orders has found expression, is being favorably and unfavorably
commented upon. But since monks, friars and nuns seldom find favor with
the non Catholic world, the general verdict is that the religious, like
the anarchist, must go; society is afraid of both and is safe from
neither.

To Catholics who understand human nature and have read history, this
condition of things is not surprising; it is, we might venture to say,
the normal state of mind in relation to things so intensely Catholic is
religious vows. Antagonism against monasticism was born the day Luther
decided to take a wife; and as long as that same spirit lingers on
earth we shall expect this antagonism to thrive and prosper. Not only
that, but we shall never expect the religious to get a fair hearing
for their cause. The hater, open or covert, of the habit and cowl is
whole-souled or nothing in his convictions. And he believes the devil
should be fought with his own weapons.

We do not expect all men to think as we do concerning the merits of the
religious profession. To approve it without restriction would be to
approve the Church. To find no wrong in it would be indicative of a
dangerous Romish tendency. And we are not prepared to assert that any
such symptoms exist to an alarming extent in those who expatiate on
religious topics these latter days. There will be differences of
opinion on this score, as on many others, and one fellow's opinion is
as good, to himself, as another's.

There are even objections, to many an honest man, serious objections,
that may be brought up and become legitimate matter for discussion. We
take it for granted that intelligent men do not oppose an institution
as venerable as monasticism without reasons. Contention between people
who respect intelligence is always based on what has at least a
semblance of truth, and has for its object to detect reality and label
it as distinct from appearance.

We go farther, and admit that there have been abuses in this system of
perfection, abuses that we were the first to detect, the first to
deplore and feel the shame of it. But before we believed it, we
investigated and made sure it was so. We found out very often that the
accusations were false. Scandalmongers and dishonest critics noted the
charges, but forgot to publish the verdict, and naturally with the
public these charges stand. No wonder then that such tales breed
antipathy and hatred among those who are not in position to control
facts.

A queer feature about this is that people do not give religious credit
for being human. That they are flesh and blood, all agree; that they
should err, is preposterous. A hue-and-cry goes up when it becomes
known that one of these children of Adam has paid the penalty of being
human. One would think an angel had fallen from heaven. We notice in
this attitude an unconscious recognition of the sanctity of the
religious state; but we see behind it a Pharisaic spirit that
exaggerates evil at the expense of justice.

Now, if the principle that abuse destroys use is applied to all things,
nothing will remain standing, and the best will go first. Corruptio
optimi pessima. Everything human is liable to abuse; that which is
not, is divine. Religious and laymen, mortals all, the only time it
is beyond our power to do wrong is when we are dead, buried, and
twenty-four hours underground. If in life we make mistakes, the fault
lies, not in our being of this or that profession, but in being human.
Whatever, therefore, the excesses that religious can be proven guilty
of, the institution itself must not be held responsible, unless it can
be shown that there exists a relation of cause and effect. And whoever
reasons otherwise, abuses the intelligence of his listeners.

We desire, in the name of honesty and fairness, to see less of that
spirit that espies all manner of evil beneath the habit of a religious;
that discovers in convents and monasteries plotting against the State
in favor of the Papacy, the accumulation of untold wealth by oppression
and extortion for the satisfaction of laziness and lust, iniquity of
the deepest dye allied to general worthlessness. Common sense goes a
long way in this world. If it were only a less rare commodity, and if
an effective tribunal could be erected for the suppression of
mendacity, the religious would appear for the first time in history in
their true colors before the world, and light would shine in darkness.



