CHAPTER LXV.
SOME WEAK POINTS IN THE CATHOLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.

SOME parents claim that their children do not learn anything in the
Catholic school. It is good policy always to accept this statement as
true in all its parts; it may be true, and it is never good to deny the
truth. All are not equally endowed with brains in this world. If a
child has it dinned into his ears that the school he attends is
inferior, he will come to be convinced of the fact; and being
convinced, he will set to work verifying it, in his case, at least.
Heredity may have something to do with it; children are sometimes
"chips of the old block,"--a great misfortune in many cases,
handicapping them in the race of life. It is well, therefore, not to
claim too much for our schools. We concede the point.

Another parent thinks that because he went through the public schools
and kept the faith in his day, his children may be trusted to do the
same. This objection has a serious front to it. It does seem strange
that children should not walk in the footsteps of their worthy parents;
but the fact is, and facts are stubborn things, the fact is that they
do not always act thus. And they might tell you, to justify their
unseemly conduct, that the conditions that obtained in life in olden
days are not the same as at present; that there were no parochial
schools then to offer a choice in matters of education and that kind
Providence might have taken this into consideration: that it was the
custom in those days for children to imitate the rugged virtues of
their parents struggling against necessity on one hand and bigotry on
the other; but that through the powerful influence of money, the
progeny of the persecuted may now hobnob with the progeny of the bigot,
and the association is not always the best thing in the world for the
faith and religious convictions of the former, unless these convictions
are well grounded in youth. The parent therefore who kept the faith
with less had a very considerable advantage over his child who
apparently has more privileges, but also more temptations and dangers.
The objection does not look so serious now.

Of course there is the question of social standing--a very important
matter with some parents of the "nouveau riche" type. A fop will gauge
a man's worth by the size of his purse or the style and cut of the coat
he wears. There are parents who would not mind their children's sitting
beside a little darkey, but who do object most strenuously to their
occupying the same bench with a dirty little Irish child. A calico
dress or a coat frayed at the edges are certainly not badges of high
social standing, but they are not incompatible with honesty, purity,
industry and respect for God, which things create a wholesome
atmosphere to live in and make the world better in every sense of the
word. There is no refinement in these little ones, to speak of, not
even the refinement of vice. There is something in the air they breathe
that kills the germ of vice. The discipline considers sin a worse evil
than ignorance of social amenities, and virtue and goodness as far
superior to etiquette and distinction of manners. If a different
appreciation of things is entertained, we grant the inferiority of our
schools.

"But then, it is so very un-American, you know, to maintain separate
schools in opposition to an institution so intensely American as our
public school system. This state of affairs fosters creed prejudices
that it is the duty of every true American to help destroy. The age of
religious differences is past, and the parochial school is a perpetual
reminder of things of the past that were best forgotten."

We deny that the system that stands for no religious or moral training
is intensely American. This is a Christian land. If our denial cannot
be sustained, we consider such a system radically wrong and detrimental
to the best interests of the country; and we protest against it, just
as some of us protest against imperialism, high tariff and
monometalism. It is wrong, bad, therefore un-American.

We also claim that the Protestant propaganda that is being carried on
under the guise of non-sectarian education is unspeakably unjust and
outrageous. Protestantism is not a State institution in this country. A
stranger might think so by the way public shekels are made to serve the
purposes of proselytism; but to make the claim, in theory, or in
practise, is to go counter to the laws of this land, and is un-American
to a degree. That is another un-Americanism we protest against.

We teach truth, not creed prejudices; we train our children to have and
always maintain a strong prejudice for religious truth, and that kind
of prejudice is the rock-bed of all that is good and holy and worth
living for. We teach dogma. We do not believe in religion without
dogma, any more than religion without truth. "That kind of religion has
not been invented, but it will come in when we have good men without
convictions, parties without principles and geometry without theories."

If there is anything un-American in all this, it is because the term is
misunderstood and misapplied. We are sorry if others find us at odds on
religious grounds. The fact of our existence will always be a reminder
of our differences with them in the past. But we are not willing to
cease to exist on that account.



CHAPTER LXVI.
CORRECTION.

AMONG the many things that are good for children and that parents are
in duty bound to supply is--the rod! This may sound old-fashioned, and
it unfortunately is; there is a new school of home discipline in vogue
nowadays.

Slippers have outgrown their usefulness as implements of persuasion,
being now employed exclusively as foot-gear. The lissom birch thrives
ungarnered in the thicket, where grace and gentleness supply the whilom
vigor of its sway. The unyielding barrel-stave, that formerly occupied
a place of honor and convenience in the household, is now relegated, a
harmless thing, to a forgotten corner of the cellar, and no longer
points a moral but adorns a wood-pile. Disciplinary applications of the
old type have fallen into innocuous desuetude; the penny now tempts,
the sugar candy soothes and sugar-coated promises entice when the rod
should quell and blister. Meanwhile the refractory urchin, with no fear
to stimulate his sluggish conscience, chuckles, rejoices and is glad,
and bethinks himself of some uninvented methods of devilment.

Yes, it is old-fashioned in these days to smite with the rattan as did
the mighty of yore. The custom certainly lived a long time. The author
of the Proverbs spoke of the practise to the parents of his generation,
and there is no mistaking the meaning of his words. He spoke with
authority, too; if we mistake not, it was the Holy Ghost that inspired
his utterances. Here are a few of his old-fashioned sayings: "Spare the
rod and spoil the child; he who loves his child spares not the rod;
correction gives judgment to the child who ordinarily is incapable of
reflection; if the child be not chastised, it will bring down shame and
disgrace upon the head of its parent." It is our opinion that authority
of this sort should redeem the defect of antiquity under which the
teaching itself labors. There are some things "ever ancient, ever new;"
this is one of them.

The philosophy of correction may be found in the doctrine of original
sin. Every child of Adam has a nature that is corrupted; it is a soil
in which pride in all its forms and with all its cortege of vices takes
strong and ready root. This growth crops out into stubbornness,
selfishness, a horror of restraint, effort and self-denial; mischief,
and a spirit of rebellion and destruction. In its native state,
untouched by the rod of discipline, the child is wild. Now, you must
force a crooked tree to grow straight; you must break a wild colt to
domesticate it, and you must whip a wild boy to make him fit for the
company of civilized people. Being self-willed, he will seek to follow
the bent of his own inclinations; without intelligence or experience
and by nature prone to evil, he will follow the wrong path; and the
habits acquired in youth, the faults developed he will carry through
life to his own and the misery of others. He therefore requires
training and a substitute for judgment; and according to the Holy
Ghost, the rod furnishes both. In the majority of cases nothing can
supply it.

This theory has held good in all the ages of the world, and unless the
species has "evolved" by extraordinary leaps and bounds within the last
fifty years, it holds good to-day, modern nursery milk-and-honey
discipline to the contrary notwithstanding. It may be hard on the
youngster--it was hard on us!--but the difficulty is only temporary;
and difficulty, some genius has said, is the nurse of greatness, a
harsh nurse, who roughly rocks her foster-children into strength and
athletic proportions.

The great point is that this treatment be given in time, when it is
possible to administer it with success and fruit. The ordinary child
does not need Oft-repeated doses; a firm hand and a vigorous
application go a long way, in most cases. Half-hearted, milk-and-water
castigation, like physic, should be thrown to the dogs. Long
threatenings spoil the operation; they betray weakness which the child
is the first to discover. And without being brutal, it is well that the
chastisement be such as will linger somewhat longer in the memory than
in the sensibility.

The defects that deserve this corrective especially are
insubordination, sulkiness and sullenness; it is good to stir up
the lazy; it is necessary to instil in the child's mind a saving
sense of its own inferiority and to inculcate lessons of humility,
self-effacement and self-denial. It should scourge dishonesty and lying.
The bear licks its cub into shape; let the parent go to the bear,
inquire of its ways and be wise. His children will then have a moral
shape and a form of character that will stand them in good stead in
after life; and they will give thanks in proportion to the pain
inflicted during the process of formation.



