The Project Gutenberg eBook of Explanation of Catholic Morals
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Explanation of Catholic Morals

Author: John H. Stapleton


        
Release date: May 23, 2006 [eBook #18438]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/18438

Credits: E-text prepared by Michael Gray(Lost_Gamer@comcast.net)




E-text prepared by Michael Gray (Lost_Gamer@comcast.net)



EXPLANATION OF CATHOLIC MORALS

A Concise, Reasoned, and Popular Exposition of Catholic Morals

by

Rev. JOHN H. STAPLETON







New York, Cincinnati, Chicago:
Benzinger Brothers
Printers to the Holy Apostolic See
Publishers of Benzinger's Magazine
1913




Nihil Obstat.
REMY LAFORT,
_Censor Librorum_.




Imprimatur
JOHN M. FARLEY,
Archbishop of New York
New York, March 25, 1904
Copyright, 1904, by Benzinger Brothers.




PREFACE

THE contents of this volume appeared originally in The Catholic
Transcript, of Hartford, Connecticut, in weekly installments, from
February, 1901, to February, 1903. During the course of their
publication, it became evident that the form of instruction adopted was
appreciated by a large number of readers in varied conditions of life--
this appreciation being evinced, among other ways, by a frequent and
widespread demand for back-numbers of the publishing journal. The
management finding itself unable to meet this demand, suggested the
bringing out of the entire series in book-form; and thus, with very few
corrections, we offer the "Briefs" to all desirous of a better
acquaintance with Catholic Morals.
THE AUTHOR.



CONTENTS

          I. Believing and Doing
         II. The Moral Agent
        III. Conscience
         IV. Laxity and Scruples
          V. The Law of God and Its Breach
         VI. Sin
        VII. How to Count Sins
       VIII. Capital Sins
         IX. Pride
          X. Covetousness
         XI. Lust
        XII. Anger
       XIII. Gluttony
        XIV. Drink
         XV. Envy
        XVI. Sloth
       XVII. What We Believe
      XVIII. Why We Believe
        XIX. Whence Our Belief: Reason
         XX. Whence Our Belief: Grace and Will
        XXI. How We Believe
       XXII. Faith and Error
      XXIII. The Consistent Believer
       XXIV. Unbelief
        XXV. How Faith May Be Lost
       XXVI. Hope
      XXVII. Love of God
     XXVIII. Love of Neighbor
       XXIX. Prayer
        XXX. Petition
       XXXI. Religion
      XXXII. Devotions
     XXXIII. Idolatry and Superstition
      XXXIV. Occultism
       XXXV. Christian Science
      XXXVI. Swearing
     XXXVII. Oaths
    XXXVIII. Vows
      XXXIX. The Professional Vow
         XL. The Profession
        XLI. The Religious
       XLII. The Vow of Poverty
      XLIII. The Vow of Obedience
       XLIV. The Vow of Chastity
        XLV. Blasphemy
       XLVI. Cursing
      XLVII. Profanity
     XLVIII. The Law of Rest
       XLIX. The Day of Rest
          L. Keeping the Lord's Day Holy
         LI. Worship of Sacrifice
        LII. Worship of Rest
       LIII. Servile Works
        LIV. Common Works
         LV. Parental Dignity
        LVI. Filial Respect
       LVII. Filial Love
      LVIII. Authority and Obedience
        LIX. Should We Help Our Parents?
         LX. Disinterested Love in Parents
        LXI. Educate the Children
       LXII. Educational Extravagance
      LXIII. Godless Education
       LXIV. Catholic Schools
        LXV. Some Weak Points in the Catholic School System
       LXVI. Correction
      LXVII. Justice and Rights
     LXVIII. Homicide
       LXIX. Is Suicide a Sin?
        LXX. Self-Defense
       LXXI. Murder Often Sanctioned
      LXXII. On the Ethics of War
     LXXIII. The Massacre of the Innocents
      LXXIV. Enmity
       LXXV. Our Enemies
      LXXVI. Immorality
     LXXVII. The Sink of Iniquity
    LXXVIII. Wherein Nature Is Opposed
      LXXIX. Hearts
       LXXX. Occasions
      LXXXI. Scandal
     LXXXII. Not Good to Be Alone
    LXXXIII. A Helping Hand
     LXXXIV. Thou Shalt Not Steal
      LXXXV. Petty Thefts
     LXXXVI. An Oft Exploited, But Specious Plea
    LXXXVII. Contumely
   LXXXVIII. Defamation
     LXXXIX. Detraction
         XC. Calumny
        XCI. Rash Judgment
       XCII. Mendacity
      XCIII. Concealing the Truth
       XCIV. Restitution
        XCV. Undoing the Evil
       XCVI. Paying Back
      XCVII. Getting Rid of Ill-Gotten Goods
     XCVIII. What Excuses From Restitution
       XCIX. Debts



MORAL BRIEFS.

CHAPTER I.
BELIEVING AND DOING.

MORALS pertain to right living, to the things we do, in relation to God
and His law, as opposed to right thinking, to what we believe, to
dogma. Dogma directs our faith or belief, morals shape our lives. By
faith we know God, by moral living we serve Him; and this double
homage, of our mind and our works, is the worship we owe our Creator
and Master and the necessary condition of our salvation.

Faith alone will save no man. It may be convenient for the easy-going
to deny this, and take an opposite view of the matter; but convenience
is not always a safe counsellor. It may be that the just man liveth by
faith; but he lives not by faith alone. Or, if he does, it is faith of
a different sort from what we define here as faith, viz., a firm assent
of the mind to truths revealed. We have the testimony of Holy Writ,
again and again reiterated, that faith, even were it capable of moving
mountains, without good works is of no avail. The Catholic Church is
convinced that this doctrine is genuine and reliable enough to make it
her own; and sensible enough, too. For faith does not make a man
impeccable; he may believe rightly, and live badly. His knowledge of
what God expects of him will not prevent him from doing just the
contrary; sin is as easy to a believer as to an unbeliever. And he who
pretends to have found religion, holiness, the Holy Ghost, or whatever
else he may call it, and can therefore no longer prevaricate against
the law, is, to common-sense people, nothing but a sanctified humbug or
a pious idiot.

Nor are good works alone sufficient. Men of emancipated intelligence
and becoming breadth of mind, are often heard to proclaim with a
greater flourish of verbosity than of reason and argument, that the
golden rule is religion enough for them, without the trappings of
creeds and dogmas; they respect themselves and respect their neighbors,
at least they say they do, and this, according to them, is the
fulfilment of the law. We submit that this sort of worship was in vogue
a good many centuries before the God-Man came down upon earth; and if
it fills the bill now, as it did in those days, it is difficult to see
the utility of Christ's coming, of His giving of a law of belief and of
His founding of a Church. It is beyond human comprehension that He
should have come for naught, labored for naught and died for naught.
And such must be the case, if the observance of the natural law is a
sufficient worship of the Creator. What reasons Christ may have had for
imposing this or that truth upon our belief, is beside the question; it
is enough that He did reveal truths, the acceptance of which glorifies
Him in the mind of the believer, in order that the mere keeping of the
commandments appear forthwith an insufficient mode of worship.

Besides, morals are based on dogma, or they have no basis at all;
knowledge of the manner of serving God can only proceed from knowledge
of who and what He is; right living is the fruit of right thinking. Not
that all who believe rightly are righteous and walk in the path of
salvation: losing themselves, these are lost in spite of the truths
they know and profess; nor that they who cling to an erroneous belief
and a false creed can perform no deed of true moral worth and are
doomed; they may be righteous in spite of the errors they profess,
thanks alone to the truths in their creeds that are not wholly
corrupted. But the natural order of things demands that our works
partake of the nature of our convictions, that truth or error in mind
beget truth or error correspondingly in deed and that no amount of
self-confidence in a man can make a course right when it is wrong, can
make a man's actions good when they are materially bad. This is the
principle of the tree and its fruit and it is too old-fashioned to be
easily denied. True morals spring from true faith and true dogma; a
false creed cannot teach correct morality, unless accidentally, as the
result of a sprinkling of truth through the mass of false teaching. The
only accredited moral instructor is the true Church. Where there is no
dogma, there can logically be no morals, save such as human instinct
and reason devise; but this is an absurd morality, since there is no
recognition of an authority, of a legislator, to make the moral law
binding and to give it a sanction. He who says he is a law unto himself
chooses thus to veil his proclaiming freedom from all law. His golden
rule is a thing too easily twistable to be of any assured benefit to
others than himself; his moral sense, that is, his sense of right and
wrong, is very likely where his faith is--nowhere.

It goes without saying that the requirements of good morals are a heavy
burden for the natural man, that is, for man left, in the midst of
seductions and allurements, to the purely human resources of his own
unaided wit and strength; so heavy a burden is this, in fact, that
according to Catholic doctrine, it cannot be borne without assistance
from on high, the which assistance we call grace. This supernatural aid
we believe essential to the shaping of a good moral life; for man,
being destined, in preference to all the rest of animal creation, to a
supernatural end, is thereby raised from the natural to a supernatural
order. The requirements of this order are therefore above and beyond
his native powers and can only be met with the help of a force above
his own. It is labor lost for us to strive to climb the clouds on a
ladder of our own make; the ladder must be let down from above. Human
air-ships are a futile invention and cannot be made to steer straight
or to soar high in the atmosphere of the supernatural. One-half of
those who fail in moral matters are those who trust altogether, or too
much, in their own strength, and reckon without the power that said
"Without Me you can do nothing."

The other half go to the other extreme. They imagine that the Almighty
should not only direct and aid them, but also that He should come down
and drag them along in spite of themselves; and they complain when He
does not, excuse and justify themselves on the ground that He does not,
and blame Him for their failure to walk straight in the narrow path.
They expect Him to pull them from the clutches of temptation into which
they have deliberately walked. The drunkard expects Him to knock the
glass out of his hand: the imprudent, the inquisitive and the vicious
would have it so that they might play with fire, yea, even put in their
hand, and not be scorched or burnt. 'Tis a miracle they want, a miracle
at every turn, a suspension of the laws of nature to save them from the
effects of their voluntary perverseness. Too lazy to employ the means
at their command, they thrust the whole burden on the Maker. God helps
those who help themselves. A supernatural state does not dispense us
from the obligation of practising natural virtue. You can build a
supernatural life only on the foundations of a natural life. To do away
with the latter is to build in the air; the structure will not stay up,
it will and must come down at the first blast of temptation.

Catholic morals therefore require faith in revealed truths, of which
they are but deductions, logical conclusions; they presuppose, in their
observance, the grace of God; and call for a certain strenuosity of
life without which nothing meritorious can be effected. We must be
convinced of the right God has to trace a line of conduct for us; we
must be as earnest in enlisting His assistance as if all depended on
Him; and then go to work as if it all depended on ourselves.



