CHAPTER LXXXVII.
CONTUMELY.

THE Eighth Commandment concerns itself with the good name of the
neighbor; in a general way, it reproves all sins of the tongue, apart
from those already condemned by the Second and Sixth commandments, that
is to say, blasphemous and impure speech. It is as a weapon against the
neighbor and an instrument of untruth that the tongue is here
considered.

By a good name is here intended the esteem in which a person is held by
his fellow-men. Call it reputation, character, fame, renown, etc., a
good name means that the bearer is generally considered above reproach
in all matters of honesty, moral integrity and worth. It does not
necessarily imply that such esteem is manifested exteriorly by what is
technically known as honor, the natural concomitant of a good name; it
simply stands for the knowledge entertained by others of our
respectability and our title to honor. A good name is therefore one
thing; honor is another. And honor consists precisely in that
manifestation on the part of our fellows of the esteem and respect in
which they hold us, the fruit of our good name, the homage rendered to
virtue, dignity and merit. As it may therefore be easily seen, these
two things--a good name and honor--differ as much as a sign differs
from the thing signified.

The Eighth Commandment protects every man's honor; it condemns
contumely which is an attack upon that honor. Contumely is a sign of
contempt which shows itself by attempting to impair the honor one duly
receives; it either strives to prevent that honor being paid to the
good name that naturally deserves it, or it tries to nullify it by
offering just the contrary, which is contumely, more commonly called
affront, outrage, insult.

Now, contumely, as you will remark, does not seek primarily to deprive
one of a good name; which it nearly always succeeds in doing, and this
is called detraction; but its object is to prevent your good name from
getting its desert of respect, your character supposedly remaining
intact. The insult offered is intended to effect this purpose. Again,
all contumely presupposes the presence of the party affronted; the
affront is thrown in one's face, and therein consists the shocking
indecency of the thing and its specific malice.

It must be remembered that anger, hatred, the spirit of vengeance or
any other passion does not excuse one from the guilt of contumely. On
the other hand, one's culpability is not lessened by the accidental
fact of one's intended insults going wide of the mark and bearing no
fruit of dishonor to the person assailed. To the malice of contumely
may, and is often, added that of defamation, if apart from the dishonor
received one's character is besmirched in the bargain. Contumely
against parents offends at the same time filial piety; against God and
His saints, it is sacrilegious; if provoked by the practice of religion
and virtue, it is impious. If perpetrated in deed, it may offend
justice properly so called; if it occasion sin in others, it is
scandalous; if it drive the victim to excesses of any kind, the guilt
thereof is shared by the contumelious agent.

Sometimes insult is offered gratuitously, as in the case of the weak,
the old, the cripple and other unfortunates who deserve pity rather
than mockery; the quality of contumely of this sort is brutal and
fiendish. Others will say for justification: "But he said the same, he
did the same to me. Can I not defend myself?" That depends on the sort
of defense you resort to. All weapons of defense are not lawful. If a
man uses evil means to wrong you, there is no justification, in
Christian ethics, for you to employ the same means in order to get
square, or even to shelter yourself from his abuse. The "eye-for-eye"
principle is not recognized among civilized and Christian peoples.

This gross violation of personal respect may be perpetrated in many
ways; any expression of contempt, offered to your face, or directed
against you through a representative, is contumely. The usual way to do
this is to fling vile epithets, to call opprobrious names, to make
shameful charges. It is not always necessary that such names and
epithets be inapplicable or such charges false, if, notwithstanding,
the person in question has not thereby forfeited his right to respect.
In certain circumstances, the epithet "fool" may hold all the
opprobriousness of contumely: "thief" and "drunkard" and others of a
fouler nature may be thus malicious for a better reason. An accusation
of immorality in oneself or in one's parents is contumelious in a high
degree. Our mothers are a favorite target for the shafts of contumely
that through them reach us. Abuse is not the only vehicle of contumely;
scorn, wanton ridicule, indecent mockery and caricature that cover the
unfortunate victim with shame and confusion serve the purpose as well.
To strike one, to spit on one and other ignoble attacks and assaults
belong to the same category of crime.

The malice of contumely is not, of course, equal in all cases;
circumstances have a great deal to do in determining the gravity of
each offense. The more conspicuous a person is in dignity and the more
worthy of respect, the more serious the affront offered him; and still
more grave the offense, if through him many others are attainted. If
again no dishonor is intended and no offense taken, or could reasonably
be taken, there is no sin at all. There may be people very low on the
scale of respectability as the world judges respectability; but it can
never be said of a man or woman that he or she cannot be dishonored,
that he or she is beneath contempt. Human nature never forfeits all
respect; it always has some redeeming feature to commend it.



CHAPTER LXXXVIII.
DEFAMATION.

DEFAMATION differs from contumely in that the one supposes the absence,
the other, the presence, of the person vilified; and again, in that the
former asperses the reputation of the victim while the latter attacks
the honor due or paid to said reputation. A good name is, after the
grace of God, mans most precious possession; wealth is mere trash
compared with it. You may find people who think otherwise, but the
universal sentiment of mankind stigmatizes such baseness and buries it
under the weight of its opprobrium. Nor is it impossible that honor be
paid where a good character no longer exists; but this is accidental.
In the nature of things, reputation is the basis of all honor; if you
destroy character, you destroy at the same time its fruit, which is
honor. Thus will be seen the double malice of defamation.

To defame therefore is to lessen or to annul the estimation in which a
person is held by his fellow-men. This crime may be perpetrated in two
different manners: by making known his secret faults, and this is
simple detraction; and by ascribing to him faults of which he is
innocent, and this is calumny or slander. Thus it appears that a man's
character may suffer from truth as well as from falsehood. Truth is an
adorable thing, but it has its time and place; the fact of its being
truth does not prevent it from being harmful. On the other hand, a lie,
which is evil in itself, becomes abominable when used to malign a
fellow-man.

There is one mitigating and two aggravating forms of defamation. Gossip
is small talk, idle and sufficiently discolored to make its subject
appear in an unfavorable light. It takes a morbid pleasure in speaking
of the known and public faults of another. It picks at little things,
and furnishes a steady occupation for people who have more time to mind
other people's business than their own. It bespeaks small-ness in
intellectual make-up and general pusillanimity. That is about all the
harm there is in it, and that is enough.

Libel supposes a wide diffusion of defamatory matter, written or
spoken. Its malice is great because of its power for evil and harm.
Tale-bearing or backbiting is what the name implies. Its object is
principally to spread discord, to cause enmity, to break up
friendships; it may have an ulterior purpose, and these are the means
it employs. No limit can be set to its capacity for evil, its malice is
especially infernal.

It is not necessary that what we do or say of a defamatory nature
result, as a matter of fact, in bringing one's name into disfavor or
disrepute; it is sufficient that it be of such a nature and have such a
tendency. If by accident the venomous shaft spend itself before
attaining the intended mark, no credit is due therefore to him who shot
it; his guilt remains what it was when he sped it on its way. Nor is
there justification in the plea that no harm was meant, that the deed
was done in a moment of anger, jealousy, etc., that it was the result
of loquacity, indulged in for the simple pleasure of talking. These are
excuses that excuse not.

There are those who, speaking in disparagement of the neighbor, speak
to the point, directly and plainly; others, no less guilty, do it in a
covert manner, have recourse to subterfuge and insinuation. They
exaggerate faults and make them appear more odious, they put an evil
interpretation on the deed or intention; they keep back facts that
would improve the situation; they remain silent when silence is
condemnatory; they praise with a malignant praise. A mean, sarcastic
smile or a significant reticence often does the work better than many
words and phrases. And all this, as we have said, independently of the
truth or falsehood of the impression conveyed.

Listeners share the guilt of the defamers on the principle that the
receiver is as bad as the thief. This supposes of course that you
listen, not merely hear; that you enjoy this sort of a thing and are
willing and ready to receive the impression derogatory to the
neighbor's esteem and good name. Of course, if mere curiosity makes us
listen and our pleasure and amusement are less at the expense of the
neighbor's good name than excited by the style of the narrator or the
singularity of the facts alleged, the fault is less; but fault there
nevertheless is, since such an attitude serves to encourage the
traducer and helps him drive his points home. Many sin who could and
should prevent excesses of this kind, but refrain from doing so; their
sin is greater if, by reason of their position, they are under greater
obligations of correction.

Although reputation is a priceless boon to all men, there are cases
wherein it has an especial value on account of the peculiar
circumstances of a man's position. It not infrequently happens that the
whole success of a man's life depends on his good name. Men in public
life, in the professions, religious and others similarly placed,
suffer from defamation far more than those in the ordinary walks of
life; and naturally those who injure them are guilty of more grievous
wrong. And it goes without saying that a man can stand an immoral
aspersion better than a woman. In all cases the malice is measured by
the injury done or intended.



