CHAPTER LIII.
SERVILE WORKS.

BUT, if servile works are prohibited on the Lord's day, it must be
remembered that "the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath," that, for certain good and sufficient reasons, the law ceases
to oblige; and, in these circumstances, works of a purely servile
nature are no longer unlawful. This is a truth Christ made very clear
to the straight-laced Pharisees of the old dispensation who interpreted
too rigorously the divine prohibition; and certain Pharisees of the new
dispensation, who are supposed assiduously to read the Bible, should
jog their memories on the point in order to save themselves from the
ridicule that surrounds the memory of their ancestors of Blue-Law fame.
The Church enters into the spirit of her divine Founder and recognizes
cases in which labor on Sunday may be, and is, more agreeable to God,
and more meritorious to ourselves, than rest from labor.

The law certainly does not intend to forbid a kind of works,
specifically servile in themselves, connected with divine worship,
required by the necessities of public religion, or needed to give to
that worship all the solemnity and pomp which it deserves; provided, of
course, such things could not well be done on another day. All God's
laws are for His greater glory, and to assert that works necessary for
the honoring of God are forbidden by His law is to be guilty of a
contradiction in terms. All things therefore needed for the preparation
and becoming celebration of the rites of religion, even though of a
servile nature, are lawful and do not come under the head of this
prohibition.

The law ceases likewise to bind when its observance would prevent an
act of charity towards the neighbor in distress, necessity, or pressing
need. If the necessity is real and true charity demands it, in matters
not what work, not intrinsically evil, is to be done, on what day or
for how long a time it is to be done; charity overrides every law, for
it is itself the first law of God. Thus, if the neighbor is in danger
of suffering, or actually suffers, any injury, damage or ill, God
requires that we give our services to that neighbor rather than to
Himself. As a matter of fact, in thus serving the neighbor, we serve
God in the best possible way.

Finally, necessity, public as well as personal, dispenses from
obligation to the law. In time of war, all things required for its
carrying on are licit. It is lawful to fight the elements when they
threaten destruction, to save crops in an interval of fine weather when
delay would mean a risk; to cater to public conveniences which custom
adjudges necessary,--and by custom we mean that which has at least the
implicit sanction of authority,--such as public conveyances,
pharmacies, hotels, etc. Certain industries run by steam power require
that their fires should not be put out altogether, and the labor
necessary to keep them going is not considered illicit. In general, all
servile work that is necessary to insure against serious loss is
lawful.

As for the individual, it is easier to allow him to toil on Sunday,
that is, a less serious reason is required, if he assists at divine
worship, than in the contrary event. One can be justified in omitting
both obligations only in the event of inability otherwise to provide
for self and family. He whose occupation demands Sunday labor need not
consider himself guilty so long as he is unable to secure a position
with something like the same emoluments; but it is his duty to regret
the necessity that prevents him from fulfiling the law, and to make
efforts to better his condition from a spiritual point of view, even if
the change does not to any appreciable extent better it financially; a
pursuit equally available should be preferred. Neglect in seeking out
such an amelioration of situation would cause the necessity of it to
cease and make the delinquent responsible for habitual breach of the
law.

If it is always a sin to engage without necessity in servile works on
Sunday, it is not equally sinful to labor little or labor much. Common
sense tells us that all our failings are not in the same measure
offensive to God, for they do not all contain the same amount of malice
and contempt of authority. A person who resolves to break the law and
persists in working all day long, is of a certainty more guilty than he
who after attending divine service fails so far as to labor an hour.
The question therefore is, how long must one work on Sunday to be
guilty of a mortal sin.

The answer to this question is: a notable time; but that does not throw
a very great abundance of light on the subject. But surely a fourth of
the whole is a notable part. Now, considering that a day's work is, not
twenty-four hours, but ten hours, very rarely twelve, frequently only
eight, it will be seen to follow that two hours' work would be
considered a notable breach of the law of rest. And this is the
decision of competent authority. Not but that less might make us
grievously guilty, but we may take it as certain that he who works
during two full hours, at a labor considered servile, without
sufficient reason, commits a mortal sin.



CHAPTER LIV.
COMMON WORKS.

THERE is a third sort of works to be considered in relation to Sunday
observance, which, being of their nature neither liberal nor servile,
go by the specific name of common works. This class embraces works of
two kinds, viz., those which enter into the common, daily, inevitable
necessities of life, and those in which the mind and body are exerted
in an equal measure.

The former are not considered servile because they are necessary, not
in certain circumstances, but at all times, for all persons, in all
conditions of life. Activity of this kind, so universally and
imperiously demanded, does not require dispensation from the law, as in
the case of necessary servile works properly so-called; but it stands
outside all legislation and is a law unto itself.

These works are usually domestic occupations, as cooking and the
preparation of victuals, the keeping of the house in becoming tidiness,
the proper care of children, of beasts of burden and domestic animals.
People must eat, the body must be fed, life requires attention on
Sunday as well as on the other six days; and in no circumstances can
this labor be dispensed with. Sometimes eatables for Sunday consumption
may be prepared on the previous day; if this is not done, whether
through forgetfulness, neglect or indifference, it is lawful on Sunday
to prepare a good table, even one more sumptuous than on ordinary days.
For Sunday is a day of festival, and without enthusing over the fact,
we must concede that the words feast and festival are synonymous in
human language, that the ordinary and favorite place for human
rejoicing is the table, and in this man differs not from the other
animals of creation. This may not be aesthetic but it is true.

In walking, riding, games, etc., the physical and mental forces of man
are called into play in about equal proportion, or at least, these
occupations can be called neither liberal arts nor manual labor; all
manners of persons engage therein without respect to condition or
profession. These are also called common works; and to them may be
added hunting and fishing, when custom, rightly understood, does not
forbid them, and in this region custom most uniformly does so forbid.

These occupations are looked upon as innocent pastime, affording relief
to the body and mind, and in this respect should be likened to the
taking of food. For it is certain that sanitary conditions often as
imperiously demand recreation as nourishment. Especially is this the
case with persons given to sedentary pursuits, confined during the week
to shops, factories and stores, and whose only opportunity this is to
shake off the dull monotony of work and to give the bodies and minds
necessary relaxation and distraction. It is not physical rest that such
people require so much as healthy movement of a pleasing kind, and
activity that will draw their attention from habitual channels and thus
break the strain that fatigues them. Under these conditions, common
works are not only allowed, but they are to be encouraged.

But it must not be lost sight of that these pursuits are permitted as
long as they remain common works, that is, as long as they do not
accidentally become servile works, or go contrary to the end for which
they are allowed. This may occur in three different manners, and when
it does occur, the works known as common are forbidden as servile
works.

1. They must not expose us to the danger of omitting divine service.
The obligation to positively sanctify the day remains intact. Sin may
be committed, slight or grievous, according as the danger to which we
expose ourselves, by indulging in these pursuits, of missing public
worship, is more or less remote, more or less probable.

2. These works become illicit when they are excessive, when too much
time is given to them, when the body receives too large a share of the
exercise, when accompanied by overmuch application, show or fatigue. In
these cases, the purpose of the law is defeated, the works are
considered no longer common and fall under the veto that affects
servile works. An aggravating circumstance is that of working for the
sole purpose of gain, as in the case of professional baseball, etc.

3. Lastly, there are exterior circumstances that make these occupations
a desecration of the Lord's day, and as such evidently they cannot be
tolerated. They must not be boisterous to the extent of disturbing the
neighbor's rest and quiet, or detracting from the reverence due the
Sabbath; they must not entice others away from a respectful observance
of the Lord's day or offer an opportunity or occasion for sin, cursing,
blasphemy and foul language, contention and drunkenness; they must not
be a scandal for the community. Outside these contingencies of
disorder, the Sabbath rest is not broken by indulgence in works
classified as common works. Such activity, in all common sense and
reason, is compatible with the reverence that God claims as His due on
His day.



