CHAPTER LXX.
SELF-DEFENSE.

THE thought is a terrible one--and the act is desperate in itself--of a
man, however justified his conduct may be, slaying with his own hand a
fellow being and sending his soul, unprepared perhaps, before its
Maker. But it is a still more desperate thing, because it strikes us
nearer home, to yield up one's life into the hands of an agent of
injustice. There is here an alternative of two very great evils; it is
a question of two lives, his and mine; I must slay or I must die
without having done anything to forfeit my life.

But the law of charity, founded in nature, makes my life more precious
to me than his, for charity begins at home. Then, to save his life, I
must give mine; and he risks his to take mine! I do not desire to kill
my unjust aggressor, but I do intend, as I have a perfect right, to
protect my own life. If he, without cause, places his existence as an
obstacle to my enjoyment of life, then I shall remove that obstacle,
and to do it, I shall kill. Again, a desperate remedy, but the
situation is most terribly desperate. Being given law of my being, I
can not help the inevitable result of conditions of which I am nowise
responsible. The man who attacks my life places his own beyond the
possibility of my saving it.

This, of course, supposes a man using the full measure of his rights.
But is he bound to do this, morally? Not if his charity for another be
greater than that which he bears towards himself, if he go beyond the
divine injunction to love his neighbor as himself and love him better
than himself; if he feel that he is better prepared to meet his God
than the other, if he have no one dependent on him for maintenance and
support. Even did he happen to be in the state of mortal sin, there is
every reason to believe that such charity as will sacrifice life for
another, greater than which no man has, would wash away that sin and
open the way of mercy; while great indeed must be the necessity of the
dependent ones to require absolutely the death of another.

The aggression that justifies killing must be unjust. This would not be
the case of a criminal being brought to justice or resisting arrest.
Justice cannot conflict with itself and can do nothing unjust in
carrying out its own mandates. The culprit therefore has no grounds to
stand upon for his defense.

Neither is killing justifiable, if wounding or mutilation would effect
the purpose. But here the code of morals allows much latitude on
account of the difficulty of judging to a nicety the intentions of the
aggressor, that is, whether he means to kill or not; and of so
directing the protecting blow as to inflict just enough, and no more
disability than the occasion requires.

Virtue in woman is rightly considered a boon greater than life; and for
that matter, so is the state of God's friendship in the soul of any
creature. Then, here too applies the principle of self-defense. If I
may kill to save my life, 1 may for a better reason kill to save my
soul and to avoid mortal offense. True, the loss of bodily integrity
does not necessarily imply a staining of the soul; but human nature is
such as to make the one an almost fatal consequence of the other. The
person therefore who kills to escape unjust contamination acts within
his or her rights and before God is justified in the doing.

We would venture to say the same thing of a man who resorts to this
extreme in order to protect his rightly gotten goods, on these two
conditions, however: that there be some kind of proportion between the
loss and the remedy he employs to protect himself against it; and that
he have well grounded hope that the remedy will be effective, that it
will prevent said loss, and not transform itself into revenge.

And here a last remark is in order. The killing that is permitted to
save, is not permitted to avenge loss sustained; the law sanctions
self-defense, but not vengeance. If a man, on the principle of
self-defense, has the right to kill to save his brother, and fails to
do so, his further right to kill ceases; the object is past saving and
vengeance is criminal. If a woman has been wronged, once the wrong
effected, there can be no lawful recourse to slaying, for what is lost
is beyond redemption, and no reason for such action exists except
revenge. In these cases killing is murder, pure and simple, and there
is nothing under Heaven to justify it.

Remembering the injunction to love our neighbor as ourself, we add that
we have the same right to defend our neighbor's life as we have to
defend our own, even to protect his or her innocence and virtue and
possessions. A husband may defend the honor of his wife, which is his
own, even though the wife be a party to the crime and consent to the
defilement; but the right is only to prevent, and ceases on the event
of accomplishment, even at the incipient stage.



CHAPTER LXXI.
MURDER OFTEN SANCTIONED.

ALL injury done to another in order to repair an insult is criminal,
and if said injury result in death, it is murder.

Here we consider an insult as an attack on one's reputation or
character, a charge or accusation, a slurring remark, etc., without
reference to the truth or falsity thereof. It may be objected that
whereas reputation, like chastity and considerable possessions, is
often valued as high as life itself, the same right exists to defend it
even at the cost of another's life. But it must be remembered that the
loss of character sustained in consequence of an insult of this kind is
something very ephemeral and unsubstantial; and only to a mind
abnormally sensitive can any proportion be perceived between the loss
and the remedy. This is especially true when the attack is in words and
goes no farther than words: for "sticks and stones will break your
bones, but names will never hurt you," as we used to say when we were
boys. Then, words are such fleeting things that the harm is done,
whatever harm there is, before any remedy can be brought to bear upon
it; which fact leaves no room for self-defense.

In such a case, the only redress that can be had is from the courts of
justice, established to undo wrongs as far as the thing can be done.
The power to do this belongs to the State alone, and is vested in no
private individual. To assume the prerogative of privately doing
oneself justice, when recourse can be had to the tribunals of justice,
is to sin, and every act committed in this pursuit of justice is
unlawful and criminal.

This applies likewise to all the other cases of self-defense wherein
life, virtue and wealth are concerned, if the harm is already done, or
if legal measures can prevent the evil, or undo it. It may be that the
justice dealt out by the tribunal, in case of injury being done to u's,
prove inferior to that which we might have obtained ourselves by
private methods. But this is not a reason for one to take the law into
one's own hands. Such loss is accidental and must be ascribed to the
inevitable course of human things.

Duelling is a form of murder and suicide combined, for which there can
possibly be no justification. The code of honor that requires the
reparation of an insult at the point of the sword or the muzzle of a
pistol has no existence outside the befogged intelligence of godless
men. The duel repairs nothing and aggravates the evil it seeks to
remedy. The justice it appeals to is a creature dependent on skill and
luck; such justice is not only blind, but crazy as well.

That is why the Church anathematizes duelling. The duel she condemns is
a hand-to-hand combat prearranged as to weapons, time and place, and it
is immaterial whether it be to the death or only to the letting of
first blood. She fulminates her major excommunication against
duellists, even in the event of their failing to keep their agreement.
Her sentence affects seconds and all those who advise or favor or abet,
and even those whose simple presence is an incentive and encouragement.
She refuses Christian burial to the one who falls, unless before dying
he shows certain dispositions of repentance.

Prize fighting, however brutal and degrading, must not be put in the
category of duelling. Its object is not to wipe out an insult, but to
furnish sport and to reap the incidental profits. In normal conditions
there is no danger to life or limb. Sharkey might stop with the point
of his chin a blow that would send many another into kingdom come; but
so long as Sharkey does the stopping the danger remains non-existent.
If, however, hate instead of lucre bring the men together, that motive
would be sufficient to make the game one of blood if not of death.

Lynching, is another kind of murder, and a cowardly, brutal kind, at
that. No crime, no abomination on the part of the victim, however
great, can justify such an inhuman proceeding. It brands with the crime
of wilful murder every man or woman who has a hand in it. To defend the
theory of lynching-is as bad as to carry it out in practice. And it is
greatly to be feared that the Almighty will one day call this land to
account for the outrageous performances of unbridled license and
heartless cruelty that occur so frequently in our midst.

The only plea on which to ground an excuse for such exhibitions of
brutality and disrespect for order and justice would be the inability
of established government to mete out justice to the guilty; but this
is not even the case, for government is defied and lawful authority
capable and willing to punish is spurned; the culprit is taken from the
hands of the law and delivered over to the vengeance of a mob. However
popular the doctrine of Judge Lynch may be in certain sections of the
land, it is nevertheless reprobated by the law of God and stands
condemned at the bar of His justice.



