CHAPTER XCVI.
PAYING BACK.

A MAN who has stolen, has nothing more urgent and imperative to
perform, on this side of eternity, than the duty of refunding the money
or goods unjustly acquired, or the value thereof. He may possibly
consider something else more important; but if he does, that man has
somehow unlearned the first principles of natural honesty, ignores the
fundamental law that governs the universe, and he will have a difficult
time convincing the Almighty that this ignorance of his is not wholly
culpable. The best and only thing for him to do is to make up his mind
to pay up, to disgorge his ill-gotten goods, to make good the losses
sustained by his neighbor through his fault.

He may, or may not, have profited to any great extent by his criminal
proceedings; but there is no doubt that his victim suffered injustice;
and that precisely is the root of his obligation. The stolen goods may
have perished in his hands and he have nothing to show; the same must
be said of the victim the moment his possessions disappeared; with this
difference, however, that justice was not violated in one case, and in
the other, it was. The lawful owner may be dead, or unfindable among
the living; but wherever he may be, he never intended that the thief
should enjoy the fruit of his crime. The latter's title, vitiated in
its source, cannot be improved by any circumstance of the owner's
whereabouts. No one may thrive on one's own dishonesty.

You say this is hard; and in so saying, you lend testimony to the truth
of the axiom that honesty is the best policy. There is no one but will
agree with you; but such a statement, true though it be, helps matters
very little. It is always hard to do right; blame Adam and Eve for it,
and think of something more practicable. But must I impoverish myself?
Not to the extent of depriving yourself of the necessaries of life. But
you must deprive yourself to the extent of settling your little
account, even if you suffer something thereby. But how shall I be able
to refund it all! You may never be able to refund it all; but you may
start in immediately and do the best you can; resolve to keep at it;
never revoke your purpose to cancel the debt. In case your lease of
life expires before full justice is done, the Almighty may take into
consideration your motives and opportunities. They do say that hell is
paved with good intentions; but these intentions are of the sort that
are satisfied with never coming to a state of realization.

But I shall lose my position, be disgraced, prosecuted and imprisoned.
This might happen if you were to write out a brief of your crime and
send the same, signed and sworn to, to your employer. But this is
superfluous. You might omit the details and signature, enclose the sum
and trust luck for the rest. Or you might consult your spiritual
adviser; he might have had some experience in this line of business.
The essential is not that you be found out, but that you refund.

It may happen that several are concerned in a theft. In this case, each
and every participant, in the measure of his guilt, is bound to make
restitution. Guilt is the object, restitution is the shadow; the
following is fatal. To order or advise the thing done; to influence
efficaciously its doing; to assist in the deed or to profit knowingly
thereby, to shield criminally the culprit, etc., this sort of
co-operation adds to the guilt of sin the burden of restitution. Silence
or inaction, when plain duty would call for words and deeds to prevent
crime, incriminates as well as active participation, and creates an
obligation to repair.

There is more. Conspiracy in committing an injustice adds an especial
feature to the burden of restitution. If the parties to the crime had
formed a preconcerted plan and worked together as a whole in its
accomplishment, every individual that furnished efficient energy to the
success of the undertaking is liable, in conscience, not for a share of
the loss, but for the sum total. This is what is called solidarity;
solidarity in crime begets solidarity in reparation. It means that the
injured party has a just claim for damages, for all damages sustained,
against any one of the culprits, each one of whom, in the event of his
making good the whole loss, has recourse against the others for their
share of the obligation. It may happen, and does, that one or several
abscond, and thus shirk their part of the obligation; the burden of
restitution may thus be unevenly distributed. But this is one of the
risks that conspirators in sin must take; the injured party must be
protected first and in preference to all others.

No Catholic can validly receive the sacrament of penance who refuses to
assume the responsibility of restitution for injustices committed, and
who does not at least promise sincerely to acquit himself at the first
favorable opportunity and to the extent of his capacity. This means
that only on these conditions can the sin be forgiven by God. That man
is not disposed sufficiently to receive absolution who continually
neglects opportunities to keep his promise; who refuses to pay any,
because he cannot pay all; who decides to leave the burden of
restitution to his heirs, even with the wherewith to do so. It is
better not to go to confession at all than to go with these
dispositions; it is better to wait until you can make up your mind.



CHAPTER XCVII.
GETTING RID OF ILL-GOTTEN GOODS.

IT may happen that a person discover among his legitimately acquired
possessions something that does not in reality belong to him. He may
have come by it through purchase, donation, etc.; he kept it in good
faith, thinking that he had a clear title to it. He now finds that
there was an error somewhere, and that it is the property of some one
else. Of course, he is not the lawful owner, and does not become such
by virtue of his good faith; although, in certain given circumstances,
if the good faith, or ignorance of error, last long enough, a title may
be acquired by prescription, and the possessor become the lawful owner.
But we are not considering the question of prescription.

It is evident, then, that our friend must dispossess himself in favor
of the real owner, as soon as the latter comes upon the scene and
proves his claim. But the possessor may in all innocence have alienated
the goods, destroyed or consumed them; or they may have perished
through accident or fatality. In the latter case, nothing remains to
refund, no one is to blame, and the owner must bear the loss. Even in
the former case, if the holder can say in conscience that he in nowise
became richer by the possession and use of the goods in question, he is
not bound to make restitution. If, however, there be considerable
profits, they rightly belong to the owner, and the possessor must
refund the same.

But the question arises as to how the holder is to be compensated for
the expenditure made in the beginning and in good faith when he
purchased the goods which he is now obliged to hand over to another.
Impartial justice demands that when the rightful owner claims his
goods, the holder relinquish them, and he may take what he gets, even
if it be nothing. He might claim a compensation if he purchased what he
knew to be another's property, acting in the interests of that other
and with the intention of returning the same to its owner. Otherwise,
his claim is against the one from whom he obtained the article, and not
against him to whom he is obliged to turn it over.

He may, if he be shrewd enough, anticipate the serving of the owner's
claim and secure himself against a possible loss by selling back for a
consideration the goods in question to the one from whom he bought
them. But this cannot be done after the claim is presented; besides,
this proceeding must not render it impossible for the owner to recover
his property; and he must be notified as to the whereabouts of said
property. This manoeuvre works injustice unto no one. The owner stands
in the same relation to his property as formerly; the subsequent holder
assumes an obligation that was always his, to refund the goods or their
value, with recourse against the antecedent seller.

The moment a person shirks the responsibility of refunding the
possessions, by him legitimately acquired, but belonging rightfully to
another, that person becomes a possessor in bad faith and stands
towards the rightful owner in the position of a thief. Not in a
thousand years will he be able to prescribe a just title to the goods.
The burden of restitution will forever remain on him; if the goods
perish, no matter how, he must make good the loss to the owner. He must
also disburse the sum total of profits gathered from the illegal use of
said goods. If values fluctuate during the interval of criminal
possession, he must compute the amount of his debt according to the
values that prevailed at the time the lawful owner would have disposed
of his goods, had he retained possession.

Finally, there may be a doubt as to whether the object I possess is
rightfully mine or not. I must do my best to solve that doubt and dear
the title to ownership. If I fail, I may consider the object mine and
may use it as such. If the owner turn up after the prescribed time, so
much the worse for the owner. An uncertainty may exist, not as to my
proprietorship, but as to whom the thing does belong. If my possession
began in good faith and I am unable to determine the ownership, I may
consider myself the owner until further developments shed more light on
the matter.

It is different when the object was originally acquired in bad faith.
In such a case, first, the ill-gotten goods can never be mine; then,
there is no sanction in reason, conscience or law for the conduct of
those who run immediately to the first charitable institution and leave
there their conscience money; or who have masses said for the repose of
the souls of those who have been defrauded, before they are dead at all
perhaps. My first care must be to locate the victim; or, if he be
certainly deceased or evidently beyond reach, the heirs of the victim
of my fraud. When all means fail and I am unable to find either the
owner or his heirs, then, and not till then, may I dispose of the goods
in question. I must assume in such a contingency as this, that the will
of the owner would be to expend the sum on the most worthy cause; and
that is charity. The only choice then that remains with me is, what
hospital, asylum or other enterprise of charity is to profit by my
sins, since I myself cannot be a gainer in the premises.

It might be well to remark here that one is not obliged to make
restitution for more than the damages call for. Earnestness is a good
sign, but it should not blind us or drive us to an excess of zeal
detrimental to our own lawful interests. When there is a reasonable and
insolvable doubt as to the amount of reparation to be made, it is just
that such a doubt favor us. If we are not sure if it be a little more
or a little less, the value we are to refund, we may benefit by the
uncertainty and make the burden we assume as light as in all reason it
can be made. And even if we should happen to err on the side of mercy
to ourselves, without our fault, justice is satisfied, being fallible
like all things human.



