CHAPTER XVIII.
WHY WE BELIEVE.

BELIEF, we have said, is the acceptance of a truth from another. We do
not always accept what others present to us as truth, for the good
reason that we may have serious doubts as to whether they speak the
truth or not. It is for us to decide the question of our informant's
intellectual and moral trustworthiness. If we do believe him, it is
because we consider his veracity to be beyond question.

The foundation of our belief is therefore the veracity of him whose
word we take. They tell me that Lincoln was assassinated. Personally, I
know nothing about it. But I do know that they who speak of it could
know, did know, and could not lead us all astray on this point. I
accept their evidence; I believe on their word.

It is on the testimony of God's word that we believe in matters that
pertain to faith. The idea we have of God is that He is infinitely
perfect, that He is all-wise and all-good. He cannot, therefore, under
pain of destroying His very existence, be deceived or deceive us. When,
therefore, He speaks, He speaks the truth and nothing but the truth. It
would be a very stultification of our reason to refuse to believe Him,
once we admit His existence.

Now, it is not necessary for us to inquire into the things He reveals,
or to endeavor to discover the why, whence and wherefore. It is truth,
we are certain of it; what more do we need! It may be a satisfaction to
see and understand these truths, just as it is to solve a problem two
or three different ways. But it is not essential, for the result is
always the same--truth.

But suppose, with my senses and my reason, I come to a result at
variance with the first, suppose the testimony of God's word and that
of my personal observations conflict, what then? There is an error
somewhere. Either God errs or my faculties play me false. Which should
have the preference of my assent? The question is answered as soon as
it is put. I can conceive an erring man, but I cannot conceive a false
God. Nothing human is infallible; God alone is proof against all error.
This would not be my first offense against truth.

"Yes, all this is evident. I shall and do believe everything that God
deigns to reveal, because He says it, whether or not I see or
understand it. But the difficulty with me is how to know that God did
speak, what He said, what He meant. My difficulty is practical, not
theoretical."

And by the same token you have shifted the question from "Why we
believe" to "Whence we believe;" you no longer seek the authority of
your faith, but its genesis. You believe what God says, because He says
it; you believe He did say it because--the Church says it. You are no
longer dealing with the truth itself, but with the messenger that
brings the truth to be believed. The message of the Church is: these
are God's words. As for what these words stand for, you are not to
trust her, but Him. The foundation of divine belief is one thing; the
motives of credibility are another.

We should not confound these two things, if we would have a clear
notion of what faith is, and discover the numerous counterfeits that
are being palmed off nowadays on a world that desires a convenient,
rather than a genuine article.

The received manner of belief is first to examine the truths proposed
as coming from God, measure them with the rule of individual reason, of
expediency, feeling, fancy, and thus to decide upon their merits. If
this proposition suits, it is accepted. If that other is found wanting,
it is forthwith rejected. And then it is in order to set out and prove
them to be or not to be the word of God, according to their suitability
or non-suitability.

One would naturally imagine, as reason and common sense certainly
suggest, that one's first duty would be to convince oneself that God
did communicate these truths; and if so, then to accept them without
further dally or comment. There is nothing to be done, once God
reveals, but to receive His revelation.

Outside the Church, this procedure is not always followed, because of
the rationalistic tendencies of latter-day Protestantism. It is a
glaring fact that many do not accept all that God says because He says,
but because it meets the requirements of their condition, feelings or
fancy. They lay down the principle that a truth, to be a truth, must be
understood by the human intelligence. This is paramount to asserting
that God cannot know more than men--blasphemy on the face of it. Thus
the divine rock-bed of faith is torn away, and a human basis
substituted. Faith itself is destroyed in the process.

It is, therefore, important, before examining whence comes our faith,
to remember why we believe, and not to forget it. This much gained, and
for all time, we can go farther; without it, all advance is impossible.



CHAPTER XIX.
WHENCE OUR BELIEF: REASON.

MY faith is the most reasonable thing in the world, and it must needs
be such. The Almighty gave me intelligence to direct my life. When He
speaks He reveals Himself to me as to an intelligent being: and He
expects that I receive His word intelligently. Were I to abdicate my
reason in the acceptance of His truths, I would do my Maker as great an
injury as myself. All the rest of creation offers Him an homage of pure
life, of instinct or feeling; man alone can, and must, offer a higher,
nobler and more acceptable homage--that of reason.

My faith is reasonable, and this is the account my reason gives of my
faith: I can accept as true, without in the least comprehending, and
far from dishonoring my reason, with a positive and becoming dignity,--
I can accept!--but I must accept--whatever is confided to me by an
infallible authority, an authority that can neither deceive nor be
deceived. There is nothing supernatural about this statement.

That which is perfect cannot be subject to error, for error is evil and
perfection excludes evil. If God exists He is perfect. Allow one
imperfection to enter into your notion of God, and you destroy that
notion. When, therefore, God speaks He is an infallible authority. This
is the philosophy of common sense.

Now I know that God has spoken. The existence of that historical
personage known as Jesus of Nazareth is more firmly established than
that of Alexander or Caesar. Four books relate a part of His sayings
and doings; and I have infinitely less reason to question their
authenticity than I have to doubt the authenticity of Virgil or
Shakespeare. No book ever written has been subjected to such a
searching, probing test of malevolent criticism, at all times but
especially of late years in Germany and France. Great men, scholars,
geniuses have devoted their lives to the impossible task of explaining
the Gospels away, with the evident result that the position of the
latter remains a thousandfold stronger. Unless I reject all human
testimony, and reason forbids, I must accept them as genuine, at least
in substance.

These four books relate how Jesus healed miraculously the sick, raised
the dead to life, led the life of the purest, most honest and sagest of
men, claimed to be God, and proved it by rising from the dead Himself.
That this man is divine, reason can admit without being unreasonable,
and must admit to be reasonable; and revelation has nothing to do with
the matter.

A glaring statement among all others, one that is reiterated and
insisted upon, is that all men should share in the fruit of His life;
ana for this purpose He founded a college of apostles which He called
His Church, to teach all that He said and did, to all men, for all
time. The success of His life and mission depends upon the continuance
of His work.

Why did He act thus? I do not know. Are there reasons for this economy
of salvation? There certainly are, else it would not have been
established. But we are not seeking after reasons; we are gathering
facts upon which to build an argument, and these facts we take from the
authentic life of Christ.

Now we give the Almighty credit for wisdom in all His plans, the wisdom
of providing His agencies with the means to reach the end they are
destined to attain. To commission a church to teach all men without
authority, is to condemn it to utter nothingness from the very
beginning. To expect men to accept the truths He revealed, and such
truths! without a guarantee against error in the infallibility of the
teacher, is to be ignorant of human nature. And since at no time must
it cease to teach, it must be indefectible. Being true, it must be one;
the work of God, it must be holy; being provided for all creatures, it
must be Catholic or universal; and being the same as Christ founded
upon His Apostles, it must be apostolic. If it is not all these things
together, it is not the teacher sent by God to Instruct and direct men.

No one who seeks with intelligence, single-mindedness and a pure heart,
will fail to find these attributes and marks of the true Church of
Christ. Whether, after finding them, one will make an act of faith, is
another question. But that he can give his assent with the full
approval of his reason is absolutely certain. Once he does so, he has
no further use for his reason. He enters the Church, an edifice
illumined by the superior light of revelation and faith. He can leave
reason, like a lantern, at the door.

Therein he will learn many other truths that he never could have found
out with reason alone, truths superior, but not contrary, to reason.
These truths he can never repudiate without sinning against reason,
first, because reason brought him to this pass where he must believe
without the immediate help of reason.

One of the first things we shall hear from the Church speaking on her
own authority is that these writings, the four relations of Christ's
life, are inspired. However a person could discover and prove this
truth to himself is a mystery that will never be solved. We cannot
assume it; it must be proven. Unless it be proven, the faith based on
this assumption is not reasonable; and proven it can never be, unless
we take it from an authority whose infallibility is proven. That is why
we say that it is doubtful if non-Catholic faith is faith at all,
because faith must be reasonable; and faith that is based on an
assumption is to say the least doubtfully reasonable.



