CHAPTER XLVII.
PROFANITY.

PROFANITY is not a specific sin. Under this general head come all
blasphemy, false, rash, unjust and unnecessary oaths, rash and violated
vows, and cursing:--called profanity, because in each case the name of
God is profaned, that is to say, is made less holy, by its application
to unworthy objects and in unbecoming circumstances; profanity, because
it has to do with the Holy Name, and not profanation, which looks to
sacred things. Although language lends itself to many devices and is
well nigh inexhaustible in its resources, this category of sins of
profanity embraces about all modes of offending against the Holy Name,
and consequently against the Second Commandment.

We have already examined the different species of profanity. But it is
not always easy to classify certain utterances and expressions that
savour of profanity, to determine the specific nature of their malice,
especially the guilt incurred by the speaker. First of all, the terms
used are often distorted from their original signification, or require
that words left understood be supplied; as they stand, they are often
as meaningless to the speaker as to the general uninitiated public. To
get at the formal malice of such utterances is still more difficult,
for it becomes necessary to interpret the intentions of the speaker.
Thus, in one case, words that contain no evident insult to God may be
used with all the vehemence of profanity, to which guilt is certainly
attached; in another, the most unholy language may be employed in
ignorance of its meaning, with no evil intent, the only danger of
malice being from habit, passion or scandal.

This brings us to consider certain ejaculatory or exclamatory
expressions such as: God! good God! Lord! etc., employed by persons of
very different spiritual complexion. Evidently, these words may be
employed in good and in evil part; whether in one or the other, depends
on the circumstances of their using. They may proceed from piety and
true devotion of the heart, out of the abundance of which the mouth
speaks. Far from being wrong, this is positively good and meritorious.

If this is done through force of habit, or is the result of levity,
without the least interior devotion or affection, it is a mitigated
form of profanity. To say the least, no honor accrues to God from such
language and such use of His name; and where He is concerned, not to
honor Him is dangerously near dishonoring Him. If contempt of God or
scandal result from such language, the offense may easily be mortal.

Finally, excited feelings of passion or wrath vent themselves in this
manner, and here it is still more easy to make it a grievous offending.
About the only thing that can excuse from fault is absolute
indeliberation.

Again, without implying any malediction, prescinding altogether from
the supernatural character of what they represent, as ejaculations
only, we come across the use of such words as hell, devil, damnation,
etc. Good ethics condemn such terms in conversation; hearing them used
people may be scandalized, especially the young; if one uses them with
the mistaken idea that they contain blasphemy, then that one is
formally guilty of blasphemy; finally, it is vulgar, coarse and
unmannerly to do so. But all this being admitted, we do not see any
more moral iniquity in the mention of these words than of their
equivalents: eternal fire, Satan, perdition, etc. We do not advise or
encourage the use of such terms, but it sometimes jars one's sense of
propriety to see people hold up their hands in holy horror at the sound
of these words, as if their mention were something unspeakably wicked,
while they themselves would look fornication, for instance, straight in
the face without a shudder or a blush.

Profanity is certainly a sin, sometimes a grievous sin; but in our
humble opinion, the fiat of self-righteous Pharisaism to the contrary
notwithstanding, it is a few hundred times oftener no sin at all, or a
very white sin, than the awful crime some people see in it. If a fellow
could quote classical "Mehercule," and Shakespearean cuss-words, he
would not perhaps be so vulgar as to say "hell." But not having such
language at his command, and being filled with strong feelings that
clamor for a good substantial expression, if he looks around and finds
these the strongest and only available ones, and uses them,--it is
necessity and human nature, we wot, more than sacrilegious profanity.
It were better if his speech were aye, aye and nay, nay; but it does
not make it look any better to convict him of the blackest sin on the
calendar just because he mentioned a place that really exists, if it is
hot, and which it is well to have ever before our eyes against the
temptations of life.



CHAPTER XLVIII.
THIRD COMMANDMENT
THE LAW OF REST.

THE last of the three Commandments that refer directly to God,
prescribes a rest from toil, and profane works; and in commemoration of
the mystical repose of the Lord after the six days' creation,
designates the Sabbath or seventh day as a day that shall be set apart
and made sacred to God. The peculiarity of the commandment is that it
interferes with the occupations of man, intrudes upon his individual
affairs and claims a worship of works. The others do not go thus far,
and are satisfied with a worship of the heart and tongue, of affections
and language.

Leaving aside for the moment the special designation of a day devoted
to this worship, the law of rest itself deserves attention. Whether the
Saturday or Sunday be observed, whether the rest be long or brief, a
day or an hour, depends entirely on the positive will of God. More than
this must be said of the command of rest; that law grows out of our
relations with God, is founded in nature, is according to the natural
order of things.

This repose means abstention from bodily activity.. The law does not go
so far as to prescribe stagnation and sloth, but it is satisfied with
such abstention as is compatible with the reasonable needs of man. Of
its nature, it constitutes an exterior, public act of religion. The
question is: Does the nature of our relations with God demand this sort
of worship? Evidently, yes. Else God, who created the whole man, would
not receive a perfect worship. If God made man, man belongs to Him; if
from that possession flows a natural obligation to worship with heart
and tongue, why not also of the body? God has a Maker's right over us,
and without some acknowledgment on the part of the body of this right,
there would be no evidence that such a right existed. There is no doubt
but that the law of our being requires of us an interior worship. Now,
if that spirit of homage within us is sincere, it will naturally seek
to exteriorize itself; if it is to be preserved, it must "out." We are
not here speaking of certain peculiarly ordered individuals, but of the
bulk of common humanity. Experience teaches that what does not come out
either never existed or is not assured of a prolonged existence. Just
as the mind must go out of itself for the substance of its thoughts, so
must the heart go out to get relief from the pressure of its feelings.
God commanded this external worship because it alone could preserve
internal affections.

Again, there are many things which the ordinary man ignores concerning
God, which it is necessary for him to know, and which do not come by
intuition. In other words, he must be taught a host of truths that he
is incapable of finding out by himself. Education and instruction in
religious matters are outside the sphere of his usual occupations.
Where will he ever get this necessary information, if he is not taught?
And how can he be taught, if he does not lay aside occupations that are
incompatible with the acquisition of intellectual truths? He is
therefore forced by the law of his being, and the obligation he owes
his Maker, to rest from his every-day labors, once in awhile, in order
to learn his full duty, if for nothing else.

Pagans, who never knew the law of Moses, serve neither Saturday nor
Sunday; neither do they give an entire day, at fixed intervals to the
exterior worship of the Deity, as we do. But a case will not be found
where they did not on certain occasions rest from work in order to
offer the homage of their fidelity to their gods, and to listen, to
instruction and exhortation from their holy men. These pagans follow
the natural law written in their souls, and it is there they discover
the obligation they are under to honor God by rest from labor and to
make holy unto Him a certain space of time.



