CHAPTER XXX.
PETITIONS.

FOR all spiritual needs, therefore, prayer is the one thing necessary.
I am in the state of sin. I desire to be forgiven. To obtain pardon is
a supernatural act. Alone I can no more do it than fly. I pray then for
the grace of a good confession--I prudently think myself in the state
of grace. Were I for a moment left to my depraved nature, to the mercy
of my passions, I should fall into the lowest depths of iniquity. The
holiest, saintliest of men are just as capable of the greatest
abominations as the blackest sinner that ever lived. If he does not
fall, and the other does, it is because he prays and the other does
not.

Some people have certain spiritual maladies, that become second nature
to them, called dominant passions. For one, it is cursing and swearing;
for another vanity and conceit. One is afflicted with sloth, another
with uncleanness of one kind or another. To discover the failing is the
first duty, to pray against it is the next. You attack it with prayer
as you attack a disease with remedies. And if we only used prayer with
half the care, perseverance and confidence that we use medicines, our
spiritual distemper would be short-lived.

A person who passes a considerable time without prayer is usually in a
bad state of soul. There is probably no one, who, upon reflection, will
fail to discover that his best days were those which his prayers
sanctified, and his worst, those which had to get along without any.
And when a man starts out badly, the first thing he takes care to do is
to neglect his prayers. For praying is an antidote and a reminder; it
makes him feel uneasy while in sin, and would make him break with his
evil ways if he continued to pray. And since he does not wish to stop,
he takes no chances, and gives up his prayers. When he wants to stop,
he falls back on his prayers.

This brings us to the bodily favors we should ask for. You are sick.
You desire to get well, but you do not see the sense of praying for it;
for you say, "Either I shall get well or I shall not." For an ordinary
statement that is as plain and convincing as one has a right to expect;
it will stand against all argument. But the conclusion is not of a
piece with the premises. In that case why do you call in the physician,
why do you take nasty pills and swallow whole quarts of vile
concoctions that have the double merit of bringing distress to your
palate and your purse? You take these precautions because your most
elementary common sense tells you that such precautions as medicaments,
etc., enter for something of a condition in the decree of God which
reads that you shall die or not die. Your return to health or your
shuffling off of the mortal coil is subject to conditions of prudence,
and according as they are fulfiled or not fulfiled the decree of God
will go into effect one way or the other.

And why does not your sane common sense suggest to you that prayer
enters as just such a condition in the decrees of God, that your
recovery is just as conditional on the using of prayer as to the taking
of pills?

There are people who have no faith in drugs, either because they have
never used any or because having once used them, failed to get
immediate relief. Appreciation of the efficacy of prayer is frequently
based on similar experience.

To enumerate all the cures effected by prayer would be as bootless as
to rehearse all the miracles of therapeutics and surgery. The doctor
says: "Here, take this, it will do you good. I know its virtue." The
Church says likewise: "Try prayer, I know its virtue." Your faith in it
has all to do with its successful working.

As in bodily sickness, so it is in all the other afflictions that flesh
is heir to. Prayer is a panacea; it cures all ills. But it should be
taken with two tonics, as it were, before and after. Before: faith and
confidence in the power of God to cure us through prayer. After:
resignation to the will of God, by which we accept what it may please
Him to do in our case; for health is not the greatest boon of life, nor
are sickness and death the greatest evils. Sin alone is bad; the grace
of God alone is good. All other things God uses as means in view of
this supreme good and against this supreme evil. Faith prepares the
system and puts it in order for the reception of the remedy.
Resignation helps it work out its good effects, and brings out all its
virtue.

Thus prayer is necessary to us all, whether we be Christians or pagans,
whether just or sinners, whether sick or well. It brings us near to
God, and God near to us, and thus is a foretaste and an image of our
union with Him hereafter.



CHAPTER XXXI.
RELIGION.

AS far back as the light of history extends, it shows man, of every
race and of every clime, occupied in giving expression, in one way or
another, to his religious impressions, sentiments, and convictions. He
knew God; he was influenced by this knowledge unto devotion; and sought
to exteriorize this devotion for the double purpose of proving its
truth and sincerity, and of still further nourishing, strengthening,
safeguarding it by means of an external worship and sensible things.
Accordingly, he built temples, erected altars, offered sacrifices,
burnt incense; he sang and wept, feasted and fasted; he knelt, stood
and prostrated himself--all things in harmony with his hopes and fears.
This is worship or cult. We call it religion, distinct from interior
worship or devotion, but supposing the latter essentially. It is
commanded by the first precept of God.

He who contents himself with a simple acknowledgment of the Divinity in
the heart, and confines his piety to the realm of the soul, does not
fulfil the first commandment. The obligation to worship God was
imposed, not upon angels--pure spirits, but upon men--creatures
composed of a body as well as a soul. The homage that He had a right to
expect was therefore not a purely spiritual one, but one in which the
body had a part as well as the soul. A man is not a man without a body.
Neither can God be satisfied with man's homage unless his physical
being cooperate with his spiritual, unless his piety be translated into
acts and become religion, in the sense in which we use the word.

There is no limit to the different forms religion may take on as
manifestations of intense fervor and strong belief. Sounds, attitudes,
practices, etc., are so many vehicles of expression, and may be
multiplied indefinitely. They become letters and words and figures of a
language which, while being conventional in a way, is also natural and
imitative, and speaks more clearly and eloquently and poetically than
any other human language. This is what makes the Catholic religion so
beautiful as to compel the admiration of believers and unbelievers
alike.

Of course, there is nothing to prevent an individual from making
religion a mask of hypocrisy. If in using these practices, he does not
mean what they imply, he lies as plainly as if he used words without
regard for their signification. These practices, too, may become
absurd, ridiculous and even abominable. When this occurs, it is easily
explained by the fact that the mind and heart of man are never proof
against imbecility and depravity. There are as many fools and cranks in
the world as there are villains and degenerates.

The Church of God regulates divine worship for us with the wisdom and
experience of centuries. Her sacrifice is the first great act of
worship. Then there are her ceremonies, rites, and observances; the use
of holy water, blessed candles, ashes, incense, vestments; her chants,
and fasts and feasts, the symbolism of her sacraments. This is the
language in which, as a Church, and in union with her children, she
speaks to God her adoration, praise and thanksgiving. This is her
religion, and we practice it by availing ourselves of these things and
by respecting them as pertaining to God.

We are sometimes branded as idolaters, that is, as people who adore
another or others than God. We offer our homage of adoration to God who
is in heaven, and to that same God whom we believe to be on our altars.
Looking through Protestant spectacles, we certainly are idolaters, for
we adore what they consider as simple bread. In this light we plead
guilty; but is it simple bread? That is the question. The homage we
offer to everything and everybody else is relative, that is, it refers
to God, and therefore is not idolatry.

As to whether or not we are superstitious in our practices, that
depends on what is the proper homage to offer God and in what does
excess consist. It is not a little astonishing to see the no-creed,
dogma-hating, private-judgment sycophants sitting in judgment against
us and telling us what is and what is not correct in our religious
practices. We thought that sort of a thing--dogmatism--was excluded
from Protestant ethics; that every one should be allowed to choose his
own mode of worship, that the right and proper way is the way one
thinks right and proper. If the private-interpreter claims this freedom
for himself, why not allow it to us! We thought they objected to this
kind of interference in us some few hundred years ago; is it too much
if we object most strenuously to it in them in these days! It is
strange how easily some people forget first principles, and what a rare
article on the market is consistency.

The persons, places and things that pertain to the exterior worship of
God we are bound to respect, not for themselves, but by reason of the
usage for which they are chosen and set aside, thereby becoming
consecrated, religious. We should respect them in a spiritual way as we
respect in a human way all that belongs to those whom we hold dear.
Irreverence or disrespect is a profanation, a sacrilege.



