CHAPTER LI.
WORSHIP OF SACRIFICE.

WE Catholics contend, and our contention is based on a law of nature
that we glean from the history of man, that sacrifice is the soul of
religion, that there never was a universally and permanently accepted
religion--and that there cannot be any such religion--without an altar,
a victim, a priest, and a sacrifice. We claim that reason and
experience would bear us out in this contention, even without the
example and teaching and express commands of Jesus Christ, who, in
founding a new and the only true religion, Himself offered sacrifice
and left a sacrifice to be perpetually offered in His religion; and
that sacrifice constitutes the high worship we owe to the Creator.

It is our conviction that, when man came into the presence of the
Almighty, his first impulse was to speak to Him, and his first word was
an act of adoration. But human language is a feeble medium of
communication with the Almighty. Man talks to man. To talk with God, he
sought out another language; and, as in the case of Adam's sons, he
discovered in sacrifice a better and stronger mode of expressing his
religious feelings. He therefore offered sacrifice, and sacrifice
became the language of man in his relations with the Deity.

In its simplest definition, sacrifice is the offering to God of a
victim, by one authorized for that task. It supposes essentially the
destruction of the victim; and the act is an eloquent acknowledgment,
in language that is as plain as it possibly can be made, that God is
the supreme Lord of life and death, that all things that exist come
from Him, and revert to Him as to their natural end.

The philosophy of sacrifice is that man, in some manner or other, had
incurred the wrath of the Almighty. The pagan could not tell hi just
what his offense consisted; but there is nothing plainer than the fact
that he considered himself under the ban of God's displeasure, and that
sin had something to do with it; and he feared the Deity accordingly.
We know that original sin was the curse under which he labored.

Whatever the offense was, it was in the flesh, the result of weakness
rather than malice. There was something in his nature that inclined to
evil and was responsible for sin. The better part tried to serve, but
the inferior man revolted. Flesh, therefore, was wicked and sinful; and
since all offense must be atoned for, the flesh should pay the penalty
of evil. The wrath of God could be appeased, and sacrifice was the
thing that could do it.

Another thing most remarkable among those who worshiped by sacrifice in
the early times, is that they believed firmly in the reversibility of
merit, that is, that the innocent could atone for the wicked. Somehow,
they acquired the notion that stainless victims were more agreeable to
God than others. God sanctioned this belief among the Jews, and most
strikingly on the hill of Calvary.

This being the case, man being guilty and not having the right to
inflict the supreme penalty upon himself, the natural thing to do was
to substitute a victim for himself, to put the flesh of another in the
place of his own and to visit upon it the punishment that was due to
himself. And he offered to God this vicarious atonement. His action
spoke in this wise: "My God, I am a sinner and deserve Thy wrath. But
look upon this victim as though it were myself. My sins and offenses I
lay upon its shoulders, this knife shall be the bolt of Thy vengeance,
and it shall make atonement in blood." This is the language of
sacrifice. As we have said, it supposes the necessity of atonement and
belief in the reversibility of merit.

Now, if we find in history, as we certainly do find,--that all peoples
offered sacrifice of this kind, we do not think we would be far from
the truth if we deduced therefrom a law of nature; and if it is a law
of nature, it is a law of God. If there is no religion of antiquity
that did not offer sacrifice, then it would seem that the Almighty had
traced a path along which man naturally trod and which his natural
instinct showed him.

We believe in the axiom of St. Augustine: "securus judicet orbis
terrarum, a universally accepted judgment can be safely followed."
Especially do we feel secure with the history of the chosen people of
God before us arid its sacrifice ordained by the law; with the sanction
of Christ's sacrifice in our mind, and the practice of the divinely
inspired Church which makes sacrifice the soul of her worship.

The victim we have is Jesus Christ Himself, and none other than He. He
gave us His flesh and blood to consume, with the command to consume.
Our sacrifice, therefore, consists in the offering up of this Victim to
God and the consuming of it. Upon the Victim of the altar, as upon the
Victim of the Cross, we lay our sins and offenses, and, in one case as
in the other, the sacred blood, in God's eyes, washes our iniquity
away.

Of course, it requires faith to believe, but religion is nothing if it
is not whole and entire a matter of faith. The less faith you have, the
more you try to simplify matters. Waning faith began by eliminating
authority and sacrifice and the unwritten word. Now the written word is
going the same way. Pretty soon we shall hear of the Decalogue's being
subjected to this same eliminating process. After all, when one gets
started in that direction, what reason is there that he should ever
stop!



CHAPTER LII.
WORSHIP OF REST.

PARTICIPATION in public worship is the positive obligation flowing from
the Third Commandment; abstention from labor is what is negatively
enjoined. Now, works differ as widely in their nature as differ in form
and dimension the pebbles on the sea-shore. There are works of God and
works of the devil, and works which, as regards spirituality, are
totally indifferent, profane works, as distinguished from sacred and
sinful works. And these latter may be corporal or intellectual or both.
Work or labor or toil, in itself, is a spending of energy, an exercise
of activity; it covers a deal of ground. And since the law simply says
to abstain from work, it falls to us to determine just what works are
meant, for it is certain that all works, that is, all that come under
the general head of work, do not profane the Lord's day.

The legislation of the Church, which is the custodian of the Sunday, on
this head commends itself to all thoughtful men; while, for those who
recognize the Church as the true one, that legislation is authority.
The Church distinguishes three kinds of profane works, that is, works
that are neither sacred nor iniquitous of their nature. There is one
kind which requires labor of the mind rather than of the body. These
works tend directly to the culture or exercise of the mind, and are
called liberal works, because under the Romans, freemen or "liberi"
almost exclusively were engaged therein. Such are reading, writing,
studying, music, drawing--in general, mental occupations in whole, or
more mental than corporal. These works the Church does not consider the
law includes in its prohibition, and they are consequently not
forbidden.

It is impossible here to enumerate all that enters into this class of
works; custom has something to say in determining what is liberal in
our works; and in investigating, we must apply to each case the general
principle. The labor in question may be gratuitous or well paid; it may
cause fatigue or afford recreation: all this is not to the point. The
question is, outside the danger of omitting divine service, scandal or
circumstances that might lead to the annoyances and distraction of
others--the question is: does this work call for exercise of the mind
more than that of the body? If the answer is affirmative, then the work
is liberal, and as such it is not forbidden on Sunday, it is not
considered a profanation of the Lord's day.

On the other extreme are what go by the name of servile works, which
call forth principally bodily effort and tend directly to the advantage
of the body. They are known also as works of manual labor. Before the
days of Christianity, slaves alone were thus employed, and from the
word "servi" or slaves these are called servile works.

Here again it is the nature of the work that makes it servile. It may
be remunerative or not, recreative or not, fatiguing or not; it may be
a regular occupation, or just taken up for the moment; it may be,
outside cases of necessity, for the glory of God or for the good of the
neighbor. If it is true that the body has more part therein than the
mind, then it is a servile work and it is forbidden. Of course there
are serious reasons that dispense us from our obligation to this law,
but we are not talking about that just at present.

The reason of the proscription is, not that such works are evil, but
that they interfere with the intention we should give to the worship we
owe to God, and that, without this cessation of labor, our bodily
health would be impaired: these are the two motives of the law. But
even if it happened, in an individual case, that these inconveniences
were removed, that neither God's reverence nor one's own health
suffered from such occupations as the law condemns, the obligation
would still remain to abstain therefrom, for it is general and
absolute, and when there is question of obeying a law, the subject has
a right to examine the law, but not the motives of the law.

We shall later see that there are other works, called common, which
require activity of the mind and of the body in about an equal measure
or which enter into the common necessities of life. These are not
forbidden in themselves, although in certain contingencies they may be
adjudged unlawful; but, in the matter of servile works, nothing but
necessity, the greater glory of God, or the good of the neighbor, can
allow us to consider the law non-binding. To break it is a sin, slight
or grievous, according to the nature of the offense.



