CHAPTER XXXIII.
IDOLATRY AND SUPERSTITION.

THE first and greatest sinner against religion is the idolater, who
offers God-worship to others than God. There are certain attributes
that belong to God alone, certain titles that He alone has a right to
bear, certain marks of veneration that are due to Him alone. To ascribe
these to any being under God is an abomination, and is called idolatry.

The idols of paganism have long since been thrown, their temples
destroyed; the folly itself has fallen into disuse, and its
extravagances serve only in history "to point a moral or adorn a tale."
Yet, in truth, idolatry is not so dead as all that, if one would take
the pains to peruse a few pages of the current erotic literature
wherein people see heaven in a pair of blue eyes, catch inspired words
from ruby lips and adore a well trimmed chin-whisker. I would sooner,
with the old-time Egyptians, adore a well-behaved cat or a toothsome
cucumber than with certain modern feather-heads and gum-drop hearts,
sing hymns to a shapely foot or dimpled cheek and offer incense to
"divinities," godlike forms, etc. The way hearts and souls are thrown
around from one to another is suggestive of the national game; while
the love they bear one another is always infinite, supreme, without
parallel on earth or in heaven.

No, perhaps they do not mean what they say; but that helps matters very
little, for the fault lies precisely in saying what they do say; the
language used is idolatrous. And a queer thing about it is that they do
mean more than half of what they say. When degenerate love runs riot,
it dethrones the Almighty, makes gods of clay and besots itself before
them.

What is superstition and what is a superstitious practice? It is
something against the virtue of religion; it sins, not by default as
unbelief, but by excess. Now, to be able to say what is excessive, one
must know what is right and just, one must have a measure. To attempt
to qualify anything as excessive without the aid of a rule or measure
is simply guesswork.

The Yankee passes for a mighty clever guesser, outpointing with ease
his transatlantic cousin. Over there the sovereign guesses officially
that devotion to the Mother of God is a superstitious practice. This
reminds one of the overgrown farmer boy, who, when invited by his
teacher to locate the center of a circle drawn on the blackboard, stood
off and eyed the figure critically for a moment with a wise squint; and
then said, pointing his finger to the middle or thereabouts: "I should
jedge it to be about thar'." He was candid enough to offer only an
opinion. But how the royal guesser could be sure enough to swear it,
and that officially, is what staggers plain people.

Now right reason is a rule by which to judge what is and what is not
superstitious. But individual reason or private judgment and right
reason are not synonyms in the English or in any other language that is
human. When reasoning men disagree, right reason, as far as the debated
question is concerned, is properly said to be off on a vacation, a
thing uncommonly frequent in human affairs. In order, therefore that
men should not be perpetually at war concerning matters that pertain to
men's salvation, God established a competent authority which even
simple folks with humble minds and pure hearts can find. In default of
any adverse claimant the Catholic Church must be adjudged that
authority. The worship, therefore, that the Church approves as worthy
of God is not, cannot be, superstition. And what is patently against
reason, or, in case of doubt, what she reproves and condemns in
religion is superstitious.

Leaving out of the question for the moment those species of
superstition that rise to the dignity of science, to the accidental
fame and wealth of humbugs and frauds, the evil embraces a host of
practices that are usually the result of a too prevalent psychological
malady known as softening of the brain. These poor unfortunates imagine
that the Almighty who holds the universe in the hollow of His hand,
deals with His creatures in a manner that would make a full-grown man
pass as a fool if he did the same. Dreams, luck-pieces, certain
combinations of numbers or figures, ordinary or extraordinary events
and happenings--these are the means whereby God is made to reveal to
men secrets and mysteries as absurd as the means, themselves. Surely
God must have descended from His throne of wisdom.

Strange though it appear, too little religion--and not too much--leads
to these unholy follies. There is a religious instinct in man. True
religion satisfies it fully. Quack religion, pious tomfoolery, and
doctrinal ineptitude foisted upon a God-hungry people end by driving
some from one folly to another in a pitiful attempt to get away from
the deceptions of man and near to God. Others are led on by a sinful
curiosity that outweighs their common-sense as well as their respect
for God. These are the guilty ones.

It has been said that there is more superstition--that is belief and
dabbling in these inane practices--to-day in one of our large cities
than the Dark Ages ever was afflicted with. If true, it is one sign of
the world's spiritual unrest, the decay of unbelief; and irreligion
thus assists at its own disintegration. The Church swept the pagan
world clean of superstition once; she may soon be called upon to do the
work over again.



CHAPTER XXXIV.
OCCULTISM.

SPIRITISM as a theory, a science, a practice, a religion, or--I might
add--a profitable business venture, is considered an evil thing by the
Church, and by her is condemned as superstition, that is, as a false
and unworthy homage to God, belittling His majesty and opposed to the
Dispensation of Christ, according to which alone God can be worthily
honored. This evil has many names; it includes all dabbling in the
supernatural against the sanction of Church authority, and runs a whole
gamut of "isms" from fake trance-mediums to downright diabolical
possession.

The craft found favor with the pagans and flourished many years before
the Christian era. Wondrous things were wrought by the so-called
pythonic spirit; evidently outside the natural order, still more
evidently not by the agency of God, and of a certainty through the
secret workings of the "Old Boy" himself. It was called Necromancy, or
the Black Art. It had attractions for the Jews and they yielded to some
extent to the temptation of consulting the Python. For this reason
Moses condemned the evil as an abomination. These are his words, taken
from Deuteronomy:

"Neither let there be found among you any one that consulteth
soothsayers, or observeth dreams and omens; neither let there be any
wizard, nor charmer, nor any one that consulteth pythonic spirits or
fortune tellers, or that seeketh the truth from the dead. For the Lord
abhorreth all these things; and for these abominations He will destroy
them."

The Black Art had its votaries during the Middle Ages and kept the
Church busy warning the faithful against its dangers and its evils.
Even so great a name as that of Albert the Great has been associated
with the dark doings of the wizard, because, no doubt, of the marvelous
fruits of his genius and deep learning, which the ignorant believed
impossible to mere human agency. As witchcraft, it nourished during the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The excesses to which it gave rise
caused severe laws to be enacted against it and stringent measures were
taken to suppress it. Many were put to death, sometimes after the most
cruel tortures. As is usually the case, the innocent suffered with the
guilty. The history of the early New England settlers makes good
reading on the subject.

Some people claim that the spiritism of to-day is only a revival of
old-time witchery and necromancy, that it is as prevalent now as it was
then, perhaps more prevalent. "Only," as Father Lambert remarks, "the
witch of to-day instead of going to the stake as formerly, goes about
as Madam So-and-So, and is duly advertised in our enlightened press as
the great and renowned seeress or clairvoyant, late from the court of
the Akoorid of Swat, more recently from the Sublime Porte, where she
was in consultation with the Sultan of Turkey, and more recently still
from the principal courts of Europe. As her stay in the city will be
brief, those who wish to know the past or future or wish to communicate
with deceased friends, are advised to call on her soon. Witchcraft is
as prevalent as it ever was, and the witches are as real. They may not
have cats on their shoulders or pointed caps, or broomsticks for quick
transit, but they differ from the witches of the past only in being
liberally paid, instead of liberally punished."

The Church does not deny the possibility of intercourse between the
living and the souls of the dead; she goes farther and admits the fact
that such intercourse has taken place, pointing, as well she may, to
the Scriptures themselves wherein such facts are recorded. The lives of
her saints are not without proof that this world may communicate with
the unknown. And this belief forms the groundwork, furnishes the basic
principles, of Spiritism.

Nevertheless, the Church condemns all attempts at establishing such
communication between the living and the dead, or even claiming, though
falsely, such intercourse. If this is done in the name of religion, she
considers it an insult to God, Who thereby is trifled with and tempted
to a miraculous manifestation of Himself outside the ordinary channels
of revelation. As an instrument of mere human curiosity, it is
criminal, since it seeks to subject Him to the beck and call of a
creature. In case such practices succeed, there is the grave danger of
being mislead and deceived by the evil spirit, who is often permitted,
as the instrument of God, to punish guilty men. When resorted to, as a
means of relieving fools of their earnings, it is sacrilegious; and
those who support such impious humbugs can be excused from deadly sin
only on the grounds of lunacy.

Hypnotism and Mesmerism differ from Spiritism in this, that their
disciples account for the phenomena naturally and lay no claim to
supernatural intervention. They produce a sleep in the subject, either
as they claim, by the emanation of a subtile fluid from the operator's
body, or by the influence of his mind over the mind of the subject They
are agreed on this point, that natural laws could explain the
phenomenon, if these laws were well understood.

With this sort of a thing, as belonging to the domain of science and
outside her domain, the Church has nothing whatever to do. This is a
theory upon which it behooves men of science to work; they alone are
competent in the premises. But without at all encroaching on their
domain, the Church claims the right to pronounce upon the morality of
such practices and to condemn the evils that flow therefrom. So great
are these evils and dangers, when unscrupulous and ignorant persons
take to experimenting, that able and reliable physicians and statesmen
have advocated the prohibition by law of all such indiscriminate
practices. Crimes have been committed on hypnotized persons and crimes
have been committed by them. It is a dangerous power exercised by men
of evil mind and a sure means to their evil ends. It is likewise
detrimental to physical and moral health. Finally, he who subjects
himself to such influence commits an immoral act by giving up his will,
his free agency, into the hands of another. He does this willingly, for
no one can be hypnotized against his will; he does it without reason or
just motive. This is an evil, and to it must be added the
responsibility of any evil he may be made to commit whilst under this
influence. Therefore is the Church wise in condemning the
indiscriminate practice of hypnotism or mesmerism; and therefore will
her children be wise if they leave it alone. It is not superstition,
but it is a sin against man's individual liberty over which he is
constituted sole guardian, according to the use and abuse of which he
will one day be judged.



