CHAPTER LXXXIII.
A HELPING HAND.

THE moralist is usually severe, and the quality of his censure is
merciless, when he attempts to treat the unwholesome theme of moral
deformity; and all his efforts are mere attempts, for no human language
can do full justice to such a theme, or fully express the contempt such
excesses deserve. It is just, then, that, when he stands in the
presence of the moral leper who blushes not for his degradation, he
flay with the whip of scorn and contempt, scourge with anathema and
brand him with every stigma of infamy, in order that the load of
opprobrium thus heaped upon his guilty head may at least deter the
clean from such defilement.

But, if guilt is always guilt, the quality of guilt is varied. Just as
all virtue is not equally meritorious, so to other sources than
personal unworthiness may often be traced moral debility that strives
against natural causes, necessary conditions of environment and an
ever-present and ever-active influence for evil. A fall does not always
betoken profound degradation nor a stain, acute perversity of the will.
Those therefore who wrestle manfully with the effects of regretted
lapses or weaknesses, who fight down, sometimes perhaps unsuccessfully,
the strong tendencies of a too exuberant animal nature, who strive to
neutralize an influence that unduly oppresses them,--against these,
guilty though they may have been, is not directed the moralist's
unmeasured censure. His reproaches in such cases tend less to condemn
than to awake to a sense of moral responsibility; earnestness in
pointing out remedy and safeguards takes the place of severity against
wilfulness. For he knows that not a few sentences of condemnation
Christ writes on the sands, as He did in a celebrated case, and many an
over-zealous accuser he has confounded, like the villainous Pharisees
whom He challenged to show a hand white enough to be worthy to cast the
first stone.

Evidently such pity and commiseration should not serve to make vice
less unlovely and thus undo the very work it is intended to perform. It
should not have the characteristics of certain books and plays that
pretend to teach morality by exposing vice in all its seductiveness.
Over-sensitive and maudlin sympathy is as ridiculous as it is
unhealthy; its tendency is principally to encourage and spoil. But a
judicious, discreet and measured sympathy will lift up the fallen,
strengthen the weak and help the timorous over many a difficulty. It
will suggest, too, the means best calculated to insure freedom from
slavery of the passions.

The first of these is self-denial, which is the inseparable companion
of chastity; when they are not found together, seldom does either
exist. And by self-denial is here meant the destruction of that eternal
r reference for self, that is at the bottom of all uncleanness, that
makes all things, however sacred, subservient to one's own pleasures,
that considers nothing unlawful but what goes against the grain of
natural impulse and natural appetites. There may be other causes, but
this self-love is a primary one. Say what you will, but one does not
fall from his own level; the moral world is like the physical; if you
are raised aloft in disregard for the laws of truth, you are going to
come down with a thud. If you imagine all the pleasures of life made
for you, and become lawful because your nature craves for them, you are
taking a too high estimate of yourself; you are going before a fall He
who takes a correct measure of himself, gets his bearings in relation
to God, comes to realize his own weak points and several deficiencies,
and acknowledges the obligations such a state of affairs places upon
him, that one may sin, but he will not go far.

He may fall, because he is human, because strength sufficient to guard
us against the assaults of impurity is not from us, but from God. The
spirit of humility, therefore, which makes known to him his own
insufficiency, must be fortified with the spirit of faith which makes
him ask for support through prayer. It is faith that makes prayer
possible, and living faith, the spirit of faith, that makes us pray
aright. This kind of prayer need not express itself in words; it may be
a habit, a long drawn out desire, an habitual longing for help coupled
with firm confidence in God's mercy to grant our request. No state of
soul however disordered can long resist such a power, and no habit of
evil but in time will be annihilated by it.

The man or woman who undertakes to keep himself or herself pure, or to
rise out of a habit of sin without the liberal use of divine
supplication has in hand a very ungrateful task, and he or she will
realize it before going far. And unless that prayer is sincere and
heartfelt, a prayer full of faith that will not entertain the thought
of failure, every effort will be barren of results. You must speak to
God as to one near you, and remember that He is near you all the time.

Then there are the sacraments to repair every breach and to heal every
wound. Penance will cleanse you, communion will adorn and equip you
anew. Confession will give you a better knowledge of yourself every
time you go; the Food of God will strengthen every fibre of your soul
and steel you against the seductions that otherwise would make you a
ready victim. Don't go once a year, go ten, twenty times and more, if
necessary, go until you feel that you own yourself, that you can
command and be obeyed. Then you will not have to be told to stop; you
will be safe.



CHAPTER LXXXIV.
THOU SHALT NOT STEAL.

THE Seventh Commandment is protective of the right of property which is
vested in every human being enjoying the use of reason. Property means
that which belongs to one, that which is one's own, to have and to
hold, or to dispose of, at one's pleasure, or to reclaim in the event
of actual dispossession. The right of property embraces all things to
which may be affixed the seal of ownership; and it holds good until the
owner relinquishes his claim, or forfeits or loses his title without
offense to justice. This natural faculty to possess excludes every
alien right, and supposes in all others the duty and obligation to
respect it. The respect that goes as far as not relieving the owner of
his goods is not enough; it must safeguard him against all damage and
injury to said goods; otherwise his right is non-existent.

All violations of this right come under the general head of stealing.
People call it theft, when it is effected with secrecy and slyness;
robbery, when there is a suggestion of force or violence. The swindler
is he who appropriates another's goods by methods of gross deception or
false pretenses while the embezzler transfers to himself the funds
entrusted to his care. Petty thieving is called pilfering or filching;
stealing on a large scale usually has less dishonorable qualificatives.
Boodling and lobbying are called politics; watering stock, squeezing
out legitimate competition, is called financiering; wholesale
confiscation and unjust conquest is called statesmanship. Give it
whatever name you like, it is all stealing; whether the culprit be
liberally rewarded or liberally punished, he nevertheless stands
amenable to God's justice which is outraged wherever human justice
suffers.

Of course the sin of theft has its degrees of gravity, malice and
guilt, to determine which, that is, to fix exactly the value of stolen
goods sufficient to constitute a grievous fault, is not the simplest
and easiest of moral problems. The extent of delinquency may be
dependent upon various causes and complex conditions. On the one hand,
the victim must be considered in himself, and the amount of injury
sustained by him; on the other, justice is offended generally in all
cases of theft, and because justice is the corner stone of society, it
must be protected at all hazards. It is only by weighing judiciously
all these different circumstances that we can come to enunciate an
approximate general rule that will serve as a guide in the ordinary
contingencies of life.

Thus, of two individuals deprived by theft of a same amount of worldly
goods, the one may suffer thereby to a much greater extent than the
other; he who suffers more is naturally more reluctant to part with his
goods, and a greater injustice is done to him than to the other. The
sin committed against him is therefore greater than that committed
against the other. A rich man may not feel the loss of a dollar,
whereas for another less prosperous the loss of less than that sum
might be of the nature of a calamity. To take therefore unjustly from a
person what to that person is a notable amount is a grievous sin. It is
uniformly agreed that it is a notable loss for a man to be unduly
deprived of what constitutes a day's sustenance. This is the minimum of
grievous matter concerning theft.

But this rule will evidently not hold good applied on a rising scale to
more and more extensive fortunes; for a time would come when it would
be possible without serious guilt to appropriate good round sums from
those abundantly blessed with this world's goods.

The disorders necessarily attendant on such a moral rule are only too
evident; and it is plain that the law of God cannot countenance abuses
of this nature. Justice therefore demands that there be a certain fixed
sum beyond which one may not go without incurring serious guilt; and
this, independent of the fortune of the person who suffers. Theologians
have fixed that amount approximately, in this country, at five dollars.
This means that when such a sum is taken, in all cases, the sin is
mortal. It is not always necessary, it is seldom necessary, that one
should steal this much in order to offend grievously; but when the
thief reaches this amount, be his victim ever so wealthy, he is guilty
of grave injustice.

This rule applies to all cases in which the neighbor is made to suffer
unjustly in his lawful possessions; and it effects all wrongdoers
whether they steal or destroy another's goods or co-operate
efficaciously in such deeds of sin. It matters not whether the harm be
wrought directly or indirectly, since in either case there may be moral
fault; and it must be remembered that gross negligence may make one
responsible as well as malice aforethought.

The following are said to co-operate in crime to the extent of becoming
joint-partners with the principal agent in guilt: those in whose name
the wrong is done, in obedience to their orders or as a result of any
other means employed; those who influence the culprit by suggesting
motives and reasons for his crime or by pointing out efficient means of
arriving thereat; those who induce others to commit evil by playing on
their weaknesses thereby subjecting them to what is known as moral
force; those who harbor the thief and conceal his stolen property
against their recovery; those whose silence is equivalent to
approbation, permission or official consent; those finally who before,
during or after the deed, abstain from performing a plain duty in
preventing, deterring or bringing to justice the guilty party. Such
persons as the foregoing participate as abettors in crime and share all
the guilt of the actual criminals; sometimes the former are even more
guilty than the latter.

The Tenth Commandment which forbids us to covet our neighbor's goods,
bears the same relation to the Seventh as the Ninth does to the Sixth.
It must, however, be borne in mind that all such coveting supposes
injustice in desire, that is, in the means by which we desire to obtain
what is not ours. To wish for, to long ardently for something that
appeals to one's like and fancy is not sinful; the wrong consists in
the desire to acquire it unjustly, to steal it, and thereby work damage
unto the neighbor. It is a natural weakness in man to be dissatisfied
with what he has and to sigh after what he has not; very few of us are
free from this failing. But so long as our cravings and hankerings are
not tainted with injustice, we are innocent of evil.



