CHAPTER LXXVI.
IMMORALITY.

THE natural order of things brings us to a consideration of the Sixth
Commandment, and at the same time, of the Ninth, as treating of the
same matter--a matter so highly immoral as to deserve the specific
appellation of immorality.

People, as a rule, are tolerably well informed on this subject. It is a
knowledge acquired by instinct, the depraved instinct of our fallen
nature, and supplemented by the experiences weaned from the daily
sayings and doings of common life. Finally, that sort of journalism
known as the "yellow," and literature called pornographic, serve to
round off this education and give it the finishing touches.

But, on the other hand, if one considers the innocent, the young and
inexperienced, who are not a few; and likewise the morbidly curious of
sensual tendencies, who are many, this matter must appear as a high
explosive, capable of doing any amount of damage, if not handled with
the utmost care and caution.

Much, therefore, must be left unsaid, or half-said; suggestion and
insinuation must be trusted to go far enough, in order that, while the
knowing understand, the ignorant may be secure in the bliss of their
ignorance and be not prematurely informed.

They, for whom such language is insufficient, know where to go for
fuller information. Parents are the natural teachers; the boy's father
and the girl's mother know what to say, how and when to say it; or at
least should know. And if parents were only more careful, in their own
way, to acquaint their children with certain facts when the time comes
for it, much evil would be avoided, both moral and physical.

But there are secrets too sacred even for parents' ears, that are
confided only to God, through His appointed minister. Catholics know
this man is the confessor, and the place for such information and
counsel, the holy tribunal of penance. These two channels of knowledge
are safe; the same cannot be said of others.

As a preliminary, we would remark that sins, of the sort here in
question as well as all kinds of sin, are not limited to deeds.
Exterior acts consummate the malice of evil, but they do not constitute
such malice; evil is generated in the heart. One who desires to do
wrong offends God as effectively as another who does the wrong in deed.
Not only that, but he who makes evil the food of his mind and ponders
complacently on the seductive beauty of vice is no less guilty than he
who goes beyond theory into practice. This is something we frequently
forget, or would fain forget, the greed of passion blinding us more or
less voluntarily to the real moral value of our acts.

As a consequence of this self-illusion many a one finds himself far
beyond his depth in the sea of immorality before he fully realizes his
position. It is small beginnings that lead to lasting results; it is by
repeated acts that habits are formed; and evil grows on us faster than
most of us are willing to acknowledge. All manner of good and evil
originates in thought; and that is where the little monster of
uncleanness must be strangled before it is full-grown, if we would be
free from its unspeakable thralldom.

Again, this is a matter the malice and evil of which very, very rarely,
if ever, escapes us. He who commits a sin of impurity and says he did
not know it was wrong, lies deliberately, or else he is not in his
right frame of mind. The Maker has left in our souls enough of natural
virtue and grace to enable us to distinguish right and wrong, clean and
unclean; even the child with no definite knowledge of the matter,
meeting it for the first time, instinctively blushes and recoils from
the moral hideousness of its aspect. Conscience here speaks in no
uncertain accents; he alone does not hear who does not wish to hear.

Catholic theologians are even more rigid concerning the matter itself,
prescinding altogether from our perception of it. They say that here no
levity of matter is allowed, that is to say, every violation, however
slight, of either of these two commandments, is a sin. You cannot even
touch this pitch of moral defilement without being yourself defiled. It
is useless therefore to argue the matter and enter a plea of triviality
and inconsequence; nothing is trivial that is of a nature to offend God
and damn a soul.

Weakness has the same value as an excuse as it has elsewhere in moral
matters. Few sins are of pure malice; weakness is responsible for the
damnation of all, or nearly all, the lost. That very weakness is the
sin, for virtue is strength. To make this plea therefore is to make no
plea at all, for we are all weak, desperately weak, especially against
the demon of the flesh, and we become weaker by yielding. And we are
responsible for the degree of moral debility under which we labor just
as we are for the degree of guilt we have incurred.

Finally, as God, is no exceptor of persons, He does not distinguish
between souls, and sex makes no difference with Him. In this His
judgment differs from that of the world which absolves the man and
condemns the woman. There is no evident reason why the violation of a
divine precept should be less criminal in one human creature than in
another. And if the reprobation of society does not follow both
equally, the wrath of God does, and He will render unto every one
according to his and her works.



CHAPTER LXXVII.
THE SINK OF INIQUITY.

THE malice of lust consists in the abuse of a natural, a quasi-divine
faculty, which is prostituted to ignoble purposes foreign to the ends
by the Creator established. The lines along which this faculty may be
legitimately exercised, are laid down by natural and divine laws,
destined to preserve God's rights, to maintain order in society and to
protect man against himself. The laws result in the foundation of a
state, called matrimony, within which the exercise of this human
prerogative, delegated to man by the Creator, receives the sanction of
divine authority, and becomes invested with a sacred character, as
sacred as its abuse is abominable and odious.

To disregard and ignore this condition of things and to seek
satisfaction for one's passions outside the domain of lawful wedlock,
is to revolt against this order of creative wisdom and to violate the
letter of the law. But the intrinsic malice of the evil appears in the
nature of this violation. This abuse touches life; not life in its
being, but in its source, in the principle that makes all vitality
possible, which is still more serious. Immorality is therefore a moral
poisoning of the wells of life. It profanes and desecrates a faculty
and prerogative so sacred that it is likened to the almighty power of
the Creator.

A manifold malice may attach to a single act in violation of the law of
moral purity. The burden of a vow in either party incurring guilt,
whether that vow be matrimonial or religious, is a circumstance that
adds injustice or sacrilege to the crime, according to the nature of
that vow; and the double guilt is on both parties. If the vow exists in
one and the other delinquent, then the offense is still further
multiplied and the guilt aggravated. Blood-relationship adds a specific
malice of its own, slight or grievous according to the intimacy of said
relationship. Fornication, adultery, sacrilege and incest--these, to
give to things their proper names, are terms that specify various
degrees of malice and guilt in this matter; and although they do not
sound well or look well in print, they have a meaning which sensible
folks should not ignore.

A lapse from virtue is bad; the habit or vice, voluntarily entertained,
is infinitely worse. If the one argues weakness, even culpable, the
other betrays a studied contempt for God and the law, an utter
perversion of the moral sense that does not even esteem virtue in
itself; an appalling thralldom of the spirit to the flesh, an appetite
that is all ungodly, a gluttony that is bestial. Very often it supposes
a victim held fast in the clutches of unfeeling hoggishness, fascinated
or subjugated, made to serve, while serviceable; and then cast off
without a shred of respectability for another. It is an ordinary
occurrence for one of these victims to swallow a deadly potion on being
shown her folly and left to its consequences; and the human ogre rides
triumphantly home in his red automobile.

But the positions may be reversed; the victim may play the role of
seductress, and displaying charms that excite the passions, ensnare the
youth whose feet are not guided by the lamp of experience, wisdom and
religion. This is the human spider, soulless and shameless, using
splendid gifts of God to form a web with which to inveigle and entrap a
too willing prey. And the dead flies, who will count them!

The climax of infamy is reached when this sort of a thing is made, not
a pastime, but a business, when virtue is put on the market with its
fixed value attached and bartered for a price. There is no outrage on
human feeling greater than this. We are all born of woman; and the
sight of womanhood thus degraded and profaned would give us more of a
shock if it were less common. The curse of God is on such wretches as
ply this unnatural trade and live by infamy; not only on them, but on
those also who make such traffic possible and lucrative. Considering
all things, more guilty the latter than the former, perhaps. Active
co-operation in evil makes one a joint partner in guilt; to encourage
infamy is not only to sin, but also to share all the odium thereof;
while he who contributes to the perpetuation of an iniquity of this
nature is, in a sense, worse than the unfortunates themselves.

The civil law which seeks to eliminate the social evil of prostitution
by enactment and process, gives rise, by enactment and process, to
another evil almost as widespread. Divorce is a creature of the law,
and divorce opens the door to concubinage, legalized if you will, but
concubinage just the same. The marriage tie is intact after as well as
before the decree of divorce; no human power can break that bond. The
permission therefore to re-marry is permission to live in adultery, and
that permission is, of its very nature, null and void. They who avail
themselves of such a permission and live in sin, may count on the
protection of the law, but the law will not protect them against the
wrath of the Almighty who condemns their immoral living.



