CHAPTER XXVIII.
LOVE OF NEIGHBOR.

THE precept, written in our hearts, as well as in the law, to love God,
commands us, at the same time, to love the neighbor. When you go to
confession, you are told to be sorry for your sins and to make a firm
purpose of amendment. These appear to be two different injunctions; yet
in fact and reality, they are one and the same thing, for it is
impossible to abhor and detest sin, having at the same moment the
intention of committing it. One therefore includes the other; one is
not sincere and true without the other; therefore one cannot be without
the other. So it is with love of God and of the neighbor; these two
parts of one precept are coupled together because they complete each
other, and they amount practically to the same thing.

The neighbor we are to love is not alone those for whom we naturally
have affection, such as parents, friends, benefactors, etc., whom it is
easy to love. But our neighbor is all mankind, those far and those
near, those who have blessed us and those who have wronged us, the
enemy as well as the friend; all who have within them, as we have, the
image and likeness of God. No human being can we put outside the pale
of neighborly love.

As for the love we bear others, it is of course one in substance, but
it may be different in degree and various in quality. It may be more or
less tender, intense, emphatic. Some we love more, others, less; yet
for all that, we love them. It is impossible for us to have towards any
other being the same feelings we entertain for a parent. The love a
good Christian bears towards a stranger is not the love he bears
towards a good friend. The love therefore that charity demands admits a
variety of shades without losing its character of love.

When it comes to loving certain ones of our neighbors, the idea is not
of the most welcome. What! Must I love, really love, that low rascal,
that cantankerous fellow, that repugnant, repulsive being? Or this
other who has wronged me so maliciously? Or that proud, overbearing
creature who looks down on me and despises me?

We have said that love has its degrees, its ebb and flow tide, and
still remains love. The low water mark is this: that we refuse not to
pray for such neighbors, that we speak not ill of them, that we refuse
not to salute them, or to do them a good turn, or to return a favor. A
breach in one of these common civilities, due to every man from his
fellow-man, may constitute a degree of hatred directly opposed to the
charity strictly required of us.

It is not however necessary to go on doing these things all during life
and at all moments of life. These duties are exterior, and are required
as often as a contrary bearing would betoken a lack of charity in the
heart. Just as we are not called upon to embrace and hug an uninviting
person as a neighbor, neither are we obliged to continue our civilities
when we find that they are offensive and calculated to cause trouble.
But naturally there must be charity in the heart.

We should not confound uncharity with a sort of natural repugnance and
antipathy, instinctive to some natures, betraying a weakness of
character, if you will, but hardly what one could call a clearly
defined fault. There are people who can forgive more easily than forget
and who succeed only after a long while in overcoming strong feelings.
In consequence of this state of mind, and in order to maintain peace
and concord, they prefer the absence to the presence of the objects of
their antipathy. Of course, to nourish this feeling is sinful to a
degree; but while striving against it, to remove prudently all
occasions of opening afresh the wound, if we act honestly, this does
not seem to have any uncharitable malice.

Now all this is not charity unless the idea of God enter therein. There
is no charity outside the idea of God. Philanthropy, humanity is one
thing, charity is another. The one is sentiment, the other is love--two
very different things. The one supposes natural motives, the other,
supernatural. Philanthropy looks at the exterior form and discovers a
likeness to self. Charity looks at the soul and therein discovers an
image of God, by which we are not only common children of Adam, but
also children of God and sharers of a common celestial inheritance.
Neither a cup of water nor a fortune given in any other name than that
of God is charity.

There are certain positive works of charity, such as almsgiving and
brotherly correction, etc., that may be obligatory upon us to a degree
of Serious responsibility. We must use prudence and intelligence in
discerning these obligations, but once they clearly stand forth they
are as binding on us as obligations of justice. We are our brothers'
keepers, especially of those whom misfortune oppresses and whose lot is
cast under a less lucky star.



CHAPTER XXIX.
PRAYER.

NO word so common and familiar among Christians as prayer. Religion
itself is nothing more than a vast, mighty, universal, never ceasing
prayer. Our churches are monuments of prayer and houses of prayer. Our
worship, our devotions, our ceremonies are expressions of prayer. Our
sacred music is a prayer. The incense, rising in white clouds before
the altar, is symbolical of prayer. And the one accent that is dinned
into our ears from altar and pulpit is prayer.

Prayer is the life of the Christian as work is the life of the man;
without one and the other we would starve spiritually and physically.
If we live well, it is because we pray; if we lead sinful lives, it is
because we neglect to pray. Where prayer is, there is virtue; where
prayer is unknown, there is sin. The atmosphere of piety, sanctity, and
honesty is the atmosphere of prayer.

Strange that the nature and necessity of prayer are so often
misunderstood! Yet the definition in our Catechism is clear and
precise. There are four kinds of prayer; adoration, thanksgiving,
petition for pardon, and for our needs, spiritual and bodily.

One need be neither a Catholic nor a Christian to see how becoming it
is in us to offer to God our homage of adoration and thanksgiving; it
is necessary only to believe in a God who made us and who is infinitely
perfect. Why, the very heathens made gods to adore, and erected temples
to thank them, so deep was their sense of the devotion they owed the
Deity. They put the early Christians to death because the latter
refused to adore their gods. Everywhere you go, under the sun, you will
find the creature offering to the Creator a homage of worship.

He, therefore, who makes so little of God as to forget to adore and
thank Him becomes inferior to the very pagans who, sunk in the darkness
of corruption and superstition as they were, did not, however, forget
their first and natural duty to the Maker. Neglect of this obligation
in a man betrays an absence, a loss of religious instinct, and an
irreligious man is a pure animal, if he is a refined one. His
refinement and superiority come from his intelligence, and these
qualities, far from attenuating his guilt, only serve to aggravate it.

The brute eats and drinks; when he is full and tired he throws himself
down to rest. When refreshed, he gets up, shakes himself and goes off
again in quest of food and amusement. In what does a man without prayer
differ from such a being?

But prayer, strictly speaking, means a demand, a petition, an asking.
We ask for our needs and our principal needs are pardon and succor.
This is prayer as it is generally understood. It is necessary to
salvation. Without it no man can be saved. Our assurance of heaven
should be in exact proportion to our asking. "Ask and you shall
receive." Ask nothing, and you obtain nothing; and that which you do
not obtain is just what you must have to save your soul.

Here is the explanation of it in a nutshell. The doctrine of the Church
is that when God created man, He raised him from a natural to a
supernatural state, and assigned to him a supernatural end.
Supernatural means what is above the natural, beyond our natural powers
of obtaining. Our destiny therefore cannot be fulfilled without the
help of a superior power. We are utterly incapable by ourselves of
realizing the end to which we are called. The condition absolutely
required is the grace of God and through that alone can we expect to
come to our appointed end.

Here is a stone. That that stone should have feeling is not natural,
but supernatural. God, to give sensation to that stone, must break
through the natural order of things, because to feel is beyond the
native powers of a stone. It is not natural for an animal to reason, it
is impossible. God must work a miracle to make it understand. Well, the
stone is just as capable of feeling, and the animal of reasoning, as is
man capable of saving his soul by himself.

To persevere in the state of grace and the friendship of God, to
recover it when lost by sin, are supernatural works. Only by the grace
of God can this be effected. Will God do this without being asked? Say
rather will God save us in spite of ourselves, or unknown to ourselves.
He who does not ask gives no token of a desire to obtain.



