The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Theories of Darwin and Their Relation to Philosophy, Religion, and Morality
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Theories of Darwin and Their Relation to Philosophy, Religion, and Morality

Author: Rudolf Schmid

Translator: G. A. Zimmermann


        
Release date: July 26, 2007 [eBook #22150]
                Most recently updated: January 2, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/22150

Credits: Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Keith Edkins and
        the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        https://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
        public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital
        Libraries.)






Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Keith Edkins and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital
Libraries.)





Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

THE THEORIES OF DARWIN.

HALL, STUTTGART, April 5, 1880.

We hereby authorize the Rev. Dr. G. A. Zimmermann to translate into English
the book entitled

_Die Darwin'schen Theorien und ihre Stellung zur Philosophie, Religion und
Moral von Rudolf Schmid_.

We declare that we know of no other translation of the said book and that
Dr. Zimmermann's translation will be the only one authorized by us for the
United States as well as for the British Empire and its Dominions.

  (_The Author_) RUDOLF SCHMID.

  (_The Publisher_) PAUL MOSER.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE

THEORIES OF DARWIN

AND THEIR RELATION TO

PHILOSOPHY, RELIGION AND MORALITY.

By RUDOLF SCHMID, President of the Theological Seminary at Schoenthal,
Wuertemberg.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN BY G. A. ZIMMERMANN, PH.D.

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY THE DUKE OF ARGYLL

CHICAGO:
JANSEN McCLURG. & COMPANY
1883.

       *       *       *       *       *

COPYRIGHT
BY JANSEN, MCCLURG & CO.
A.D. 1882.

R. R. DONNELLEY & SONS, PRINTERS.

       *       *       *       *       * {1}


AUTHOR'S PREFACE

       *       *       *       *       *

The movement which received its impulse as well as its name from Darwin,
seems to have recently passed its distinctest phase; but the more prominent
points of opposition, religious, ethical, and scientific, which have been
revealed through it, remain as sharply contrasted as before. The author of
this book desires, in the first place, to be of service to such readers as
feel the need of setting themselves right upon these questions, which touch
the highest interests of mankind, but who lack time and opportunity to
investigate independently a realm in which so many and so heterogeneous
sciences come into mutual contact. The illogical and confused manner in
which some noisy leaders confound these sciences and their problems and
consequences, renders it still more difficult to arrive at a satisfactory
result; and thus perhaps many readers will look with interest upon an
investigation designed to simplify the different problems and the different
attempts at their solution, and to treat them not only in their relations
to each other, but also separately. But with this primary object, the
author combines another: to render a service to some among the many who
perceive the harmony between their scientific conviction and their
religious need threatened or shaken by the results of science, and who are
unwilling to lose this harmony, or, having lost it, desire to regain it.
Those voices are indeed becoming louder, and more generally and willingly
heard, which proclaim an irreconcilability between faith and {2} knowledge,
between the religious and the scientific views of the world; which declare
that peace between the two can only be had at the price either of
permitting the religious impulses of the heart to be stifled in favor of
science, of satisfying the religious need of the mind with a nourishment
which in the light of science proves to be an illusion, or, as sceptics in
theory and eclectics in practice, of renouncing with resignation a logical
connection and foundation to their former view of the world. The most
striking proof of the extent to which these voices are heard, is the fact
that it has been possible for a one-sided pessimism to become the
fashionable system of philosophy in a Christian nation. The most effective
means for opposing such discordant voices, and for making amends for the
disagreements which they have occasioned, undoubtedly consists in the
actual proof of the contrary of their theories, in the clear presentation
of a standpoint from which not only the most unrestricted freedom of
investigation and the most unreserved acknowledgment of its results shall
be in perfect harmony with the undiminished care of our entire religious
possession, but in which this peace is preserved and forever established by
the very fact that one function of the mind directly requires the other,
one possession directly guarantees the other. This is the standpoint of the
author, and from it he has endeavored to treat all the questions which are
to be taken into consideration. Should he, by his exposition of this
standpoint, succeed in helping even a few readers in reaching the
conviction of the actual harmony between the scientific, religious, and
ethical acquisitions of mankind, or in confirming them anew in such
conviction, he would find himself amply rewarded for this first extended
venture before the public.

R. S.

{3}

AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO AMERICAN EDITION.

Six years have elapsed since I wrote the book which is now going forth in
English dress. The great leader of the theories in question has passed
away; the waves of thought he set in motion are assuming smoother shape;
and I can only add to what I have already written, that not only have I had
no occasion to retract any of the statements or views laid down in the
book, but I perceive the religious as well as the scientific world growing
more and more into accord with the views I have maintained, and which were
at first so vehemently opposed.

I owe so much to the literary men of the English tongue on both sides of
the Atlantic, that I shall be glad if, through the devoted labors of the
translator, I am enabled to pay them a tribute of gratitude by aiding them
in clearing the way for thought in these much disputed fields, or in
reconciling in their minds the conflict between faith and science.

R. S.

SCHOeNTHAL, WUeRTEMBERG, _September_, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


{5}

INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION,

BY THE DUKE OF ARGYLL.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is well known that Mr. Darwin's theory on the Origin of Species has been
accepted in Germany more widely, with more absolute faith, and with more
vehement enthusiasm, than in the country of its birth. In Germany, more
conspicuously than elsewhere, it has itself become the subject of
developments as strange and as aberrant as any which it assumes in the
history of Organic Life. The most extravagant conclusions have been drawn
from it--invading every branch of human thought, in Science, in Philosophy,
and in Religion. These conclusions have been preached, too, with a
dogmatism as angry and as intolerant as any of the old theologies. It is
the fate of every idea which is new and fruitful, that it is ridden to the
death by excited novices. We can not be surprised if this fate has
overtaken the idea that all existing animal forms have had their ancestry
in other forms which exist no longer, and have been derived from these by
ordinary generation through countless stages of descent. Although this is
an idea which, whether true or not, is entirely subordinate to the larger
idea of creation, it usurps in many minds the character of a substitute.
This is natural enough. The theory, or at least the language, of
Evolutionists, puts forward a visible order of phenomena as a complete and
all-sufficient account of its own origin and cause. However unsatisfactory
this may be to the higher faculties of the mind, it is eminently {6}
satisfactory to those other faculties which are lower in the scale. It
dismisses as needless, or it postpones indefinitely, all thought of the
agencies which are ultimate and unseen. Just as in the physical world, some
trivial object which is very near us may shut out the whole of a wide
horizon, so in the intellectual world, some coarse mechanical conception
may shut out all the kingdom of Nature and the glory of it.

Two great subjects of investigation lie before us. The first is to
ascertain how far the Theory of Evolution represents an universal fact, or
only one very partial and fragmentary aspect of a great variety of facts
connected with the origin and development of Organic Life. The second and
by far the most important inquiry, is to estimate aright, or as nearly as
we can, the relative place and importance of these facts in the Philosophy
of Nature.

Subjects of investigation so rich and manifold as these may well attract
all the most varied gifts of the human mind. This they have already done,
and there is every indication that they will continue to do so for
generations yet to be. Already an immense literature is devoted to them;
and every fresh effort of observation and of reasoning seems to open out
new and fruitful avenues of thought. The work which is here introduced to
the English reader contains an excellent review of this literature, so far
as it is represented in the English and German languages. Knowing the
author personally, as I have done for many years, I recognize with pleasure
in his work all the carefulness of inquiry, and all the conscientiousness
of reasoning, which belong to a singularly candid and patient mind.

ARGYLL.

  INVERARY CASTLE, SCOTLAND,
      _September, 1882._

       *       *       *       *       *


{7}

NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR.

The consideration which this work has received from the leaders of
religious and philosophic thought in Germany, and, indeed, wherever it has
been read in its original form, has led the translator to believe that an
English version of it would be acceptable. Especially in America, where
religious problems and religious thought are so intimately connected with
the processes of scientific and philosophic investigation, and where the
agitation of these problems is so peculiarly active and violent, it has
seemed that a work marked by so much scholarship, profundity, and
comprehensiveness and originality of treatment, must serve an important
purpose to the cause of religious no less than of scientific truth. It may
be explained here, that the author resided for some years in the family of
the Duke of Argyll, and there breathed, to a certain extent, the scientific
air of Darwinism in its very origin; and thus his familiarity with all the
results of modern scientific research, added to his theological and
philosophical acquirements, enable him, with a most admirable blending of
the spirit of fairness and toleration with logical severity of treatment,
to bring these different domains into their proper relation with each other
and to establish between them that essential harmony in which consists the
solution of these most profound and vital problems of man's welfare.

Of the translation it may properly be said that, while the aim has been to
give the work the clearest possible form consistent with that strict
fidelity to the original which is {8} especially demanded by the character
of its material, the translator has not hoped to make the work altogether
"easy" reading. Peculiarities of the author's style have been, it is
believed, largely preserved; and occasional difficulties of apprehension
are no doubt to be expected, both from the method of treatment and from the
profound and abstruse character of the topics treated. The translator will
be well satisfied if it shall be found that he has succeeded in performing
his task without adding unduly to the seeming obscurities of certain
passages--obscurities which, however, will no doubt vanish before that
degree of mental application without which such works may not be read at
all intelligibly.

Acknowledgments are properly due and are gladly rendered to George C.
Dawson, Esq., of Chicago, and to Mr. Francis F. Browne, editor of _The
Dial_, for valuable assistance in revising and perfecting this version.

G. A. Z.

CHICAGO, _October_, 1882.

       *       *       *       *       *


{9}

CONTENTS.

  INTRODUCTION ... 17

_PART FIRST:_
_THE DARWINIAN THEORIES_.

BOOK I.
THE PURELY SCIENTIFIC THEORIES.

  The Scientific Problem, ... 23

