PART I.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE THEORIES OF DARWIN.

       *       *       *       *       *


{23}

BOOK I.

THE PURELY SCIENTIFIC THEORIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SCIENTIFIC PROBLEM.

The interesting problem which underlies Mr. Darwin's theories is the answer
to the question: _How did the different species of organic beings on the
earth originate?_ We find ourselves in the midst of an endless variety of
organic beings, animals and plants; we see ourselves, so far as regards the
entire physical part of our being, in relationship with this organic
world--especially with the organization and physical functions of the
animal body. The organic individuals come and go. They originate by being
begotten by and born of individuals of the same kind, or they spring up
through the formation of germs and buds; and they produce in the same way
new individuals, that resemble them in all essential characteristics. Like
always begets like, so far as our observations go. But not only the
individuals, but even the species to which they belong, must have
originated at some definite period of time--and, indeed, as geology tells
us, not all at once, but in a long series, which stretched through
immeasurable epochs of the earth's history. Thus we come face to face with
the question, already put, which we can now formulate more {24} precisely:
_How did the first individuals of each organic species come into
existence?_

No human being ever has observed, nor ever could observe, the origination
of a new species, because man, as it seems, did not appear on the earth
until all the other organisms were in existence. For this reason, the
scientists for a long time thought it unprofitable to occupy themselves
with this question; and even in our time a great many of them declare the
question to be absolutely insolvable, and every attempt at answering it to
be an unjustifiable use of hypotheses. But the impulse toward investigation
admits of no limitation so long as there is any probability of extending
its field of action. Especially in the province of nature, so many things
which could not be discovered by mere observation have been traced
indirectly, and so many important and established facts have been added to
our stores of knowledge, by first starting from hypothetical premises, that
man has again and again endeavored to approximate an answer to the question
of the origin of species by taking the indirect course of hypothesis and
induction, whenever the direct way of observation did not lead to any
result. Religion of course gives a solution to the problem by stating that
the species have been originated by the creative act of God. It is wrong to
say that this solution is opposed to the above-mentioned impulse toward
investigation; for this solution suffices for religion, whether a natural
progress in the origination of species be established or not. For, to the
believer in religion, the whole universe, with all its objective phenomena
and growth, is the work of God as well as the individuals of the already
existing species; and a {25} closer acquaintance with the manner of their
origin is not only no disturbance to his ground of belief, but, on the
contrary, an addition to his knowledge of the method of God's action. In
every man of sound mind, the religious faith is not antagonistic or even
indifferent to the scientific impulse toward investigation, but stands upon
a most intimate footing with it. Hence the human intellect again and again
makes the attempt to find an answer to the problem of the origin of species
in a scientific way, and each endeavor of this kind necessarily ends with
the dilemma that either the first individuals of a species, no matter
whether it be the highest or the lowest, have been evolved out of inorganic
matter, or they originated by descent from the most closely related species
of their predecessors. The denial of the first part of our dilemma, and the
affirmation of the second, is the "Theory of Descent."

But this theory of descent leads us at once into another dilemma. If the
species originated by descent from the most closely related lower species,
and under certain circumstances also from species of the same rank, and
even by degeneration from the next higher, it must have occurred in one of
two ways: either by leaps--called by naturalists "metamorphosis of germs"
or "heterogenetic conception"--or by a succession of imperceptibly small
alterations of the individuals from generation to generation. Each of these
changes would have been no greater than the differences we observe to-day
between the individuals of the very same species, but became in the course
of time so massed and strengthened in one direction that new species have
been evolved. This hypothesis is called the "Theory of Development," {26}
or "Evolution." We retain this name, although well aware of the fact that
the authors do not agree in their use of the term "evolution." Professor
Wigand, who adopts only the theory of a descent from one primordial cell to
another, and who positively rejects the idea of a progress from one fully
developed species to another, claims among other things that one value of
his own theory is that he secures for the idea of evolution its full
meaning. The expression still has a meaning for those who reject the real
descent of the species or their primordial germs one from another, and
acknowledge only the ideal bond of a common plan in their successive
manifestations. But as soon as we examine more closely the literal and
logical meaning of the word, we shall find it of most weight when we
understand by it the before-mentioned gradual evolution in opposition to
the theory of progress by leaps or new creations. Moreover, it is well
known that long before this no other term than evolution was used to
designate the growth of a single organic individual from the primordial
cell and egg to its fully developed form and vital function. Besides, we
find ourselves also in harmony with most of the authors, so far as they
have distinct conceptions of the different scientific problems, if we use
the term "theory of evolution" for the gradual development of one species
from another, in opposition to the hypothesis of a metamorphosis of germs,
or even of a genealogy of primordial cells.

But each evolution theory leads again to new theories, as soon as it has to
be proved in a scientific way. For it can claim a scientific worth only
when sustained by earnest attempts to find and prove the {27} productive
power, agencies and laws of such an evolution of species. Those attempts
can be made in various ways. As a philosophical question, many attempts at
solution have been made, both in ancient and modern times; but being mainly
in the realm of metaphysics, they do not come within the limits of our
scientific essay. As a question for investigators of natural phenomena,
only two attempts of sufficient importance to be mentioned have been made.
The first one was made by Lamarck, who, taking the really different ideas
of descent and evolution as one, made use of the hypothesis of
transmutation; thus becoming the pioneer of Darwinism. The other attempt
was made by Darwin in his theory of natural selection, or struggle, for
existence, and is called the "Theory of Selection."

In defining our problem, therefore, we find ourselves under the influence
of a scientific law of development. The simple problem which we started
from has developed into a trinity of problems and attempts at solution. The
simple question of the origin of species led us into the dilemma of a
_generatio aequivoca_, or a descent; the hypothesis of a descent led to the
dilemma of a heterogenetic conception, or an evolution; and the hypothesis
of an evolution rendered necessary the attempt at explaining this
evolution, and showed Darwin's method of explaining it by his selection
theory. It will be well for the reader to keep distinctly in mind the
difference between these problems and theories, in following our
investigations, even if we cannot arrange our historical sketch according
to the natural principle of division arising from these differences.

For it lies in the nature of the question itself, that {28} these theories,
in their historical progress, did not appear singly, but together. Those
who inclined to the theory of a descent of species could claim for it the
attention of scientific investigators only after having also made the
attempt at conceiving this descent in a concrete way, and according to
certain analogies of observation. The only analogy of the kind appeared in
the sphere of individual development and individual differences on the one
hand, and in that of closely related characters of allied species on the
other; and thus led of itself to the evolution theory. As soon as the
naturalists thought they had found the causes of such an evolution of the
species, they naturally placed these causes in the foreground of their
demonstrations, and erected upon them the structure of their entire theory;
thus treating descent, evolution and selection as one single and
indissolubly connected theory. But this manner of treating the question had
also its dangers, which have already caused a great deal of confusion and
misunderstanding, as well as much unprofitable controversy. Often friends
and enemies of the theories placed that which was in favor of the theory of
descent to the credit of the evolution or selection theory; and, on the
other hand, that which seemed opposed to the selection theory was often
held to be a weakening of the evolution and descent theory; and this was
done, not only by amateurs, but often enough by the highest authorities
also. In reality, however, it is quite conceivable that the idea of a
descent may prove correct, and possibly the idea of an evolution of the
species will have to be replaced by that of a heterogenetic generation, or
by the theory that certain groups in the organic system are originated {29}
by heterogenetic generation, and others by evolution; and so the evolution
theory must share with the theory of heterogenetic generation, or of a
metamorphosis of germs. On the other hand, it is conceivable that even
where the evolution theory is confirmed, the evolution can be accounted for
wholly or partly by other reasons than those derived from the selection
theory. And even this result of present investigations is not
inconceivable: that the reasons for and against the different theories will
be found to balance one another to such a degree that they will sooner or
later lead science, in answering the question of the origin of species, to
the old confession of Socrates--"_Ignoramus_."

We shall, therefore, have to arrange our historical sketch according to the
historical order of the appearance of the theories, and treat the problems
more or less as an undivided whole. But we shall keep in mind, during our
historical sketch, not only the logical separation of the problems in
question, in order not to lose clearness of judgment, but we shall also at
the end of our review, if we consider the present condition of the
problems, have to examine the same once more in detail, so far as regards
the above mentioned separation.

       *       *       *       *       *


{30}

