CHAPTER IV.

DARWINISM AND MORAL LIFE.

Sec. 1. _Darwinistic Naturalism and Moral Life._

Precisely the same relationship between Darwinism and morality, which we
found in treating of moral principles, presents itself when we ask about
the relationship of Darwinistic ideas and moral life in its concrete
reality. He who builds a system of monistic naturalism upon his Darwinism,
if he is logical, and not better than his system, comes into inevitable
collision with concrete moral life; while he who limits his Darwinism to
the realm of natural science, remains in concrete life in peace with
morality.

That Darwinistic ethical naturalism also comes into conflict with concrete
moral life, becomes evident from the joy with which the advocates of
subversion and negation greet the new principle of the "struggle for
existence," and make it the principle of their own actions and social
theories. This is not chance sympathy, but is founded upon the nature of
ethical naturalism. Of him who learns to look upon himself only as a
product of nature, though highly ennobled, we cannot expect any other
principle than that of following his nature: not, indeed, the ideal nature
of man--for this is an abstraction which man reaches only by means of a
long {392} process of reflection--but his own empirical nature, as he finds
it present in himself; for this is indeed that natural product as which man
has to consider himself according to that theory. Where this leads to,
everybody knows who knows human nature. If these consequences are not to be
found in all ethical naturalists, and if they are perhaps the least evident
in the system and life of the very ones who otherwise teach naturalism the
most logically (Strauss, for example), we again most cheerfully admit that
many men are better than their systems, and that in making objection to a
system, even an ethical system, we in the first place do not say anything
at all about the advocates of this system and their moral value. Often
enough some noble and fruitful truth has been advocated by men who are
personally contemptible, and often enough some dangerous error is
propagated by men who are personally very amiable and moral, although the
damage which such an error carries with it, must become evident in their
lives, on closer observation. Besides, we must not overlook the fact, that
what in a perverse system is still relatively true, and the thing which
gives it a relative vitality, is borrowed from truth and from the correct
system; and that all those who oppose the present fundamentals of morality,
and especially of Christian morality, in a thousand ways live upon and
consume the possessions which they owe to the same influences against which
they contend.

But to whatever relative height the moral nobility of single advocates of
ethical naturalism may rise, it is not able, at least not from its own
principles, to produce thoroughly moral and truly cultivated characters;
such are only produced where that which forms the character, {393} flows
out of a spring of life whose origin is _above_ nature and its series of
causes.

From this we see that for the most part a very low idea of personality, a
very low derivation of the motives of human action, is found in the works
of Darwinistic moralists--as, _e.g._, we have seen in the works of Haeckel
that to him the idea of a personality of God is inseparably connected with
the idea of capricious arbitrariness, and that he derives all actions of
all men from the motives of egoism.

But we also see, from still more common evidences, the fact that some of
the very highest blossoms and noblest fruits of human virtue, as they ripen
on the ground of Christian morality, are not even acknowledged, much less
required, by ethical naturalism. We think particularly of the virtues of
_love_, of _self-denial_, and of _humility_. Certainly, we do not deny that
men who are inclined toward naturalism can and do possess love to a certain
degree, but the highest exemplification of love, the love of enemies in the
fullest sense of the word--not only compassion on the battle-field, but the
full, forgiving, blessing love which renders good for evil, and even
intercedes for a personal enemy, although he may be the intentional and
successful destroyer of our whole earthly happiness--such a love may
perhaps be demanded and admired by a naturalistic moralist under the
imposing influence of the presence of such a love and in unconscious
dependence on the motives of Christianity which surround him; but he will
never be able to show from what point of his system it is to be deduced. On
the other hand, it is easy to show him more than one point of his system
which, far from requiring such love, {394} stigmatizes it as simple
foolishness. Such a fruit only ripens under the care of him who gave his
life for us while we still were enemies, and under the influence of the
remission of our sin by our Heavenly Father.

Moreover, an ethical naturalist can also accomplish much in _self-denial_:
he can make many great sacrifices, if he can thereby reach a desirable end
that cannot be reached without acts of self-denial; he can show great
strength and patience in a resigned endurance of the inevitable; and if we
take into consideration the possibility of its being logically at variance
with his system, he may perform all that which the highest morality
requires. But a renunciation which is more than silent resignation, and
which under certain circumstances can also become a joyful renunciation of
all that was beloved and dear to man on earth, does not grow out of the
soil of naturalism, and is possible only there where man carries in himself
a possession which would render him still more fortunate and happy than the
idea of species, and where he knows the cross of Jesus, and understands the
word of the Lord: "He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that
loseth his life for my sake, shall find it." Strauss is a striking proof
that naturalism is not able to estimate the tasks of self-denial at their
full importance. In his "The Old Faith and the New," although he speaks
with great earnestness of moral demands, yet he deeply degrades that which
is connected with a Christian renunciation of self and the world, when he
reproaches Christianity with "a thorough cult of poverty and _mendicity_"
(!) and, regarding its demand for self-denial, he denies that it has any
comprehension of the tasks of {395} industry, of the virtues of home and
family life, of patriotism and civil virtue.

Finally, we may make a similar statement in regard to _humility_. There
certainly are ethical naturalists also who are modest. But when the
prophets of ethical naturalism again and again announce that the great aim
of all the discoveries of the evolution theory is to show us how far
mankind has fortunately progressed; when their spirit of devotion is
nourished by Goethe's Promethean word: "Hast thou not thyself accomplished
all, thou holy glowing heart?"--and even when Haeckel prints as the leading
motto of his "Anthropogeny" Goethe's poem "Prometheus"; when the struggle of
selection is also elevated to a moral principle, and the life-task of an
individual is limited to creating elbow-room for himself: then humility,
indeed, is a virtue which a naturalist may acquire, not through his
naturalism, but in spite of it; and the great _naivete_ with which, in
books of that tendency, haughtiness and passion for glory are treated as
something necessarily understood, and their own ego is glorified, is a much
more logical result. "We are proud of having so immensely out-stripped our
lower animal ancestors, and derive from it the consoling assurance that in
future also, mankind, as a whole, will follow the _glorious_ career of
progressive development, and attain a still higher degree of mental
perfection." (Haeckel, "Hist. of Creat.") This is the theme which is
repeated in many variations in all books of similar tendency. In the same
book already referred to, we read: "Each free and highly developed
individual, each _original_ person, has his own religion, his own God; _so
it is certainly not arrogance_ when we also claim the {396} right of
forming our own idea of God." Or, "The recognition of the theory of
development and the monistic philosophy based upon it forms the best
criterion for the degree of man's mental development." L. Buechner, in his
collection of essays, "Aus Natur und Welt" ("From Nature and the World"),
dedicates a long chapter to self-glorification, and finds confirmed in
himself the word of the poet, "Great destinies are always preceded by
spirit messengers"; and he, still living, prefaces his own biography in the
latest edition of "Kraft und Stoff" ("Force and Matter"), and on the first
page of the same publishes the testimonial which he received, when leaving
the gymnasium: "The bearer of this testimonial excelled in the thorough
study of literature, philosophy, and poetry, and as regards style in his
productions showed an excellent talent." In view of these things, we
certainly do no injustice to this tendency when we deny to it the
conception of the idea and the practice of humility.

Sec. 2. _Scientific Darwinism and Moral Life._

It is evident from the peace-relation between mere scientific Darwinism and
moral principles, that naturo-historical Darwinism also remains in peace
with moral life. We therefore have no longer to treat of any question of
competency in the realm of concrete moral life, but only to mention the
points of contact in which both realms, fully acknowledging their mutual
independence, yet in an inferior way exercise some beneficial influence
upon each other. {397}

Moral life influences Darwinism in so far as, by its mere existence, it
cautions the advocate of the scientific evolution theory against effacing
the differences between the moral and the natural, and against degrading
man to the level of animals on account of his connection with the animal
world. The naturo-historical idea of evolution, in case it should turn out
to be correct, would exercise an influence upon moral life in a three-fold
direction: First, it would add to all the motives of the humane treatment
of the animal world--which certainly without it already has moral
demands--a new one, and establish them all more firmly. Man would then
recognize in the animal world which surrounds him branches of his own
natural pedigree, and exercise his right of mastery only in the sense which
Alex. Braun expresses, when he says: "Man consents to the idea of being
appointed master of animals; but then he must also acknowledge that he is
not placed over his subjects as a stranger, but proceeded from the people
itself, whose master he wishes to be." A second service which the idea of
evolution would have to render to the forming of moral life, would consist
in the fact that it would favor all those ethical modes of contemplation
and those maxims which regard the gradual process of development and the
growth of character as the relative power of influences and conditions, and
that it would give them hints for the perception of moral growth, in like
manner as, in the before-mentioned parable, the Lord illustrates the
imperceptible and continual growth of the kingdom of God with the growth of
a plant. A third service which the evolution theory might be able {398} to
render to moral life, would consist in the fact that it would give to the
motive of perfection and progress, which is always and everywhere a moral
lever, a new illustration and a new weight by pointing at the progress
which development has to show in the life of nature.

       *       *       *       *       * {399}


CONCLUSION.

If now, having reached our goal, we look back upon the way which we have
traversed, we find a justification of the regret expressed at the
beginning, that a scientific treatment of religion and morality is
compelled to take a position in regard to theories which are not yet
established. We found the most different problems--scientific,
naturo-philosophical, metaphysical, religious and ethical--inextricably
mixed, and were obliged, as one of our first tasks, to make an attempt at
finding the clew and at examining and testing each single problem, together
with attempts at its solution, separately, although keeping constantly in
mind its connection with all other problems and their attempts at solution.
We found ourselves led into the presence of a series of the most
interesting problems, but not a single solution finished. That very attempt
at solution which brought up this whole question, and which was repeatedly
announced as the infallible key to the solution of all scientific
problems--the selection theory--we found a decided failure, at least in the
direction of the extension and importance which was given to this theory.
And yet in spite of the hypothetical nature of all attempts at solution, we
see investigators in all the realms of natural science strongly attracted
by the very promising character of these problems and busily engaged in
making attempts at solution; {400} and we see even philosophy strongly
attracted by its interest in these works. Such a diligent work can
certainly not be without gain; but wherein will this gain consist? Will it,
as its antagonists prophecy, be like that which in former times alchemy
brought to science, which, indeed, enriched chemistry by an entire series
of new discoveries, but did not find what it sought, the one fundamental
element from which all the rest are derived, which only confirmed, with a
power acknowledged even to-day, the old doctrine of the elementary
difference of the elements? Will the Darwinian investigations thus also
make all possible discoveries _by the way_, but in place of that which they
look for, in place of a common pedigree or of a few pedigrees for all
organisms, finally only give additional strength to the permanence of
species and the unapproachableness of the secret of their origin? Or can we
derive from the reasons which the investigators urge in favor of the idea
of an origin of species through descent and evolution, the hope that that
mysterious darkness of prehistoric times upon which the works of our
century have shed so much light, will still be illuminated even to the
sources from which organic species came, and from which mankind also
originated? We must leave the decision of these questions to the future and
to scientists.

But we have to note _one_ gain, which is so great that on its account, we
willingly cease our regret in regard to the unfinished condition of these
theories; for we owe the full enjoyment of this gain to that very
unfinished condition. It is the gain which _religion and morality_ get from
these investigations, and which consists in the new and comprehensive
confirmation of the conviction, {401} which, indeed, was established
before, that religion and morality--Christian religion and Christian
morality--rest on foundations which can no longer be shaken by any result
of exact investigation.

The triumph with which the Darwinian theories were greeted by many as the
new sun before whose rising all that mankind had thus far called light and
sun turns pale, and the antipathy with which, on that very account, many to
whom their religious and ethical acquisitions are a sacred sanctuary, turn
away from these theories, urged us to investigate their position in
reference to religion and morality. Now, if these theories had produced a
certain undoubted result, we should unquestionably have been satisfied with
the examination of the position of religion and morality in reference to
this certain result. But since not a single result of those investigations
is really established, we have found ourselves obliged to give our
investigation a much greater extension and to discuss even all imaginable
_possibilities_. The beneficial result of this comparison was, that
religion and morality not only remain at peace with all imaginable
possibilities of _scientific_ theories, but can also, in the realm of the
_philosophy of the doctrines of nature_, be passive spectators of all
investigations and attempts, even of all possible excursions into the realm
of fancy, without being obliged to interfere. It is in the realm of _mere
metaphysics_ that we first perceive an antagonist whose victory would
indeed be fatal to the religious and ethical acquisitions of mankind: this
antagonist is called elimination from nature of the idea of design.
Fortunately, this metaphysical idea is in such striking opposition not only
to the whole world of facts but also to all logical {402} reasoning, it has
everywhere, where man perceives organization and a difference between lower
and higher, especially in the contemplation of the world, of this _cosmos_
of wonderful order and beauty, so decidedly all philosophical as well as
all exact sciences as its adversaries, it lays its hands so rudely and so
destructively not only upon the religious and ethical acquisitions but also
upon all ideal remaining acquisitions of mankind, that religion and
morality know, when fighting this adversary, they are in firm accord with
all the spiritual interests of mankind.

This, in its most essential features, is the pleasing result of our
critical examination; and such a demonstration of the immovably solid
foundation, secure from all the change of opinions and all the progress of
discoveries on which morality and religion rest, has still an entire series
of further pleasing consequences in its train.

In the first place, it is a living and actual proof of the fact that
religion and morality give to all sciences _the full freedom of
investigation_. The religious and ethical interest itself not only gives,
but even _requires_, this freedom of investigation. It requires it in
consequence of that _impulse of truth_ which religion has in common with
every impulse of knowledge, and which in itself is an ethical impulse. In
consequence of this impulse, religion must found its possession on nothing
else than subjective and objective truth, and can look upon all the paths
which lead through even the remotest realm of knowledge to the
establishment of truth, only with sympathetic interest. Precisely those who
see in religion more than a mere expression of emotion, and all those who
require that their religious life and the object of {403} their religious
faith shall possess truth, subjective and objective, cannot commit any
greater folly than treating search for truth in any other realm with
suspicion, or even ignoring it. They only injure that which they meant to
defend, by rendering the purity of their own religious interest suspected,
and by establishing more firmly the breach between religious life and faith
and the other acquisitions of culture and interests of their time, of which
neither religion nor science, but only a misguided tendency of their minds
and hearts, is guilty. How much unfriendly and unjust judgment has already
found utterance by means of the pen and voice, in reference to honest and
meritorious workers, on the part of religious zealots who fail to recognize
that close relationship of the religious with the scientific impulse of
truth! How often and how much does such a judgment gain great consideration
from a public of which but a few are able to form an independent opinion of
the men and works which are thus abused before their eyes and ears, and how
much of the aversion to the form in which the religious life of the present
offers itself, on the part of those men who are thus suspected, is in the
last instance to be attributed neither to be irreligiousness of these men
nor to the deficiency of the present form of our religious life, but to the
repelling effect of that unjust treatment!

Another gain of our discussion, correlated to that just mentioned, consists
in the proof _that religion and morality have their autonomous principle
and realm_ which is not at all obliged to borrow the proof of its truth
from the present condition and degree of our knowledge, but carries it in
itself, although it stands in {404} fruitful reciprocal action with all the
other realms of knowledge and life. Just as decidedly as we had to caution
the advocates of religion against keeping themselves indifferent,
suspicious, or even hostile, regarding the advances into the realm of
secular knowledge, so decidedly do we like to see the workers in the realm
of the knowledge of nature cautioned against confusing points of view, in
thinking that they can through their scientific knowledge purify and reform
the religious and ethical realms. They may purify and reform as much as
they please, but only in their own realm. The only thing they are able to
reform is our knowledge of nature, and in our religious and ethical life
and perception only that which belongs to this natural part; but this is
only the outer part of religious and ethical life: the source of our
religion and morality springs from quite another ground than that which
they cultivate.

A third gain from our discussion is the actual proof of _the harmony
between faith and knowledge, between the religious and the scientific views
of the world_. In our investigation we had no occasion for psychological or
theoretical investigations as to faith and knowledge and their mutual
relation; but if our discussion is not an entire failure, perhaps the
actual exposition of a standpoint on which faith and knowledge may live at
peace with one another, which is not bought by a sacrifice on either side,
and which does not consist in a compromise of the two, but which has its
reason in the deepest and most active interest of the one, in the full and
unconstrained freedom of the other, a stronger proof for the intimate
relationship of these brothers, between whom the present generation wishes
too often to sow discord, than if we {405} had undertaken long
religio-philosophical and theoretical investigations.

Finally, the results of our analysis have given us still another gain: they
have led us beyond Lessing's "Nathan" and his parable of the "Three Rings."
We call this a gain, without the least intention of discrediting by it the
motives of tolerance and the points of view for the judgment of the
character and religiousness of human individuals, which lay in that
parable, or suspecting the motives of so many of our contemporaries whose
religio-philosophical judgment is entirely expressed in that parable. We
saw ourselves compelled to make a choice either of accepting or of
rejecting ends in the world, and found that the world resolves itself into
a senseless game at dice, and that the phenomena become more unintelligible
the more important they are, if we ignore or even reject teleology. The
acknowledgment of the latter prevented us from seeing in the world and its
events merely the eternal stream of planless coming and going; it prevented
us from accepting such an endless stream of appearance and disappearance,
and therefore also an endless stream of the appearance and disappearance of
new forms of religion in that creature for whose appearance we see all
other creatures are only a preparation, and are even obliged to look upon
them as a preparation in accordance with no other theory more than that of
evolution. It also urged us to inquire as to the ends and designs of
mankind, and we found this end in the disposition of man for a communion
with God, for the state of bearing his image and of being his child. Now we
have fully to acknowledge that Christianity, like all religions which claim
truth and universal acceptance, {406} is to be analyzed with the very same
means of science as all phenomena in the world of facts, and that therefore
it is especially subject to all investigations of religio-philosophical,
religio-historical, and historical criticism, to its fullest extent. But
precisely such an analysis of Christianity leads us to a result which
elevates Christian religion high above all other forms. It also confirms by
means of science what, indeed, is established to a Christian mind as
certainty from his own direct experience, that the quintessence of that
which Christianity offers us, is truth and gives full satisfaction to soul
and mind. For that analysis establishes, in the first place, that
Christianity shows us the idea of God and the nature and destiny of man in
a purity such as no other religion does, and in such a life-creating power
that it is able to satisfy most completely all the nobler desires and
impulses of soul and mind, and to overcome most successfully all ignoble
ones. Furthermore, it shows us that these gifts of Christianity offered
themselves, and still offer themselves, not only in philosophemes and
doctrines, in parables and myths, in postulates and prophecies, but what,
indeed, is not the case in any other religion, in an arranged course of
deeds and facts which, in everything that is necessary and essential for
the acquisition of that idea of God and for the realization of that ideal
of mankind, legitimate themselves to criticism as historical facts, and
which legitimate themselves as actions of divine manifestation by the fact,
that they and their consequences also are really able to fulfill what they
promise, and to bring mankind nearer to the accomplishment of that goal
which they set up for it. Finally, it shows us, when it reviews and
compares the development of {407} culture among all mankind, that the
Christian nations have really borne the richest blossom and fruit which has
appeared hitherto on the tree of mankind, and that Christianity, for the
life of nations, has not only, like other religions, powers of
preservation, but also powers of renovation and renewal which other
religions are wanting. Even all the errors of superstition and immorality,
of intolerance and lust of power, of so many of its advocates and
confessors, at which the adversaries of the Christian view of the world so
willingly point, are but a confirmation of its value. For they show us how
divine and heavenly the gift must be, if even such errors were not able to
smother its fruits. If we do not wish to suppose that mankind has
foundations and ends which up to the present it is not yet allowed to know,
we certainly must look for these foundations and ends where we find the
best which has so far been given to mankind and which has been accomplished
by it.

This acknowledgment of Christianity as the only true and only really
universal religion leads us beyond another sentiment of Lessing, which has
found an equally strong or perhaps still stronger echo in the mind. We mean
the expression that, if he had to choose, he would prefer the continual
search for truth to the possession of truth itself. We emphatically
acknowledge the holy right and the high nobility of this impulse of
investigation and activity, but we need not buy its acknowledgment and
satisfaction at the price of being obliged to renounce a consciousness or
the hope of a consciousness which is equally indispensable to our inner
happiness as that impulse of investigation, and which first gives to this
impulse its overwhelming power--namely, the {408} consciousness and the
hope of really possessing the truth. For, in fact, we are not required to
make this choice. There is a possession of truth which does not exclude,
but requires, the search for truth: that is the possession of truth in the
answer to the questions as to the starting point and the goal of our life,
the possession of truth in the fundamentals of our religious view of the
world. It is the certainty about the starting-point and goal of our life,
which lastingly and effectively invites us also to look for and perceive
all the ways which, in theory as well as in practice, lead from a firm
starting-point to a certain end, and only the possession of truth in the
fundamentals of our religious view of the world gives value and
satisfaction to investigation in a world which, without this possession,
contains for us only transitory and fleeting, and therefore only
unsatisfactory, things, but which stands before us as the work and the
theatre of revelation of a God and Father, and therefore gives to
investigation inexhaustible joy and satisfaction when we look upon it from
those stand-points.

In like manner as, at the outset of our investigation, we perceived in
organic species creations of God, and in spite of this, or rather on
account of it, looked upon the attempts at exploring their origin with so
much deeper interest, we also see ourselves, in the still more direct
religious realm, not at all condemned to stagnation when we acknowledge
Christianity as absolute religion. This very acknowledgment alone makes a
real progress possible for us. For every progress, in order to be a real
progress, needs a firm starting-point and a certain goal; hence that which
is shown and offered to mankind in Christianity. From this {409}
starting-point and toward this end there are tasks enough for religious
progress. The ever more definite investigation of the facts and doctrines
of Christianity, the improvement and ever more complete reproduction of the
scientific image in which these facts and doctrines are reflected in the
mind of man the progressing adaptation of ecclesiastical life in divine
service, and organization to the substance and the need of Christian
religiousness, the harmonizing of our possession of faith with all other
elements of culture of each period, the working up of that which is given
to us in Christianity into the spiritual and ethical acquisition of a
single personality and its ever more complete representation and
realization in the individual and the common life, the progressing
penetration of generations by the transfiguring light of religion and
morality, and the progressive overcoming of the likewise progressingly
developing kingdom of evil--in short, all that which the language of
religion calls the growth of the kingdom of God, is work and progress
enough, but certainly work and progress on the ground of a certain basis as
the starting-point given to us by God, and work and progress toward a
certain goal set for us by God.

It is only from this basis of a possession of truth as it is offered to us
by Christian theism, and by the facts of redemption and of a reconciliation
of man with God, that the breach between faith and knowledge, between
religion and the life of culture, which at present takes place in so many a
heart and mind, can be healed; and, far from seeking to cripple or hinder
those who stand on this basis, it alone gives to their theoretical and
practical activity its joyous strength and certain end, to {410} their
sphere of knowledge its universal breadth. The Apostle Paul, at the end of
1 Corinthians, XV, when he takes a comprehensive view from the highest
points of Christian hope to which he found himself led from those
fundamentals, knows of no fitter words to conclude with and to give it a
practical application than these: "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch
as ye know that your labour is not vain in the Lord."

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes

[1] "The International Scientific Series." No. XIII.

[2] "Evolution of Man."

[3] It was only when the manuscript of this work was nearly finished and
the first part of it had gone to the press, that the author received the
second part of K. E. von Baer's "_Studien aus dem Gebiete der
Naturwissenschaften_" (Studies in the Realm of Natural Sciences). It
contains another essay on teleology, "_Ueber Zielstrebigkeit in den
organischen Koerpern insbesondere_," and a treatise on Darwin's doctrine,
"_Ueber Darwin's Lehre_," which Baer had promised long ago and which the
public had anxiously awaited. It is no little satisfaction to find that I,
from my modest premises, reached results regarding the naturo-philosophical
problems and their weight in the religious realm which so fully harmonize
with the views of this first authority in the realm of the history of
development. I shall still have occasion here and there to avail myself of
a study of this latest and most important publication upon the question of
Darwinism, and shall confine myself here to the remark that von Baer,
although he rejects the selection theory and the superficial treatment of
the principle of evolution on the part of materialists, is by no means
disinclined to the idea of the origin of species through descent, whether
in gradual development or in leaps; and that in this respect he could no
longer be counted among the advocates of the group above referred to, but
among those which we mention farther on, had he not repeatedly and forcibly
confessed, with a modesty worthy of acknowledgment, his total ignorance
concerning the manner in which certain forms of life, especially the higher
ones, originated. The origin of higher species without the supposition of a
descent is to him unexplainable, because the individuals of these species
are, in their first development of life, so dependent on the mother.
Furthermore, he points out the fact that in early periods of the earth the
organic forming power which ruled, must have been a higher one than it is
at the present time; in like manner as the first period in the embryonic
development of individuals is to-day the most productive. This higher power
of organization, he says, could consist in a higher power of changing
organisms into new species, as well as in a higher power of producing new
species through primitive generation; or it could consist in both. In
general, there is no reason to suppose that primitive generations which
took place at the first origination of life on earth, could not have been
repeated later and oftener. The nearer a generation was to these
individuals originated through primitive generation, the greater was
undoubtedly its flexibility and changeableness; the farther, the greater
the fixity of type.

[4] After the completion this manuscript, the author found that K. E. von
Baer, in his treatise upon Darwin's doctrine, pays especial attention to
the change of generation and also to the metamorphosis of plants and
animals in exactly the same sense and reaches the same conclusion.

[5] Compare Max Mueller, "Lectures on the Science of Language," 6th ed.,
London, 1871, vol. I, p. 403.

[6] Compare v. Baer, "Studies, etc.," p. 294 ff.

[7] Darwin says, on page 146, Eng. Ed., of his "Descent of Man": "In the
earlier editions of my 'Origin of Species', I perhaps attributed too much
to the action of natural selection or the survival of the fittest.... I did
not formerly sufficiently consider the existence of structures which, as
far as we can at present judge, are neither beneficial nor injurious; and
this I believe to be one of the greatest oversights as yet detected in my
work.... An unexplained residuum of change, perhaps a large one, must be
left to the assumed uniform action of those unknown agencies, which
occasionally induce strongly-marked and abrupt deviations of structure in
our domestic productions."

[8] This word, which is of recent coinage in Germany, has been found so
incapable of being rendered by an exact English equivalent, that it has
been thought best to retain it and to give the author's own explanation of
the meaning which he desired it to express. He says, in a note to the
translator: "I was led to this idea [of _Auslosung_] in a small essay of
Robert von Mayer ("Ueber Ausloesung," 1876). Afterwards Mayer personally
stated to me that he heartily approved the emphasis I had given to this
idea, and said that he had only thought of the fact that psychical
processes, like the action of the will, _losen aus_ (release) physiological
processes, like the action of the muscles, and that I had carried the idea
farther, in saying that psychical processes are _ausgelost_ (released) by
physiological processes, and that this is a very important step farther on
the way of investigation. Mayer himself thought it would be necessary to
call the attention to this, when he further developed the ideas he had
given in the before-mentioned essay; his intention to do so was prevented
by his death.

"_Auslosung_ is a word originated by modern mechanical science, and means:
(1.) Slight mechanical operations of detaching and the like, by which
another and more important action, whose forces were heretofore restrained,
can be set into activity: _e.g._, the pressure which sets in motion a
machine, previously at rest, is _Auslosung_; the pressure on the trigger of
a gun is _Auslosung_; the friction of a match which is the beginning of a
great fire is _Auslosung_. (2.) This idea may now be applied to chemical
processes: _e.g._, a glass of sugar-water will remain sweet unless some
foreign element is introduced into it, but the moment it receives a
fermenting substance either by chance, from the air, or with intention,
then the sugar water is brought into a process of chemical decomposition,
and from this there results _Auslosung;_ but the introduction of the
fermenting agent into the sugar-water is _Auslosung_. (3.) Von Mayer
applies this idea to psycho-physical relations of life, and says: when the
will acting through the agency of the motor nerves sets in motion the
muscles, this is _Auslosung_."--[TRANS.]

[9] For the use of readers who do not understand Greek, we may state that
the word _teleology_ is derived from the Greek word _telos_, Gen. _teleos_:
end, purpose, aim; and means the "doctrine of design or a conformity to the
end in view," or, as K. E. von Baer prefers and wishes to have introduced
into scientific language, "the doctrine of the striving toward an end"
(_Zielstrebigkeit_). It seems to be quite a superficial treatment of an
idea on whose reception or rejection no less a thing than an entire view of
the world with all its most important and deepest questions depends, when
Dr. G. Seidlitz, in an essay on the success of Darwinism ("Ausland," 1874,
No. 37), states incidentally that teleology is derived from the Greek
[Greek: teleos] _perfect_. It is true that the Greek adjective for perfect
is also derived from that noun, [Greek: telos], which has the same root as
the German word _Ziel_, and there is even an Ionic form for that adjective
which is [Greek: teleos], but the Attic form is [Greek: teleios]; and since
modern languages, when a choice is allowed, do not derive their Greek
foreign words from the Ionic, but from the Attic dialect, that word--were
it really derived from that adjective and did it express "doctrine of
perfection"--would have to be teleiology, or, in Latinized form, teliology.
As far as we know, the word, since it was introduced into scientific
language, has never been derived from any other root than from [Greek:
telos], Gen. [Greek: teleos], _end_, and has never been used in any other
sense than to express the doctrine of a purpose and end in the world.

[10] Compare "History, Essays, and Orations of the 6th General Conference
of the Evangelical Alliance," New York, Harper Bros., 1874, p. 264-271.

[11] Compare D. F. Strauss, the most celebrated moral philosopher of
Monism, in Sec. 74 of his "The Old Faith and the New."

       *       *       *       *       *


Corrections made to printed original.

p. 43. "the whole course of the zooelogical system" - "zoloogical" in
original.

p. 65. "corals, radiata, worms, mollusca, and crustacea" - "radita" in
original.

p. 73. "many portions of the skin" - "the the" (across line break) in
original.

p. 86. "forsakes us in the inquiry" - "inqury" in original.

p. 112. "even philosophy can not take up the investigation" - "phi-osophy"
(across line break) in original.

p. 147. "the origin of self-consciousness" - "conciousness" in original.

p. 265. "the origin of species through development" - "developement" in
original.

p. 297. "any other interpretation than to take them" - "then" in original.

p. 343. "the Titan-like, rebellious Kainites" - "Titian" in original.

Note 3. "The nearer a generation was" - "a a" (across line break) in
original.








