CHAPTER I.

RISE OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.

Sec. 1. _Direct Predecessors.--Lamarck._

The first man who gave direct expression to the idea of a successive
generation of the species through transmutation, and who attempted to
follow it up in a scientific way, was the French naturalist and
philosopher, Jean Lamarck, born 1744. In the year 1801, and subsequently,
he published his views, first in smaller essays and afterward more in
detail in his "_Philosophie Zoologique_," which appeared in 1809, and in
the first volume of his "_Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans Vertebres_,"
published in 1815. In these works Lamarck upholds fully the descent and
evolution theory, and maintains that the simplest organisms are generated
through a _generatio spontanea_, which is still taking place; but that all
the more developed organisms, including man, are descended through a
gradual change from other species. With this theory, he put himself in
direct and conscious opposition to the old doctrine of the immutability of
species and their characteristics, which had been ably maintained by
Linnaeus, and also made some attempts at explanation which approach very
nearly the selection theory. A change in the physical conditions of life,
especially the force of habit in the use or disuse of the organs, the
inheritance of physical and psychical {31} qualities thus attained, and the
extension of the process of transmutation into extraordinarily long periods
of time with very slight changes, are also, in his view, the probable
causes of the variation and development of the species. He only lacks the
idea of a natural selection in the struggle for existence, and the
comparison of the processes in nature with the methodical selection of man
in the breeding of domestic animals and plants, to identify his views with
those of Darwin.

At first, Lamarck met only with violent opposition; but after a little
while his views ceased to attract attention. The time had not yet come to
make such an attempt at observing nature from the standpoint of evolution.
The sciences which favor such a mode of observation, and even demand
it--such as comparative anatomy and physiology and the history of the
development of the different plants and animals--were only in their
infancy, or were--like palaeontology and the comparative geography of plants
and animals--not yet in existence. The influence of Linnaeus, whose views
diametrically opposed those of Lamarck, predominated over all the
investigations of natural science; Buffon, who favored the ideas of
Lamarck, and loved to trace a unity in natural phenomena, was too instable
in his investigations and views to arrive at a comprehensive principle; and
even the eminent naturalist, Cuvier, of Montpellier, showed in his
observation of nature a predilection for analysis rather than synthesis,
and although his comprehensive mind inclined to generalize and explain, he
placed himself in decided opposition to a theory which was founded only on
a few decisive facts.

This last mentioned deficiency seems to have been {32} the main cause of
Lamarck's views soon being lost sight of. They nowhere found a support in
facts; the force of habit played in them an exaggerated and unnatural
_role_; the different illustrations of them--such as the long neck of the
giraffe explained by the permanent and inherited habit of browsing on the
branches of high trees, or the web on the toes of frogs, swimming-birds,
etc., explained by the habit of swimming--were talked about and laughed at
more as curiosities than as worthy of serious consideration.

Only twice after this did the question put by Lamarck attract wider
attention from the learned world. The first time was when, in 1830, the
bitter contest arose at the Academy of Paris, between Cuvier and Etienne
Geoffrey St. Hilaire, the father of Isidor G. St. Hilaire. Geoffrey St.
Hilaire had views similar to Lamarck's, but reached them from quite a
different standpoint--from the observation of the analogy and homology of
the organs; and accounted for the variation of species, not by the use or
disuse of the organs, but on the one hand by the common original type of
the organs, and on the other by the varied influence of the
surroundings--the _monde ambiant_. Lamarck himself seems not to have been
mentioned in this contest. The controversy turned much more on the question
whether in observing nature we can proceed by synthesis and find in the
analogies of the organisms the principles for explaining the real
connection between the different organic forms, or whether the analytical
process is the only correct one, and the synthetical should be discarded.
The solution of it will probably be, that the one process must be
supplemented by the {33} other, as Goethe has already shown in his account
of this controversy; but at that time it was decided in favor of the
analytical principle, and the question was for the time dropped. It came up
for a second time, but created little excitement, in 1844, when an
anonymous work, "Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation," directed the
attention and the interest of scientists again to Lamarck and his doctrine.
But this interest also soon came to an end, until through Darwin's first
publication the half-forgotten man again suddenly attained great honor.

Those who wish to form a closer acquaintance with the different advocates
of the evolution theory before Darwin's appearance, will find them
carefully arranged in the historical sketch which Darwin gives in the
introduction to his work on "The Origin of Species"; and the most important
extracts of Lamarck's "_Philosophie Zoologique_" are to be found in Oscar
Schmidt's "Descent and Darwinism."[1]

Sec. 2. _Indirect Preparations._

While thus the ideas of Lamarck gradually fell into partial oblivion, yet
contemporaneous with and following them arose several other series of
thoughts, views, and investigations, which, although they only indirectly
prepared for the revival of the evolution theory, yet exercised a deeper
and more lasting influence on the minds of scientists. We refer to the
ideas in regard to natural phenomena held during the first decades of our
century; further, to the principles of comparative anatomy which, up to the
present time, partly dependent {34} and partly independent of natural
philosophy, have been expressed, valued, and admired as leading thoughts;
and, lastly, to the empiric results of comparative anatomical and
biological investigations in palaeontology and geology, as attained by the
help of those very principles. And even physics and astronomy had to
cooeperate in preparing the way for the idea of evolution.

The philosophical ideas referred to, together with the points of view and
results of comparative anatomy, led more and more decisively to the idea of
an _original form_, or _type_, which retains its identity in all the
modifications of form in plants and animals; and of a _ground-plan_, which
is realized in the systems of the plant and animal world in higher and
higher differentiations and in more and more developed modifications,
diverging farther and farther from the prototype until it reaches its
highest form, still reducible to the prototypes, in the most highly
organized dicotyledons in plants, and in the animal world in the mammalia,
and lastly in man.

Men like Cuvier and Geoffrey St. Hilaire, who otherwise stand diametrically
opposed to each other, unite in these and kindred ideas. The naturalist
Oken attains the same result, tinged with the views of Schelling; the poet
Goethe, from an intuitive knowledge of nature, arrived at the same
conclusion. The former, during a journey in the Hartz Mountains, at the
sight of a bleached deer's skull, and the latter, upon picking up a sheep's
skull in the Jewish cemetery at Venice, were struck by the same thought:
the skull is only a modified vertebra. Oken founded upon this idea and
kindred analogies his profound philosophy of the system of animals and
plants which comes very near to the evolution {35} theory, and in his
cosmogony traces all organisms to a protoplasm in such a way as to bring
him in this respect also very near to Darwinism. Goethe, in his
metamorphosis of plants, develops ideas in which, in all seriousness, he
makes a concrete application of his thought of a prototype to the leaf of a
plant; and proved for zooelogy the fruitfulness of his idea of a type by his
well known discovery of the mid-jaw bone in man. Although Oscar Schmidt
seems to be decidedly right in supposing, in opposition to Ernst Haeckel,
that Goethe did not intend to have his idea of unity and development taken
in a real but in an ideal sense, and hence could not be called a direct
representative of the evolution theory, still he is all the more decidedly
a predecessor of that theory in directing attention to the unity in plan
and metamorphosis of plants and animals. Louis Agassiz, who, on the other
hand, continued up to his death in opposition to the entire doctrine of
descent, made the idea of _types_ the principle of his whole
classification, and said: "Man is the purpose toward which the whole animal
creation tends from the first appearance of the first paleozoic fish."
Richard Owen, who rejected the selection theory and favored that of
descent, published, long before Darwin's appearance, some most interesting
results of his anatomical and palaeontological investigations from the point
of view of the prototype and its modifications. "Man, from the beginning of
organisms, was ideally present upon the earth," is a sentence which we
quote from Owen's works.

In short, this ideal momentum in the observation of the organic kingdoms is
not only the most beautiful blossom and the ripest fruit of the union
between {36} laborious and comprehensive detailed investigations and a
generalizing philosophic penetration, but it was also a very efficient
preparation of the mind for the evolution problem, so far as the summing up
of the organisms under a type and plan is only the ideal reverse of its
realistic reduction to a common pedigree.

We have yet to add the investigations in regard to the history of evolution
of the single organisms, as well as those in comparative anatomy, which in
former centuries were begun by scientists like Swammerdam and Boerhave and
carried more nearly to completion by K. E. von Baer, Carus, and others. In
reducing all the tissues of plants and animals to one cell, and tracing
back also their individual developments to the first differentiation of the
simplest cell, they followed out the unity of the plan of the organic
kingdoms--which hitherto had been maintained only ideally and proclaimed as
a philosophic postulate--farther and deeper into the sphere of empiric
reality. We must mention, moreover, the great palaeontological discoveries
which, from the first foraminifera of the Cambrian formations up to the
historical period of man, showed a great progressive scale in the
appearance of the organisms and a very wide relationship between this scale
and the natural systems of botany and zooelogy; and, finally, the principles
of geology, which, under the leadership of Sir Charles Lyell, starting from
the idea of an identity of the powers which were active in former times
with those of the present, attempted to explain the most violent of the
changes in the earth's crust in former times by causes active to-day. This
often explains prodigious effects--such as the elevation and settling of
entire mountains {37} and continents--by the constant and related action of
the slightest causes and most gradual steps; it opens the perspective into
vast epochs of long and numerous geological periods; and sometimes, where
scientists like Cuvier and Agassiz have supposed the most complete
cataclysms and the most universal revolutions of the globe, there prove to
have been only gradual changes with revolutions very partially and locally
limited.

Finally, if we take into consideration the grand discoveries which
strikingly illustrate the connection in extent and quality between the
universe and all its agencies and powers--such as Robert von Mayer's
discovery of the conservation of force and of the mechanical equivalent of
heat, or the spectrum analysis and the information which it gives us by
ever-increasing evidences of the identity of the cosmic and telluric
substances--we may venture to say that the scientific and intellectual
ground was well prepared for a theory which takes the origin of organisms
into this common relationship of the essential unity and development of the
universe.

Only one thing more remained to complete the hypothesis offered by Lamarck,
of the _fact_ of a development of species by a new and more satisfactory
answer to the question as to the _manner_ of their development. The task of
answering in a more comprehensive and scientific way the question as to the
manner of development has been undertaken by Darwin in his selection
theory. Alfred Russell Wallace, who arrived at the same results
contemporaneously with and independently of Darwin, has, with praiseworthy
modesty, renounced his claim to priority of the discovery, as Darwin had
been longer engaged in working out his theories and had begun to collect
materials for proof.

       *       *       *       *       * {38}


